Similar to the skin, hair forms by rapid division and differentiation of stem cells which form keratinocytes that migrate, flatten, and die, forming keratinized cells. The final hair product that is exposed on the surface of the skin will be composed entirely of keratin. The growth of the hair follicle is cyclical. Stages of rapid growth and elongation of the hair shaft alternate with periods of quiescence and regression driven by apoptotic signals. This cycle can be divided into three phases: **anagen**(growth),**catagen**(transition), and**telogen**(rest).

**Anagen**growth is the active phase in which the hair follicle takes on its onion-like shape and works to produce the hair fiber. The anagen phase can be further broken down intoproanagen and metanagen phases.

Proanagen sees the follicle proliferating hair progenitor cells and begins the process of differentiation.

The new hair shaft appears on the surface of the skin to mark the metanagen phase. The anagen phase as a whole can last for several years.

The **catagen**phase begins with the end of the anagen phase and is characterized by a transition into quiescence. During this phase, which can last a few weeks, the hair follicle undergoes apoptosis-driven regression and loses about one-sixth of its standard diameter. The formation of a**club hair**, an important prognostic indicator in assessing hair pathology, also occurs at this time. If many hairs form club hair at once and are subsequently shed, it can give the appearance of thinning. Some conditions that this may occur in include, but are not limited to hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, stress, vitamin deficiencies, and after childbirth.

Next is the **telogen**or resting phase of the hair cycle in which the hair follicle is dormant, and growth of the hair shaft does not occur. About 10% to 15% of all hairs on the body are in this resting phase at any given time and can remain in this state for a variable amount of time depending on the location of the hair - from a few weeks for eyelashes to nearly one year in scalp hair. The exact mechanism that controls passage from one phase into the next is not fully known.

The bulge activation theory posits that growth factors produced in the dermal papilla stimulate bulge stem cells to proliferate and modulate growth-phase transitions. Because these cells are transient amplifying cells, they only can go through a limited number of mitoses, thereby setting the duration of anagen and onset of catagen phases.

The hair follicle and its product are also one of the few areas of the body protected from immune surveillance in a phenomenon first described by Sir Peter Medawar in 1948 as an **immune privilege**(IP). IP is achieved via a number of major histocompatibility complex by the follicle, local production of immune modulators such as TGF-beta, and expression of Fas-Ligand to kill autoreactive T cells. Hair growth also is controlled by a number of hormonal signals, with androgens having the most prominent effect. The growth of hair on the face, trunk and extremities in the male and of axillary and pubic hair in both sexes is brought about by androgens, although with considerable ethnic variability: Chinese men, for example, exhibit less body hair than those from Europe.