**Coronary Artery Calcifications**

There are two distinct forms of vascular calcifications, medial calcification, and intimal calcification. Medial calcifications (involving tunica media) are seen in patients with disturbance of calcium and phosphate homeostasis. These are patients with hypercalcemia, hyperparathyroidism, hyperphosphatemia, and end-stage renal disease which is the most common cause of medial calcification and duration of dialysis correlates with the degree of calcification. Intimal calcifications (involving tunica intima) represent atherosclerotic coronary artery disease (CAD), and it is related to advanced age. Other traditional risk factors include hypertension, smoking, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, metabolic syndrome, and chronic kidney disease.

**Valvular Calcifications**

Age-related degeneration is the most common cause of calcification of the valves. However, patients with disturbance in calcium and phosphate hemodynamics (hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and hyperparathyroidism, as well as end-stage renal disease) are more prone to develop valvular calcifications.

**Pericardial and Myocardial Calcifications**

Any previous infection (tuberculosis) or previous radiation exposure leads to constrictive pericarditis is marked by calcium deposits in the pericardium. Myocardial calcifications are related to previous global myocardial injuries (sepsis, myocardial infarction, radiation-induced myocardial injury, previous myocarditis). However, any disturbance in calcium and phosphate metabolism can accelerate the myocardial and pericardial calcifications.