"The American Indian, once proud and free, is torn now between white and tribal values; between the politics and language of the white man and his own historic culture. His problems, sharpened by years of defeat and exploitation, neglect and inadequate effort, will take many years to overcome."- Excerpt from the speech of Lyndon B. Johnson, 36th President of the United States delivered on March 06, 1968, as "Special Message to the Congress on the problems of American Indian: "The Forgotten American" (The American Presidency Project- Peters G and Woolley JT, University of California. Santa Barbara).

American Indians and Alaska Natives (AIAN) are the original indigenous people of North America. Since the Iroquois League of Five Nations (Mohawk, Oneida, Onondaga, Cayuga, and Seneca) was established in the 1100s, the individual tribal nations have undergone a series of upheavals. Since the arrival of European colonists, they became aliens in their own land. It was not until June 2, 1924, that American Indians were granted full citizenship when the Indian Citizenship Act was signed into law by President Calvin Coolidge. However, it took another 22 years until the US government recognized the sovereignty of the tribal nations. To show gratitude for their service in the second world war, the US government passed the Indian Claims Act in 1946 to set up the Indian Claims Commission that acted as a Judicial arbiter between the US government and the land claims of the AIAN. The last of these claims were settled in the early 21st century. Although it may seem that the tribal nations exist as sovereign nations within a nation, the disparities in economics, literacy, and healthcare continue to be an egregious challenge in the 21st century. These disparities have been further laid bare with the raging pandemic that has come to pass as a defining moment of this century.

Despite the progress being made in recognizing the sovereignty of AIAN people, the stark disparities between the healthcare provided to the indigenous people and the non-Hispanic whites (NHW) have continued to exist. The first arrival of European settlers 500 years ago brought devastating diseases like smallpox, measles, yellow fever to the virgin lands and wiped out multiple tribes over the next two centuries, since the recognition of the right of Indian Nations to health in 1832 (Supreme Court Chief Justice John Marshall, Worcester v. Georgia, 31 (6 Pet.) 515, 561 (1832), little changed in the health care allotment towards AIAN communities. The federal government continued to provide healthcare to the AIAN community under various treaties, executive orders, and legal bases over the next century. In 1849, the AIAN community's healthcare passed from the war department to the department of the interior.

Post-second world war, under the mandate of "the highest attainable standard of health" from the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by the United Nations, a progressive change began in the Indian health policy. The transfer of health affairs from the Bureau of Indian Affairs to the Indian Health Services (IHS) in 1955 was a pivotal point in integrating the services and administration of healthcare to the AIAN community. Nixon-administration passed the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act in 1975 and the Indian health care Improvement Act in 1976, which have been instrumental in improvement in the health of the AIAN community.

Since the establishment of IHS in 1955, and through commitments shown by various governments in the following years, the health of the AIAN community has improved significantly. Better sanitation programs, increased immunization rates, increased use of antibiotics, and healthcare provision have reduced morbidity and mortality in the AIAN community. An 82% decline in the infant mortality rate (IMR) is an astonishing feat achieved since the establishment of IHS. Although the morbidity and mortality from communicable diseases have reduced since the establishment of IHS, non-communicable diseases like obesity, diabetes, alcohol abuse have risen to the forefront.