Histopathologic studies of GA are rare. In a postmortem study of a patient with pyridoxine-responsive GA, the retina showed focal areas of atrophy of the photoreceptors with hyperplasia of the adjacent RPE. An abrupt transition from the almost-normal retina to the zone of the almost totally atrophic retina, RPE, and choroid was present in the retinal mid-periphery. Examination by electron microscopy revealed abnormalities in the mitochondria of the corneal endothelium and the non-pigmented epithelium of the ciliary body. There were also similar, albeit less severe, mitochondrial abnormalities affecting the photoreceptors.

In an adult domestic cat with a condition analogous to GA characterized by OAT deficiency and plasma hyperornithinemia, a postmortem study revealed atrophy of the RPE and photoreceptors throughout the fundus with an abnormal and discontinuous choriocapillaris layer.

In a study of OAT-deficient GA mouse models developed by gene targeting, there was marked swelling of the RPE cells with irregular shape and engorgement in mice on a standard diet. There was also an absence of the outer segments of photoreceptors, while the inner segments were disorganized and shortened. The outer nuclear layer was also markedly reduced in thickness. These changes were not apparent in mice on an arginine-restricted diet. The findings were also confirmed by electron microscopy.

Muscle biopsy of patients with GA typically shows gross fatty changes with type 2 muscle fiber atrophy and tubular aggregates.