The root is one of the more unique characteristics of the tooth. It enables a single tooth to serve as a functional unit within the masticatory system through a firm, resilient skeletal anchorage and balanced transmission of occlusal force. Blood supply and sensation to our teeth are made possible by the neurovascular connection the root provides to neighboring nerves and vessels of the jaws.

A critical concept to be aware of is the high frequency of variability between the size, shape, length, and number of roots certain teeth can possess. These variations can impact a surgeon's difficulty extracting a given tooth, which is why a sound understanding of dental morphology is vital to surgical success in exodontia.

Tooth development proceeds reciprocally from cellular crosstalk between epithelial and mesenchymal cells. With the formation of the dental lamina, various cell types begin the process of organic tissue deposition. Enamel, a highly mineralized tissue forming the external layer of the crown, is deposited by differentiated cell types derived from the epithelium called ameloblasts. Dentin, which begins as a tissue matrix and lies just deep to enamel, is another mineralized substance deposited during tooth development and is produced by mesenchymal derivatives called odontoblasts. This back-and-forth deposition of mineralized tissue between ameloblasts and odontoblasts gives rise to the crown. Eventually, the deposit of enamel terminates at the level of the cementoenamel junction, which is the delineation between the most inferior extent of the crown and the most superior extent of the root.

The root of the tooth begins formation following the completion of crown development. Hertwig's epithelial root sheath, or HERS, acts as the growth center for root formation.

Various signaling pathways involved in tooth formation have been suggested in recent literature and are believed to promote the number and shapes of roots directly.

Root morphology tends to follow a pattern in most individuals. In the maxilla, central and lateral incisors traditionally have single, straight, and typically conical roots.

Because of the length of the root trunk, which often spans half the length of the root, maxillary first premolars are commonly associated with inadvertent root tip fractures during extraction. Unlike the maxillary first premolar, the maxillary second premolar is usually single-rooted and rarely presents with two roots or a bifurcated root phenotypically.

Maxillary first molars typically have two buccal roots and one larger palatal root.

In the mandible, central and lateral incisors have single roots, with central incisors often lacking apical curvature.

The mandibular first and second premolars typically present with single roots but may have bifurcated roots in rare situations. The root tips are often inclined distally, and the mandibular second premolar's root is usually longer than the first premolar's.

Finally, the mandibular third molars typically have two shorter, often parallel, mesial, and distal roots with a more pronounced taper than the first or second mandibular molars.