A pulmonary contusion causes injury to the lung parenchymal, leading to disruption of alveoli and capillaries, resulting in leakage of blood and other interstitial fluids (water and serum) across the alveolar-capillary membrane into lung tissue and alveolar space. Fluid in the alveolar space leads to alveolar edema and a decrease in the amount of surfactant, leading to alveolar collapse and atelectasis. Decreased lung compliance, ventilation-perfusion mismatch, and intra-pulmonary shunting result from the discoloration.

Lung injury due to pulmonary contusion leads to activation of the immune system, resulting in tissue macrophage activation, accumulation of blood leucocytes, and increased production of cytokines, chemokines, arachidonic acid metabolites, oxygen radicals, complement, and coagulation cascades.

Concurrent aspiration of gastric acid can complicate a pulmonary contusion by worsening the permeability of lung injury and increasing inflammatory response and progress to ARDS and pneumonia.

Three possible mechanisms are suggested for resulting in pulmonary contusion.

- **The spalling effect**leads to increased cell membrane permeability due to the interruption of the lipid layer when a pressure wave encounters a liquid-gas interface, such as the alveolar wall.

- **The inertial effect**, when a pressure wave encounters tissues with different densities, leads to a different rate of acceleration and deceleration, resulting in lighter alveoli stripping away from denser bronchial tissue.

- **The implosion effect**, when a pressure wave encounters tissues with air bubbles, compresses the gas within tissues, and a rebound leads to stretching and tearing of tissues due to over-expansion.