The facial muscles serve two major functions for the body: mastication and facial expressions. The primary muscles of mastication include the temporalis, medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid, and the masseter, although the mylohyoid and anterior digastric muscles also move the mandible and assist with the acts of chewing and swallowing. The masseter originates on the undersurface of the zygomatic arch and wraps around the angle of the mandible to provide forceful closure of the jaw. The temporalis has a similar function but originates as a large fan shape in the temporal fossa across the frontal, temporal, parietal, and sphenoid bones, then travels deep to the zygomatic arch and inserts on the coronoid process and ramus of the mandible. The medial pterygoid muscle originates on the lateral pterygoid plate of the sphenoid bone and inserts on the medial aspect of the mandibular ramus and angle, completing a sling with the masseter, which inserts on the lateral surface of the mandibular angle; the medial pterygoid aids closure of the jaw and protrusion of the chin. The lateral pterygoid muscle originates on the lateral pterygoid plate as well but inserts on the condyle of the mandible to assist with protrusion of the chin and opening of the jaw. The mylohyoid and anterior digastric muscles also serve to open the jaw, running from the hyoid bone to the inner aspect of the mandible.

There are far more muscles of facial expression than there are muscles of mastication. The mimetic muscles are considered to be an extension of the superficial musculoaponeurotic system (SMAS) of the face, which is a fascial plane deep to the subcutaneous tissue but superficial to the muscles of mastication, running from the platysma in the neck up to the galea aponeurotica and the temporoparietal fascia under the scalp.

Continuing around the oral commissure from lateral to medial along the lower lip is the risorius, which pulls the corner of the mouth directly outward, and the deeper buccinator tightens the cheek to prevent food pocketing while chewing. The depressor anguli oris (also known as the triangularis) is a continuation of the platysma muscle that pulls down on the corner of the mouth, and just medial to that is the depressor labii inferioris. Lastly, the mentalis is an unpaired muscle of the chin that allows protrusion of the lower lip. All of these perioral muscles insert onto the orbicularis oris, which is the sphincter muscle that allows closure of the lips and permits articulate speech. In the neck, the platysma muscles are large sheets that produce vertical bands during contraction and may aid with lower lip depression. Laterally, the superior, posterior, and anterior auricular muscles move the pinna around subtly, which may have had a role in sound localization during evolution many millennia ago. There are also a number of small muscles lying upon the cartilage of the pinna itself, and these have no apparent extant function either. In some patients, a temporoparietalis muscle also exists within the temporoparietal fascia, which may help elevate the auricle and apply tension to the scalp; its function is far from critical. What makes the muscles of facial expression unique is that while most other skeletal muscles in the body serve to move bones, the mimetic muscles originate on bone and insert in the dermis, serving to manipulate the skin and soft tissues.