After the implementation of sterile techniques to prepare the femoral catheterization site and application of local anesthesia, the angiographic needle is inserted into the common femoral artery below the inguinal ligament at an angle of 45 degrees or less. The fluoroscopic device can be used to ensure the location of an angiographic needle into the common femoral artery as the arterial puncture above the inguinal ligament is strongly associated with retroperitoneal hemorrhage, and arterial puncture at or below the femoral artery bifurcation is associated with acute limb ischemia. After ensuring adequate placement of the radiographic needle, the J-tip of 0.035" guidewire gets inserted and advanced through the angiographic needle into the femoral artery. The angiographic needle is removed over the guidewire while keeping the guidewire in place. A small incision with the help of the blade is made in the skin at the site of insertion of the guidewire to facilitate insertion of the sheath introducer. With the help of an introducer dilator to be inserted over the guidewire and advanced it in a rotary fashion into the femoral artery, the sheath tract can further be prepared to facilitate the insertion of the introducer sheath into the artery. The introducer sheath gets placed over the guidewire, and then 0.035 guidewire is removed while leaving the introducer sheath in the arterial lumen. It is followed by the insertion of a J-tube of the 0.018" guidewire (IABP guide wire) through the introducer sheath and advanced into the thoracic aorta.

The IABP catheter is prepared for insertion. Balloon preparation is by establishing a vacuum with the help of a syringe by applying aspiration, and the central catheter lumen is flushed with sterile saline to ensure patency. The IABP catheter is inserted and advanced over the 0.018" guidewire to the proper positioning of the balloon in the aorta. The location of the intra-aortic balloon with its tip lying distal to the left subclavian artery and the proximal portion ending above the origin of renal arteries is considered as the ‘safe zone,’ and the confirmation of position can be by chest x-ray or fluoroscopy. Following guidewire removal, and the central lumen of the catheter is flushed and connected to the transducer to measure intra-aortic pressure. The IABP catheter gets connected to the extender catheter, which then connects to the IABP console.