Classically, angiography has referred to studies done under fluoroscopy; however, the advent of rapid CT image acquisition has led to CT angiography. Classic angiography is now predominantly found in the interventional radiology suite and the cardiac catheter lab. CT angiography is often utilized because it is faster, costs less, and is less user-dependent. The sensitivity of CT vs. fluoroscopic evaluation depends on the indication. The spatial resolution is higher with fluoroscopic angiography; however, the ability to define surrounding structures or contrast resolution is far superior to CT. While many studies came from the fluoroscopy suite, CT angiography has become the standard in many situations.

The use of IV contrast in CT angiography relies on the combination of contrast enhancement curve and timing of the study. Fluoroscopic evaluation utilizes small intravascular boluses administered in real-time by a physician. The real-time evaluation allows the physician to adapt the study to the findings, allowing targeted evaluation of multiple areas and more judicious use of contrast. CT temporal resolution is limited to a few time points that can be assessed but can cover larger areas with the larger boluses utilized.

MRI angiography, like CT angiography, is quickly becoming clinically advantageous. A classic scenario is the MRI of the head and neck to evaluate vasculature following a transient ischemic attack. One advantage of utilizing MRI is that some vasculature can be evaluated without contrast, utilizing the flow properties of moving blood.