Subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord is most commonly caused by a deficiency in vitamin B12. The primary sources of vitamin B12 are dietary and include meat, eggs, and dairy products. Vitamin B12 obtained from these products is absorbed in the ileum along with the intrinsic factor produced from the parietal cells in the stomach. Alteration at the level of dietary intake, absorption, or intrinsic factor activity can cause vitamin B12 deficiency and, in turn, the neurological manifestations of subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord.

Dietary deficiency is an unlikely cause of vitamin B12 deficiency as liver stores last up to 3 years. However, in patients that are strict vegans or the elderly, particularly those in assisted facilities, dietary deficiencies have been identified as causes for vitamin B12 deficiency.

Vitamin B12 deficiency can be suspected as the cause of unexplained anemia in patients who have other autoimmune conditions such as vitiligo or thyroiditis. In such patients, pernicious anemia can be identified as the cause. It is an autoimmune condition where antibodies are formed against the parietal cells in the stomach, decreasing the production of the intrinsic factor and altering the absorption of vitamin B12.

Malabsorption as a cause of vitamin B12 deficiency can be due to loss of intrinsic factor seen in patients post gastrectomy or after gastric bypass surgery. Malabsorption is also found after the loss of absorption surface area in the ileum in patients with surgical resection following Crohn disease. It has also been associated with fish tapeworm infestations which compete with the host for vitamin B12 absorption. Certain medications such as metformin, proton pump inhibitors, and nitrous oxide have been associated with vitamin B12 deficiency as well.