The pathophysiology of SSc is complex and not completely understood. The hallmarks of the disease are (1) vascular insult, (2) autoimmunity, and (3) tissue fibrosis. SSc has several clinical phenotypes, which can be attributed to differences in the contribution of these in the pathogenesis of the disease in each patient.

The initial vascular insult in SSc can be triggered by several factors, including viruses, environmental exposures, autoantibodies, proteolytic enzymes, and inflammatory cytokines. This initial vascular insult leads to endothelial cell activation, followed by overexpression of adhesion molecules, leading to the activation of platelets and thrombotic and fibrinolytic cascades. Activated endothelial cells also release ET-1, a potent vasoconstrictor, and promote adhesion of leukocytes, the proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells, and activation of fibroblasts. Activated endothelial cells transdifferentiate into mesenchymal cells with prominent functional abnormalities such as impaired responsiveness to vasodilators such as nitric oxide and prostacyclins. Activated platelets release thromboxane-A2, PDGF, and TGF-β and activate thrombin, leading to coagulation, thrombosis, vasoconstriction, and fibroblast activation. Thus, this initial vascular insult eventually leads to tissue hypoxia. Patients with SSc have an impaired compensatory vascular repair mechanism along with widespread microangiopathy and a loss of microvasculature in addition to diminished angiogenesis, which leads to chronic tissue hypoxia and oxidative stress.

Immune dysregulation and inflammation play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of SSc, with dysregulation of both innate and humoral immune systems. Activated T-cells are predominant in the tissue as well as peripheral blood in SSc. Patients with SSc have an imbalance of the T-helper 1/T-helper 2 (Th1/Th2) cytokines with a predominant Th2 profile. This Th2 profile skewing leads to more fibrosis by collagen synthesis and myofibroblast transdifferentiation due to more pro-fibrotic cytokines such as TGF-β, IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, and less anti-fibrotic cytokines such as Interferon-γ. Activated macrophages, monocytes, and dendritic cells further promote vascular injury and fibrosis by activating T-cells and B-cells and producing pro-fibrotic and pro-inflammatory cytokines. Humoral autoimmunity and autoantibodies are present in almost all patients with SSc. Activated B-cells produce autoantibodies that are considered directly pathological, in addition to serving as diagnostic markers. Further, autoantibody profiles are specific and are strongly associated with specific disease phenotypes.

The result of vascular injury and inflammation due to autoimmunity leads to tissue fibrosis by mesenchymal cell activation and differentiation, irreversible extra-cellular matrix accumulation, uncontrolled fibroblast activation, persistent myofibroblasts, increase in microvascular pericyte compartment, and pathologic epithelial-mesenchymal transition.