The use of opioids and chronic opioid therapy in the treatment of chronic pain is always a risk versus benefit consideration which must be reassessed on a continuing basis in order to help assure that the benefits outweigh the risks as well as in order to minimize the potential long-term risks and side effects of opioid medications such as dependence addiction constipation as well as OIE. Opioid medications may have an important role in treating and managing a patient's chronic pain and when opioid cessation is not possible, and chronic opioid therapy is indicated, treating the potential side effects of opioid medications such as opioid-induced endocrinopathy should be addressed accordingly.

In men, there appears to be widespread consensus that revolves around testosterone replacement therapy. In order to maintain stable testosterone levels, stable modes of release testosterone treatment may include buccal, gel, cream, and transdermal patch release formulations. IV route administration of testosterone therapy may attribute to unstable serum levels over the aforementioned forms. Hormone replacement therapy should include follow-up laboratory assessments at approximately 2 to 3-week intervals so that dosages are titrated appropriately.

Although testosterone replacement therapy in males is well-supported and common, there appears to be relatively little evidence supporting this treatment in women. This may be due to, in part, the constantly fluctuating baseline hormone levels, which can complicate and impede the ability to verify the successful restoration of the HPG and HPA axes. For this reason, guidelines on hormone replacement in females are not well-established or documented. In females, hormone replacement in the form of estrogen-methyltestosterone is only approved for the treatment of postmenopausal vasomotor symptoms. DHEAS supplementation has shown promise in the female patient pool with reports of increased energy, increased libido, and weight loss having been found. This treatment, however, remains less well-established and controversial.

Opioid rotation may be a viable option, as many patients may not tolerate the adverse effects associated with hormone replacement. This may be fruitful in the female patient population as a treatment choice before hormone supplementation is considered. Opioid rotation is a concept of switching the current opioid class for an equipotent opioid dosage since different opioids will bind different receptor subtypes (mu, delta, kappa) with varying affinities (differential binding), hence potentially mitigating their inhibitory effect on the HPG and HPA axis.

It is important to realize that certain classes of opioids may inherently possess more sedative effects than others for certain patients, thereby impacting a patient's perception of fatigue or decreased libido as being brought on by the OIE disease process, or as being a direct side effect from the opioid regimen itself. Opioids with sedative effects include morphine, and methadone, while potentially less-sedative opioids include oxycodone and Suboxone. Other potential benefits of opioid rotation include the fact that there is incomplete cross-tolerance between various opioids, which therefore allows an overall dose-reduction and lowering of the overall milligram morphine equivalent (MME).