Fluphenazine has an adverse effect profile similar to other first-generation or typical antipsychotics, which is due to its dopamine receptor antagonism as well as its anticholinergic, antihistaminic, and alpha-adrenergic antagonistic properties. Common side effects include sedation, dry mouth, dry eyes, blurred vision, constipation, orthostasis, dizziness, hypotension, and urinary retention. Other possible side effects include rebound tachycardia, urinary retention, and weight gain. Due to dopaminergic antagonism, fluphenazine can cause extrapyramidal symptoms, including akathisia, parkinsonian features such as resting tremor and shuffling gait, acute dystonic reactions, oculogyric crises, opisthotonos, and tardive dyskinesia.

Extrapyramidal side effects of fluphenazine and other antipsychotics are manageable with medications such as benztropine or sodium benzoate. Additionally, prolactin-induced side effects of galactorrhea, gynecomastia in men, sexual dysfunction, and in females, amenorrhea, or off-cycle bleeding can occur. Rare but serious side effects include neuroleptic malignant syndrome, liver function abnormalities and jaundice, seizures, and agranulocytosis. Like other antipsychotic medications, fluphenazine carries a black-box warning for increased risk of cerebrovascular events and death in elderly patients with psychosis related to the major neurocognitive disorder. There are reports of allergic reactions with the use of fluphenazine and other phenothiazine typical antipsychotics. Reports also exist of electrocardiogram abnormalities with the use of fluphenazine and various other antipsychotics; QT-interval prolongation, as well as T-wave abnormalities, have been associated with fluphenazine use.