Ghrelin contributes to a large number of bodily functions, including appetite regulation and fat storage, inhibition of insulin secretion, stimulation of growth hormone release, reward processing, increased gastric acid secretion, intestinal motility, and other potential effects. It circulates in 2 forms, acyl-Ghrelin, and des-acyl ghrelin.

Ghrelin’s notable effects of appetite stimulation, increased food intake, and increased fat storage have dubbed it the “hunger hormone.” Ghrelin acts on the hypothalamus, an area of the brain which contains the satiety center which is responsible for appetite regulation. Ghrelin is thought to be part of a neural network that is involved in feeding regulation, modulating the appetitive response to food cues as well as increasing brain response in areas responsible for visual processing, attention, and memory associated with images of food.

Ghrelin is also known to inhibit insulin secretion in both humans and animals, thereby increasing blood glucose levels. In clinical studies, the administration of ghrelin in humans has resulted in increased glucose levels with little change in insulin levels.

Another function of ghrelin is the stimulation of growth hormone (GH) release from the pituitary gland. Exogenous ghrelin has been found to stimulate growth hormone release from the pituitary via a mechanism involving endogenous GH-releasing hormone.

Ghrelin is also known to act on reward-processing regions of the brain such as the amygdala; its binding activates the cholinergic-dopaminergic reward link, potentially contributing to food and alcohol addiction.

Additionally, ghrelin has been found to stimulate gastric motility as well as gastric acid secretion via a mechanism involving the vagal nerve.

Ghrelin is also thought to be involved in sleep-wake cycle regulation. Studies have shown that shorter sleep duration is associated with elevated levels of ghrelin and reduced leptin.