The diagnosis of intestinal malrotation is suspected in an infant who presents with bilious emesis, acute duodenal, or bowel obstruction with or without abdominal tenderness. In older children and adults, abdominal pain onset may be more variable. The diagnostic approach focuses on the clinical presentation. If intestinal perforation with peritonitis is suspected, rapid resuscitation with emergent operative exploration is required.

If a patient is thermodynamically stable, the diagnosis is usually confirmed by radiologic evaluation. When malrotation with volvulus or malrotation with bowel obstruction is suspected, a nasogastric or orogastric tube is placed on low intermittent suction. Correction of fluid and electrolyte deficits is initiated, and broad-spectrum antibiotics are administered before surgery. The acute intervention in the setting of volvulus is emergent surgical intervention.

**Surgical Care**

Surgery does not correct malrotation but rather widens the mesenteric pedicle to prevent future volvulus. The Ladd procedure is performed by reducing the volvulus (if present) by rotating the bowel in a counterclockwise direction, dividing of mesenteric (Ladd) bands, placing the small bowel on the right abdomen, and large bowel on the left of the abdomen, and performing an appendectomy. Published reports for laparoscopic Ladd procedure have demonstrated that it is a reliable procedure but with a possible need for conversion to an open surgical approach and an associated learning curve.

Laparoscopy is also very helpful in the non-acute setting, especially in situations where an elective Ladd procedure is taking place or in older children and adults. While there have been no prospective studies comparing open to laparoscopic malrotation, neither technique has been demonstrated as superior in decreasing the recurrence of recurrent volvulus.

Appendectomy is performed for two main reasons: the location of the appendix in the left upper quadrant may make the diagnosis of appendicitis atypical and challenging to diagnose. Additionally, the appendiceal artery may become damaged during dissection of the Ladd bands.

**Midgut Volvulus**

If midgut volvulus is present, the small and large intestines are delivered outside the abdomen to detorse the volvulus. Then the surgeon must decide the viability of the intestine. If bowel viability is in question, it is left in place and reassessed through a second look laparotomy after 12-24 hours to make an accurate decision regarding the extent of required resection. If a second-look laparotomy is anticipated following bowel detorsion, the Ladd procedure should not be completed until the patient's condition stabilized, the patient is adequately resuscitated, and the bowel viability is confirmed.

Identify any extrinsic obstruction on the duodenum after relieving the volvulus if present and caused by the peritoneal bands, ligate them with care to protect the superior mesenteric vessel (SMA). The bands may also obstruct other surrounding structures. Obstruction may be due to the cecum, colon, or superior mesenteric artery (SMA). Relieve obstruction, place the cecum in addition to its mesentery in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen, followed by exposing the full length of the anterior part of the duodenum, then pass an NG tube through the duodenum to assess for the presence of intrinsic obstruction.