Elderly female patients are more likely to have osteoporosis that puts them at risk of fractures secondary to a ground level fall. Due to the strength of the femur bone, young patients often sustain femur fractures from high-energy trauma such as motor vehicle accidents or falls from a significant height. Unless the patients have high surgical risks or severe comorbidities, all femur fractures are managed operatively to allow patients earlier ambulation and improved quality of life. Main complications that lead to revision include avascular necrosis, aseptic nonunion and periprosthetic fracture.

In regard to a proximal femur fracture, the decision to pursue arthroplasty versus internal fixation depends on the fracture pattern and characteristic. An intracapsular fracture that involves the femoral neck is more likely to disrupt blood supply from the deep branch of the medial femoral circumflex artery than an extracapsular fracture. Thus, arthroplasty with replacement of the femoral head is more appropriate to avoid the risk of avascular necrosis if treated with intramedullary (IM) nail and screws.

Femoral neck fractures are evaluated by plain film x-ray and can be classified using the Garden classification. Garden I is an incomplete femoral neck fracture that is minimally displaced or valgus impacted. Garden II is a complete fracture with minimal displacement. Garden III is a complete fracture with less than 50% displacement. Garden IV is a complete fracture with more than 50% displacement. However, it is difficult to classify the fractures on X-ray, so femoral neck fractures are mostly classified as displaced (Garden I and II) or nondisplaced (Garden III and IV). Nondisplaced fractures are treated with cancellous lag screws or sliding hip screw. Both techniques have about the same outcomes and complications. Cancellous lag screws are associated with shorter operative time and less blood loss. However, cancellous lag screws also have a higher revision rate compared to sliding hip screw due to prominent lag screw head irritation of soft tissue as the naturally femoral neck shortens postoperatively.

Distal femur fractures are complicated injuries that should be evaluated by CT scan because more than half of distal femur fractures are intra-articular and the type of surgical treatment depends on whether there is joint space involvement. Extra-articular fractures are treated with anterograde or retrograde intramedullary (IM) nail, plate, blade or screws. Retrograde IM nail has better outcomes and lower revision and infection rates compared to open reduction internal fixation with plate, blade or screws. Anterograde IM nail has comparable outcomes to retrograde IM nail. Some stable and nondisplaced intra-articular fractures can be treated with retrograde IM nail, but most intra-articular fractures should be managed as total knee arthroplasty (TKA). However, elderly patients who undergo TKA have a high morbidity and mortality, so patient selection is important. TKA revisions have worse outcomes than primary TKA.