There are five parts of an Apgar score. Each category is weighted evenly and assigned a value of 0, 1, or 2. The components are then added together to give a total score that is recorded at 1 and 5 minutes after birth. A score of 7 to 10 is considered reassuring, a score of 4 to 6 is moderately abnormal, and a score of 0 to 3 is deemed to be low in full-term and late preterm infants. At 5 minutes, when an infant has a score of less than 7, Neonatal Resuscitation Program guidelines recommend continued recording at 5-minute intervals up to 20 minutes. It should be noted that scoring during resuscitation is not equivalent to that of an infant not undergoing resuscitation because resuscitative efforts alter several elements of the score.

The score is calculated as follows:

**Breathing Effort**

- If the infant is not breathing, the respiratory score is 0.

- If respirations are slow and irregular, weak or gasping, the respiratory score is 1.

- If the infant is crying vigorously, the respiratory score is 2.

**Heart Rate**

- Note, heart rate is evaluated with a stethoscope, and it is the most critical part of the score in determining the need for resuscitation.

- If there is no heartbeat, the heart rate score is 0.

- If the heart rate is less than 100 beats per minute, the heart rate score is 1.

- If the heart rate is more than 100 beats per minute, the heart rate score is 2.

**Muscle Tone**

- If the muscle tone is loose and floppy without activity, the score for muscle tone is 0.

- If the infant demonstrates some tone and flexion, the score for muscle tone is 1.

- If the infant is in active motion with a flexed muscle tone that resists extension, the score for muscle tone is 2.

**Grimace Response or Reflex Irritability in Response to Stimulation**

- If there is no response to stimulation, the reflex irritability response score is 0.

- If there is grimacing in response to stimulation, the reflex irritability response score is 1.

- If the infant cries, coughs, or sneezes on stimulation, the reflex irritability response is 2.

**Color**

- Note, most infants will score 1 for color as peripheral cyanosis is common among normal infants. Color can also be misleading in non-white infants.

- If the infant is pale or blue, the score for color is 0.

- If the infant is pink, but the extremities are blue, the score for color is 1.

- If the infant is entirely pink, the score for color is 2.