T-cell function is dependent on the type of T cell. The major T cells are CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T cells, and T regulatory cells (i.e., suppressor T cells). Several other minor types of T cells exist that are beyond this article.

CD8+ T cells, also known as killer T cells (or cytotoxic T cells), are effector cells for cell-mediated immunity. Initially, CD8+ T cells are naive and must be activated to begin effector functions (i.e., immune functions). This activation occurs by interaction with pro-APCs (“professional” antigen-presenting cells), mainly dendritic cells in lymph nodules/follicles, and leads to an intracellular pathway that up-regulates more antigen-specific TCRs on the T cell and leads to effector functions. T cells can only recognize protein-based antigens. TCRs (T-cell receptor and their co-receptors, such as CD3 and CD8) found on these cells form a complex with the MHC 1 receptor and the antigen in question. Once an activated CD8+ migrates into circulation and finds its antigenic target (expressed on a virally infected cell or cell with intracellular bacteria, for example), it utilizes its killing function.Listeria species or a virally infected cell). The second method that activated CD8+ T cells can use for their killing function involves the release of granzymes and perforin (two compounds that bypass cell walls and active caspases). Activated CD8+ T cells also secrete IFN-? (a cytokine used in the activation of macrophages/other immune processes).

CD4+ T cells, also known as helper T cells, are effector cells for cell-mediated immunity. Initially, CD4+ T cells are naïve and must be activated to begin effector functions (i.e., immune functions). This activation occurs by interaction with pro-APCs (“professional” antigen-presenting cells), mainly dendritic cells in lymph nodules/follicles, which leads to an intracellular pathway that up-regulates more antigen-specific TCRs on the T cell and leads to effector functions. T cells can only recognize protein-based antigens. TCRs (T cell receptor and their co-receptors, such as CD3 and CD4) found on these cells form a complex with the MHC 2 receptor and the antigen in question. The CD4+ cells are then activated and produce cytokines to initiate immune responses from other white blood cells/other immune cells of cell-mediated immunity. They also activate the T cell-dependent branch of humoral immunity, in which CD4+ T cells recognize protein antigens (which normally would elicit a weak or absent B cell response) and activate B cells to produce immunoglobulin in response to the antigen.

There are three different subtypes of CD4+ T cells, each with a unique function: TH1 CD4+ T cells, TH2 CD4+ T cells, and TH17 CD4+ T cells. TH1 CD4+ cells are important in the activation of macrophages and fighting off intracellular infections. They secrete the cytokine IFN-gamma which activates macrophages, B cells (to produce IgG) and increased surface expression of the MHC 2 markers on macrophages/antigen-presenting cells. TNF-a is also secreted by these cells to activate dendritic cell migration. The activated macrophages then produced IL-12, which increases differentiation/production of TH1 T cells, further amplifying the immune response. TH1 T cells also play roles in several autoimmune reactions and disease, notably in delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH). TH2 CD4+ T cells are important in combating helminthic infections. These T cells produce IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13, which activate and expand mast cells and eosinophils to clear the parasitic infection.

The last major type of T cells is the T regulatory cell (also known as suppressor T cells). These cells modulate immune responses and inhibit autoimmune processes (such as autoreactive immune cells). T regulatory cells produce inhibitory IL-10 and IL-35 cytokines to control immune responses, as well as using CTLA-4 to inhibit B7 on antigen-presenting cells to decrease immune responses. Production of T regulatory cells is spurred by cytokine IL-2 (so much so that in autoimmune disease IL-2 is often absent) and TGF-beta. T regulatory cells express the TCR (CD3), CD4 (they likely share a common lineage with CD4+ Helper T cells), CTLA-4 and CD25. They also express the biomarker FOXP3 (a transcription marker important in their development and immune functions). There has been a recent interest in T regulatory cells as a method to promote wound healing after surgery and to battle cancers.