LPS is a serologically reactive bacterial toxin, and as little as 1 to 2 mg entered intravenously can be lethal. LPS can enter the bloodstream through intestinal absorption of the LPS produced by gut bacteria. The LPS does not damage the gut epithelium of the luminal side. However, it can induce toxicity if it reaches the basal side, which has exposure to the deeper tissues. The body has developed compartmentalization to prevent high amounts of LPS from entering the bloodstream. However, gut lesions or a diet rich in lipids facilitate transport across the membrane into the systemic circulation.

A weak immune system is another breach in the barrier that leads to the endotoxic effects of LPS during an infection process. If allowed to progress unabated, it can lead to serious consequences such as septic shock or hypotension. Bacterial modifications in LPS structure, mostly the Lipid A portion, are a sophisticated strategy employed by Gram-negative bacteria to adapt to the host environment. Recently, there have been suggestions that certain types of autoimmune diseases and allergies may correlate with LPS. A large cohort study conducted on the fecal samples from North European infants indicates that the presence of Bacteroides species LPS is associated with higher levels of food allergy and anti-insulin antibodies, indicating early signs of immune dysfunction. On the other hand, high levels of bacteria from the genus Bifidobacterium correlates with the development of a healthy immune system. Thus, LPS from the gut may assist in the development of the immune system in infants.

Besides lipid-binding protein (LBP), lipopolysaccharide-binding proteins are carriers for LPS in the blood. They can transfer LPS either to the macrophages or to the serum carrier lipoproteins (HDL and LDL). The transfer of LPS to macrophages initiates signal transduction to induce proinflammatory cytokines, while the delivery of LPS to HDL or LDL compromises the immune reaction against the infection. Additionally, the binding of LPS to lipoproteins induces dyslipidemia.