Contrast material, radiologic table, X-ray tubes, monitor, fluoroscope, and detector are required to perform the test.

The patient must empty the bladder before the procedure. Images should systematically be obtained to improve the visualization of stones and increase the soft-tissue contrast.

Oblique radiographs help confirm the position and nature of calcifications. This view is vital in cases where the patient may have signs of urinary tract calculus, but none is otherwise observable on the AP view.

Although unenhanced computed tomography has replaced intravenous pyelography (IVP) in the evaluation of flank pain, IVP might play a role in the follow-ups of these patients. Adjustments after contrast administration can be made based on preliminary images. The initial images play a vital role as they indicate urinary causes for the patient’s discomfort and also indirectly help detect other abdominal pathologies.

The standard procedure for pyelography consists of the following steps

- A set of preliminary images (Kidney-ureter-bladder [KUB] radiograph) is necessary before contrast administration. This imaging is a crucial step and should not be missed. Additional oblique images can also be helpful.

- Next, a bolus of contrast should be administered.

- After 1 to 3 minutes of contrast administration, nephrographic images should be obtained. (Oblique images are also an option.)

- A KUB radiograph should follow five minutes after contrast administration.

- Apply abdominal compression immediately after getting a KUB radiograph.

- Five minutes after compression, obtain pyelographic images during early bladder filling.

- Immediately after the release of compression, obtain a KUB radiograph and fluoroscopic spot images of ureters.

- Obtain the radiographic image of the bladder.