General approach: Educating the patient about CSH and what might trigger an event (explain the events, cardioinhibitory or vasopressor); i.e., avoid tight collar dressing, chiropractic activities around the neck, or manipulation around the carotid sinus besides the control of associated medical conditions (for example hypertension, diabetes, etc.).

Asymptomatic patients who fulfill the criteria for CSH diagnosis without developing an event need no further evaluation (this finding is when approaching syncope diagnosis for a reason other than CSH).

Asymptomatic patients who develop an event during monitored carotid massage (supervised) and otherwise asymptomatic need no further treatment except for avoiding triggers and controlling other medical issues.

Symptomatic patients treatment depend on the CSH subtype:

- Vasopressor subtype maintaining a proper status of hydration and salt intake up to 6 gm/day if not contraindicated (hypertension and congestive heart failure) is enough to control most of the cases, if still symptomatic adding fludrocortisone (mineralocorticoid) or midodrine (alpha-adrenergic agonist) if not contraindicated as hypertension is usually existed in CSH population, adjusting the medication dosage and timing is important in avoiding hypertension and CSH events.

- The cardioinhibitory subtype, the use of a dual-chamber pacemaker, is the cornerstone of the management, the reason beyond using a dual-chamber pacer is because that in some cases there is a complete block at the AV node and dual-chamber pacemaker can overcome this via stimulating both the atria and the ventricles. It is also wise to use a pacemaker in the mixed subtype. However, in this case, an event development is still possible because of the vasopressor component in the mixed type, but the incidence of events is decreased with pacemaker placement, especially if the vasopressor is managed properly.

- There is an association between sick sinus syndrome (SSS) and CSH, and they coexist in 26% of cases, hereby, pacemaker placement is both beneficial for the two cases.

- Surgical or radiologic denervation of the carotid sinus was previously used to treat CSH. However, they are not used anymore because of their complications.