Hydroceles can be diagnosed on clinical grounds, as discussed in the history and physical section. However, in the presence of any concomitant medical condition or to exclude other medical or surgical conditions, further studies, including laboratory or imaging, should be considered.

**Laboratory Studies**

These are indicated to exclude other surgical or medical conditions that may be in the differential diagnosis.

- **Inguinal Hernia:**Laboratory tests are usually not indicated, but in the case of an incarcerated inguinal hernia, which can mimic hydrocele, leukocytosis can aid in the differentiation. Negative transillumination and palpable bowel at the deep ring on the digital examination is more consistent with an inguinal hernia.

- **Testicular Tumor:**Serum alpha-fetoprotein and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels are indicated if there is suspicion of malignant teratomas or other germ cell tumors.

- **Epididymitis/Orchitis:**These conditions can lead to secondary or reactive hydroceles. In such cases, urinalysis and urine culture may be useful.

**Imaging Studies**

These are helpful in diagnosing and evaluating hydrocele. They can also assess for underlying processes such as epididymitis, testicular torsion, or testicular tumor.

**Ultrasonography:**Scrotal pain or failure to delineate the testicular anatomy on palpation is an indication for ultrasonography as it provides excellent detail of testicular parenchyma. During the ultrasonography examination, hydrocele appears as an anechoic or echolucent area surrounding the testis. Ultrasonography could also help with the sizing and characterization of the hydrocele. Spermatoceles, testicular tumors, and testicular atrophy can be easily distinguished via ultrasonography. The patient should be examined in both supine and upright positions as hydrocele has a tendency to reduce into the abdomen based on the position of the patient.****

**Duplex Ultrasonography:**It provides information regarding testicular blood flow, which will be reduced or absent in hydroceles resulting from testicular torsions. However, in the case of hydroceles secondary to epididymitis, the epididymal flow would be increased. In addition, duplex studies help identify the Valsalva augmented regurgitant flow in varicoceles.

**Plain Abdominal Radiography:**In an incarcerated inguinal hernia, one may see gas overlying the groin.