**Ophthalmological**

Histological findings in advanced stages of ocular onchocerciasis are characterized by chronic sclerosing keratitis and pannus formation, chronic uveitis, and secondary glaucoma. The presence of microfilariae, both dead and viable, was demonstrated in all ocular tissues from the cornea to the optic disc, except the crystalline lens.

Inflammatory cells, including eosinophils, plasma cells, and to a lesser extent, lymphocytes have been identified to be present in the acute response to dead microfilariae in the cornea and elsewhere in the eye.

Pannus formation is seen as a direct consequence of the sclerosing keratitis and the mobilization of new capillaries, fibroblasts, and inflammatory cells, including abundant plasma cells and eosinophils. Typically the pannus exists above the Bowman’s membrane.

**Dermatological**

Histology of the early stages of the onchocerciasis dermal lesion will reveal microfilariae concentrated within the papillary dermis. This is often associated with clusters of inflammatory cells. Dying larvae induces a response typified by microabscess formation and granuloma. Advanced stages of onchocerciasis typically manifest with acanthosis, parakeratosis, melanophagocytosis, and pigment incontinence.

Onchocercal nodule represents a subcutaneous ball of the Onchocerca worms, which is embedded in an inflammatory granuloma. It is also known as an onchocercoma. Onchocerca worms can become calcified or degenerated in the dermis and cause scarring and atrophy. Cutaneous onchocerciasis may feature an acute or chronic papular onchodermatitis, lichenified onchodermatitis, atrophy, and depigmentation.