Patients with appendicitis typically present with abdominal pain localizing to the right lower quadrant. Emergency department triage staff should be familiar with the presenting signs and symptoms of acute appendicitis to facilitate urgent admission and treatment.

While the patient is undergoing further clinical evaluation, IV access should be obtained, and fluids, pain medication, and antibiotics administered as ordered. Imaging study orders should indicate the possibility of acute appendicitis. In addition, a pregnancy test should be performed in patients of childbearing age with a uterus.

After a presumptive diagnosis of appendicitis, the surgeon should coordinate with the patient and interprofessional team to determine the preferred surgical approach. The pharmacist should evaluate potential drug interaction allergies and report any concerns to the interprofessional team. Before surgery, the anesthesiologist and surgical assistant should be notified of the patient’s scenario and surgical plan. The operating room staff should ensure all necessary instruments and materials are available. Postoperatively, the nurse should monitor for acute changes in vital signs or symptoms and report findings to the team.

Early recognition of the signs and symptoms of appendicitis lowers rates of complications to improve outcomes. Laparoscopic appendectomy is an effective and safe method for treating uncomplicated appendicitis and may also be performed safely in patients with perforated appendicitis. [Level 1, 2] The laparoscopic approach is associated with lower morbidity and mortality rates and shorter stays regardless of whether abscesses developed or perforations occurred. [Level 2] Developing consistent operative methods decreases operating time, costs, and complications.