Treatment, unfortunately, for PLP has not proven to be very effective. While treatment for RLP tends to focus on an organic cause for the pain, PLP focuses on symptomatic control.

**Pharmacotherapy**

- NSAIDs/Tylenol are the most commonly used treatment for PLP.

- Opioids. Although observational and randomized controlled trials have demonstrated the effectiveness of certain opioids such as tapentadol for neuropathic pain

- Antidepressants are commonly used for addressing PLP. Amitryptiline, in particular, tends to be the tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) of choice as it has shown the best overall results, but other studies looking at nortriptyline and desipramine have shown them to be equally effective. However, most of these studies were not very rigorous and in a 6 week randomized trial between amitriptyline and placebo involving 39 patients, there was no significant difference between the two.

- Anticonvulsants (gabapentin, pregabalin) have shown mixed results.

- N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist mechanism is not clear. These drugs have been shown to have benefit in pain syndromes, primarily with ketamine and dextromethorphan. Memantine has had mixed results. In the Cochrane review of 6 studies that were included looking at memantine versus placebo, there was no statistical improvement in pain between the groups

- Beta-blockers (propranolol) and calcium channel blocker (nifedipine) show unclear data.

- Topical Analgesics like Capsaicin have been shown in some small studies to reduce hypersensitivity and PLP, but the evidence is still weak and requires more investigation.

- Botulinum toxin type B injections have been used to treat hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating) in the post-amputation patient. Hyperhidrosis can not only hinder the use of a prosthetic but can adversely affect the course of both the phantom limb and RLP. Treatment of hyperhidrosis with botulinum toxin type B injections has shown in several small studies to reduce RLP, PLP, and sweating.

- Local anesthetics. A Cochrane review looked at two studies examining the effectiveness of local anesthetics, lidocaine infusion at 4mg/kg and bupivacaine 0.25% as a contralateral myofascial injection, in treating PLP in randomized trials. The one-time contralateral myofascial injection of 1cc bupivacaine 0.25% showed significantly improved pain relief in the 8 patients studied

- Other pharmacological strategies such as calcitonin have no clear evidence.

**Non-Pharmacologic Options**

- Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) shows moderate evidence supporting its use. Low-frequency and high-intensity are thought to be the most effective for PLP. It may also be used to help relieve RLP.

- Mirror therapy. A small randomized trial of mirror therapy in patients with lower leg amputation showed a significant benefit of PLP.

- Biofeedback shows limited evidence.

- Acupuncture research is still ongoing.

- Spinal cord stimulation (SCS) is obtained through an implantable device that stimulates transdural dorsal columns of the spinal cord. It is often effective therapy for PLP.

- Apart from TENS and SCS, other neuromodulation approaches such as peripheral nerve stimulation (PNS) can be helpful for both PLP and RLP.

- Virtual and Augmented Reality has provided some novel opportunities to utilize technology as an advanced form of "mirror therapy."  Researchers have been able to program myoelectric movement patterns from the RLP into the virtual or augmented reality headsets and then correlate those movements to the movements of the "complete" limb in the virtual world.  This has been shown in several case studies to be effective treatments for PLP, but no large studies have been conducted.

- A sympathetic block may also help.

- Stump revision