Diphenhydramine can be given by tablet, capsule, or solution by mouth; by intramuscular (IM) or intravenous (IV) injection; or topically.

The following are recommended dosages for allergy symptoms:

**Mild Symptoms**

- Adult

- 25 to 50 mg by mouth/IM/IV every 4 to 6 hours as needed
- Max: 300 mg/day by mouth; 100 mg/dose up to 400 mg/day IM/IV

- Pediatric

- 2 to 5 years: 6.25 mg by mouth/IM/IV every 4 to 6 hours as needed; max 37.5 mg/day
- 6 to 11 years: 12.5 to 25mg by mouth/IM/IV every 4 to 6 hours as needed; max 150 mg/day
- 12 years and older: use adult dosing

**More Severe Symptoms**

- Adult

- 25-50 mg by mouth/IM/IV every 2 to 4 hours as needed
- Max: 300 mg/day by mouth; 100mg/dose up to 400 mg/day IM/IV

- Pediatric

- 2 to 11 years: 1-2mg/kg by mouth/IM/IV every 2 to 4 hours as needed; max: 300 mg/day by mouth; 100mg/dose up to 400 mg/day IM/IV
- 12 yo and older: use adult dosing

**Extrapyramidal Symptoms**

- 25 to 50 mg by mouth/IM/IV every 6 to 8 hours as needed

- Max 300 mg/day by mouth; 100 mg/dose up to 400 mg/day IM/IV

- Pediatric

- 2 to 11 years: 1 to 2 mg/kg by mouth/IM/IV every 6 to 6 hours as needed; max: 50 mg/dose up to 300 mg/day IM/IV
- 12 years and older: use adult dosing

**Insomnia (Short Treatment)**

- 25 to 50 mg by mouth at bedtime as needed, start 30min before bedtime

- Pediatric - 12 yo and older: 25 to 50 mg by mouth at bedtime as needed; start 30min before bedtime

**Motion Sickness Prevention**

- 25 to 50 mg by mouth/IM/IV every 4 to 6 hours as needed.

- Start 30 min before event; max 300 mg/day by mouth; 100 mg/dose up to 400 mg/day IM/IV

- Pediatric dose:

- 2 to 5 years: 6.25 mg by mouth/IM/IV every 4 to 6 hours as needed; start 30 min before the event; max 37.5 mg/day
- 6 to 11 years: 12.5 to 25mg by mouth/IM/IV every 4 to 6 hours as needed; start 30 min before the event; max 150 mg/day
- 12 years and older: use adult dosing

**Pruritis/Urticaria**

- 25 to 50 mg by mouth/IM/IV every 4 to 6 hours as needed. Max 300 mg/day by mouth; 100 mg/dose up to 400 mg/day IM/IV

- Pediatric

- 2 to 5 years: 6.25 mg by mouth/IM/IV every 4 to 6 hours as needed; max 37.5 mg/day
- 6 to 11 years: 12.5 to 25 mg by mouth/IM/IV every 4 to 6 hours as needed; max 150 mg/day
- 12 years and older: use adult dosing

**Sedation**

- 25 to 50 mg by mouth/IM/IV every 4 to 6 hours as needed. Max 300 mg/day by mouth; 100 mg/dose up to 400 mg/day IM/IV

**Pruritis/Urticaria (Topical Treatment)**

- Apply as needed; max 4 times/day

- For local anesthesia

- Prepare a 1% solution of diphenhydramine (10 mg/mL)
- Draw up the entire contents of a vial containing 50 mg/mL diphenhydramine into a 10 mL syringe. This should measure at a volume of 1 mL. 
- Dilute the contents of the syringe with four mL of 0.9% sodium chloride to yield a final volume of 5 mL. This is now diphenhydramine 1% (10 mg/mL).
- This use is off-label. 
- Watch for tissue necrosis.