# Introduction

Healthcare education is more complex now than ever before. Evolving practice patterns, learner time constraints, and the constant influx of new medical information have made it increasingly difficult for educators to expose trainees to the breadth and depth of clinical experiences necessary to develop proficiency and expertise.

Medical simulation has emerged as a powerful instructional technique that can replicate or amplify patient care scenarios through guided, interactive experiences and allow for feedback and assessment without putting real patients at risk.

Despite its growing popularity, different learners may have markedly disparate levels of experience with and acceptance of simulation as a training modality. As such, orienting learners to the medical simulation environment is a critical step in enhancing learner engagement and providing a safe and effective educational experience.

# Function

There are a number of potential barriers to providing effective experiential learning in the medical simulation environment. Some learners have no prior exposure to simulation, while others may have preconceived understandings of how to behave in the simulation environment based on their previous experiences. These participants may feel misled or humiliated if their expectations for the simulation session differ from those of the instructors and staff.

Learners may also find the realism of the simulation problematic, which can negatively impact their willingness and ability to immerse themselves in the fictional scenario and fully engage in the learning activity. Additionally, participants may have concerns about the logistical details of the simulation exercise, which can distract them from focusing on the learning objectives of the session. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, learners may feel exposed by the simulation experience in a manner that threatens their professional and social identity, which can lead to defensiveness and resentment.

Educators can directly address many of these potential threats to learner engagement by orienting participants to the medical simulation environment.

In such a setting, learners can fully engage in a challenging educational experience, venture beyond their intellectual and interpersonal comfort zones, and reflect on all aspects of their performance without worrying that they will be shamed or embarrassed.

# Issues of Concern

Instructors should conduct a complete orientation to the simulation environment at the start of each simulation session.

For learners who will participate in simulation as part of a larger training program (e.g., medical school, nursing school, medical residency), an initial orientation should ideally take place at the beginning of the program to lay the foundation for the many simulation sessions that will follow. Some educators may choose to record a video or provide reading materials to standardize the orientation process. However, these strategies should not replace a live prebriefing, as learners must receive an opportunity to voice their concerns and ask clarifying questions about the simulation experience.

# Curriculum Development

As part of the orientation to the simulation environment, educators should clarify the objectives and expectations for the simulation. When learners clearly understand what to expect and what is expected of them, they are more willing to engage and more likely to meet those expectations.

Educators should then state the intended learning objectives of the course.

Instructors should also discuss matters of confidentiality with the simulation participants. This may include a review of who will be observing the simulation activity and who will be informed of the learners’ performance. Faculty should obtain permission from learners if they wish to record or conduct research on the session. At the same time, participants should be instructed to refrain from divulging the details of the simulation experience to other learners. Addressing these privacy issues provides learners with clear expectations and empowers them to fully engage in the simulation and debriefing.

After reviewing the session goals and expectations, instructors should collaborate with learners to optimize the realism of the simulated environment. First, it is important to establish a “fiction contract,” an explicit agreement between faculty and participants to contribute to the success of the simulation experience.

Next, instructors should provide an orientation to the physical components of the simulation environment. This should include a detailed description of the features and limitations of the various simulation technologies (e.g., mannequins, task trainers) that might be utilized in the simulation exercise.

The faculty should provide clarification on the learners’ roles within the simulated environment.

Another key element of the prebriefing is to review the logistical details of the simulation session.

Faculty should also orient learners to the physical space in which the simulation experience will take place. It is important to highlight the specific locations of the simulation scenario and the accompanying debriefing, so that learners can move efficiently from one space to the next and minimize the gap time between their performance and the subsequent review of that performance.

Some learners must temporarily suspend their clinical work to participate in the simulation session. As such, instructors should clarify what learners should do if they receive pages or phone calls related to the care of real patients.

Finally, the orientation to the simulation environment should include a promise to respect learners’ intentions and perspectives.

# Clinical Significance

Simulation-based training has become an important component of medical education across many specialties and disciplines in healthcare. Providing trainees with an orientation to the medical simulation environment is an essential step in maximizing their engagement in the educational experience.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

To provide safe and effective patient care, medical professionals must utilize highly organized team-based strategies. There is abundant evidence from a wide range of healthcare disciplines indicating that simulation is an effective instructional technique for training and assessing teamwork behaviors, especially in high-risk, high-stress environments.