Five stages in the management of the patient with confirmed cardiopulmonary arrest are:

-  Initial evaluation plus Basic Life Support

-  Defibrillation

-  Advanced Life Support

-  Post-resuscitation care

-  Long-term management

Once the diagnosis of cardiopulmonary arrest is confirmed, then basic life support (BLS) and defibrillation can be carried out by the public, physicians, paramedical personnel, trained laypersons, and nurses. There is an increasing demand for specialized skills such as Advanced Life Support (ALS), post-resuscitation care, and long-term management of post cardiopulmonary arrest patients. The cardiopulmonary arrest could be reversed by two main interventions, i.e., early CPR and early Automated external defibrillation (AED). The first step involves recognition of the cardiopulmonary arrest and the BLS measures. If defibrillation is available for public use, then it should be activated and used if needed. Next, advanced life support (ALS) measures are used, involving IV/IO medication administration. If spontaneous circulation returns, then the case will undergo post-resuscitation care along with subsequent long-term management. The identification of a cardiopulmonary arrest victim includes ensuring that the patient is unresponsive, pulseless, and having abnormal breathing. Once the patient is identified, immediate CPR and activation of the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) should be done promptly. Nowadays, public access to defibrillation has been adding another layer of response.

**Initial Evaluation and BLS**

Confirming cardiopulmonary arrest need careful examination of the patient's level of consciousness, skin color, breathing movement, and arterial pulse either in the carotid or femoral artery. Just after confirming the arrest, the immediate responsibility of the rescuer is to call Emergency Medical Services and start CPR.

It is essential to diagnose the signs of aspirations of a foreign body in the respiratory tract, which includes severe stridor, dyspnea, suprasternal and intercostal retractions. It is recommended to do the Heimlich maneuver if we are suspecting aspiration.

Maintaining a patent airway is necessary for successful cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Maneuvers like chin lift, head tilt, and jaw thrust can be used to keep the airway patent. Any visible foreign bodies like displaced dentures should be removed from the oropharynx. Ventilatory aids like oropharyngeal airway (OPA) and the nasopharyngeal airway (NPA) may be used if the rescuer is experiencing difficulty in ventilating the patient.

The AHA guideline suggested certain recommendation for doing high-quality CPR:

- Compression should start within 10 seconds of diagnosing cardiopulmonary arrest.

- Two breaths to be given after 30 compressions. Excessive ventilation should be avoided.

- Every effort should be made to reduce the interruption while changing the rescuer or while checking the rhythm.

- The rate of compression should be between 100 to 120 per minute

- The depth of compression should be between 2 to 2.4 inches for adults.

- Adequate time should be given for chest recoil

**Automated External Defibrillation**

The AEDs are easily handled via nonconventional responders, for instance: ambulance drivers, police officers, firefighters, security guards, and laypersons. Recent studies have suggested that AED use via nonconventional responders could improve the survival rates of cardiopulmonary arrest as the arrival of the ALS team takes time, and early defibrillation by non-conventional responders will not only reduce the time for defibrillation but will also improve patient outcome.

**Advanced Cardiac Life Support**

Providers can use basic life support along with advanced airway aid and medication like epinephrine and amiodarone for CPR. The advanced airway may include supraglottic airway devices and endotracheal tubes. ACLS team has the further advantage of cardiac rhythm interpretation and using defibrillation when indicated.

ADVANCED CARDIAC LIFE SUPPORT****(ACLS) is designed to deliver adequate ventilation, stabilize the blood pressure along with the cardiac output, control cardiac arrhythmias, and restore organ perfusion. Maneuvers needed to accomplish these goals include-

-  Defibrillation and pacing.

-  Endotracheal tube intubation and mechanical ventilation

-  Intravenous line insertion.

The rapidity by which defibrillation is performed is an essential element for improving patient outcomes. The AHA guideline suggested certain recommendation for defibrillation-

- Cardiopulmonary resuscitation should be carried out whilst the AED is being charged

- Immediate early defibrillation should be given preference over intubation and intravenous line insertion

- A defibrillator with a biphasic waveform is preferred over monophasic.

- Manufacturers recommended energy dose should be used for the first shock. If this is not mentioned, then the maximum dose should be used for defibrillation.

- Fixed versus escalating energy for subsequent shock should depend on manufacturers' recommendations. If the machine has the capability to escalate the energy, then higher energy should be used for a subsequent shock.

- A single shock strategy should be preferred to stacked shock.

After failed defibrillation, epinephrine, 1mg I/V, should be given. Furthermore, the dose of this drug may be repeated after periods of three to five minutes. Additionally, vasopressin has been recommended as an alternative.

After 2 or 3 failed attempts, immediate intubation and arterial blood gas analysis should be carried out. Those patients who still remain acidotic even after intubation and successful defibrillation should be given 1 new/ kg of NaHCO3 initially, and further 50 percent of the dose may be repeated after 10 minutes.

Antiarrhythmic therapy with amiodarone may be started after recurrent electrical instability and failed defibrillation. 150 mg amiodarone should be given over 10 minutes, followed by 1 mg/ hr for 6 hours and 0.5 mg/ hour for the next 18 hours. Procainamide is rarely used nowadays. Calcium gluconate is not considered safe, and its use is only reserved for patients having hyperkalemia or have taken a lethal dose of calcium channel blocker.

**Postresucitation Care**

This phase starts with the successful return of spontaneous circulation. Generally, the Primary ventricular fibrillation after acute myocardial infarction( AMI)  are highly responsive to treatment and are readily controlled while in secondary ventricular fibrillation after AMI, resuscitative efforts are usually less successful, and those patients who are resuscitated successfully, the rate of recurrence of VF is very high. Patient outcome is determined by hemodynamic stability. Asystole, bradyarrhythmias, and PEA are commonly seen in hemodynamically unstable patients.

The outcomes and the clinical picture after In-hospital cardiopulmonary arrest (IHCA) associated with the noncardiac diseases are very poor, and in some successfully resuscitated cases, the post-resuscitation course is controlled by the nature of the underlying illness. Patients with cancer, central nervous system disease, renal failure have a survival rate of less than ten percent after IHCA.

**Long-Term Management After The Survival Of OHCA**

Patients who survive cardiopulmonary arrest without irreversible damage to the brain must undergo proper investigation in order to know the etiology and definite intervention so that such episodes can be prevented in the future.

Patients with cardiopulmonary arrest due to myocardial ischemia should be managed by surgical, pharmacological ( anti ischemia therapy), and radiological intervention so that long term survival can be improved.

Survivors of cardiopulmonary arrest due to diseases, like hypertrophic cardiomyopathies, rare inherited disorders, right ventricular dysplasia, catecholaminergic polymorphic VT, Brugada syndrome, and long QT syndrome, are the candidates for Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD).