Broad differential diagnosis of emergent and non-emergent pathology exist for a gastrocnemius rupture. Other calf related muscular injuries include a soleus strain, plantaris strain, or popliteal tendinopathy. A plantaris strain presents similarly to a gastrocnemius strain but is typically less severe, and the pain is located more distally in the mid-Achilles region rather than the proximal calf. Patients will typically have a full or near full range of motion without much pain, and typically will only have mild functional impairment. Ultrasound and MRI can help to make a definitive diagnosis.

A soleus strain typically develops from overuse injury secondary to long-distance running in which patients endorse a generalized deep calf pain that increases with knee flexion or ankle dorsiflexion, such as when running up a hill.

Popliteal tendinopathy typically develops in a sprint runner who endorses lateral knee or proximal posterior lateral calf pain. Symptoms can be made worse or reproduced from running downhill. Exam reveals tenderness at the popliteal tendon origin at the lateral aspect of the lateral femoral condyle.

Popliteal artery entrapment presents with claudication type symptoms during intense activities that involve repetitive ankle plantar and dorsiflexion that improves with rest. The patient may endorse pedal paresthesias or cold feet. Exam reveals decreased distal pulses during active plantarflexion or passive dorsiflexion.

It is important to differentiate a gastrocnemius injury from an Achilles tendinopathy or tear. Tendinopathy presents with a gradually increasing pain along the tendon approximately 2 to 6 cm from calcaneal insertion and is associated with overuse or increased activity. A tendon rupture is quite common in middle-aged adults during a sudden change of direction activities such as tennis, jumping, or sprinting. Patients often hear a “pop,” and physical exam reveals a palpable defect. Patients with complete tears typically cannot fully plantarflex but may be able to do so partially with accessory muscle use. A positive Thompson squeeze test (loss of plantar flexion with calf squeeze) can be useful to diagnose a complete tear. Ultrasound or MRI are also options if the diagnose is still uncertain.

The gastrocnemius, plantaris, and soleus are the muscles of the superficial posterior compartment of the leg. It is essential to rule out acute compartment syndrome (ACS), which presents with rapidly worsening leg pain. It is most commonly associated with trauma but can also be non-traumatic. The physical exam includes a tense, painful muscle compartment with pain out of proportion to the exam. Suspected ACS requires emergent surgical consultation.

Other musculoskeletal diagnoses to consider include chronic exertional compartment syndrome (CECS), exercise-associated muscle cramps, medial tibial stress syndrome, and osteomyelitis. CECS presents in runners with an increasing, deep pain within a specific area of the calf or shin, is often bilateral, begins with activity, ends 10 to 20 minutes after activity cessation, and may be associated with ankle and foot paresthesias. The physical exam is often benign. Diagnosis can be made by measuring intra-compartmental pressures.

The non-musculoskeletal causes to consider include claudication, deep vein thrombosis (DVT), and peripheral nerve entrapment. DVT presents with worsening pain and swelling of the calf without a history of injury; however, several case reports have associated DVT with calf injuries. Patients with DVT have more generalized swelling over the calf and lack focal tenderness typically associated with acute calf strains.