Direct damage of central nervous system tissue due to HIV combined with activated immune responses to infection has been implicated in causing the neurocognitive decline associated with HIV encephalitis. HIV infection results in rapid seeding of the virus in various body premises, including CNS tissues, which is usually asymptomatic. Following infection with HIV, monocytes circulating in the blood migrate to the brain after traversing the blood-brain barrier, thus enabling HIV to gain access to the central nervous system. The entry of HIV into brain tissue through brain endothelium is believed to be aided by the induction of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) and E-selectin. Though the direct impact of HIV on neurocognitive dysfunction after further development of distinct genetic sequences has been studied, the more significant impact has been attributed to the indirect immune pathways triggered after viral entry into brain tissue.

The release of monocyte-derived cytokines such as IL-1, TNF-a, TGF-B, which trigger neurotoxic changes, is believed to be the more damaging entity in the pathophysiology of HIV encephalopathy.

The compartmentalization of HIV infection in the CNS also plays a particularly important role in developing HIV encephalitis. After the initial development of the virus from the circulating CD4 cells, in later stages of infection, CSF viral replication occurs independently of plasma viral replication. A change in the tropism of the CNS viruses in the later stages of the infection also worsens the severity of the illness.

Several factors determine the neurological deterioration in HIV encephalitis. The production of neurotoxic HIV proteins, uncontrolled viral replication in brain tissue, and immune activation are underlying factors controlling the rate of neurological decline.