The classical clinical findings of progressive weakness with developmental delay or regression, inattentiveness, and exaggerated startle response with physical findings of a cherry-red spot, generalized hypotonia with sustained clonus, or hyperreflexia should warrant further evaluation for Gangliosidosis. The first step in the evaluation involves the demonstration of Hex A and total Hexosaminidase levels in the serum. Individuals with infantile form will have no or extremely low level of enzyme activity (0-5%) in addition to normal or elevated levels of Beta hexosaminidase levels (HEX B isoenzyme). Individuals with juvenile or adult forms will have low enzyme activity (10 to 15%). If the initial testing shows reduced enzyme activity and if the patient is from Azheknazi or French Canadian background, consider targeted gene testing.

Neuroradiological findings in Tay Sachs disease are described in three phases of the clinical course.

For carrier testing in Ashkenazi Jew ancestry, the first step depends on whether comprehensive Ashkenazi Jewish carrier screening is desired or only Tay Sachs screening is required.

Molecular genetic testing includes sequencing, targeted analysis for pathogenic variants, and deletion/duplication analysis. The targeted analysis is done if the enzyme activity is absent or low on the initial assay. The panel consists of six common pathogenic variants. The panel includes three null alleles p.Tyr427IlefsTer5, c.1421+1G>C, and c.1073+G>A, which in the homozygous or compound heterozygous state is associated with Tay Sachs. Allele p.Gly269Ser is associated with an adult-onset form of Hex A deficiency. Two pseudo deficiency alleles ( p.Arg247Trp and p.Arg249Trp ) are not associated with neurological disease but with reduced degradation of the synthetic substrate when Hex A activity is determined in-vitro.

Prenatal testing on fetal cells can be done by chorionic villus sampling at 10 to 12 weeks of gestation or by amniocentesis at 15 to 18 weeks of gestation in families when Hex A enzyme assay shows parents are heterozygous and molecular genetic testing has ruled out pseudo deficiency allele in either parent. In families with identified pathogenic variants, preimplantation genetic testing is an option.