Amphetamines are non-catecholamines, sympathomimetic amines with central nervous system (CNS) stimulant activity. Amphetamines increase dopamine and norepinephrine in the synaptic space by promoting the release of catecholamines from the presynaptic nerve terminals.  They also block norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake into the presynaptic neuron by competitive inhibition. Released norepinephrine affecting both alpha-adrenergic receptor sites and beta-adrenergic receptor sites.

Stimulation of beta-adrenergic receptor sites by these medications increases heart rate, stroke volume, and skeletal muscle blood flow.

Alpha-adrenergic stimulation causes vasoconstriction and an increase in total peripheral resistance, leading to elevations of both systolic and diastolic blood pressures, a weak bronchodilator, and respiratory stimulant action.

However, the mechanism of amphetamine's mental and behavioral effects in children is not clearly understood.

Both immediate-release tablets and extended-release capsules contain both enantiomer, d-amphetamine, and l-amphetamine salts in the ratio of 3:1. The bioavailable average half-lives are similar for both the sustained-release capsule and immediate-release tablet.

**Duration of action**

- The immediate-release tablet is 4 to 6 hours; the extended-release is 8 to 12 hours.

**Half-life Elimination**

- Children 6 to 12 years: D-enantiomer: 9 hours; L-enantiomer: 11 hours

- Adolescents 13 to 17 years: D-enantiomer: 11 hours; L-enantiomer: 13 to 14 hours

- Adults: D-enantiomer: 10 hours; L-enantiomer: 13 hours

**Time to Peak**

- Immediate release tablet: 3 hours; extended-release: 7 hours