Treatment typically begins with aggressive lubrication of the eyes with artificial tears, gels, and ointments. If the ocular surface is protected, then there is not an urgent need to protect the eyelid. However, if the ocular surface is compromised, for example in a patient with facial palsy, then the cornea can quickly decompensate, and scarring of the cornea can develop and lead to permanent vision loss.

Treatment is based on correcting the underlying etiology leading to ectropion. For example, with involutional changes, the lateral canthal tendon may be loose and disinserted. In this situation, a lateral tarsal strip surgical procedure may be performed with a lateral canthotomy and lower cantholysis to completely disinsert the canthus. Then a small wedge can be excised from the lateral lower eyelid. Then the lateral lower eyelid is reattached to the periosteum of the lateral orbital rim to reattach the lateral canthus back into position. By horizontally shortening the eyelid with this procedure and reattaching the canthus, the lower eyelid can be put back into proper position to protect the globe effectively. In cases of facial palsy, with the compromise of the orbicularis function, a lateral tarsal strip procedure may also be beneficial, as well as a lateral tarsorrhaphy to connect the lateral upper eyelid to the lateral lower eyelid.

In other cases, for example with cicatricial ectropion from aggressive lower eyelid blepharoplasty and excessive skin removal or scarring from chronic skin changes, the anterior lamella may be too short vertically. In these cases, it may be necessary to replace the skin, typically by using a full-thickness skin graft. One may use the ipsilateral or contralateral upper eyelid skin as a donor, if available, or pre-auricular or post-auricular skin may be used. It is not uncommon to perform a lateral tarsal strip in addition to a full-thickness skin graft in these cases. In cases of scar tissue formation leading to cicatricial ectropion, for example after trauma to the cheek, it may be necessary to dissect and free cicatrix formation to release the lower eyelid to allow it to go back into proper position. A temporary tarsorrhaphy or Frost tarsorrhaphy may be necessary to connect and elevate the eyelids during the initial healing phase after surgical repair.

It is common for the bilateral lower eyelids to have asymmetric but affected eyelids, for example with involutional ectropion, both lower eyelids may be affected, but to different extents. It may be necessary to perform a bilateral lower eyelid repair to improve both lower eyelids and to provide a symmetric result.