**Evaluation should include**

- CBC (Complete blood count) to rule out the infection, look for complications of cirrhosis: anemia, thrombocytopenia, a leukemoid reaction in alcoholic hepatitis.

- LFTs (liver function tests): AST (aspartate aminotransferase) is markedly raised as opposed to ALT (alanine aminotransferase) in alcoholic liver disease. There is hypoalbuminemia, hyperbilirubinemia, and hypertriglyceridemia. Also, GGTP (gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase) is usually raised.

- Prothrombin time (PT) and INR (to assess liver synthetic function): an elevated value indicates more severe disease.

- Abdominal imaging (abdominal ultrasonography) is useful in looking for biliary obstruction and liver tumors.

- BMP (basic metabolic profile) should be ordered to look for renal failure and electrolyte disturbance (low levels of potassium, magnesium, and phosphorus).

- Ascitic fluid SAAG (serum-ascites albumin gradient) should be calculated to assess the reason for ascites if present.

- Screening blood tests for other causes of chronic liver disease, including viral hepatitis.

- Endoscopy to look for esophageal varices due to portal hypertension in patients with cirrhosis.

- A liver biopsy can lead to a definitive diagnosis in cases where the diagnosis is uncertain. More often than not, it is used for evaluation of severity, prognosis, staging, and treatment monitoring. For an accurate diagnosis of fibrosis, at least a 1.5 to 2 cm long sample of liver tissue is necessary. Liver biopsy has a risk of complication, including life-threatening hemorrhage, so it is reserved for cases where the results of a biopsy can make a difference in the treatment plan.

- Elevated CA-125 levels were noted in 85% of patients with cirrhosis in one study. The more advanced the degree of decompensation based on MELD score, Child’s Turcotte-Pugh classification, and ALBI score, the higher the elevation in CA-125.