During inguinal hernia surgery, great care is required to prevent damage to the nerves as it can lead to significant morbidity. In hernia repairs that utilize a mesh the ilioinguinal and genital nerves can be compressed while suturing around the internal oblique muscle. Postoperatively the patient will complain of significant pain or tingling in the innervated areas.

The spermatic cord is easily recognized as it runs in the inguinal canal. It runs together with several small vessels and nerves that connect with the testis. The structures that are of importance in the spermatic cord include the testicular artery, artery to the vas deferens and the cremaster artery. In addition, there are lymphatics and the pampiniform plexus and the genital branch running with the cord. Any combination of these structures can be injured if the spermatic cord is handled inappropriately during surgical dissection.

The inguinal area and canal are known with inguinal hernias. Inguinal and femoral hernias are collectively called groin hernias. Other surgical diseases like hydrocele, varicocele and undescended testis are encountered in the area but are less common.

**Indirect Hernia**

An indirect hernia can occur when the peritoneal sac enters the inguinal canal via the deep inguinal ring. The hernia protrudes through the external inguinal ring.  There is typically associated failure of the processus vaginalis atrophy after birth.

**Direct Hernia**

In a direct hernia, the peritoneal sac enters the inguinal canal directly via a defect or weakness in the posterior wall of the inguinal canal, usually the transversus abdominis. It usually protrudes directly to the abdominal wall but may exit through the external inguinal ring.

Both inguinal hernias often present in the labia majora or inguinal area as swellings which are more prominent when the individual is upright.

**Femoral Hernia**

The hernial sac protrudes through the femoral ring, the medial part of the femoral canal. Surgical repair of the femoral hernia is slightly different than inguinal hernias in the open approach. While it is the same in the minimally invasive approach.]

**Hydroceles**

A hydrocele occurs because of the persistent patency of the processus vaginalis, and it may coexist with an indirect hernia. The condition presents with fluid accumulation in the scrotum. The fluid accumulation can be significant, and most hydroceles need surgical intervention.