**Chronic venous insufficiency/venous hypertension:**Venous hypertension can present as swelling of the affected extremity, which can be progressive and limit mobility. Insufficiency is demonstrated in the development of stasis pigmentation of the skin, varicosities, and ulcerations. This complication is a direct result of arterial pressure against the thinner venous walls and failure of one-way valves in the veins.

**High cardiac output failure:**In a study of 120 patients who suffered from high-output heart failure, 23% were found to have an AV shunt, which includes congenital, traumatic, and HD fistulas. In all patients with high-output cardiac failure, their increased stroke volume was secondary to decreased vascular resistance, which is a mechanism found in patients with AVFs, particularly when these become high-flow.

**Arterial insufficiency**: Steal syndrome can occur in up to 6% of patients with an AVF or arteriovenous graft for hemodialysis. It is a result of a high-flow fistula causing distal ischemia.

**Hemorrhage:**Hemorrhage is a much rarer complication than those above. Due to the high flow through the venous system, dilatations can occur throughout the venous drainage system. These can become thin-walled and be at risk for rupture. This can be especially problematic with hemodialysis fistulas which are repetitively accessed through the venous side causing ulcerations to the vein and overlying skin. High flow through the fistula and outflow stenosis can make obtaining hemostasis challenging after dialysis.