**Macroscopic Examination**

Phyllodes tumors form well-circumscribed, firm, protruding masses. When cut, the surface is tan or pink to grey and may present as fleshy and mucoid. The characteristic whorled pattern with curved clefts resembling leaf buds is most evident in large lesions, but smaller lesions may have a homogeneous appearance. Hemorrhage or necrosis may be present in large lesions.

**Microscopic Examination**

Phyllodes tumors exhibit an enhanced intra-canalicular growth pattern with leaf-like projections into variably dilated elongated lumina. The epithelial component consists of luminal epithelial and myoepithelial cells stretched into arc-like clefts surmounting stromal fronds.

**Grading**

There have been proposals for several grading systems, but the use of the three-tiered system, including benign, borderline, and malignant phyllodes tumor, is preferred because this approach leads to greater certainty at the ends of the spectrum of these fibroepithelial lesions.

**Benign Phyllodes Tumors**

This variety comprises 60% to 75% of all phyllodes tumors. In benign phyllodes tumors, the stroma is usually more cellular than in fibroadenomas. The spindle-cell stromal nuclei are uniform, and mitoses are rare, generally less than 5 per 10 high-power fields. Areas of sparse stromal cellularity, hyalinization, or myxoid changes are not uncommon, reflecting stromal heterogeneity. The margins are usually well-delimited and pushing.

**Borderline Phyllodes Tumors**

These tumors are diagnosed when the mass does not possess all the adverse histological characteristics found in malignant phyllodes tumors.

Borderline phyllodes tumors may have frequent mitoses (5 to 9 per 10 HPF), moderate stromal cellularity, a circumscribed or focally invasive border,  and stromal atypia. Stromal overgrowth is often absent.

**Malignant Phyllodes Tumors**

Malignant phyllode tumors show a combination of marked nuclear pleomorphism of stromal cells, stromal overgrowth defined as the absence of epithelial elements in one low-power microscopic field containing only stroma, increased mitoses (greater than or equal to 10 per 10 HPF), increased stromal cellularity, which is usually diffuse, and infiltrative borders.

**Immunohistochemistry**

Multiple immunohistochemistry markers have undergone a study in an attempt to improve the classification of PT and predict their outcomes. Studies demonstrate that p53, Ki67, CD117, EGFR, p16, and VEGF (being the lowest in benign phyllodes tumors and the highest in malignant phyllodes tumors) are associated with histologic grades of phyllodes tumors, but none has been proven to be clinically useful.

Among these markers, p53 expression and Ki67 index were reported in some studies to be significantly associated with disease-free and overall survivals,  but other studies found no association with recurrence or clinical behavior.

PAX3 and SIX1 expression by immunohistochemistry and gene expression analysis have recently been identified in borderline and malignant phyllodes tumors and correlate with a poor clinical outcome.