Leukocoria is a whitish or altered pupillary reflex that appears due to obstruction of the normal retinochoroidal vasculature, which reflects through the pupil. The various causes of leukocoria, their etiopathogenesis, and clinical features are as follows:

- **Retinoblastoma:**Retinoblastoma (RB) results from the malignant transformation of the primitive retinal cells, most likely a multipotent retinoblast. Forty-eight percent of cases show autosomal dominant transmission with 90% penetrance at birth and maps to chromosome 13q14.

- **Coats disease:**Coats disease is a retinal telangiectatic condition that commonly affects one eye of young males.

- **Persistent fetal vasculature:**Persistent fetal vasculature (PFV) or Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV)is a congenital condition due to failure of regression of the intraocular fetal vasculature. It’s the second most common cause of infantile leukocoria.

- **Pediatric cataract:**Over 60% of children presenting with leukocoria have congenital cataracts [unilateral (18%) and bilateral (42%)]. Unilateral cataracts are usually sporadic, while bilateral cataracts are often associated with other systemic diseases like intrauterine infections (rubella, toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex virus infections), metabolic disorders (galactosemia), chromosomal anomalies (trisomy 21, Stickler syndrome and myotonic dystrophy).

- **Pediatric uveitis:**Pars-planitis with its ‘snowball’ or ‘snow-banking’ in the vitreous commonly presents as leukocoria. Most children have bilateral symmetry. Other causes of uveitis in children are juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), tubulointerstitial nephritis, uveitis (TINU), leukemia, retinoblastoma, juvenile xanthogranuloma, and Blau syndrome.

- **Toxocariasis:**Toxocariasis is caused by a nematode,Toxocara canis, which causes both systemic and ocular toxocariasis. Definitive hosts are dogs and cats, so close contact with domestic pet dogs and cats is an important risk factor for children. Ocular toxocariasis is mostly unilateral and presents with blurred vision, floaters, leukocoria, and strabismus. Toxocariasis clinically presents as retinal granuloma (localized at the posterior pole or peripheral), endophthalmitis, vitreous abscess, temporal dragging of the macula, and tractional retinal detachment.

- **Astrocytic hamartoma:**Retinal astrocytic hamartoma is a benign retinal tumor composed of glial cells, especially astrocytes, and is frequently associated with tuberous sclerosis. Other features are hamartomas of the iris and ciliary body with neovascular glaucoma and giant retinal astrocytoma with exudative retinal detachment.

- **Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP):**This is also known as Retrolental Fibroplasia. ROP results from abnormal proliferation of retinal vessels in premature infants weighing less than 1250 gm or under 32 weeks of gestation. These children usually receive oxygen therapy and present signs of ROP between 35 and 45 weeks of post-conceptional age. Children under 1000 gm pose the highest risk for blindness, while most cases regress spontaneously over 3 to 4 months. ROP shows four stages, as mentioned below. Leukocoria might present from stage 3 onwards.

- **Endogenous endophthalmitis:**Endogenous endophthalmitis is rare and occurs commonly in premature, very low birth weight neonates. Klebsiella pneumoniae, Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Candida albicans are the common causative organisms.

- **Retinochoroidal coloboma:**Coloboma is a congenital defect in the iris, ciliary body, choroid, retina, and optic nerve due to a failed or incomplete closure of the embryonic fissure. It usually involves the inferonasal quadrant of the eye. Retinochoroidal coloboma usually presents as leukocoria. Rhegmatogenous Retinal detachment is the most common complication.

- **Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR):**Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR) is a hereditary retinal vascular disorder characterized by an avascular peripheral retina, especially temporal quadrant with a ‘V-shaped demarcation, temporal dragging of retinal vessels and macula, retinal falciform folds, retinal ischemia with neovascularization, subretinal exudates, and retinal detachment. Inheritance is Autosomal Dominance with 100% penetrance. FEVR develops as a consequence of a genetic abnormality (Wnt signaling) that affects the growth and development of retinal blood vessels. An important differential is ROP, but cases with ROP have a history of preterm birth and low birth weight. FEVR cases have a family history of a similar disease, and clinical examination or fundus fluorescein angiogram (FFA) may reveal peripheral avascular retina in the family members.

- **Retinal detachment:**Pediatric retinal detachments account for 3.2% to 6.6% of all cases of retinal detachment.

- **Medulloepithelioma:**Medulloepithelioma (diktyoma) is a non-hereditary tumor of the non-pigmented ciliary epithelium. These slow-growing tumors present with visual decline, raised intraocular pressure, localized angle closure, leukocoria, cataracts, and red-eye. It appears in the ciliary body region as a whitish-pink mass and is associated with the DICER-1 gene. 5% of cases are associated with pleuropulmonary blastoma, family tumor, and dysplasia Syndrome (PPB-FTDS). Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) and anterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT) would help assess the size and extent of the tumor.

- **TORCH syndrome:**TORCH syndrome includes toxoplasmosis, other agents (Treponema pallidum, Varicella-zoster virus, Parvovirus B19), rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex. It’s a neonatal infection that spreads transplacentally from an infected mother and presents with leukocoria.

- **Medullated retinal nerve fibers:**Normal retinal nerve fibers usually are devoid of myelin sheath anterior to lamina cribrosa. Medullated retinal nerve fibers are those fibers that still possess the myelin sheath anterior to lamina cribrosa. They are asymptomatic except for causing leukocoria and are associated with myopia, amblyopia, and strabismus. They appear as a white or yellowish striated patch with feathered borders in the peripapillary area or around the macula.

- **Incontinentia pigmenti (IP):**Incontinentia Pigmenti (Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome) is a rare X-linked dominant disorder caused by mutation of the NEMO/IKK gene located at the Xq28 loci. It affects mostly females, and the disease is lethal for males in-utero. IP is characterized by skin, ocular, neurological, and dental abnormalities. Ocular findings are retinal non-perfusion areas, tractional retinal detachment, vitreoretinal fibrosis, and retinal pigment epithelial defects. IP may clinically resemble retinoblastoma and presents as leukocoria due to vitreoretinal fibrosis. Skin lesions initially present as erythematous vesicular rashes, which are later replaced with verrucous lesions, swirling macular hyperpigmentation, and linear hypopigmentation.