Conventional therapies for nonhealing wounds and bleeding problems as is seen in soft tissue radionecrosis are not satisfactory and many times are unsuccessful in the control of symptoms. Because the tissue is lacking in adequate vascularity to provide oxygen and nutrients for the tissue to heal, surgical interventions have a higher rate of failure, and may contribute to further tissue damage and breakdown. Radiation damaged tissue is also more prone to infection complications, especially after surgery.

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is helpful in treating soft tissue radionecrosis by the improved oxygenation of the damaged tissue in part, but more importantly, over the course of 30 to 40 treatments usually at 2 to 3 atmospheres absolute (ATA) for 90 to 110 minutes, angiogenesis is stimulated. The new capillary beds and granulation tissue that is formed have a more robust blood supply and durable improvement in the tissue with improved oxygenation. This improvement in the tissue is clinically manifested in chronic wound healing, more elastic and less fibrotic texture of the tissue, and problems such as xerostomia (dry mouth because of lack of saliva production) resolving with hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Common sites of soft tissue radionecrosis treated with hyperbaric oxygen therapy are head and neck, breast or chest wall, pelvic organs such as bladder and rectum, but any organ or tissue that was in the radiation field can be damaged, and thus treatable with hyperbaric oxygen therapy.

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy, in general, has an approximately 80% response rate with an improvement of the patient’s symptoms of soft tissue radionecrosis, but the tissue never recovers to what would be considered normal tissue. Clinically what is seen is an improvement of the fibroatrophic changes of the tissue, for example, improvement of xerostomia, improve granulation of wounded tissue, reduction or resolution of hemorrhaging from ulcerated mucosal tissue, improved osteocyte functions in radiation damage bone, and improvement of the neurologic symptoms seen in radiation myelitis.

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is helpful in treating soft tissue radionecrosis by the improved oxygenation of the damaged tissue transiently during the treatment, and after 20 to 30 treatments, angiogenesis is stimulated with the formation of new capillary beds and granulation tissue that has a more robust blood supply for wound healing. Typically, hyperbaric oxygen therapy is done at 2 to 3 ATA pressure for 90 to 110 minutes with 5 to 10-minute air breaks every 30 minutes to reduce the risk of oxygen toxicity. A pressure of 2.4 ATA is often chosen for treatment to the maximized benefit of hyperbaric oxygen therapy, but minimize the risk of oxygen seizures. It takes about 20 daily treatments to start to see clinical evidence for improved angiogenesis and improvement of the symptoms of soft tissue radionecrosis. This improvement in the tissue is clinically manifested by more elasticity to the fibrotic tissue, improved granulation of the wound bed, and improvement in xerostomia (dry mouth because of lack of saliva production). It may take 30 to 40 or more treatments before the benefits of hyperbaric oxygen therapy plateaus. Common sites of soft tissue radionecrosis needing treatment with hyperbaric oxygen therapy are head and neck, breast or chest wall, pelvic organs, such as bladder and rectum, but any organ or tissue that was in the radiation field can be damaged, and thus treatable with hyperbaric oxygen therapy.  Not only clinical parameters can be followed for response to therapy, but improvement in transcutaneous oxygen measurement and florescent angiography can be followed.

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy, in general, has approximately 80% response rate with an improvement of the patient’s symptoms of soft tissue radionecrosis, but the tissue never recovers to what would be considered normal tissue. Clinically, what is seen is an improvement of the fibroatrophic changes of the tissue, for example, improvement of tissue elasticity, resolution of xerostomia, formation of granulation tissue in chronic wounds, reduction or resolution of hemorrhaging from ulcerated mucosal tissue, improved osteocyte functions in radiation damage bone, and improvement of the neurologic symptoms seen in radiation myelitis.

The risk of hyperbaric oxygen therapy includes hypoglycemia in diabetic patients, especially if taking insulin and/or hypoglycemic agents, barotrauma to the ears, pneumothorax, and oxygen toxicity seizures and rarely pulmonary oxygen toxicity. Cancer patients who have a history of having had bleomycin chemotherapy are at increased risk of pulmonary fibrosis even though the chemotherapy was administered remotely from getting the hyperbaric oxygen therapy. This has been a relative contraindication, but some physicians will treat the patient if the benefits outweigh the risk. A patient actively receiving cis-platin is at high risk of bladder toxicity if also getting hyperbaric oxygen therapy and this a contraindication. Also, a relative contraindication is if the patient has had a history of spontaneous pneumothorax with underlying lung disease with air trapping. Chest x-ray, CT scan, and Xenon washout nuclear medicine study can be done to look for blebs, pulmonary disease, pneumothorax, and air trapping. As with any procedure, the risk of the treatment must be weighed against the benefit.

There are mostly anecdotal cases and prospective studies on the benefit of the treatment of cerebral radionecrosis which is very difficult to treat with standard steroid therapy and surgery. Further study is needed in this area to make consensus statements as to the best therapy and how hyperbaric oxygen therapy should be used. From a theoretical standpoint, the use of hyperbaric oxygen therapy should be beneficial for the angiogenesis and repair of cerebral radionecrotic tissue. An interesting area that will need further research is the use of hyperbaric oxygen therapy with stem cells in the repair of the damaged tissue. It is theorized that hyperbaric oxygen therapy helps to sensitive the stem cells to seek out damaged tissue so that the stem cells they can differentiate into the cells that are most needed for the repair of the tissue.