Intraoperative complications include neurovascular injury, iatrogenic fractures, compartment syndrome, thermal necrosis, and malalignment. Postoperative complications include fat emboli syndrome, pulmonary embolism, infection, osteomyelitis, malunion, nonunion, and hip and knee pain. Reaming can cause increased temperatures of up to 57 degrees C resulting in thermal necrosis secondary to enzyme denaturation, potentially leading to delayed fracture healing.

Nerve injuries are common and can be due to positioning as well as iatrogenic injury. Pudendal nerve injuries occur from positioning patients with a perineal post and have an incidence of 15%.

Vascular injury to the DFA or SFA can occur after penetration with instruments or implants. Despite the use of safe zones for implant insertion, aberrant anatomy can predispose the patient to iatrogenic injury.

Intraoperative fractures may occur, especially of the greater trochanter, the knee, and perforation of the anterior cortex by the implant. Patients with an abnormally low radius of curvature (increased anterior femoral bow) are at increased risk for anterior perforation.

Malrotation is one of the most significant complications of long bone fractures, with an incidence of up to 25%. Malrotation of greater than 14 degrees from neutral can alter gait mechanics and efficiency. Patients cope better with internal than with external malalignment.

Comminuted fractures can present a significant challenge in determining leg length that can manifest as pelvic tilt leading to hip pain and back pain. In a study of comminuted femur fractures, six patients had a leg length discrepancy greater than 1.25 cm, with only 4 of these patients requiring revision surgery.

Nonunion is a failure of the fracture to heal or lack of signs of healing for six months. Nonsurgical treatments may include supplementation or vitamin D and calcium and external bone stimulation. Work up would include evaluation for infection as a cause of nonunion. Surgical treatment may include revision fixation with or without bone graft, depending on the cause of nonunion.