Nortriptyline has a black box warning for increased risk of suicide in adolescents, children, and young adults with major depressive disorder and multiple other psychiatric disorders.

The most common adverse effects of nortriptyline include downiness, xerostomia, dizziness, constipation, blurred visions, palpitations, tachycardia, impaired coordination, increased appetite, nausea/vomiting, diaphoresis, weakness, disorientation, confusion, restlessness, insomnia, anxiety/agitation, urinary retention, urinary frequency, rash, urticaria, pruritus, weight gain, libido changes, impotence, gynecomastia, galactorrhea, tremor, hypo/hyperglycemia, paraesthesia, and photosensitivity.

The most serious adverse effects include orthostatic hypotension, HTN, syncope, ventricular arrhythmias, AV block, MI, stroke, paralytic ileus, glaucoma, increased IOP, agranulocytosis, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, hepatitis, angioedema.

Neuropsychiatric adverse drug reactions include EPS symptoms, ataxia, tardive dyskinesia, hallucinations, psychosis exacerbation, hypomania/mania, exacerbation of depression, suicidality, serotonin syndrome, SIADH, hyperthermia, and seizures.

Cardiotoxicity is the hallmark adverse drug reaction of tricyclic antidepressants, such as nortriptyline. In the case of TCA toxicity, fast cardiac sodium channels are inhibited, which can lead to cardiac arrhythmias. On electrocardiography. A widened QRS complex is often noted.

A patient can also have withdrawal symptoms such as dizziness, gastrointestinal problems such as nausea and vomiting, anxiety, headaches, and restlessness if the patient discontinues nortriptyline abruptly. Clinicians can avoid these withdrawal symptoms by gradually decreasing the dose of nortriptyline over a period.

**Drug Interactions**

Clinicians should avoid concurrent usage of cimetidine and tricyclic antidepressants such as nortriptyline as the drug interaction can increase the concentration of TCAs. Using nortriptyline, along with alcohol, can increase the effects of alcohol on patients. Cytochrome P450 2D6 metabolizes nortriptyline. All pharmacological drugs that inhibit 2D6 can produce an adverse reaction. Significant drug interactions that can inhibit cytochrome P450 2D6 include quinidine and cimetidine. Cimetidine increases bioavailability and decreases the clearance of this drug due to its inhibition of metabolic pathways of both demethylation and hydroxylation, as well as its ability to reduce hepatic extraction of nortriptyline. Other drugs are substrates for CYP2D6, such as other antidepressants, phenothiazines, and type-1C antiarrhythmics such as propafenone and flecainide.

Concurrent usage of nortriptyline with drugs that can inhibit cytochrome CYP2D6 may require lower doses than usually prescribed for either nortriptyline or the other medication.

Many patients prescribed nortriptyline may already be taking SSRIs such as fluoxetine. If the benefit of switching from fluoxetine to nortriptyline is higher than the risk, the clinician should consider that fluoxetine has an active metabolite, norfluoxetine, with a long half-life. The risk of adverse effects and interactions may be high for several weeks after discontinuing fluoxetine. Therefore, usage of nortriptyline with SSRIs like fluoxetine can increase the risk for serotonin syndrome. Fluoxetine should be discontinued for up to six weeks before starting another medication that inhibits serotonin reuptake. If serotonin syndrome occurs, clinicians should promptly administer an antidote, i.e., cyproheptadine. Cyproheptadine is a 5-HT1A, 5-HT2A, and H1 receptor antagonist.