The evaluation of suspected Candida auris infection starts with obtaining a clinical specimen from the site of infection. Specimens may be obtained from blood, urine, nose, pharynx, sputum, pleural cavity, heart, bile, peritoneal fluid, stool, vagina, bone, axilla, groin, wounds/surgical tissue, pus, ear, and cerebrospinal fluid and sent for culture, staining, and/or histopathologic evaluation. It is important to establish whether there is clinical evidence of a true infection, especially in the setting of cultures obtained from non-sterile sites, which may represent colonization. Growth of Candida species in blood culture systems typically takes 1 to 3 days and another 1 to 2 days for identification after subculture onto agar medium.

The identification of Candida auris has presented challenges for laboratories, and it is commonly misidentified using clinical microbiology methods. While the aforementioned phenotypic characteristics of Candida auris colonies in culture may be useful in identifying it, they cannot be used for definitive diagnosis. Many biochemical methods and automated testing methods commonly misidentify C. auris for other Candida species, notably C. haemulonii and other yeast species.

The most accurate identification is made with devices using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) with appropriate reference databases, which can differentiate C. auris from other Candida species.C. auris as C. albicans and C. haemulonii by MALDI-TOF MS.C. auris to the species level becomes accurate, although the distinction between geographic strains depends on the number of spectra for each clade in the library.

An automated molecular test using competitive DNA hybridization and electrochemical detection can rapidly distinguish 15 fungal pathogens, including C. auris. A multi-center study showed that this testing method has a 100% sensitivity and specificity for C. auris, C. dubliniensis, C. famata, and C. krusei and was able to distinguish between other Candida species, including C. glabrata, C. lusitaniae, C. albicans, C. tropicalis, and C. parapsilosis.

A range of molecular techniques, including amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP), have been utilized for the typing of Candida auris isolates. The role of AFLP analysis in the demarcation of the geographical clusters has been demonstrated.