Preparation will be determined by whether this is a traumatic amputation or elective. Of course, in all traumatic situations, one must adhere to the principles of Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) to ensure an A to E approach is used, and life-threatening injuries are seen before limb-threatening. Of course, the injury to the limb may well be life-threatening. Once the patient is stabilized, if the decision is made to amputate, this should be agreed by two consultants/attendings, and appropriate consent taken from the patient. In the acute setting, a better approach is for progressive debridement with definitive delayed closure. The goal is to safely maintain as much length in the limb to better functional outcomes. The injury mechanism may determine this, as will the amount of soft tissue coverage one can make. One must assess the viability of the musculoskeletal structures outlined above and the motor and sensory function of the three major nerves in the forearm and their branches. Fundamentally, an adequate vascular supply will be the priority in the healing of the stump, mainly if any flaps are used. Therefore, assessing the arterial injury level is paramount and will be the most likely parameter in determining the level of amputation. In elective settings, the majority of the above is right. However, a more planned approach can be used, as well as adjunctive measures such as insertion of peripheral stents to improve blood flow or optimizing the patient. Additionally, one must be considerate towards the team required. Surgically, vascular, general, orthopedic, or plastic surgeons can all perform these amputations. Plastic surgeons will be crucial for flap coverage of the stump and are highly recommended to have their early involvement. Non-surgically, patients may require intensive care or high dependency care postoperatively. And the initial participation of psychologists, physiotherapists, and occupational therapists will improve outcomes. Finally, less commonly, there may be a requirement for amputation in congenital deformities or other cases such as severe contractures.