Pulmonary sequestration, both intralobar or extralobar, is a rare clinical phenomenon with less than 6% incidence among all congenital lung malformations. Large randomized controlled trials and consensus guidelines regarding diagnostic and management strategies are lacking. Most of the practice standards are based on retrospective case series reviews and single-center experiences.

Management, particularly when diagnosed in infancy, requires a coordinated effort between pulmonologists, radiologists, and thoracic surgeon, in collaboration with an intensive care unit well versed in handling pulmonary emergencies. Once diagnosed, referral to a specialized center equipped for thoracic surgery, interventional radiology, advanced ventilation modalities like high-frequency oscillatory ventilation and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation should be a priority. In adults, the diagnostic workup should establish vascular supply (both arterial and venous), anomalous vessels, coexisting congenital malformations, and any evidence of infection. The establishment of cardiac and pulmonary functional status is essential before definitive treatment, as is the treatment of any underlying infection.

An extensive discussion with the patient (if adult) and family regarding education about the condition, complications, and treatment options are necessary. Although surgery has been historically the standard of treatment, the emergence of embolization as an alternative further requires patient participation in treatment choice, particularly for those with limited pulmonary function or hesitancy toward surgery. Even though surgical resection is the treatment of choice, there is emerging evidence of a neo-adjuvant approach of embolization before surgery to reduce intraoperative hemorrhagic complications.

The exact duration of postoperative surveillance and follow up is yet to be established and is contingent upon individual center standards.