Congenital pulmonary airway malformation has five major subtypes that have been described and assigned by the Stocker classification. Each type originates from a different part of the bronchial tree, subsequently leading to distinct histopathological differentiation, clinical features, malignant potential, and prognosis.

Type 0 originates in the trachea or bronchi with histology showing bronchial type airways with cartilage, smooth muscles, and glands separated by mesenchyme. This type is incompatible with life.

Type 1 originates in the bronchi and accounts for about 70% of all CPAM. The cysts in this type are usually multiloculated, located within one lobe, and have a lining of pseudo-stratified columnar epithelium. There is also cell hyperplasia in about half the cases. This type has excellent prognosis following resection and rarely undergoes malignant transformation, however rarely, is shown to transform to broncho-alveolar carcinoma.

Type 2 originates in the bronchiolar regions and is the second most frequent type. This type is often associated with other types of anomalies (renal agenesis, cardiovascular defects, diaphragmatic hernia, skeletal defects, esophageal atresia). Usually, it presents as multiple small cysts with no mass effect. The prognosis is good and has no malignant potential.

Type 3 also originates in the bronchiolar regions but is less common than the previous types. This type typically involves and expands an entire lobe, and compresses the other lobes. These lesions are usually solid versus cystic. The prognosis is good with no malignant potential; however, there is typically an absence of pulmonary arteries within the lesion.

Lastly, Type 4 originates in the acinar structures of the lung. This type is very rare and consists of peripheral thin-walled cysts that are multiloculated, lined by alveolar type 1 or type 2 cells. There is a strong association of this type of CPAM with type 1 pleuropulmonary blastomas.