# Introduction

Developmental disorders of the esophagus are relatively common, occurring in approximately 1 in 3000 live births. Because of the shared embryologic origins of the esophagus and respiratory system, esophageal defects commonly correlate with concurrent defects in the lungs and trachea. These defects include several combinations of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula. The defects, understandably, can lead to difficulties with feeding and, in some cases maintaining oxygenation, requiring urgent attention in the perinatal period. In utero, defects of the esophagus can lead to difficult birth conditions stemming from the decreased ability to swallow and resultant polyhydramnios. While the process of organogenesis is immensely complex and the cellular mediators are still being worked out, a basic understanding of the current knowledge on esophageal embryology is important for understanding the link between congenital esophageal and tracheal malformations.

# Development

The development of the gastrointestinal system results from a series of highly regulated biochemical processes and folding patterns. Gut and, more specifically, esophageal development are most easily understood, starting at week four. At this stage, the early embryo consists of three distinct layers, in what is known as a trilaminar disc, connected to the yolk sac. The trilaminar disc comprises the outer ectoderm, middle mesoderm, and an inner layer known as the endoderm.

Initially, this inner tube is blind-ended at both poles and is the precursor to the final digestive tract.

After esophageal specification occurs, several notable changes are visible in the developing embryo. At approximately week 6 of development, the circular and longitudinal muscular layers begin to form, and ganglion cells of the myenteric plexus first present. Moving into week 7, cells of mesodermal origin proliferate into the submucosal layer forming the eventual blood supply to the esophagus. The muscular layers, which began in week 6, are completed by the 9th week.

Co-innervation of muscle cells is hypothesized to allow for early peristalsis after birth, while the nervous system is not fully mature. The process of esophageal innervation occurs throughout the development of the embryo and requires proliferation and migration of neural crest cells that migrate rostrally-caudally through the gut tube starting during the 4th week and ending their migration around the 9th week of development.

# Cellular

Esophageal embryogenesis involves complex signaling pathways. The first step of the organogenesis of the esophagus from the foregut is the specification of the foregut cells into respiratory lineages or esophageal lineage.

Dose-dependent signaling of Noggin from the notochord as well as specific timed signaling from the surrounding mesoderm via Wingless-related Integration site proteins (Wnt) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) allows for the progression of the dorsal aspect of the foregut to begin differentiation into the esophagus while the ventral aspect of the foregut. Also, expressing NKx2-1 in conjunction with a lower dose of Noggin begins the specification into the future trachea and lungs.

Another crucial event in the development of the foregut into the esophagus is the separation of the trachea from the esophagus. While the precise mechanisms of separation have not yet been elucidated, signaling from lateral mesoderm to the ventral foregut allows for differentiation into the two final structures, which, once separated, both experience a rapid elongation. Wnt signaling, specifically, Wnt5a and Ror2 (a receptor tyrosine kinase) signaling appears to play an important role in this elongation.

Another important development is the differentiation of the esophagus from the structures that are continuous with the esophagus, namely the pharynx and the stomach. Many cell signaling molecules regulate esophageal differentiation and transition from the pharynx and into the stomach.  Several mediators that have identifiable roles in esophageal and respiratory differentiation also play a part in the differentiation of the pharynx and the stomach from the esophagus, serving to highlight the numerous roles these factors play.

# Biochemical

Mechanisms of signaling molecule's interactions are a subject of an ongoing investigation. This section will serve as a summary of mediators, which are discussed above, as well as describe other signaling molecules identified in esophageal embryogenesis.

**Ventral-Dorsal Axis**

The notochord is a major structure that participates in the formation of the ventral-dorsal axis. Of the mediators produced by the notochord, Noggin expression plays a well-described role in setting up the ventral-dorsal axis within the embryo. The ventral portion of the foregut begins to express NKx2-1 with BMP signaling, BMP's action gets antagonized by Noggin activity and mediates continued specification and differentiation of the respiratory system from the foregut.

**Wnt5a-Ror2 Signaling**

Wnt5a-Ror2 signaling within subepithelial intercalated smooth muscle cells is thought to be involved in tubulogenesis of the esophagus as well as the trachea. This signal-receptor pair plays key roles in elongation for the trachea and esophagus.

**Hedgehog Signaling**

Hedgehog is another potent mediator that plays critical roles in the development of the esophagus and other structures. Aberrant activation of hedgehog correlates with numerous developmental disorders and cancers of the brain and GI tracts. Of the major components of hedgehog signaling, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) seems to play the most prominent role in the esophagus and tracheal organogenesis.

**BMP Signaling**

Broadly, BMP signaling has been studied in two distinct areas of esophageal embryogenesis. The Noggin inhibits the activity of BMP, and thus in the early foregut, is preferentially active on ventral cells. BMP4 appears to play a role in maintaining the specification of foregut cells, which have already expressed NKx2-1. Studies in mice have shown that knockout of BMP4 results in loss of expression of NKx2-1 after specification, indicating BMP4 signalings' role is predominantly in the outgrowth of the respiratory tract from the ventral foregut rather than setting up the initial specification for respiratory differentiation. BMP signaling also plays a role in epithelialization of the esophagus. Recall the foregut has a columnar epithelium and must make the transition into a stratified nonkeratinized squamous epithelium, the epithelium of the esophagus. BMP7 plays a major role in this transition.

**Factors of Epithelial and Mesenchymal Development**

Studies of knockout mice have revealed numerous other signaling factors for the esophagus. The most prominent of these signaling molecules include Keap1, P63, Foxp1, Foxp2, and HoxC4. These factors seem to play dramatic roles in the differentiation of esophageal epithelium as well as esophageal muscular development. Studies of Foxp1 and Foxp2 indicate that these molecules are critical players in the development of smooth and striated muscle of the esophagus and stomach.

# Molecular Level

Esophageal embryogenesis, though an independent process, is a part of cellular events that leads to the formation of lung, trachea, and esophagus in different and specific yet interlinked pathways, namely the increased expression of SOX2 in the dorsal portion of the foregut endoderm leading to esophageal differentiation and NKx2-1 expression in the ventral foregut endoderm resulting in differentiation of the respiratory system. These genes are timely expressed and spatially regulated in the foregut endoderm. Therefore, interruption of any of these pathways at any point during development can lead to various trachea-esophageal malformations.

# Pathophysiology

Researchers have identified various Tracheoesophageal Fistula (TE) malformations by altering the gene regulation in knockout mice. These include:

Regulatory mediator Noggin, produced by the notochord, mediates continued specification and differentiation of the respiratory system from the foregut. Studies in mice highlight this regulatory role, where disruption of the notochord resulted in tracheal-esophageal fistulas and esophageal atresia with excessive endodermal tissue.

Wnt5a-Ror2 signaling plays a critical role in elongation for the trachea and esophagus. The knockout of wnt5a in mice has shown truncated esophagus development.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) has a critical role in the development of the esophagus and other structures. Studies of Shh knock out mice show decreased rates of cell division and transcription factor expression.

Briefly, various other factors resulting in esophageal malformations are as following:

- P63 knockout mice show disruption in the stratification of squamous epithelium.

- Loss of  Keap1 results in thick keratinization in the esophagus.

- Lastly, knockout HoxC4 results in an obliterated esophageal lumen from over-proliferation, implying a suppression effect of HoxC4.

# Clinical Significance

Human foregut malformations are relatively common, at a rate of about 1 in 3000 live births. Foregut malformations include a spectrum of pathologies, including tracheoesophageal fistulas with or without esophageal atresia and congenital esophageal rings. The types of esophageal atresias and tracheoesophageal fistulas fall into five subtypes; A-E. The most common type being the Type C esophageal atresia /tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). We will begin with a description of these subtypes and then delve into management. Congenital esophageal rings can be associated with esophageal atresia and TEFs or can occur in isolation.

Esophageal fistulas and TEFs subdivide into five subtypes. Type A is Isolated esophageal atresia without fistula. Type B is Esophageal atresia with the proximal TEF. Type C is esophageal atresia with a distal TEF and is the most common subtype, comprising approximately 85% of cases. Type D is esophageal atresia with both proximal and distal TEF. Lastly, type E is an isolated TEF without esophageal atresia, also known as the H-type. Because the esophagus is still continuous with the stomach, the diagnosis of type E may be delayed as issues with feeding is not readily apparent. The presence of polyhydramnios secondary to impaired swallowing of amniotic fluid may permit prenatal diagnosis. Fetal ultrasounds around 20 weeks gestation can detect esophageal atresia or TEF.

Once suspected, diagnosis can be confirmed by inserting a nasogastric tube with dual lumens (one lumen for continuous suction and another serving as an air vent to prevent the suctioning lumen from attaching to the mucosa). Once inserted, a chest radiograph will show coiling in the atresia portion of the esophagus, which is the gold standard for diagnosis.

Esophageal atresia is also associated with a syndrome of congenital anomalies known as the VACTERL association. This collection of symptoms includes vertebral, anorectal, cardiac, tracheal, esophageal, renal, and limb abnormalities. In order for a diagnosis of VACTERL to be made, at least 2 anomalies must be present. Infants with esophageal atresia and TEF should be evaluated for further anomalies because of the association with VACTERL as well as undergo genetic analysis. Treatment is then aimed at correcting associated anomalies.

Congenital esophageal webs can be isolated findings or found in association with atresias and/or fistulas. The formation of esophageal webs is not completely understood. However, they are thought to occur from incomplete cannulization of the esophagus during development. The webs are often located in the ventral wall of the esophagus and can be completely circumferential.

In summary, defects in the organogenesis of the esophagus can lead to clinically significant pathology. Because these conditions are common, it is important to understand the various subtypes of esophageal atresia and TEFs in order to recommend proper management. Additionally, because esophageal atresia can be the presenting symptom of the VACTERL association, the diagnosis of esophageal atresia should prompt a robust multisystem workup.