Once a comprehensive history and physical examination are obtained, the next step is to look at thyroid biochemistry. In primary hypothyroidism, elevated TSH levels and low free thyroxine 4 (T4) and thyroxine 3 (T3) are observed. One study evaluated patients with a TSH above 50 IU/mL; 70% of these patients had pituitary enlargement on MRI. Of these patients with pituitary enlargement, 84% had a TSH 100 IU/mL or higher, which shows there may be a correlation between TSH levels and the presence of pituitary enlargement.

When a patient has a pituitary lesion, in general, all cell lines with their end-organ hormones should be checked. Therefore, an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and morning cortisol, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and testosterone in males, estradiol with additional menstrual history in females, insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), and prolactin should all be obtained. Prolactin levels are often elevated in those with primary hypothyroidism with pituitary hyperplasia due to TRH stimulating lactotroph hyperplasia in addition to thyrotroph hyperplasia.

Imaging is important in the evaluation of these patients. MRI is generally the best test to look at pituitary anatomy. However, it is not easy to differentiate hyperplasia from an adenoma on imaging alone. In general, pituitary hyperplasia is described as homogeneously enhancing and the "nipple sign," which is when the pituitary gland has smooth contours, but a central protrusion of a pituitary mass is present.