Several muscles are involved in arytenoid cartilage movement:

- The cricothyroid is a bilaterally paired and symmetrical muscle, arising from the anterior and lateral surfaces of the cricoid arch by two heads of origin. One inserts into the lower rim of the thyroid cartilage, and the other inserts into the inferior horn of the thyroid cartilage. It is the only tensor muscle of the larynx; its action elevates the cricothyroid arch and depresses the thyroid lamina when activated. This directly decreases the cricothyroid space, which increases the length of the vocal folds, leading to a lengthening and stiffening of the vocal folds.

- The thyroarytenoid muscle is bilateral and symmetrically paired. It attaches anteriorly on the midsaggital plane of the internal face of the thyroid cartilage. Posteriorly, it attaches to the vocal and muscular processes of each arytenoid cartilage. The thyroarytenoid muscle stiffens and slightly adducts the vocal folds, which can result in changing the amplitude of vibration of the vocal folds.

- The posterior cricoarytenoid muscles are paired muscles that take origin from the central ridge on the back of the cricoid cartilage to insert into the muscular process of the arytenoid cartilage. They are the main abductors of the vocal folds. By rotating the arytenoid cartilages laterally, they abduct the vocal folds and thereby open the rima glottidis. Their action opposes the lateral cricoarytenoid muscles.

- The lateral cricoarytenoid muscle attaches along the superior border of the lateral cricoid cartilage and sends its fibers to the muscular process of the arytenoid. This muscle is the main antagonist of the posterior cricoarytenoid. It rotates the arytenoids medially, representing the main adductor of the vocal folds and closing the rima glottidis.

- The oblique arytenoid muscle passes diagonally from the muscular processes of one arytenoid cartilage to the superior pole of the opposite one, adducting arytenoid cartilages and closing the rima glottidis.

- Some fibers of the oblique arytenoid travel along the quadrangular membrane in the aryepiglottic fold as the aryepiglottic muscle. Both this muscle and the oblique arytenoid muscle help to close the inlet of the larynx during deglutition.

- The interarytenoid muscle is the only unpaired intrinsic muscle of the larynx and consists of both transverse and oblique fibers. The transverse fibers insert on the posterior face of each arytenoid and run horizontally, while the oblique fibers attach to each arytenoid apex and run obliquely to attach to the posterior face on the opposite side. Contraction of this muscle brings together the arytenoid cartilages and closes the posterior portion of the glottis.