The clinical picture of SVAS differs from other forms of aortic stenosis. SVAS is commonly a congenital malformation seen with Williams syndrome, which is a multisystem disorder with cardiac features of SVAS, infantile hypercalcemia, and deranged vitamin D metabolism. Infants with Williams syndrome often exhibit failure to thrive, due to feeding difficulties, and gastrointestinal problems such as vomiting and constipation. Other clinical manifestations include mild intellectual delay, “cocktail party” personality, elf-like facies, high prominent forehead, stellate or lacy iris patterns, epicanthal folds, strabismus, low flat nasal bridge, upturned nose, smooth philtrum, overhanging upper lip, and wide-spaced teeth. They also can have cardiac manifestations such as narrowing of peripheral systemic and pulmonary arteries and strabismus.

Recognition of this appearance in infancy should alert the physician of the underlying multisystem disease. SVAS in Williams syndrome is usually progressive, with an increase in the severity of obstruction, usually related to the poor growth of the ascending aorta.

Physical findings are very similar such as aortic valve stenosis with exceptions such as accentuation of aortic valve closure, an absent ejection click, and absence of transmission of a thrill and murmur into the jugular notch and along the carotid vessels. Another classical finding of SVAS is that systolic pressure in the right arm is usually higher than that in the left arm. This pulse disparity may be related to the tendency of a jet stream to adhere to a vessel wall and selective streaming of blood into the innominate artery.

Furthermore, SVAS is associated with other cardiac and vascular anomalies which also could complicate the clinical presentation. Some of these anomalies are coarctation of the aorta and ostial stenosis of the carotid, renal, iliac, and other peripheral arteries; dysplasia, thickening and restricted mobility of the aortic valve leaflets; coronary artery stenosis due to focal or diffuse coronary narrowing; and pulmonary artery stenosis.