Amitriptyline is a tricyclic antidepressant that is FDA approved to treat depression in adults. It is also used off-label to treat chronic pain syndrome, anxiety, and insomnia. It has a considerable side effect profile and is no longer commonly used as a first-line agent to treat depression. It may be useful for patients who have insomnia, severe depression, treatment-resistant depression, and patients with co-morbid chronic pain syndromes. Patients on amitriptyline can have anticholinergic, antihistaminic, and alpha-adrenergic blocking adverse effects. It may not be appropriate for patients with cardiac problems. It has many potential drug interactions, increasing the risk of arrhythmias and serotonin syndrome. Toxicity can be life-threatening, and patients will need to be stabilized and monitored closely. Health care providers also need to know the increased risk of suicidality in children, adolescents, and young adults, which will require discussion with families.

When a clinician (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) determines to start a patient on amitriptyline, they should counsel the patient about the risks associated with amitriptyline therapy. It is always prudent to obtain a psychiatry consultation when prescribing amitriptyline for major depressive disorder. There are significant drug-drug interactions of other medicines with amitriptyline; therefore, pharmacists should report back to the clinician if there is any concern. Pharmacists should also perform medication reconciliation and ensure appropriate dosage.

Specially trained nurses can provide medication counseling, evaluate patient adherence, and monitor for side effects on follow-up visits. The nurse should report to clinicians in the case of concern regarding therapy. In an acute overdose of amitriptyline, emergency medicine physicians and triage nurses should rapidly stabilize the patient. Critical care physician supervision is necessary if the patient remains in the ICU. In severe overdose, clinicians should obtain a medical toxicologist consultation and contact the poison control center. In case of intentional overdose, the clinician should obtain a psychiatrist consultation. As depicted above, there needs to be excellent communication between multiple healthcare providers involved in taking care of the patient receiving amitriptyline. Each provider should understand their responsibility and work collaboratively. When the interprofessional team collaborates in therapeutic decisions, amitriptyline can effectively treat depression, and patients can achieve optimal outcomes with minimal adverse events. [Level 5]