Intracapsular femoral neck fractures account for approximately 50% of all hip fractures. The majority of these fractures occur in elderly patients with underlying osteoporosis.

Femoral neck fractures are differentiated from extracapsular hip fracture patterns based on anatomic location. The distinction between these fracture patterns is critical because intracapsular fractures demonstrate limited healing potential secondary to the absence of the periosteal layer, and the fracture is bathed in the surrounding synovial fluid. The hip joint capsule attaches to the intertrochanteric line anteriorly and the crest posteriorly.

The arterial blood supply to the femoral head arises from three main sources.

- Profunda femoris artery

- Two major branches include the medial and lateral circumflex femoral arteries (MFCA, LFCA)

- The dominant contributing blood supply is from the MFCA by way of the lateral epiphyseal artery
- The LFCA supplies portions of the anterior and inferior femoral head
- Retinacular vessels branching from the circumflex arteries

- Ligamentum teres (predominant role in pediatric patients, minimal contribution in the adult patient)

- Minimal supply from the medullary canal and inferior gluteal artery

In addition to the tamponade effect mentioned above and its potential compromise to femoral head blood flow, patients with femoral neck fractures risk developing avascular necrosis (AVN) due to the retrograde blood supply and injury to the retinacular vessels.

**Implications for Treatment**

Displaced intracapsular femoral neck fractures in the elderly are typically managed with hip reconstruction procedures. The femoral head and neck are replaced with a reconstruction prosthesis. These procedures typically include hip hemiarthroplasty or total hip arthroplasty (THA) procedures. Nondisplaced fractures can be managed with fixation using cannulated screw fixation.

In contrast, extracapsular fractures rarely compromise the arterial blood supply to the femoral head and neck and, thus, are commonly managed with various types of surgical fixation techniques. AVN of the femoral head is very rare following extracapsular fractures.