Early trials in breast cancer research confirmed the validity and safety of sentinel node biopsy. The adoption of this technique helped avoid axillary dissection for node-negative patients, decreasing the morbidities associated with this surgery

Over time, the clinical relevance of a positive sentinel node continues to be studied.

The ACOSOG Z0011 trial has been practice-changing for sentinel node management in patients with clinically negative axilla. This study guides treating surgeons to avoid an ALND when performing breast conservation, and only 1 to 2 positive sentinel nodes are present and administering postoperative radiation. The results from this are not applicable in women with T3 or T4 tumors, those who have an extracapsular extension, or those who undergo partial breast radiation.

There are ongoing trials for patients who have a core-needle biopsy-proven axillary nodal metastasis who then undergo neoadjuvant chemotherapy with complete imaging response of the axilla. One trial is Alliance A11202, in which patients who have node biopsy-proven disease before neoadjuvant chemotherapy will undergo SLN at the time of surgery. If the SLN is negative, there will be no further surgery. If the SLN is positive, these patients are randomized to chest wall/nodal radiation with or without further ALND. The NSABP B51-RTOG 1304 (NRG 9353) schema follows patients with the documented nodal disease to have either SLN or ALND at the time of surgery, and then randomization with or without nodal radiation [American Society of Breast Surgeons 2019 Annual meeting].