**CT Imaging**

CT is not very helpful in the diagnosis of PKAN, but rarely hypodensity in the basal ganglia and some atrophy of the brain has been reported. Calcification in the basal ganglia in the absence of any atrophy has also been described.

**Brain MRI**

Is the standard in the diagnostic evaluation of all forms of **Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA)****.**It****has significantly increased the likelihood of a diagnosis of PKAN. Imaging findings are most conspicuous on T2W  sequences which demonstrate hypointensity reflecting areas of iron deposition, mainly in globi pallidi,  pars reticulata of the substantia nigra, and red nuclei.  Studies report that all patients with PANK2 mutations, whether classic or atypical, have the characteristic radiologic sign known as "eye of the tiger" on brain MRI, which is evident as bilateral symmetrical, central foci of hyperintense signals  in the anteromedial globus pallidus, with surrounding zone of  hypointensity in the globus pallidus on T2W MR scanning. The central T2 relatively hyperintense spot or line within the globi pallidi is due to gliosis and vacuolisation. This sign was not reported in patients without PANK2 mutations.  Cortex is usually spared, but atrophy can be seen in advanced cases.

**SWI/T2***

Show susceptibility artifact (blooming low signal) in corresponding areas due to iron accretion. MR spectroscopy shows decreased NAA peak due to neuronal loss and may depict increased myoinositol.

**SPECT Scanning**

Iodine-123 ( I)-beta-carbomethoxy-3beta-(4-fluorophenyl) tropane  SPECT scanning and ( I)-iodobenzamide (IBZM)-SPECT scanning have been used in making the diagnosis of Hellervorden Spatz disease but are not commonly used in the clinical setup.

**Antenatal Diagnosis**

Prenatal testing for pregnancies at risk is carried by DNA testing. Cells are usually obtained by amniocentesis at 15-20 weeks of gestation or by chorionic villus sampling at 10-13 weeks. At least one mutation in the proband of extracted DNA should be present for a prenatal diagnosis of NBIA. If both pathogenic variants have been found in an affected family member carrier testing for at-risk relatives is possible by the same technique.