An immense variety of clinical pathology exists involving cartilage, such as osteoarthritis, spinal disc herniation, traumatic rupture/detachment, achondroplasia, costochondritis, and neoplasm, and many others. These result from a variety of degenerative, inflammatory, and congenital causes.

Osteoarthritis is a disease affecting the whole joint; however, the articular cartilage (a subset of hyaline cartilage) within the joint is the most affected tissue. Osteoarthritis is known as a "wear and tear" phenomenon due to it mainly affecting joints under higher amounts of stress. It results due to articular cartilage being thinned and wearing away. This ultimately results in a decreased range of motion, "bone against bone" contact within the joint, and pain. The initial clinical treatment is with anti-inflammatories and corticosteroid injections intraarticularly. Both therapies function to reduce the inflammatory reaction caused by the degenerative cartilage's release of cytokines. Patients may also show improvement by losing weight, exercising, and efforts to decrease joint stress with rest and using a cane. Eventually, however, many patients will develop pain and symptoms that interfere with daily life. At this point, joint replacement or resurfacing may be recommended. Arthroscopic surgery is no longer recommended as it does not improve outcomes in knee osteoarthritis and can cause harm.

Another common degenerative disease of cartilage is spinal disc herniation. It is due to degenerative changes of the outer ring of the intervertebral disc, called the annulus fibrosus. The annulus fibrosus is composed of fibrocartilage. Trauma, straining, and lifting injuries are also implicated in the weakening of the annulus fibrosis predisposing to disc herniation. When there is structural damage to the annulus fibrosus, the nucleus pulposus contained within the disc may herniate into the spinal canal, causing impingement of 1 or multiple nerves as well as induce inflammatory changes due to the damaged fibrocartilage.

In contrast to the degenerative diseases of cartilage, Achondroplasia is a genetic disorder of cartilage formation and is the most common cause of dwarfism. The pathology seen is due to a mutation on chromosome 4 affect the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene, which normally functions as a negative regulator of bone and cartilage growth. The mutation in achondroplasia results in a truncated dysfunctional protein that is constitutively active. These dysfunctional proteins impede cartilage growth and development by suppressing chondrocyte proliferation and calcification.