The key factors that play a vital role in rapid bone loss in transplant recipients are as follows:

- Their pre-existing bone disease

- The effect of medications such as corticosteroids and calcineurin inhibitors on the skeleton.

**Pre-transplantation Bone Disease**

Several studies have shown that as high as 50 % of transplant candidates have a pre-existing bone disease, and the prevalence of fractures in this population is higher than that in the general population.

Bone mineral disease in chronic kidney disease (CKD-BMD) is a prominent feature in ESRD patients, and based on the morphology seen on bone histomorphometry study, CKD-BMD can be classified into three distinct entities as follows:

- Osteitis fibrosa, a result of secondary hyperparathyroidism and increased bone turnover

- Osteomalacia, caused by decreased bone mineralization due to vitamin D deficiency.

- Adynamic bone disease, that occurs due to parathormone (PTH) over-suppression and decreased bone remodeling.

Some of these entities can co-exist in the same patient. Bone histomorphometry is performed on biopsy samples from the iliac crest after tetracycline labeling. Differentiating between these entities is essential while considering therapy in patients with ESRD as bisphosphonates, which are the most commonly used drugs for transplantation osteoporosis treatment, are associated with worsening of adynamic bone disease.

**Skeletal Effects of Corticosteroids (CS)**

The main mechanisms by which CS induce bone loss are the direct inhibition of osteoblast functions, an increase in the apoptosis of osteoblasts, and the increased osteoclast activation by enhancing RANK ligand activity.

**Skeletal Effects of Calcineurin Inhibitors (CNIs)**

The lone effects of the CNI, such as cyclosporin and tacrolimus, on the human skeleton are unclear as patients treated with CNI are almost always concomitantly treated with CS. In murine models, though CNIs were seen to stimulate both osteoblasts and osteoclasts, the resorption rate was found to be much higher than the bone formation rate, thus leading to a net increase in bone resorption.