Multiple methods of irrigation delivery have been described using a variety of equipment. A 35 to 50mL piston syringe with an eye irrigation cup attached to the end may be used to irrigate and reduce splashing back of irrigation fluid. A 35mL syringe with a 19G catheter placed on its end generates the pressure necessary to remove debris and reduce bacterial burden in the wound. Other tricks of the trade include placing a liter of isotonic fluid in a pressure bag on an IV pole and attaching an 18 gauge catheter to the end which can provide a continuous stream of irrigation fluid under similar pressure.  You may also use an 18-gauge needle, puncture 3 or 4 holes in the cap of a bottle of irrigation, and this will create the pressure needed by squeezing the bottle for short increments. Manufacturers have now created devices that replace the cap of the irrigation bottle that acts similarly.

Personal protective gear should always be utilized when cleaning and irrigating a wound. Wound irrigation is an aseptic procedure so washing hands, donning gloves, face mask, and eye protection help avoid contamination of the wound and also protect the provider from body fluid exposure.

Wound anesthesia is achievable with lidocaine 1% injection, lidocaine 1% or 2% with epi injection, or bupivacaine 0.5% injection around the wound site.  One may also use a topical application of a LET (lidocaine-epinephrine- tetracaine) preparation.

Multiple wound cleansing agents are available as described below:

- Povidone-iodine Solution- strong, broad bactericidal action against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria; mildly toxic to healthy cells and granulating tissues.

- Chlorhexidine - Strongly bactericidal against gram-positive bacteria, less bactericidal against gram-negative bacteria

- Poloxamer 188 - No bactericidal effect; soap-like action to remove dirt and oil

Multiple irrigation solutions are available for wound irrigation as described below:

- Normal Saline - non-toxic to tissues and similar in tonicity to physiologic fluids; most commonly used

- Sterile Water - non-toxic to tissues but is hypotonic and may cause cell lysis

- Potable Water - used in austere environments where sterile water or saline is not available; no difference found in the use of potable water vs. sterile water in wound infection rates