# Continuing Education Activity

Myofascial pain syndrome (MPS) is common among patients with musculoskeletal pain problems. MPS is a pain condition originating from muscle and surrounding fascia. Patients usually present with localized pain in a restricted area or referred pain of various patterns. Moreover, the physical examinations may reveal trigger points (TrPs) on the involved muscles. MPS can be divided into the acute and chronic forms. Acute MPS frequently resolves spontaneously or after simple treatments. However, chronic MPS are usually worse in prognosis, and the symptoms can last for 6 months or longer. This activity reviews the pathophysiology and presentation of myofascial pain syndrome and stresses the importance of an interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of myofascial pain syndrome, with a focus on the pathophysiology of muscular trigger points.
- Recall the presentation of myofascial pain syndrome, and describe examination and evaluation techniques emplyed to arrive at a diagnosis of MPS.
- List the treatment and management options available for myofascial pain syndrome.
- Discuss interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the management of myofascial pain syndrome and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Myofascial pain syndrome (MPS) is common among patients with musculoskeletal pain problems. MPS is a pain condition originating from muscle and surrounding fascia. Patients usually present with localized pain in a restricted area or referred pain of various patterns. Moreover, the physical examinations may reveal trigger points (TrPs) on the involved muscles. MPS can be divided into the acute and chronic forms.  Acute MPS frequently resolves spontaneously or after simple treatments. However, chronic MPS are usually worse in prognosis, and the symptoms can last for 6 months or longer.

# Etiology

Various factors can contribute to MPS. The common risk factors are

- Traumatic events

- Ergonomic factors (e.g., overuse activities, abnormal posture)

- Structural factors (e.g., spondylosis, scoliosis, osteoarthritis)

- Systemic factors (e.g., hypothyroidism, vitamin D deficiency, iron deficiency)

# Epidemiology

The exact prevalence of MPS in the general population has rarely been mentioned in existing literature. However, 30% to 85% of patients with musculoskeletal pain suffer from this condition

# Pathophysiology

Nowadays, the exact pathophysiology of MPS is still unknown. Many researchers try to find scientific evidence and formulate hypotheses. One of the most accepted theory is energy crisis of muscle fibers

# Histopathology

In the past, there were many articles reporting histopathology of TrPs of muscles in animal and human models. Light microscope examination on TrPs showed contraction knot (local contraction of muscle fibers) and narrowing endomysium (space between muscle fibers)

# History and Physical

Most patients with MPS suffer from local muscle pain and referred pain in specific patterns. For example, myofascial pain in infraspinatus muscle usually refers to the anterior deltoid area, lateral aspect of the arm and radial half of the hand. The onset of pain may be acute or insidious. In some patients, symptoms occur after muscle injuries or overuse activities. On the other hand, certain patients developed symptoms without identifiable precipitating factors.

On physical examination, taut bands and TrPs are usually found in affected muscles. The taut band is the contracted muscle belly which can be palpated. TrP is a marked tender spot on the taut band which can be aggravated local and referred pain by compression. We classify TrPs into active or latent. While active TrPs are found in symptomatic patients, we can find latent TrPs in patients without pain

Clinical signs and symptoms normally indicate MPS. There are many clinical diagnostic criteria for MPS. The consensus for most criteria includes: “TrP,” “recognition of pain when palpating the TrP,” “specific pain referral pattern” and “local twitch response” (a rapidly local muscle contraction after palpation or needling)

# Evaluation

As mentioned above, MPS is a medical condition based on clinical findings. However, we can use medical devices (like electromyography and ultrasound) to confirm the diagnosis. End-plate noise is usually found in TrPs by using electromyography

The importance of using medical imaging and electrophysiological examinations lies in its value in excluding other musculoskeletal disorders. Diagnostic ultrasound can be used to exclude bursitis and tendinopathy. The plain radiograph can be employed to detect structural bony defects, such as spondylosis, scoliosis, foraminal stenosis, among others. Electromyography can be used to scrutinize neuromuscular diseases. Moreover, we can use laboratory tests to identify potential hormone and nutritional deficiency relevant to MPS, such as hypothyroid or vitamin D deficiency.

# Treatment / Management

The goals of MPS treatment are pain relief and correction of precipitating factors. There are many treatments to deal with MPS. All patients should be educated about stretching exercises and ergonomic modification. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and muscle relaxants are often prescribed, but current evidence of their effectiveness remains inconclusive

Besides, success in MPS management also depends on correcting perpetuating factors, especially in chronic MPS. For example, patients with vitamin D deficiency may have poor responses to conventional treatments. As a result, physicians should give them vitamin D supplement in conjunction with other treatments.

# Differential Diagnosis

Many diseases are presenting with regional pain like MPS. The common disorders include tendinopathy, arthritis, bursitis and nerve entrapment which should be excluded by clinical examination and investigation. Differential diagnosis depends on patterns and location of pain. For example, patients who have suffered from medial elbow pain should be evaluated for possible medial epicondylitis or cubital tunnel syndrome.

For patients who have chronic multiple TrPs, fibromyalgia should be considered

# Staging

MPS is commonly classified into acute and chronic MPS. Patients with acute MPS have pain in 1 or 2 local regions. Symptoms usually begin after traumatic events or overuse activities. Most symptoms resolve after a few weeks. However, some patients progress to chronic MPS. Chronic MPS persists 6 months or longer. Patients with chronic MPS have more widespread pain than the acute form. Pain intensity may fluctuate. Almost all of the chronic MPS patients have some perturbating factors

# Prognosis

The prognosis of MPS depends on symptom duration.  In acute MPS, symptoms usually resolve spontaneously or after simple treatments (heat physical modalities, stretching exercise, TrP needling or local anesthetic injection). On the other hand, chronic MPS last much longer than acute form. In a previous study, the average duration of symptoms was 63 months; the range was between 6 and 180 months. Chronic MPS may become recalcitrant if the underlying medical condition is not corrected

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Myofascial pain syndrome is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes the pharmacist. There is no one treatment that works in everyone and not everyone has the same response. A pain specialist should be involved early in the care. Because many of these patients have a range of mental health disorders, a mental health consult should be obtained.

Unfortunately, the prognosis for most patients is guarded because of recurrence of pain. Many patients regularly turn to alternative health care because of the failure of conventional medicine to help them with pain relief.