# Introduction

The pterygopalatine ganglion (PPG) is one of four parasympathetic ganglia located within the head region, existing as a bilateral pair. The pterygopalatine ganglion may also be referred to as the sphenopalatine ganglion, Meckel's ganglion, or the nasal ganglion. The pterygopalatine ganglion is responsible for housing the post-ganglionic parasympathetic neuronal cell bodies, in addition to acting as a conduit for post-ganglionic sympathetic and sensory axonal fibers. The fibers that arise from the pterygopalatine ganglion regulate secretomotor functions to and provide sensation from various structures that include: the lacrimal glands, the mucous membranes of the oropharynx, nasopharynx, nasal cavity, and upper portion of the oral cavity. The fibers from the pterygopalatine ganglion are also responsible for providing innervation to the cerebral and meningeal blood vessels.

# Structure and Function

Located within the pterygopalatine fossa (PPF), the pterygopalatine ganglion comprises the largest parasympathetic ganglion and is one of four ganglia located within the head region. The pterygopalatine ganglion includes an assortment of parasympathetic, sympathetic, and somatosensory nerve fibers.

The pterygopalatine ganglion houses post-ganglionic parasympathetic neurons that receive synaptic transmissions from pre-ganglionic parasympathetic fibers that arise from the superior salivatory nucleus, located within the pons of the brainstem.

The source of the sympathetic neurons associated with the pterygopalatine ganglion originates from pre-ganglionic sympathetic neurons located in the intermediolateral cell column at the level of the first thoracic vertebra.

Somatic sensory fibers, primarily from the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve, are another set of axons that run through the pterygopalatine ganglion without synapsing at the pterygopalatine ganglion itself. Following the maxillary nerve distal to its branches from the trigeminal nerve, it enters the posterior region of the pterygopalatine fossa via the foramen rotundum. Within the pterygopalatine fossa, the maxillary nerve gives off somatic sensory branches that pass through the pterygopalatine ganglion to predominantly form the greater and lesser palatine nerves.

# Embryology

The neurons of the pterygopalatine ganglion, along with those of the otic, submandibular, and ciliary ganglia, are derived from Schwann cell precursors that migrate via associated pre-ganglionic axons.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Current evidence suggests that the pterygopalatine ganglion is responsible for providing innervation to the anterior cerebral and meningeal blood vessels through the actions of several neurotransmitters that include: acetylcholine, nitric oxide, and vasoactive intestinal peptide.

# Nerves

As described in more detail above, multiple nerves converge at the pterygopalatine ganglion. This section describes which nerves arise from the pterygopalatine ganglion and the various structures innervated by these nerves. The pterygopalatine ganglion gives rise to the following nerves: the nasopalatine nerve, the lesser palatine nerve, the greater palatine nerve, the posterior superior lateral nasal nerves, the posterior inferior lateral nasal nerves, and pharyngeal nerve.

The posterior inferior lateral nasal nerves branch off from the greater palatine nerve in the pterygopalatine canal to innervate the medial and inferior nasal meatuses, along with the inferior nasal concha. The posterior superior lateral nasal nerves directly project from the pterygopalatine ganglion to go through the sphenopalatine foramen to enter the nasal cavity posteriorly to innervate the middle and superior nasal conchae, the posterior aspect of the nasal septum, and the posterior ethmoidal air cells.

The maxillary nerve, with its purely sensory axonal fibers, serves as a pathway for the post-ganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers of the pterygopalatine ganglion. The autonomic fibers of the pterygopalatine ganglion traverse with branches of the maxillary nerve that include the zygomatic, posterior superior alveolar, and infra-orbital nerves. The post-ganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers that travel with the zygomatic nerve are especially important because these nerves are what ultimately provide innervation to the lacrimal gland.

The nasopalatine nerve exits the pterygopalatine fossa from the sphenopalatine foramen and emerges within the posterior aspect of the nasal cavity. The nasopalatine nerve continues within the nasal cavity along the nasal septum in an anteroinferior direction, traversing a groove in the vomer and providing branches along its trajectory. The nasopalatine nerve ultimately passes through the incisive canal and fossa to innervate the gingiva and mucosa of the anterior hard palate, just posterior to the maxillary incisors and canine teeth.

The greater palatine nerve innervates the remaining portion of the hard palate’s gingiva and mucosa. The lesser palatine nerve is responsible for providing innervation to the soft palate, uvula, and tonsil. The soft palate communicates the sensation of taste from the lesser palatine nerve to the greater petrosal nerve.

Finally, the pharyngeal nerve, which branches off of the pterygopalatine ganglion, exits the pterygopalatine fossa via the palatovaginal canal. The pharyngeal nerve is responsible for providing innervation to the mucosa and glands of the nasopharynx.

# Muscles

Neurons that originate from the pterygopalatine ganglion do not typically innervate muscular tissue.

# Physiologic Variants

Rusu et al. in 2009 had analyzed the pterygopalatine ganglion of 20 adult human specimens, to which four distinct morphological forms of the pterygopalatine ganglion detailing whether the pterygopalatine ganglion was a single or partitioned unit as well as where the Vidian nerve entered the pterygopalatine ganglion, were described as follows:

- Type A – a partitioned structure with the superior partition receiving the Vidian nerve and constituting 10% of observed specimens

- Type B – a single structure with the superior part (base) of the pterygopalatine ganglion receiving the Vidian nerve and constituting 55% of observed specimens

- Type C – a single structure with the inferior part (tip) of the pterygopalatine ganglion receiving the Vidian nerve and constituting 15% of observed specimens

- Type D – a partitioned structure with the inferior partition receiving the Vidian nerve and constituting 20% of observed specimens

Various sources of the literature have detailed the shape of the pterygopalatine ganglion to be triangular,

# Clinical Significance

The pterygopalatine ganglion is theorized to be a component for a group of headache disorders classified as trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias (TACs) which present as unilateral headaches with ipsilateral autonomic features (lacrimation, rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, eyelid edema, and ptosis).

A systematic review conducted by Ho et al. found that there is substantial evidence to support the targeting of the pterygopalatine ganglion via pterygopalatine ganglion blockade, radiofrequency ablation, or neurostimulation for the treatment of cluster headaches.et al. detail other studies that have investigated therapeutic interventions aimed at the pterygopalatine ganglion to treat other conditions, such as postherpetic neuralgia and post-dural puncture headache, but these studies lack sufficient evidence or dismissed previous claims for the usage of such interventions.et al. argue that larger, double-blinded, randomized-controlled studies pertaining to therapeutic interventions targeting the pterygopalatine ganglion need to be conducted to establish the validity of these interventions in the treatment of cluster headaches, migraines, trigeminal neuralgia, and other pathologies of the head region.