ADH, also known as arginine vasopressin, is formed in the hypothalamus and stored in the posterior pituitary via a pituitary stalk. The main function of ADH is osmoregulation. However, a severe reduction in effective blood volume shifts the function of ADH to volume regulation, even at the expense of effective plasma osmolality or tonicity. "Plasma osmolality" should be differentiated from "effective plasma osmolality" or "plasma tonicity," as the latter is determined by effective osmoles in the extracellular fluid  (ECF) such as sodium (which is not freely permeable across cell membranes), the main component of the ECF. Glucose and urea also increase the plasma osmolality, but these are ineffective osmoles as they are freely permeable across the cell membranes and do not take part in maintaining plasma tonicity.

**Osmoregulation**

The most important and primary function of ADH is to maintain the plasma tonicity, primarily by an alteration in water balance. Osmoreceptors detect the change in effective plasma osmolality in the hypothalamus. A decrease in tonicity prevents ADH release and prevents water retention. An increase in tonicity causes ADH release, which acts on V2 receptors on the luminal surface of cortical and medullary collecting tubular cells. Under the influence of ADH, unique aquaporin-2 water channels are formed by the fusion of pre-formed cytoplasmic vesicles in the tubular cells, and water is absorbed down the concentration gradient. Once the water is absorbed, these channels are removed by endocytosis and returned to the cytoplasm. The osmoreceptors are extremely sensitive, responding to alterations in the plasma tonicity of as little as 1%.

In patients with SIADH, levels of ADH are high even in the presence of decreased plasma osmolality and/or hyponatremia. Excess water absorption keeps the blood volume high or normal.

**Volume Regulation**

An acute drop in blood pressure as sensed by " volume receptors" rather than "osmoreceptors" causes ADH release (along with other hormones like rennin and epinephrine), which generates free water absorption from the kidneys. This can potentially lead to hyponatremia and a decrease in effective ECF osmolality. So, the main focus in rapid and/or substantial decrease in blood volume is "volume regulation," even at the cost of osmolality. This effect is more prominent in patients with liver disease or cardiac disease, and hyponatremia in such patients is the direct predictor of a worse prognosis.