It is important to approach headache treatment from a multidisciplinary perspective by employing various strategies to treat and educate patients about handling their pain to enhance the quality of life. Pharmacists, neurologists, psychologists, and physical therapists all play an important role in managing patient headaches and reducing the risk of medication overuse. Pharmacotherapy may be acute or preventative, and the prescriber must be fully aware of the possible side effects of ergotamine and what adverse reactions it could have if taken with other drugs. Since the introduction of more selective drugs with fewer side effects, such as the triptans, physicians must also exercise sound clinical judgment and effective communication with the healthcare team to evaluate the various medication options. Numerous authors have compared the efficacy and safety of triptans versus ergot alkaloids for the treatment of acute migraines and came to mixed conclusions. Thus, the physician needs to discuss with the pharmacy team what options might be best for individual patients.

Psychologists can carry out education and cognitive behavioral therapy for migraine patients, including self-management, handling medication, and lifestyle education. Physical therapists play a supplementary role in preventing headache episodes because of the common coexistence of neck pain with headaches. Additionally, various types of relaxation training can be effective treatments in preventing migraines. Due to the pervasive nature of migraines and the complexity of their treatment, it is valuable to utilize a multidisciplinary approach to achieve the most effective outcomes for the patient.