**Vaso Constriction.**Within about 30 minutes of damage/trauma to the blood vessels, vascular spasm ensues, which leads to vasoconstriction. At the site of the disrupted endothelial lining, the extracellular matrix (ECM)/ collagen becomes exposed to the blood components.

**Platelet Adhesion.**This ECM releases cytokines and inflammatory markers that lead to adhesion of the platelets and their aggregation at that site which leads to the formation of a platelet plug and sealing of the defect. The platelet adhesion is a complex process mediated by interactions between various receptors and proteins including tyrosine kinase receptors, glycoprotein receptors, other G-protein receptors as well as the von Willebrand Factor (vWF). The von Willebrand Factor functions via binding to the Gp 1b-9 within the platelets.

**Platelet Activation.**The platelets that have adhered undergo very specific changes. They release their cytoplasmic granules that include ADP, thromboxane A2, serotonin, and multiple other activation factors. They also undergo a transformation of their shape into a pseudopodal shape which in-turn leads to release reactions of various chemokines. P2Y1 receptors help in the conformational changes in platelets.

**Platelet Aggregation.**With the mechanisms mentioned above, various platelets are activated, adhered to each other and the damaged endothelial surface leading to the formation of a primary platelet plug.

**Extrinsic Pathway.**The tissue factor binds to factor VII and activates it. The activated factor VII (factor VIIa) further activates factor X and factor IX via proteolysis. Activated factor IX (factor IXa) binds with its cofactor – activated factor VIII (factor VIIIa), which leads to the activation of factor X (factor Xa). Factor Xa binds to activated factor V (factor Va) and calcium and generates a prothrombinase complex that cleaves the prothrombin into thrombin.

**Intrinsic Pathway.**With thrombin production, there occurs conversion of factor XI to activated factor XI (factor XIa). Factor XIa with activated factor VII and tissue factor converts factor IX to activated factor IX (factor IXa). The activated factor IX combines with activated factor VIII (factor VIIIa) and activates factor X. Activated factor X (factor Xa) binds with activated factor V (factor Va) and converts prothrombin to thrombin. Thrombin acts as a cofactor and catalysis and enhances the bioactivity of many of the aforementioned proteolytic pathways.

**Fibrin Clot Formation.**The final steps in the coagulation cascade involve the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin monomers which polymerizes and forms fibrin polymer mesh and result in a cross-linked fibrin clot.  This reaction is catalyzed by activated factor XIII (factor XIIIa) that stimulates the lysine and the glutamic acid side chains causing cross-linking of the fibrin molecules and formation of a stabilized clot.

**Clot Resolution (Tertiary Hemostasis).**Activated platelets contract their internal actin and myosin fibrils in their cytoskeleton, which leads to shrinkage of the clot volume. Plasminogen then activates to plasmin, which promotes lysis of the fibrin clot; this restores the flow of blood in the damaged/obstructed blood vessels.