The management of Angelman syndrome (AS) is mainly symptomatic as there is no curative treatment till now.

**Therapeutic and Management Guidelines for Treating AS**

**Feeding Problems**

- **Feeding Difficulties**- Sucking might be ineffective, so breastfeeding is not possible sometimes. The use of special nipples is advised, monitoring weight gain and referral to specialized teams for advice and training on feeding.

- **Gastroesophageal Reflux**- Administration of magnesium carbonate and aluminum hydroxide in upright positioning.

- **Constipation**- Increased fluid intake. Jelly can be used as an alternative. A diet rich in fiber and laxatives can also be used.

- **Obesity**- Regular checkup of weight and BMI. Also, regular exercise is advised.

- **Diet**-The ketogenic diet is helpful and is effective.

**Developmental Delay**

- **General Developmental Delay**- Organization of an early, individualized, and active intervention program. Bayle scales should be used to assess development.

- **Gross and Fine Motor Delay**- Physiotherapy, orthotics, and occupational therapy are required for developing motor skills, posture management, and managing contractures.

- **Poor Active Communication**- Speech and language therapy. This can be done using verbal and nonverbal methods of communication. Computers can help massively with this.

**Seizures**

The most effective drugs are sodium valproate, clonazepam, and phenobarbital.

**Sleep Problems**

Proper sleep hygiene and melatonin are effective.

**Vision Problems**

Visual assessment for ocular problems is done to increase interaction and decrease autistic tendencies. Refer to an ophthalmologist if strabismus is suspected.

**Novel Therapeutic Approaches**

Since all patients with AS have one functional but silenced copy of paternal UBE3A, many attempts have been made to unsilenced the paternal UBE3A allele. The paternal UBE3A allele is silenced due to the SNHG14 transcript, which caused transcriptional interference. Then, one of the ways to activate the paternal allele would be to prevent the formation of the SNHG14 transcript. This has been successful in mice with topotecan, which is a topoisomerase inhibitor.

Antisense oligonucleotides(ASO) are also very promising. They function via RNA interference against SNHG14, causing its degradation.