# Introduction

Maintaining blood in a liquid state is critical for homeostasis. It allows blood to supply adequate oxygen and nutrients to tissues while also eliminating carbon dioxide and other waste products. On the other hand, the ability of blood to convert from a liquid to a solid state, in other words, to coagulate, underlies the mechanism that protects the body from life-threatening exsanguination. This process of thrombosis is normally a localized event at the site of vascular injury while the rest of the circulating blood remains in a liquid state. Thrombosis is a dynamic process that includes associated thrombolysis to maintain or restore blood flow through vessels once an injury has been sealed. These unique properties of blood are largely determined by a complex and active balance between pro-coagulation factors, anticoagulants, and fibrinolysis. Two major pathologic conditions are commonly associated with disequilibrium of this intricate system: bleeding and vessel thrombosis.

Major bleeding is a serious medical complication that may be caused by external trauma, surgery, invasive procedures, or an underlying medical condition such as aneurysm rupture or peptic ulcer disease. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), injuries are responsible for 5.8 million deaths per year worldwide, with the associated bleeding responsible for about 30% to 40% of these deaths.

Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is another common and serious condition that is associated with abnormal blood coagulation. In these cases, systemic hypercoagulability shifts the body’s homeostatic mechanisms toward a pro-thrombotic state. In particular patients, however, a definitive cause for the VTE may be unclear. Routine coagulation testing has not been shown to predict such events, and in many cases, even a detailed hypercoagulability investigation fails to identify an underlying disorder. Many people take anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents regularly, which impacts the accuracy of the results of many laboratory coagulation studies.

Several commonly used blood tests assess blood coagulation. These tests include prothrombin time (PT), international normalized ratio (INR), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), platelet count, fibrinogen concentration, D-dimer level, activated clotting time, and whole blood bleeding time (BT). These tests are usually used for the clinical diagnosis of coagulopathy and a possible prothrombotic state, to monitor anticoagulation therapy, and to assist in treating bleeding episodes. More specific factor analyses, such as Factor V, proteins C and S, anti-thrombin III, anticardiolipin antibodies, and prothrombin gene mutation, are useful but not as readily available in emergency clinical situations. Despite being very effective for specific clinical needs, such as anticoagulation monitoring, the first group of usual diagnostic tests has limitations. Their main disadvantage in circumstances of acute major bleeding is the long turnaround time. Furthermore, they do not provide a complete picture of hemostasis due to their inability to assess some coagulation factors (such as Factor XIII), platelet function, and the activity of the fibrinolytic system. Platelet concentration, easily measured as part of a complete blood count, does not necessarily reflect their function, especially in the presence of elements known to affect platelet reactivity, such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, antiplatelet agents, uremia, malignancy, or alcohol intake. Bleeding time has a low sensitivity and high inconsistency in detecting platelet disorders.

Thromboelastography (TEG) is a promising diagnostic modality that offers several advantages compared to the other tests that have been mentioned above. TEG was developed and first described by Dr. Hellmut Hartert at the University of Heidelberg (Germany) in 1948.

# Pathophysiology

TEG is a non-invasive test that quantitatively measures the ability of whole blood to form a clot. The principle of this in vitro test is to detect and quantify dynamic changes of the viscoelastic properties of a blood sample during clotting under low shear stress. The test is performed in a specially designed system called a thromboelastograph. The system consists of 2 chambers simultaneously examining a blood sample in duplicate to reduce the risk of sampling and measurement errors. Each chamber consists of a platform with a disposable cup where a blood sample is placed and a detection pin suspended in its center. The cup oscillates around the detection pin in a limited arc of plus or minus (+/-) 4 degrees 45' every 5 seconds. Induced pin movement is recorded, and changes are measured as a function of time. Initially, there is little movement of the pin since liquid blood possesses minimal viscosity, and the oscillations of the cup are not transmitted to the pin.

As the blood coagulates, it begins to adhere to both the cup and the pin, and movement of the cup induces motion on the pin. These gradually increasing viscoelastic mechanical properties of the blood reflect the developing 3-dimensional fibrin mesh and platelet components of the clot. The greater the viscoelasticity of the clot, the higher the amplitude of the pin motion. As fibrinolysis starts, the fibrin-platelet structure begins to dissolve gradually, and the clot loses its contact with the detection pin, which has less induced motion. The thromboelastogram (Figure 1) is a graphical image of the recorded amplitude of movement of the pin as a function of time. Analytical software measures and quantifies these changes. Therefore, TEG measures the functional ability of the blood to make a hemostatic plug. A newer version replaces the cup rotation method with a resonance technique wherein the blood sample is subjected to vibration, and the vertical movement of the blood meniscus is measured under LED illumination. The system uses pre-measured cartridges that do not require pipetting and allows the simultaneous performance of four blood tests.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

The blood sample is collected via venipuncture in a plastic vial with 3.2% buffered sodium citrate with a citrate-to-blood ratio of 1:9. The vial is inverted several times to mix the blood and citrate. Maintaining this citrate-blood ratio is crucial for test accuracy. Citrate binds calcium, an important cofactor of coagulation, preventing the blood from clotting before the beginning of the test. A clotted specimen, reflecting a vial overfilled with blood, cannot be used. For TEG testing, the collected non-clotted samples are considered stable and usable for up to 2 hours at room temperature. Non-citrated whole blood (native blood TEG or NATEM) can also be tested, but it must be used immediately. The test and reagents used are at room temperature. A volume of 340 uL of citrated blood is pipetted to the study cup, recalcified by the addition of 20 uL of 0.2M calcium chloride, and then activated with a kaolin-cephalin reagent. Cephalins, or phosphatidylethanolamines, are a class of phospholipids commonly present in membranes of human cells. They are an important cofactor of the coagulation cascade, enabling the assembly of tenase and prothrombinase complexes on the surface of platelets that are critical for thrombin generation. Kaolin is a mineral primarily composed of hydrated aluminum silicate, a negatively charged molecule that can initiate the intrinsic coagulation pathway by activating Factor XII. Precise proportioning of the blood and kaolin-cephalin reagent is important for accurate and reproducible TEG results.

Several modifications of the classic TEG assay have been developed to improve its diagnostic value. Rapid TEG (r-TEG) utilizes tissue factor instead of the kaolin-cephalin reagent to activate blood coagulation. Because tissue factor triggers the extrinsic coagulation pathway, which involves a smaller number of coagulation factors, the test can be performed faster than conventional TEG. Rapid TEG can be completed within 15 minutes and thus helps manage massive transfusions in trauma patients.

Rotational thromboelastography, also known as rotational thromboelastometry (RoTEM), utilizes an oscillating pin that rotates +/- 4 degrees 45' every 6 seconds while maintaining the cup in a stable position. In this assay, some different activator reagents are utilized to investigate specific components of the coagulation pathway (Table 1).

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

A normal thromboelastogram is schematically represented in Figure 1. Prompt qualitative analysis of the TEG tracing can be performed during the test. The quantitative analysis of TEG includes the measurement of the 5 parameters listed and described in Table 1. The manufacturer has also suggested a coagulation index to assess the overall coagulation status. The coagulation index (CI) for whole blood may be calculated as follows:

- CI = -0.2454R+ 0.0184K + 0.1655MA - 0.0241a - 5.0220

Normal values of the coagulation index lie within -3.0 and +3.0, which is three standard deviations from the mean of zero. A hypercoagulable state is defined as CI greater than +3.0 and coagulopathy as CI less than -3.0. Previous studies demonstrated a significantly elevated CI in the postoperative period after general surgery and in cancer patients, suggesting a prothrombotic state.

Normal TEG values are presented in Table 2, although some patient-related factors may affect these values. Elderly patients tend towards more pro-coagulable TEG results, suggesting a need to correct these reference values in the elderly.

Deviation of each of these TEG parameters from the reference values suggests specific disturbances of hemostasis and coagulation. Prolongation of the R time reflects a quantitative or qualitative deficiency of coagulation factors that may be corrected by fresh frozen plasma (FFP) transfusion, prothrombin complex, or anticoagulant reversal. Prolongation of the K time, or a decrease of the alfa angle, suggests a deficiency of fibrinogen and may be corrected by cryoprecipitate or lyophilized fibrinogen concentrate. Low MA indicates a quantitative or functional deficiency of platelets and could be corrected by platelet concentrate transfusion or desmopressin. Finally, an increased LY value implies activated fibrinolysis that may be treated by fibrinolysis inhibitors (aminocaproic or tranexamic acid). The opposite changes in TEG parameters suggest a prothrombotic state. This interpretive approach represents a convenient but rather simplified view on disturbances of blood coagulation. It is important to remember that these TEG parameters are interrelated due to the complex nature of hemostasis.

A different nomenclature is used for RoTEM assays to define the same TEG parameters: clotting time (CT) instead of R, clot formation time (CFT) instead of K, maximum clot firmness (MCF) instead of MA, and CL instead of LY. Reference values for RoTEM have been established in a multicenter study on 500 healthy volunteers.

# Clinical Significance

The main advantage of TEG testing is its potential to deliver immediate goal-oriented and individualized care to a bleeding patient:

- Global assessment of blood coagulability, including coagulation cascade, platelet function, and fibrinolysis

- Rapid real-time bedside test with a simple methodology (point-of-care testing)

- Diagnosis of coagulopathic bleeding

- Guide transfusion therapy and decrease the use of blood products

- Detect dynamic changes in blood coagulation during resuscitation

- Predict the clinical efficacy of therapeutic agents affecting blood coagulability

TEG has convincingly demonstrated its usefulness to help improve outcomes in cardiac surgery. A meta-analysis of 17 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) demonstrated that TEG decreases blood product transfusions and surgical re-exploration due to postoperative bleeding in cardiac surgery patients.

There is conflicting evidence for TEG's usefulness in trauma patients. A recent Cochrane database systematic review found insufficient data to compare the accuracy of TEG and RoTEM versus PT/INR in the diagnosis of trauma-induced coagulopathy.

There is expanding evidence of using different TEG and RoTEM assays in other additional clinical scenarios. A small RCT has demonstrated the ability of TEG to better guide anticoagulation during ECMO compared to aPTT, reducing the dose of heparin.

**Clinical Guidelines**

NICE guidelines recommend thromboelastography to help detect, manage and monitor hemostasis in cardiac surgery patients. Other clinical guidelines do not currently strongly recommend TEG for use in other settings due to the lack of high-quality evidence. Recently updated guidelines of the European Society of Anesthesiology recommended viscoelastic hemostatic assays (TEG/RoTEM) to guide the management of perioperative bleeding and manage severe peripartum hemorrhages, albeit with a low level of evidence.

**Limitations**

An ideal test on blood coagulation does not yet exist. TEG measures blood coagulation in vitro, with or without an additional activator. An important component of the coagulation cascade, tissue factor, cannot be quantified in vitro. Moreover, blood coagulation potential is only one component in such complex processes as clinical thrombosis and bleeding. Blood coagulation also depends on the size of the injured vessel, blood flow characteristics, and local vessel wall biology that determines the quantity and functional activity of the membrane-bound pro- and anticoagulation factors. In other words, there are significant aspects of coagulation that are not components of the blood. An abnormal TEG in a patient without clinically relevant bleeding does not require transfusion of blood components. A single test or patient-related factor rarely guides the decision to transfuse blood components or initiate/correct antithrombotic therapy.

TEG has a sensitivity and specificity that may vary significantly in different populations. Patients taking anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents are a major concern in the trauma setting. Warfarin is a commonly prescribed medication

**Future Directions: Guiding Anticoagulation and Antiplatelet Therapy**

Anticoagulation therapy is a field where TEG may become more applicable pending future clinical studies. Up to one-third of patients on warfarin therapy may have subtherapeutic anticoagulation at some point of treatment.

Prediction of platelet inhibition by antiplatelet agents (such as aspirin, clopidogrel, abciximab, eptifibatide, or tirofiban) is another promising avenue for TEG application. Most antiplatelet agents are used with a standard dose despite several known issues associated with this approach. For example, up to 25% of patients with STEMI may be resistant to clopidogrel, increasing the risk of recurrent cardiovascular events.

A novel concept of individualized health care applies to both anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy monitoring. Using a standard dose of the same medications to treat patients with different medical conditions and comorbidities may not be an ideal approach. The potential of TEG to improve the quality of antithrombotic therapy is a promising avenue for experimental and clinical research.

**Future Directions: Prevention of Venous Thromboembolism**

Another potential application of TEG is to improve the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of patients with venous thromboembolism. The most appropriate evidence-based practice to prevent VTE is to stratify patients based on the VTE risk using one of the risk prediction models elaborated for surgical and medical patients. None of these models includes conventional blood coagulation tests since they do not predict VTE. A number of initial reports suggest that TEG may be a useful tool to help with risk stratification. TEG may have a VTE predictive value in critically ill patients, gynecological oncology patients, and prostate cancer.

Despite an appropriate prophylaxis, VTE is still a frequent concern in hospitalized patients. In one study, the R time of TEG was significantly shorter in critically ill patients on LMWH prophylaxis who develop DVT compared to those patients who do not.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

TEG/RoTEM requires experienced personnel for the best results as the precision of the tests may vary broadly depending on the user.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

All interprofessional healthcare team members who deal with patients who require precise hemostatic control should be familiar with thromboelastography and how it can be used in the diagnosis and guide subsequent interventions for these patients. This includes clinicians, specialists, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists, as they will all need to understand the ramifications of this diagnostic information so they can inform the team and assist in making therapeutic decisions, leading to better patient outcomes. [Level 5]