**Hardware Irritation**-****Irritation leading to hardware removal is the most common complication due to the subcutaneous nature of the proximal olecranon.   There is a variable rate of hardware removal for TBW and plate fixation in the literature.  A recent prospective randomized control study reported a hardware removal rate of 50% with TBW and 22% with plate fixation

**Wound Complications/Infection**- The subcutaneous nature of the olecranon provides little soft tissue coverage over hardware used for fixation.  Placing plates on the side of the olecranon where there is a more robust soft tissue envelope may reduce the risk.  Kirshner wires (k-wires) may back out and create wound problems or soft tissue irritation.  Engaging the distal tip of the wire in the anterior cortex of the ulna

**Loss of Motion**-  Patients commonly have a loss of terminal elbow extension of 10-15 degrees.  This is usually not clinically significant as the functional elbow range of motion is a 30-130 degree arc of motion.  One study reported a 39% incidence of a flexion contracture >10 degrees after plate fixation which did not significantly impact functional outcome scores

**Arthrosis**- Degenerative changes can be seen on radiographs up to 50% percent of patients at long-term follow-up.  This is not necessarily clinically significant as 96% of this cohort reported good or excellent outcomes.  Narrowing of the distance between the tip of the olecranon and the coronoid may lead to malreduction and subsequent arthrosis

**Heterotopic ossification**- This can occur in approximately 13% of patients

**Ulnar Nerve Neuritis**- This is an infrequent complication that occurs in approximately 2-12% of cases

**Nonunion**-****The risk of nonunion is approximately 1%

**Malunion**-****This may be intra-articular or extra-articular.  Interarticular malunion may occur from an inadequate reduction of a comminuted fracture, leading to narrowing of the sigmoid notch.  Early arthritis will likely occur and may require an arthroplasty procedure.  Extra-articular malunion presents with radial head subluxation and can be treated with an osteotomy