**Thoracic Paravertebral Block**

The conventional technique relies on the loss of resistance described by Eason and Wyatt (1979) to locate the paravertebral space after penetration and passage of the needle through the superior costotransverse ligament to end in the space. However, this technique is less used by locoregional anesthesia centers because the importance of failure rates and complications such as the invasion of the parietal pleura that can lead to pneumothorax have led the authors to modify their technique and to use an ultrasound-guided approach to ensure the correct location of the space.

In 2009, a study based on cadaveric imaging by Luyet et al. described a catheter placement in the paravertebral space under ultrasound guidance. Surgical disinfection should include the cervicothoracic para-vertebral areas up to the lower edge of the scapula. Protection of the ultrasound probe and cable with a sterile ultrasound probe cover is mandatory. Therefore, an initial ultrasound examination of T2 to T6 of the paravertebral region on the surgical site is performed. Transportable ultrasound equipment and a 50 mm 15-6 MHz linear probe are used.

After identifying the spinous process T4 or T5 by decrementing from the prominent vertebra of C7, the ultrasound probe is positioned on the spinous process of T4; a lateral movement is then made to visualize the transverse process. An oblique movement of the probe allows visualizing the typical double layer of the internal intercostal membrane,  the transverse process, and the pleura.

After skin infiltration with 1% lidocaine (1 ml), the guidance of the needle out of the plane with the needle positioned 1 cm caudal from the ultrasound probe is performed. Once the needle tip is in position between the internal intercostal membrane and the pleura, a local anesthetic is administered 30 seconds after negative aspiration.

**Erector Spinae Plane Block**

After identifying the spinous process of the 5th thoracic vertebra (T5), the transverse process is traced laterally about 2.5 to 3 cm from the midline in a longitudinal position; it is identified as a hyperechoic curvilinear structure with acoustic shading below (a sign of the trident) we can also see the vertebral lamina (sawtooth pattern) and the spinous processes medially with the costochondral junction laterally. One can identify the famous three muscles, the trapezius, rhomboid major, and erector spinae deeper, which insert on the transverse process of T5. The parietal pleura moves according to the patient's breathing and is visible as a hyperechogenic line between the transverse processes.

After skin disinfection, an 8 cm 22-G needle is inserted in the craniocaudal direction and advanced through the trapezius, rhomboid major, and erector spinae to contact the transverse process. The action must be done delicately. Hydrodissection with an injection of 2 to 3 ml of normal saline is necessary to confirm the correct placement of the needle. An injection of 20 ml of the local anesthetic into the interfascial plane deep to the erector spinae and a linear pattern lifting the muscle is visible after this injection.

**Serratus Plane Block**

After skin disinfection around the mid-axillary line area, moving the probe laterally and distally allows viewing of the 4th and 5th ribs. Next, the probe can be rotated in the coronary plane and tilted posteriorly until the serratus anterior muscle and latissimus dorsi muscle are identified. After local infiltration, a local anesthetic is injected into the fascia between the serratus anterior muscle and latissimus dorsi muscle.

**Pectoralis Nerve Block**

The patient is placed in the supine position with the arm in abduction. The ultrasound probe (high frequency) is placed infraclavicular to the lateral third of the clavicle. It is then moved laterally to locate the axillary artery and the vein directly above the first rib. This allows us to identify the pectoralis major and pectoralis minor muscles. The pectoral branch of the thoracoacromial artery becomes visible on color Doppler at the level of the 2nd rib or sometimes pulsatile for good examiners. The needle is inserted under ultrasound control from the superomedial to the inferolateral direction between the pectoral muscles. The local anesthetic solution can then be injected (Pectoralis nerve block I). Then, the probe is moved towards the axilla to identify the serratus anterior muscle above the 2nd, 3rd and 4th ribs, the lateral border of the pectoralis minor, and Gerdy's ligament. The needle is then reinserted into the fascial plane between the pectoralis minor muscle and the serratus anterior muscle; the local anesthetic is injected after a negative aspiration test (Pectoralis nerve block II).

**Intercostal Nerve Block**

It blocks the intercostal nerves' ipsilateral sensory and motor fibers; local anesthetic solution injected into the subcostal groove spreads distally and proximally. In adults, the injection site is at the angle of the rib (6 to 8 cm from the spinous processes). In children, the block is performed at the axillary line level posterior to the angle of the rib.

Ultrasound guidance reduces the risk of intravascular injection and pneumothorax. The probe is placed in a sagittal plane 4 cm laterally to the spinous process; the practitioner then visualizes the costal shadow and the parietal pleura, which moves with the patient's breathing. The needle can then be inserted in or out of a transducer plane and advanced to the lower edge of the rib. An injection of local anesthetic is then performed.