The evaluation of a newborn should include an exhaustive clinical history, the existence or otherwise of a history of oligohydramnios, a traumatic delivery or pelvic presentation, and a thorough physical examination with particular attention to sternocleidomastoid palpation.

The findings include decreased range of motion and a painless swelling over the side of the neck; these are evident in neonates aged 2 to 3 weeks. If the mass is small or missed in the neonatal period, infants usually present with the head tilted and flexed to the side of the lesion. There is diagnostic confirmation in 50% of cases before two months; parents flag most cases, and some correlates with plagiocephaly but may vary depending on the nodule detected. It may grow for two months until it reaches the approximate size of an almond when it begins to regress and may disappear entirely until the eighth month of life.

In older children, the sternocleidomastoid muscle appears thickened and condensed along its length, which leads to restriction of rotation and lateral flexion of the neck. Due to these rotational changes, there can be flattening of the head called positional plagiocephaly.  It can correlate with other musculoskeletal abnormalities such as positional musculoskeletal deformities including metatarsus adductus, calcaneovalgus feet, and developmental dysplasia of the hip, brachial plexus palsy.

Due to unilateral muscle shortening, the child with congenital torticollis prefers to sleep in the prone position, with the affected side down. This position causes asymmetrical pressure on the skull and developing facial bones. This constant pressure on the head can lead to remodeling of the cheekbones and result in facial hemihypoplasia or plagiocephaly. These changes affect proper breastfeeding positioning, making it difficult for the baby to suckle during breastfeeding. Throughout the child's motor development, language, balance in different positions such as sitting, crawling originates compensations from disparate systems with possible consequences on orthostatic postures, such as scoliosis.