There may be some pathologic findings in both the victims and perpetrators of domestic violence. Certain medical conditions and lifestyles make family and domestic violence more likely.

**Perpetrators**

While the research is not definitive, several characteristics are thought to be present in perpetrators of domestic violence. Abusers tend to:

- Have a higher consumption of alcohol and illicit drugs, and assessment should include questions that explore drinking habits and violence

- Be possessive, jealous, suspicious, and paranoid

- Be controlling of everyday family activity including control of finances and social activities

- Suffer low self-esteem

- Have emotional dependence which tends to occur in both partners, but more so in the abuser

**Children**

Domestic violence at home results in emotional damage, which exerts continued effects as the victim matures.

- Approximately 45 million children will be exposed to violence during childhood.

- Approximately 10% of children are exposed to domestic violence annually, and 25% are exposed to at least one event during their childhood.

- Ninety percent are direct eyewitnesses of violence.

- Males who batter their wives batter the children 30% to 60% of the time.

- Children who witness domestic violence are at increased risk of dating violence and have a more difficult time with partnerships and parenting.

- Children who witness domestic violence are at an increased risk for post-traumatic stress disorder, aggressive behavior, anxiety, impaired development, difficulty interacting with peers, academic problems, and have a higher incidence of substance abuse.

- Children exposed to domestic violence often become victims of violence.

- Children who witness and experience domestic violence are at a greater risk of adverse psychosocial outcomes.

- Eighty to 90% of domestic violence victims abuse or neglect their children.

- Abused teens may not report abuse. Individuals 12 to 19 years of age report only about one-third of crimes against them, compared with one-half in older age groups

**State**

In Kentucky, KRS 600.020 states that an abused or neglected child "means a child whose health or welfare is harmed or threatened with harm when his parent, guardian, or other person exercising custodial control or supervision of the child."

Healthcare professionals who treat children and adolescents should understand the signs and symptoms of domestic violence and intervene quickly to protect young children and adolescents from further abuse.

**Pregnant and Females**

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends all women undergo assessment for signs and symptoms of domestic violence during regular and prenatal visits. Providers should offer support and referral information.

- Domestic violence affects approximately 325,000 pregnant women each year.

- The average reported prevalence during pregnancy is approximately 30% emotional abuse, 15% physical abuse, and 8% sexual abuse.

- Domestic violence is more common among pregnant women than preeclampsia and gestational diabetes.

- Reproductive abuse may occur and includes impregnating against a partner's wishes by stopping a partner from using birth control.

- Since most pregnant women receive prenatal care, this is an excellent time to assess for domestic violence.

Factors that predispose pregnant women to domestic violence include:

- Lack of social support

- Single

- Young maternal age

- Lower socioeconomic status

- Unintended pregnancy

- Delayed prenatal care

- Use of alcohol, drugs, or tobacco

The danger of domestic violence is particularly acute as both mother and fetus are at risk. Healthcare professionals should be aware of the psychological consequences of domestic abuse during pregnancy. There is more stress, depression, and addiction to alcohol in abused pregnant women. These conditions may harm the fetus.

**Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender**

Domestic violence occurs in gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender couples, and the rates are thought to be similar to a heterosexual woman, approximately 25%.

- There are more domestic violence cases among males living with male partners than among males who live with female partners.

- Females living with female partners experience less domestic violence than females living with males.

- Transgender individuals have a higher risk of domestic violence. Transgender victims are approximately 2 times more likely to experience physical violence.

Gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender victims may be reticent to report domestic violence. Part of the challenge may be that support services such as shelters, support groups, and hotlines are not regularly available. This results in isolated and unsupported victims. Healthcare professionals should strive to help by working with gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender patients.

**Men**

Domestic violence is usually perpetrated by men against women; however, females may exhibit violent behavior against their male partners.

- Approximately 5% of males are killed by their intimate partners.

- Each year, approximately 500,000 women are physically assaulted or raped by an intimate partner compared to 100,000 men.

- Three out of 10 women at some point are stalked, physically assaulted, or raped by an intimate partner, compared to one out of every 10 men.

- Rape is primarily perpetrated by other men, while women engage in other forms of violence against men.

Although women are the most common domestic violence victims, healthcare professionals should remember that men may also be victims and should be evaluated if there are indications present.

**Elder**

Elders are often mistreated by their spouses, children, or relatives.

- Annually, approximately 2% experience physical abuse, 1% sexual abuse, 5% neglect, 5% financial abuse, and 5% suffer emotional abuse.

- The annual incidence of elder abuse is estimated to be 2% to 10%, with only about 1 in 15 cases reported to the authorities.

- Approximately one-third of nursing homes disclosed at least 1 incident of physical abuse per year.

- Ten percent of nursing home staff self-report physical abuse against an elderly resident.

Elder domestic violence may be financial or physical. The elderly may be controlled financially. Elders are often hesitant to report this abuse if it is their only available caregiver. Victims are often dependent, infirm, isolated, or mentally impaired. Healthcare professionals should be aware of the high incidence of abuse in this population.

Because elder abuse is common, healthcare professionals must remain aware of the potential for abuse. When abuse occurs between elder partners, it is usually part of a long-standing pattern of marital violence or as abuse developing in old age. In the latter case, abuse may be precipitated by issues related to dementia, disability, and changing family relationships.

Some states have a very high percentage of older residents and a concomitant higher percentage of elderly victims of domestic violence.