**Reflex Mechanism**

A reflex occurs when a force, in this context a tap, stretches the muscle-tendon. Through the stretching of the muscle, stretch receptors within the muscle spindle become activated. This action then initiates impulse conduction along a reflex arc consisting of an afferent signal to the spinal cord and an efferent signal to the muscle, which causes the muscle to twitch.

Reflexes, however, are not solely dependent upon excitation; inhibition is also necessary for a reflex to occur. Specifically, a signal branch from the 1a afferent neuron to an inhibitory interneuron is activated to inhibit the opposing muscle group during the reflex. Additional modulation of the monosynaptic junction of the 1a afferent neuron and the motor neuron is provided by the descending corticospinal tract, which in most cases, serves to dampen the reflex response. Due to the involvement of the descending corticospinal tract, a reflex divides into lower and upper motor neuron components. The lower motor neuron components include the peripheral nerves and spinal segment, whereas the upper motor neuron portion consists of the descending corticospinal tract. Injury to either the lower or upper motor neuron portion can result in pathology.

The foundation of reflexes is the propagation of vibration waves from the point of impact to the stretch receptors within the muscle spindle. Failure of this to occur means that either the muscle was unable to sense the impact, or the muscle was unable to propagate the signal. In either situation, the result is a lack of muscle response as no sensory neuron, nor subsequent reflex arcs or motor neurons were activated. One study which explored this phenomenon in the brachioradialis muscle found that a gamma efferent block created by procaine injection was able to decrease the excitability of muscle spindles. This finding is of importance when conducting procedures on the muscle itself.

**Testing**

The evocation of deep tendon reflexes forms a crucial part of the neurological examination as it reveals information about the status of the portions of the nervous system, which contribute to the reflexes tested.

For the testing of the brachioradialis reflex, the examiner places the patient in a seated position. From there, the clinician uses his or her forearm to support the patient’s forearm in a slightly pronated position. The physician supports the patient’s forearm rather than asking the patient to maintain the position to achieve relaxation of the muscle. Once in position, the physician delivers a series of quick hits to the area of the styloid process of the radius at the point of brachioradialis insertion.

Interpretation of the test is dependent upon muscle movement observed as a result of the striking of the brachioradialis tendon. The striking of the muscle-tendon should produce flexion and supination of the forearm. In cases where it does so, that would be considered a negative test. A positive test is indicated by either finger flexion or slight elbow extension.

Elicitation of the brachioradialis reflex can pose some difficulty due to the insertion point of the tendon. Generally, however, the aim is to strike the tendon perpendicularly to the plane of the hammer. Again, this should occur in the area of the styloid process of the radius, which is the point of insertion of the brachioradialis tendon. A myriad of tools for eliciting reflexes exists, including both specialized and improvised hammers. There are three groups of specialized hammers: triangular in shape, T-shaped, and circular. For eliciting the brachioradialis reflex, there is no preference given to the type of hammer utilized other than ensuring that it has a flat edge with which to strike the tendon.

**Grading**

Reflex responses are graded based on the amplitude. Numerous scales have been applied to the grading of reflexes; however, a commonly used scale is the NINDS Muscle Stretch Reflex Scale, which is empirically supported. This is a four-point scale ranging from 0 to 4. A score of 0 indicates the reflex is absent. A score of 1 indicates that a trace response of the reflex is present with reinforcement. A score of 2 indicates that a reflex is present; however, its amplitude is within the lower half of the normal range. A present reflex that falls within the upper half of the normal range warrants a score of 3. An enhanced reflex, meaning that the response is greater than normal, is equivalent to a score of 4; this could include clonus if present.

**Absence of Reflex**

Compression of the C5 and C6 spinal nerves results in the loss of contraction of both the biceps and the brachioradialis muscles. As a result, the patient can lose their brachioradialis. While the lesion at C5 to C6 eliminates the brachioradialis reflex though a lower motor neuron lesion, it also exaggerates all reflexes below that level. These reflexes undergo stimulation via an upper motor neuron and include the finger flexion reflexes caused by C8. In the case where C5 and C6 are intact yet neither the biceps nor the brachioradialis is capable of contraction, then there must be a lesion to the anterior horn cell unless the damage affects the reflex arc. If the damage is to the anterior horns rather than the spinal nerves, then the reflex contraction is reduced in an amount proportionate to the reduction seen in muscle power.