First vascular access for placement of the CDT catheter is obtained. Typically a femoral approach is chosen, but occasionally jugular approach is pursued. Begin with the insertion of the introducer needle into the desired venous system, followed by the threading of a guide-wire through the needle into the vasculature. The guide-wire is then guided up through the right heart into the pulmonary system adjacent to the thrombus. Using fluoroscopic guidance, the infusion catheter is passed over the guide-wire and across the treatment site. Note that radiopaque marker bands can be found at each end of the catheter to enhance catheter placement. Once positioned correctly, the guide-wire is removed. The proceduralist then gently inserts the ultrasonic core into the catheter until the fittings lock into place. Thrombolysis can now be administered. The thrombolysis exits the catheter through side holes while saline exits through the distal tip. Activating the ultrasonic waves enhances the dispersion of the thrombolysis medication. Typically, thrombolysis is administered for a standard 18 hours, along with systemic heparin.

The duration of thrombolysis may vary depending on the degree of hemodynamic instability and clot burden. After completing thrombolytic therapy, a repeat computed tomography (CT) angiography is performed to evaluate the improvement in clot burden. Depending on the results, the decision is made to pursue further thrombolytic therapy versus the withdrawal of the CDT catheter. When the therapy is deemed complete, the ultrasonic core is removed, and the guide-wire is replaced inside the catheter. The proceduralist then removes the catheter leaving the guide-wire in place. Finally, the guide-wire is also replaced, and a compression device to the access site is applied.