Allergy pathophysiology is viewable through different mechanisms depending on the cause. The discussion then follows focusing on haptens (e.g., small-molecule drug reactions) that result from a direct effect. The hapten (drug) binds directly to mast cells of the immune system (also known as effector cells). This binding triggers the mast cell to degranulate, releasing histamines and chemotaxis creating symptoms of urticaria or anaphylaxis, referred to as a direct antigen response. Similar effects can occur with checkpoint inhibitors used in cancer treatment (melanoma and renal cell carcinoma) the mechanism is unclear.

Immune drug reactions are rare because they are small molecular weight compounds with simple structures. B and T cell receptors do not easily recognize these structures. Medications can become immunogenic by the small structures covalently binding to larger macromolecules. These are host proteins on or inside of cells or in plasma, and they form a complex called a hapten. The haptens then bonded by a carrier complex (integrins or albumin). These complexes are presented to B Cells creating antibody responses and to T Cells creating responses through the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) molecules.  Occasionally haptens are not formed from the medications themselves, but their metabolites form pro-haptens; this is the mechanism of penicillin and other beta-lactam antibiotics (cephalosporins, carbapenem, and monobactams). A similar mechanism occurs in the liver metabolism with cytochrome P450 enzymes forming metabolites the become pro-haptens.  Sulfamethoxazole is an example when it metabolizes to sulfamethoxazole-hydroxylamine and then oxidized to sulfamethoxazole-nitroso, which stimulates both T and B cells. Other examples are phenacetin, halothane, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine.

There is a concept of a direct immune response to medications and drugs or even biologic therapies that use proteins to stimulate a response. This concept involves the pharmacological interaction of drugs with immune receptors known as the p-i concept). The theory is that certain drugs in their naive state without processing or metabolism can stimulate T cells through T cell receptors (TCRs) or HLA molecules that are not their primary therapeutic targets. This stimulation is called “off-target” activity and explains genetic propensity through TCRs and HLA of individuals. A specific example is drugs that produce a drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms/drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome. (DRESS/DiHS) such as flucloxacillin and sulfamethoxazole). The mechanisms of p-i TCR and p-i HLA are different, but the concept is direct off-target induction of the immune system is the concept. In the p-i TCR model, a drug interacts with a TCR. Then a second interaction between the TCR and HLA molecules on APCs is required to stimulate a cellular proliferation, cytokine production, and cytotoxicity by the drug stimulated T Cells. Sulfamethoxazole, as an example, is a common public epitope, but another factor is required to induce it, such as a generalized viral infection.

PilA model the drug binds preferentially to certain HLA molecules. There is a strong association with some HLA alleles. Thus, binding to them leads to T Cells stimulation by HLA drug complexes. The drug binding to the peptide-binding site in HLA has two possible consequences 1 HLA molecule acquires features of an allollele and makes a self HLA protein look like an Allo-HLA. 2 The drug binding to the peptide-binding site may be the presentation of an altered peptide repertoire. This happens in the endoplasmic reticulum(ER). The altered HLA molecule may allow the presentation of a different set of peptides to T Cells, Since T cells are tolerant to those HLA restricted peptides which they were exposed during development in the thymus, the alternate set of peptides may be interpreted as foreign by T cells and result in an autoimmune-like T cell reaction.

- Examples of p-I TCR Sulfamethoxazole lamotrigine

- Examples of p-I HLA with interaction TCR carbamazepine

- Examples of p-I HLA predominantly main metabolite allopurinol - oxypurinol

- Lidocaine and mepivacaine

- Another p-I HLA radiocontrast agent iomeprol, flucloxacillin, and abacavir

The standard immune responses Gell and Coombs:

Type 1 immune reactions require a drug-specific immunoglobulin E(IgE), which requires a sensitization stage: The formation of drug-specific IgE normally requires coordinated actions of B cells and T Helper Cells the B cells process the hapten-carrier complex and present haptenized peptides to T cells. B and T cells interact via the HLA complex and the T cell receptor TCR and through CD40 on the B cells and CD40L on the T cell. This antibody form attaches to mast cells, and basophils surface sensitizing them then the effector stage the individual is re-exposed to the medication or substance cross-links on the sensitized mast and basophil cells resulting in sudden and widespread activation and release of an array of vasoactive mediators leading to what is called an immediate onset. Thus type one reactions are IgE immediate sensitivity reactions (humoral response activation).[17]

Type II (antibody-mediated cell destruction) are uncommon and involves antibody-mediated cell destruction; this involves IgG and occasionally IgM antibodies. The mechanism drugs or substances bind to surfaces of certain cell types (most often red blood cells or platelets and occasionally neutrophils and act as antigens forming macromolecule on the cell surface. Binding antibodies to the cells' surface results in the cells being targeted by macrophages for clearance.

Type III immune complex deposition) - This reaction is antigen-antibody complexes are present in the serum. The drug acts as a soluble antigen and binds to drug-specific IgG. The small immune complexes precipitate in various tissues.  Examples include blood vessels (vasculitis) Joints(synovitis), renal glomeruli (glomerulonephritis). These immune complexes activate complement, and an inflammatory response ensues. These responses are dose sensitive. The higher the dose of the exposure, the greater the response.

Type IV (T cell-mediated) - The T cells are activated by the complexes directly, other cells can be activated, such as macrophages, eosinophils, or neutrophils. The response is not antibody-mediated. It is a direct cell response this generally is a cutaneous T Cell response as the primed memory effector cells, which react rapidly if immunogenic agents penetrate the skin barrier or reach the skin by diffusing from the circulation. The stimulation of cutaneous T cells may be further facilitated by close contact with various types of HLA expressing dendritic cells in the skin. This reaction is the manifestation of Steven Johnson Syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis SJS/TEN, drug reactions with eosinophilia and systemic symptom/ drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome(DRESS/DIHS) or hepatitis. Type IV has subdivisions based on the P-I or haptens-peptide presentation.