The breast is found on the anterior thoracic wall and overlies the pectoralis major muscle. The superior border of the mature female breast approaches the level of the second or third rib and then extends inferiorly to the inframammary crease or fold. The medial boundary of the breast is the sternal border. Laterally, the breast extends to the mid-axillary line. Posteriorly, approximately two-thirds of the breast overlies the pectoralis major muscle, and the remaining portion overlies the serratus anterior and upper portion of the oblique abdominal muscles.

The breast is composed of mammary tissue and covered by subcutaneous fat and skin, and possesses superficial and deep fascial layers. The superficial layer of fascia is deep to the dermis and covers the breast anteriorly, and then extends over the medial and lateral breast. The deep layer of superficial fascia covers the posterior surface of the breast and lies anterior to the pectoralis major fascia.The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Disease, Bland and Copeland detail the intricate anatomy of the breast.  The epithelial component comprises about 10 to 15% of the overall breast volume, and the remainder is composed of stromal elements. The breast stroma is made up of approximately 15 to 20 lobes, and these further subdivide into nearly 20 to 40 lobules. Lobules are made up of branched tubuloalveolar glands. The intervening spaces between the individual lobes contain adipose tissue. Each lobe drains into a major lactiferous duct that extends to the nipple.

Blood supply to the breast comes from several vessels running medially and laterally, as well as several deeper penetrating vessels that must pass through chest wall muscles before reaching the breast. Medially, the internal mammary artery gives rise to various perforating branches. These two to four anterior intercostal perforating arteries pass through the pectoralis major into the breast tissue as medial mammary arteries. Laterally, the arterial supply to the breast comes from the lateral branches of the posterior intercostal arteries and branches of the axillary artery, including the lateral thoracic artery and pectoral branches of the thoracoacromial artery. The lateral vessels wrap around the superior and lateral border of the pectoral muscle to reach the breast.

Venous drainage of drainage typically follows the arterial supply, with most of the drainage extending toward the axilla. Principal venous drainage is through the perforating branches of the internal thoracic vein, tributaries of the axillary vein, and perforating branches of the posterior intercostal veins. Knowledge of venous drainage is essential, as the lymphatic channels typically follow the course of blood vessels.  This lymphatic drainage is relevant as it is the pathway for potential cancer metastasis via lymphatic and venous channels.

Breast lymphatic drainage is via the axilla 95% of the time. There is some variation in the description of lymph node groups between anatomists and surgeons. Surgeons typically define axillary nodes with respect to their relationship to the pectoralis minor muscle. Lymph nodes located lateral to or below the lower border of the pectoralis minor muscle are called Level I, and this typically includes the external mammary, axillary vein, and scapular lymph node groups. Level II lymph nodes are located deep to the pectoralis minor muscle and include the central lymph node group and possibly some of the subclavicular nodes. Level III axillary nodes are medial or superior to the upper border of the pectoralis minor muscle and include the subclavicular lymph nodes. Surgeons also commonly identify Rotter’s or interpectoral nodes that are located between the pectoralis major and minor muscles. These Rotter’s nodes may further drain into the central or subclavicular node groups representing a possible “skip pathway” for tumor cells to metastasize from the breast to level III nodes while bypassing levels I or II.