An appropriate preparticipation physical examination is composed of the following components:

- **Medical and Family History**
- Providers must inquire of a personal history of chest pain, syncope, fatigue, murmurs, etc.
- Providers should investigate a family history of premature death, disability from heart disease, and/or cardiac conditions. This line of questioning is particularly important in as much as it is not uncommon to find potentially dangerous cardiac abnormalities in an otherwise asymptomatic youth, which are discovered only because a family history of such prompted a more thorough evaluation.
- Providers should obtain a thorough history of medication use.  This may include all medications and supplements taken by the athlete. Questions such as: "Have you ever taken anabolic steroids, or used any other performance-enhancing supplement?" and "Have you ever taken any supplements to help you gain or lose weight, or improve your performance?" may help to elicit pertinent information from athletes. Within this realm, it is advisable to ask sensitive questions about the possible usage of unwise or even dangerous products that a young athlete may be taking but would routinely deny in the presence of a parent or guardian.

- **Physical Examination**
- General health screen: A general health screen should include the taking of the patient's vital signs, height, weight, blood pressure, vision testing, pulmonary testing, neurological testing, abdominal testing, thorough skin examination, and examination of genitals which includes the presence of two testicles within the male athlete.  It is not unheard of that an athlete somewhere within the country is found to have an undescended testicle on their sports preparticipation physical and, in so doing, is potentially saved from the possibility of testicular carcinoma.  If the exam is completed in an environment where a genital exam is inappropriate, the author has, over the many years of completing such preparticipation physicals, simply asked that the young athlete examine himself to confirm that he indeed has both testicles.
- Cardiovascular screen: Cardiovascular screening should assess for heart murmurs, femoral pulses, and blood pressure measurements. Auscultation of the heart should be performed in both the supine, seated, and standing positions with and without the Valsalva maneuver.  Additionally, one should assess for marfanoid stigmata, including kyphoscoliosis, high-arched palate, pectus excavatum, arachnodactyly, hyperlaxity, myopia, mitral valve prolapse, and aortic insufficiency. Occasionally an EKG provider will approach the preparticipation physical provider and offer his or her services to complete screening EKGs for all participants.  While this is not considered bad practice, it does not appear to be warranted as a screening method.  Rather, cardiac abnormalities that become apparent upon a careful auscultation examination or by way of a review of either the athlete's or family's history should be sent for a complete examination which may entail an EKG or echocardiogram.Note that often, preparticipation physicals are performed in a noisy gymnasium or by practitioners who do not have extensive experience with a stethoscope. Ensuring a provider who is comfortable with the use of a stethoscope, as well as finding an appropriate environment where the heart can be appropriately auscultated, is an essential step in finding conditions that warrant further evaluation.
- Neurologic screen: Athletes should undergo a thorough sensory testing, motor control testing, and reflex examination. Providers should inquire about a history of concussions, seizure disorders, spinal cord injuries, and cervical spinal stenosis.
- Orthopedic screen: Providers should perform examinations specific to any prior or current injuries and site-specific examinations of strength, range of motion, deformities, instabilities, and asymmetries. Functional movement testing may have a greater sensitivity for screening athletes at a higher risk of musculoskeletal injury.
- General medical screen: If medical history elicits concern for chronic diseases such as diabetes or anemia, additional laboratory tests could be performed.

- **Nutritional Assessment**
- Assess the athlete's nutritional status. Screen for disordered eating, particularly in female athletes and athletes who participate in a sport with a weight cut-off, such as wrestling. 
- Mental health issues and psychological factors likewise can be discussed, particularly because pathologically aggressive personality traits can be a sign of anabolic steroid abuse.

- **Heat and Hydration Related Risk Factors**
- It is within the realm of educating young athletes about adequate hydration that most lives may be saved in sports and athletic venues where heat illness and heat stroke are possible. Encouraging the intake of at least 20 ounces of water one hour before game time and again half that much just before game time is always good advice and one the team physician should reinforce.
- Screen athletes for risk factors related to previous problems in the heat. Athletes at risk for heat-related illness and heat stroke include those who have had a history of heat-related illness, use excessively caffeinated drinks, abuse performance enhancement medications, or who have an exaggerated BMI wherein the release of core body heat through convection is decreased.
- Use this time to review guidelines for heat acclimatization.
- Sickle Cell disease symptoms can be worsened with dehydration.

- **Mental Health Assessment**
- Question the patient to assess mental status. Specifically, examiners should inquire about symptoms of sleep disturbances, level of interest in previously enjoyed activities, symptoms of guilt or worthlessness, fatigue or loss of energy, ability to concentrate, and suicidal or homicidal ideation. 
- The lifetime prevalence of mental health problems in elite athletes is 51.7%, and symptoms often manifest at a young age. Therefore all athletes should be questioned carefully, with a referral for a more detailed examination should such be necessary.