The logistics of advanced cancer therapies are complex. There are multiple players within the health care system, and every one of them has a decisive role in the course of treatment with nivolumab. The prescription of nivolumab results from interdisciplinary interaction between clinical oncologists, surgeons, radiologists, radiation oncologists, and interprofessional tumor boards. Finally, appropriate communication with the general physician must be warranted, especially if there should be a need to treat mild complications. Proper documentation (i.e., medical history, clinical inspection, complimentary test, informed consent) is vital for a reliable interaction between multiple health care professionals in the long run. Drug preparation and coordination of transport according to schedule, appropriate labeling, and dosage are essential safety tasks the pharmacy team performs. Nurses and physician assistants administer the intravenous infusion and monitor the patient and are experts in identifying slight clinical deterioration signs.

For patients receiving nivolumab or other ICIs, the periodical treatment appointments to the oncologic center become embedded in their life routine. Therefore, an oncologic center delivering nivolumab should ensure a safe, comfortable, and hygienic environment. The physicians and nurses inform and train the patient to recognize symptoms that could hide developing side effects. It is good to provide the patient with an identification card listing the drug, underlying condition, and contact numbers of the treating physicians. A good relationship between the patient and the healthcare team fosters patient compliance. Showing up to appointments promptly and according to schedule ensures safe and effective drug concentrations. Patients undergoing nivolumab treatment may profit from psychological support and nutritional counseling regardless of the tumor entity.