Lab values (blood and urine), imaging, and specific tests vary depending on the root of the addiction. If it is a psychoactive substance, there may be obvious derangements in the comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP)  and complete blood count (CBC) values as well as in the psychoanalysis and behavioral screening. The following is an abbreviated list and summary of common addicted substances and potential evaluation expectations for healthcare professionals:

- Alcohol –

- Ethanol –

- CBC – chronic use can cause an elevated (mean corpuscular volume), MCV with megaloblastic anemia from folate deficiency.
- CMP – Blood urea nitrogen/creatinine (BUN/Cr) may be above baseline, glucose may be chronically low, and electrolytes may be deranged from dehydration.

- Anion gap will be elevated in acute intoxications with a decreased CO2 and decreased bicarbonate to reflect in an actively acidotic state


- Methanol will be the same plus developing ophthalmologic issues. Requires regular eye exams while in the emergency room.
- Ethylene glycol leads to renal failure necessitating serial BUN/Cr levels and GFR to monitor renal function; oxalic acid kidney stones are common resulting in bloody urine on urinalysis (UA).


- Cocaine –

- An obvious sympathetic drive is expressed through elevated vitals. Patients are typically tachycardic and tachypneic. Patients may present with acute psychosis.

- Intoxications may necessitate serial troponins, cardiac stress tests, and even cardiac catheterization. Due to the vasoconstriction of coronary vessels, troponins become regularly elevated.




- Opioids – Opposite to stimulants like cocaine, opioids present with parasympathetic symptoms such as bradycardia, hypotension, miosis, hypothermia, and sedation. The worrisome factor is sedation leading to respiratory depression.

Please refer to the clinical pearls section for screening criteria in detail, such as **CAGE, AUDIT,**and the**CIWA**criteria.

An evaluation commonly used for addiction screening is the **Addiction Severity Index (ASI)**. The screening evaluates seven domains that include:

- Medical status

- Employment and support

- Drug use

- Alcohol use

- Legal status

- Family/social status

- Psychiatric status

While the screening lacks in special populations such as the homeless, it has been extensively cross-reviewed to show significant reliability and validity in being the foundation of treatment plans for addicted patients.

**Imaging**

Although, not routine in clinical practice, imaging may be integrated into the panel of evaluation of addiction. Researchers found that reduction in dopamine2 (DA D2) receptors correlated with decreased activity in anterior cingulate gyrus CG and orbitofrontal cortex OFC In detoxified cocaine abusers.

**Liquid Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry and IMS**

Some of the substances of use (kratom) and misuse (bath salts) are not identifiable on a regular urine drug screen or blood work. Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry and ion mobility spectrometry (IMS) methods are used to detect kratom, for example.