The blueprints of life are coded within the nucleic acid DNA (and for some organisms RNA). The structure of DNA is complex is made up of nucleotides, consisting of the sugar deoxyribose, a nitrogenous base (either adenine, guanine, cytosine, or thymine), and a phosphate group. Nucleotides made up of purine nitrogenous bases (adenine and guanine) can only pair with nucleotides made up of pyrimidine bases (thymine and cytosine, respectively). This isomorphism allows for base pairs to be replaced by one another and not ruin the backbone of the DNA. The monomers of the opposing strands stay together due to hydrogen bonds, and the two strands together form a double helix. Each strand runs antiparallel, meaning in opposite directions, one from the 5’ => 3’, the other 3’ => 5’ (This numbering comes from the carbon atoms in the sugar, which are labeled 1’ => 5’; the phosphate and hydroxyl group are attached to the 5’ and 3’ carbons respectively, creating the directionality of the nucleotide and, therefore, the DNA strand). The molecule is considered to be flexible, and that can be partially explained by the poor directionality of the hydrogen bonds which allow for bending or stretching. This flexibility enables many different DNA conformations, with high and low degrees of bending.

DNA is held in the nucleus of eukaryotes and within the cell membrane in the nucleoid for prokaryotes. It wraps around histone proteins to create nucleosomes, which group together to form chromatin and condense to form chromosomes. Chromatin can be negatively supercoiled (underwinded, more straightened) or positively supercoiled (overwinded, less straightened); this has implications in the use of DNA, either facilitating the binding of proteins to the nucleic acid or hindering it. The looser the DNA, the easier it is for proteins to access it, and the easier it is for replication to occur. Prokaryotic chromosomes are circular and are usually smaller in number. Eukaryotic chromosomes are linear and usually larger in number. Enzymes that are critical in DNA replication include DNA polymerase, helicase, topoisomerase, nuclease, ligase, and telomerase. These will be further elaborated on in the following sections.