**Isoproterenol is a beta-1 and beta-2 adrenergic receptor agonist resulting in the following:**

- Increased heart rate

- Increased heart contractility

- Relaxation of bronchial, gastrointestinal, and uterine smooth muscle

- Peripheral vasodilation

Both beta-1 and beta-2 adrenergic receptors exert their effects through a G-alpha stimulatory second messenger system. G-protein coupled receptors are structurally composed of a seven-transmembrane-spanning protein. The extracellular domain serves as the ligand-binding site. In the inactivated state, the intracellular domain links to a G-alpha stimulatory protein bound to a GDP molecule. Upon binding of the ligand to the extracellular domain of a beta-1 receptor, the alpha subunit exchanges a GDP molecule for a GTP and becomes activated. The (now active) G-alpha protein dissociates from the intracellular domain and activates adenylate cyclase. Activated adenylate cyclase subsequently converts intracellular ATP to cAMP. The principal second messenger in this pathway, cAMP, activates protein kinase A (PKA). Activated PKA phosphorylates L-type calcium channels in cardiac myocytes, resulting in increased intracellular calcium. PKA also causes an increase in calcium release from ryanodine receptors on the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

Beta-1 adrenergic receptors are primarily concentrated in heart tissue. The terminal effects of activation of beta-1 adrenergic receptors are an increase in intracellular calcium. In cardiac pacemaker cells, increased calcium causes an increase in the slope of phase 4 of the cardiac pacemaker action potential. By increasing the slope of phase 4, pacemaker cells reach the threshold more rapidly, resulting in the characteristic increased heart rate seen in patients on an isoproterenol infusion. In non-pacemaker cardiac myocytes, an increase in intracellular calcium causes the increased contractility characteristic of isoproterenol infusion.

**The result of beta-1 agonism on the heart can be summarized as follows:**

- Positive inotropy (contractility)

- Positive lusitropy (relaxation)

- Positive chronotropy (heart rate)

- Positive dromotropy (conduction velocity)

Beta-2 adrenergic receptors function similarly to beta-1 receptors—activation of the G-protein coupled receptor results in an increase in intracellular cAMP. The second messenger, cAMP, then activates protein kinase A (PKA). PKA phosphorylates myosin light chain kinase (MLCK), thus inactivating it. In smooth muscle cells, MLCK is responsible for the phosphorylation of myosin, leading to myosin-actin cross-bridge formation and muscle contraction. As stated, agonism of beta-2 receptors leads to inactivation of MLCK and subsequent relaxation of smooth muscle, bronchial dilation, peripheral vasodilation, and gastrointestinal and uterine smooth muscle relaxation.

**Other effects of isoproterenol:**

- Hepatic glycogenolysis (beta-2)

- Release of glucagon from the pancreas (beta-2)

- Activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in the kidney (beta-1)

Isoproterenol is metabolized in the liver via the CYP450 enzyme system.