Treatment of esophageal candidiasis involves the use of antifungal therapy. Unlike oropharyngeal candidiasis, esophageal candidiasis should always be treated with systemic agents and not topical agents. The most commonly used medication to treat esophageal candidiasis is oral fluconazole 200 to 400 mg per day for 14 to 21 days.  If patients cannot tolerate oral intake, then intravenous Fluconazole 400 mg daily can be used and then de-escalated to oral Fluconazole when the patient can tolerate oral medications. Fluconazole 100 to 200 mg three times per week can be used to suppress recurrent esophageal candidiasis. Micafungin 150 mg IV daily has been shown to be non-inferior to fluconazole at 200 mg daily. Itraconazole 200 mg per day orally or Voriconazole 200 mg twice daily for 14 to 21 days are other treatment options. Amphotericin B deoxycholate 0.3 to 0.7 mg/kg daily can be used in patients with refractory candida esophagitis, but it has serious medication side effects and should be avoided if possible. Posaconazole 400 mg twice daily has been effective in refractory esophageal candidiasis as well.

One may also use caspofungin as it is preferred over amphotericin.

Since esophageal candidiasis is an opportunistic infection and most often seen in immunocompromised persons, the cause of the immunosuppression should be diagnosed and treated as well.

Patients who are immunosuppressed and have symptoms of odynophagia or dysphagia can empirically be treated with a 14-21 day course of antifungal therapy. If no improvement in symptoms is seen after 72 hours of treatment then upper endoscopy should be performed.

The dose of the azole agents does need modification in patients with renal insufficiency.

Azoles are considered teratogenic, so in pregnant patients with esophageal candidiasis, Amphotericin B is preferred.