For the presentation of progressive sensorimotor polyradiculopathy, the following differentials are to be considered:

- Transverse myelitis: Acute and rapidly progressing course of paresis with CSF cell count and glucose within the normal range. Electrodiagnostic studies show predominantly demyelinating inflammatory pathology. MRI shows edematous changes at the affected spinal level.

- Miller Fischer syndrome: GBS variant associated with ophthalmoplegia and ataxia, with a history of preceding viral infection.

- Neurosyphilis: late sequelae of syphilis in immunocompetent patients, confirmed with serology

- Toxic polyradiculopathy: Anti-PD1 agent like pembrolizumab in metastatic melanoma, late sequelae of ethylene glycol intoxication, a late adverse reaction of chemo-radiotherapy, post intrathecal injection of methotrexate

- Inflammatory polyradiculopathy: associated with systemic lupus erythematosus

- Leptomeningeal carcinomatosis: should be considered in lumbosacral polyradiculopathy picture with no structural lesion on imaging and presence of malignant cells in CSF.

- Vertebral artery dissection: may present as cervical radiculopathy with prominent upper limb involvement

- Lyme disease: Mimics GBS with similar CSF picture, diagnosis confirmed with positive serology for Lyme disease

- Neurosarcoidosis: It is an important differential with the presentation of swelling and contrast MRI enhancement of spinal roots with raised CSF proteins and cells, and it responds well to prednisolone

- Neurobrucellosis: caused by gram-negative bacilli of Brucella genus in endemic areas and presents as subacute motor polyradiculopathy with sensory nerve spared and muscle biopsy showing neurogenic changes with the secondary myopathic picture and CSF titer or culture showing Brucella

- Hypertriglyceridemia: Polyradiculoneuropathy secondary to hypertriglyceridemia is uncommon. However, it is an important differential since the resulting neurological deficits are irreversible. It presents with neuropathy and/or radiculopathy, unremarkable imaging, and lab findings other than an exceptionally deranged lipid profile.

- Post-bariatric surgery complication: Rarely, a neurological complication between 6 months to 2 years from the bariatric surgery may present as acute or subacute progressive motor and sensory axonal polyradiculopathy mainly in the lower limb, areflexia, and ataxia with normal CSF picture and predominant axonal degeneration. Sometimes autoimmune antibodies may also be detected in these patients.

- Diabetic Polyradiculopathy: Seen mostly with type 2 diabetes mellitus. The patient presents either thoracic radiculopathy with chronic unexplained abdominal pain with abdominal protrusion and weight loss, or it can be accompanied by lumbosacral radiculopathy simultaneously.