Testing is not typically indicated for gonadal dysgenesis unless a diagnosis of gonadal dysgenesis or a syndrome that has gonadal dysgenesis as a symptom is suspected. Most patients with gonadal dysgenesis will begin a necessary workup for their symptoms, including an FSH and LH level and possibly pelvic imaging. Prenatal diagnosis may be pursued in cases of abnormal maternal triple or quadruple screens, or if the fetus presents with atypical features in the womb. For example, Turner syndrome may present prenatally as coaction of the aorta, intrauterine growth restriction, oligohydramnios, polyhydramnios, increased nuchal translucency, cystic hygroma, or nonimmune hydrops

Early recognition can help prevent growth failure and hearing problems as well as better manage chronic renal and cardiac conditions associated with Turner syndrome. A karyotype in an older child is necessary when there is a high suspicion of Turner syndrome. For example, if a child has a growth delay or lack of puberty and secondary sexual characteristics, or if a child exhibited other signs such as a webbed neck or widely spaced nipples, it would serve as an indication for a karyotype. If high suspicion exists of a Turner syndrome diagnosis and initial blood karyotype is normal, another tissue should be tested, such as skin, to determine the child's genetic make-up. All patients should also have analysis to determine if there is any presence of a Y chromosome, due to the risk of gonadoblastoma and germ cell tumor. Analysis of a Y chromosome should be performed in the prenatal period as well

In all patients with suspected gonadal dysgenesis, as discussed with Turner syndrome, determination of whether a Y chromosome is present, including mosaic as well as partial and fragment Y chromosomal forms, is necessary due to risks of gonadoblastoma and germ cell tumor associated with the retained gonads. After the initial analysis and karyotype, a specialist, most likely an endocrinologist, may perform further testing for specific gene mutations to try to determine the cause of the patient's gonadal dysgenesis as well as gain an understanding of what other symptoms they may develop based on specific genetic alterations. The specific genetic testing to be performed is determined by the clinical presentation of the patient and their symptomatic presentation. The genes with known associations to their symptoms can be tested. In addition to the above testing, patients who have evidence of a Y chromosome, as well as evidence of a mass on the gonad, will need to have a biopsy performed as well as tumor markers including AFP, LDH, and beta-hCG to determine the presence of gonadoblastoma or germ cell tumor