NK-1 receptor antagonists have antinausea and anti-vomiting properties relayed through a central blockade in the area postrema, nucleus tractus solitarius, and visceral afferent nerves. NK-1 receptors mediate most of the central and peripheral effects of substance P. Substance P is an excitatory neurotransmitter that has a role in pain perception. It is among a class of neuropeptides called neurokinins. Its receptor, NK-1, is a G protein-coupled consisting of seven transmembrane helical elements. Therefore, NK-1 receptor antagonists can prevent both central and peripheral stimulation of vomiting centers. NK-1 receptor antagonists such as aprepitant (oral and IV formulations) are highly selective NK-1 receptor antagonists which cross the blood-brain barrier and occupy NK-1 receptors in the brain. Animal and human positron emission tomography (PET) studies with NK-1 receptor antagonists have shown that it crosses the blood-brain barrier and occupies brain NK-1 receptors. Aprepitant has no affinity for corticosteroid, serotonin, or dopamine receptors.

Nausea and vomiting associated with emetogenic chemotherapy have two components: a universally acute phase experienced within 24 hours after chemotherapy and a delayed phase that affects only some patients on days 2 through 5. Serotonin (5-HT3) receptor antagonists are not very effective against delayed emesis. However, inhibitors of the NK-1 receptors, i.e., the receptors for the neuropeptide substance P, such as aprepitant (and its parenteral formulation fosaprepitant), have antiemetic effects preventing delayed nausea and improve the efficacy of standard antiemetic regimens in patients receiving multiple cycles of chemotherapy.