Understanding the pathology of decerebrate rigidity requires a thorough understanding of normal anatomy and physiology in how the limbs flex and extend under voluntary control in response to a stimulus. Movement is a complex set of coordinated pathways that work together to produce the desired outcome. Ascending pathways carry sensory information to inform the cerebellum and cerebrum, which creates a motor response in the form of descending pathways that result in an intentional act of muscle flexion and extension.

The ascending afferent sensory pathway is known as the **spinothalamic tract**(also recognized as the anterolateral system) carries crude touch, pain, and temperature from tissue to the cortex via the spinal cord.

When an individual feels pain, there is a motor response. Cortical and subcortical efferent descending motor pathways engage intentional action. The cortical pathway is known as the **corticospinal****tract**.

Aiding in the motor movement are various subcortical motor pathways — those with a direct connection to the red nucleus part of this discussion. The vestibulospinal and the pontine reticulospinal tract assist in extension while the rubrospinal tract help facilitates flexion.**vestibulospinal****tract**is mainly concerned with head and body posture. Vestibulochochealer nerves send information to the vestibular nuclei located in the medulla and pons. The tract then divides into the medial and lateral tracts. The medial tract originates from the medial vestibular nucleus in the medulla and controls movement for the head.  While the lateral tract stimulated by the fastigial nucleus of the cerebellum and contralateral vestibular nuclei, originating in the lateral vestibular nucleus in the pons will travel down ipsilaterally from the nuclei and synapse in Rexed laminae VII and VIII on interneurons and other alpha and gamma motor neurons to initiate extensor movements.  The fastigial nucleus in the cerebellum stimulates the vestibular nuclei of the lateral tract while the red nucleus (its color is thought to come from the iron of hemoglobin and ferritin) acts to inhibit.

The **pontine reticulospinal tract**originates in the reticular formation of the pons and receives stimulation from the ascending spinothalamic tract. It sends axons down ipsilaterally where it synapses in the ventral horn with alpha and gamma motor neurons that then travel to the respective extensor muscles.

The **rubrospinal tract**originates in the red nucleus located medially in the rostral tegmentum of the midbrain.

Lesions that interrupt the fibers of the red nucleus lead to inhibition of the rubrospinal tract and constant excitation of the vestibulospinal and pontine reticulospinal tracts. This continued excitation results in extensor posturing when painful stimuli are applied. Most people who exhibit decerebrate posturing are also comatose as damage to the reticular formation tracts causes a decrease in normal function. The interruption of the corticospinal tract disrupts voluntary movement and inhibits a person from both perceiving and executing a normal movement. The spinothalamic tract will become disrupted as it moves through the area of the lesion. However, it continues to give off collateral fibers below the lesion to the reticular formation and other medullary and pontine nuclei.