Assessment and management of the airway, specifically breathing and circulation should always be the priority.

Management principles should be targeted toward:

- Maintenance of cerebral perfusion pressure by raising MAP

- Treatment of the underlying cause.

- Lowering of ICP.

Measures to lower ICP include:

- Elevation of the head of the bed to greater than 30 degrees.

- Keep the neck midline to facilitate venous drainage from the head.

- Hypercarbia lowers serum pH and can increase cerebral blood flow contributing to rising ICP, hence hyperventilation to lower pCO2 to around 30 mm Hg can be transiently used.

- Osmotic agents can be used to create an osmotic gradient across blood thereby drawing fluid intravascularly and decreasing cerebral edema. Mannitol was the primary agent used at doses of 0.25 to 1 g/kg body weight and is thought to exert its greatest benefit by decreasing blood viscosity and to a lesser extent by decreasing blood volume. Side effects of mannitol use are eventual osmotic diuresis and dehydration as well as renal injury if serum osmolality exceeds 320 mOsm.

- Three percent hypertonic saline is also commonly used to decrease cerebral edema and can be administered as a 5 ml/kg bolus or a continuous infusion, monitoring serum sodium levels closely. It is considered relatively safe while serum sodium is < than 160mEq/dl or serum osmolality is less than 340 mOsm.

- Drugs of the carbonic anhydrase inhibitor class, such as acetazolamide, can be used to decrease the production of CSF and is used to treat idiopathic intracranial hypertension.

- Lumbar punctures, besides being diagnostic, can be used to drain CSF thus reducing the ICP. The limitation to this is raised ICP secondary to mass effect with a possible risk of herniation if the CSF pressure drops too low.

- Similar to a lumbar puncture, an EVD can also be used to not only monitor ICP but also to drain CSF.

- Optic nerve fenestrations can be performed for patients with chronic idiopathic hypertension at a risk of blindness. Neurosurgical shunts such as ventriculoperitoneal or lumbar-peritoneal shunts can divert CSF to another part of the body from where it can be reabsorbed.

- Intravenous (IV) glyburide is being investigated in the prevention of hemispheric stroke edema. It acts by inhibiting SUR1 receptors.

- Barbiturates can be considered in cases where sedation and usual methods of treatment are not successful in reducing the ICP.

- Therapeutic hypothermia to 32-35 degrees Celcius can be used in a refractory rise in ICP not responding to hyperosmolar therapy and barbiturate coma. But its use has been questioned in recent days.

- A decompressive craniectomy is a neurosurgical procedure wherein a part of the skull is removed, and dura lifted, allowing the brain to swell without causing compression.