The evaluation of dyslipidemia should include a thorough history and physical exam. Most patients with dyslipidemia are asymptomatic.

**Personal History:**History should include dietary history (simple sugars, processed foods, fat intake including saturated and unsaturated fats, portion sizes, caloric intake), physical activity, screen time, smoking and alcohol history, liver or kidney disease, history suggestive of hypothyroidism, diabetes, any chronic medical illness and history of any medication use. A history of pancreatitis symptoms such as abdominal pain and vomiting should be elicited.

**Family history:**Family history should include- a history of dyslipidemia in childhood, history of statin use, and history of cardiovascular events especially myocardial infarction in women under 65 years and men under 55 years, stroke, interventions for coronary artery disease, angina, and sudden cardiac death.

**Physical Exam:**A physical exam should include all vital signs, including height, weight, BMI, heart rate, and blood pressure. The physical exam should also focus on detecting abnormal cholesterol accumulation in the skin and eyelids, which are uncommon in the pediatric age group but can be seen in homozygous FH and sitosterolemia.

- Tendon xanthomas: Tendon xanthomas are most common in the Achilles tendon and can also be seen on the dorsal side of the hands

- Planar xanthomas: These are painful deposits that occur in the palms of hands and soles of feet

- Xanthelasma: Xanthelesmas are cholesterol deposits that appear as yellow plaques and are usually found on the medial eyelids

- Other signs of high cholesterol such as corneal arcus (white or grey ring around cornea) and signs of arterial disease such as peripheral artery disease or aortic stenosis are rare in pediatrics but should be screened for using peripheral pulse exams in all four extremities,  auscultating for carotid and femoral bruit and cardiac murmurs.