Primary herpes simplex ophthalmicus is an acute infection occurring in a nonimmune host. It can occur in neonates through intrauterine or birth canal transmission or can occur in children through oro-labial transmission from an infected individual. Primary infection can also occur in an adult as a sexually transmitted disease.****

- **In-utero HSV infection:**The fetus can be infected by an ascending genital infection or trans-placentally and is born with cataracts and chorioretinitis.

- **Neonatal conjunctivitis:**It is transmitted through the birth canal and caused by the HSV-2 virus. Seen between 3-15 days of postpartum life and is associated with lid vesicles. Keratitis or keratouveitis can follow conjunctivitis. Cataract, vitritis, retinitis, retinal detachment, and optic neuritis have all been reported to occur with conjunctivitis.

- **Blepharoconjunctivitis:**Primary herpes simplex conjunctivitis usually occurs in children less than 5 years old. Features are watery discharge, follicular conjunctivitis, and preauricular lymphadenopathy with cutaneous vesicular eruption over the lids and margins. Most are caused by HSV-1virus. The lesions are diffuse and shed virus for ten days and resolve over 2-3 weeks. Keratitis in the form of punctate epithelial keratitis, marginal infiltrates, or a dendritic ulcer can occur.

Recurrent herpes simplex ophthalmicus occurs due to the reactivation of the latent virus in the trigeminal ganglion. Rong et al have shown that cornea is also capable of extraneuronal viral latency and later reactivation.

- **Blepharoconjunctivitis:**Lid vesicles are focal along the lid margin or eyelid skin. The weeping ulcers shed virus for only 2-3 days and last for only a week. The nasolacrimal system also gets involved with scarring and leading to epiphora due to punctal stenosis. It is associated with watery discharge, follicular conjunctivitis, and preauricular lymphadenopathy. Conjunctival smears show mononuclear cell infiltrates. Keratitis in the form of punctate epithelial keratitis, marginal infiltrates, or a dendritic ulcer can occur.

- **Epithelial Keratitis:**It starts as punctate epithelial opacities caused by actively replicating virus. These opacities coalesce centrally and then break down to form central desquamation. The presentation includes mild irritation, redness, watering, photophobia, and corneal hypesthesia.

- **Dendritic ulcer:**Central epithelial desquamation develops into a dendritic ulcer with mild subepithelial haze, dichotomous branching, and terminal buds. The bed with dead epithelial cells stains with fluorescein, while the margins with virus-laden cells stain with rose bengal. Inadvertent use of topical corticosteroid drops would cause a dendrite to enlarge into a “Geographic ulcer” with amoeboid configuration.

- **Endotheliitis (Disciform keratitis):**This is an immune-mediated condition that occurs as an immune reaction to a viral antigen or non-replicating viral particles and manifests as localized, diffuse, and linear forms. The localized form is called Disciform keratitis and manifests as central disc-shaped stroma edema with focal keratic precipitates. The diffuse form is accompanied by trabeculitis with elevated intraocular pressure. The linear form may mimic allograft rejection in a corneal graft.

- **Metaherpetic keratitis:**This neuropathic ulcer presents as a persistent epithelial defect with greyish elevated borders showing epithelial hyperplasia surrounding the ulcer with a subepithelial haze. Reverse staining is seen with rose bengal staining the unhealthy epithelial cells migrating the base of the ulcer while fluorescein leaks between these cells to stain the margins. Decreased corneal sensation, drug toxicity, poor tear film, chronic low-grade inflammation, and deficient neural growth factors contribute to form the Metaherpetic ulcer.

- **Marginal Keratitis:**Presents as marginal infiltrates similar to staphylococcal immune infiltrates but epithelial ulceration, and diminished corneal sensation helps in the diagnosis of herpes simplex marginal keratitis.

- **Necrotizing stromal keratitis:**This results from a severe inflammatory response to viral replication in the cornea. Presents as dense stromal infiltration, ulceration, necrosis, and eventually perforation due to corneal melting. Commonly seen in multiple recurrences and mimics microbial keratitis.

- **Keratouveitis:**Herpes simplex keratouveitis is immune-mediated and presents as unilateral sectoral iritis with mutton fat keratic precipitates and elevated intraocular pressure, often complicated by posterior synechiae and complicated cataract.

- **Acute retinal necrosis (ARN):**usually caused by the Herpes zoster virus, Herpes simplex virus, Cytomegalovirus, and Epstein-Barr virus. The classic triad of ARN consists of occlusive vasculitis, rapidly progressing peripheral retinal necrosis and vitritis.

**Miscellaneous Syndromes**

- **Episcleritis and scleritis:**Rarely associated.

- **Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis:**HSV can cause a picture like epidemic keratoconjunctivitis and its nearly impossible to differentiate between adenoviral and HSV infection In a Japanese study, it was observed that 3% of cases of epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (EKC) diagnosed clinically were caused by herpes simplex virus.

- **Erythema multiforme major:**Erythema multiforme major is an immune-mediated type 4 hypersensitivity reaction triggered by drugs and infections caused by Herpes simplex virus, Mycoplasma pneumonia, Epstein-Barr virus, Histoplasmosis, etc. This self-limiting condition presents as target lesions around eyelids with conjunctivitis. Antiviral therapy helps prevent the complication like symblepharon and shortening of fornices.

- **Iridocorneal endothelial (ICE) syndromes:**HSV DNA has been isolated by the Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test from corneal endothelium in Iridocorneal endothelial (ICE) syndromes.

HSV DNA has also been isolated by the PCR test from aqueous humor samples from patients affected with Posner Schlossman syndrome and Fuch heterochromic iridocyclitis.