Felbamate is available as conventional tablets and as an oral suspension. Available tablet formulations are in 400mg and 600 mg doses. The oral suspension is available in a 600 mg/5 ml suspension.

Felbamate has good bioavailability (greater than 90%) via the GI tract and reaches peak plasma concentration in 3 to 5 hours. It is minimally bound to serum protein (20 to 25%) and is primarily eliminated by renal excretion. The half-life of the drug is usually 14 to 23 hours, and serum concentrations are linearly related to the dose.

If used as a monotherapy for partial seizures in adults, the recommendation is that felbamate is initiated at 1200mg/day in 3 to 4 divided doses. Dosing can be increased by 600 mg increments every two weeks up to 3600mg/day. If added as adjunctive therapy, titration can be more aggressive; 1200 mg increments every week up to 3600 mg/day.

Lennox-Gastaut syndrome is the most common reason for using this medication in the pediatric population. Children (2 to 14 years of age) should initiate therapy at an initial dose of 15 mg/kg/day in 3 to 4 divided doses. Titration should be 15mg/kg/day per week up to  45 mg/kg/day or 3600 mg/day, whichever is less.

Felbamate should be used cautiously in patients with impaired renal function, with a 50% reduction in both initial and maintenance doses.

Felbamate has several drug interactions with commonly used AEDs. Enzyme-inducing AEDs, such as carbamazepine and phenytoin, will increase the clearance of felbamate. Gabapentin and valproic acid will decrease felbamate clearance. Lastly, felbamate can increase levels of phenytoin, phenobarbital, and valproic acid and reduce levels of carbamazepine.