# Continuing Education Activity

Excimer laser coronary angioplasty (ELCA) is a safe and effective technique as an adjunct to conventional PCI and can improve clinical outcomes when used in the appropriate context. Its primary application currently is for lesions that are uncrossable or un-dilatable with conventional balloons. This article provides a concise review of the ELCA technique and focuses on its role in interventional cardiology. This activity reviews the basic concepts behind excimer lasers, indications and contraindications, procedural steps, potential complications, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and improving care for patients who undergo this procedure.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for excimer laser coronary angioplasty.
- Outline the equipment, preparation, and technique in regards to excimer laser coronary angioplasty.
- Describe the appropriate evaluation and their potential complications and clinical significance of excimer laser coronary angioplasty.
- Review strategies for improving outcomes from excimer laser coronary angioplasty.

# Introduction

Laser coronary angioplasty was introduced in the early 1980s, mainly to manage balloon-untreatable coronary artery lesions.excited dimer, produces ultraviolet laser energy pulsatile and short wavelength.  The pulsatile nature ensured the precise ablation of plaque tissue with insignificant thermal injury to the vessel.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation, or LASER, in short, refers to the creation of high-energy, single-wavelength light beam from a gas mixture. For excimer lasers specifically, a mixture of xenon gas and diluted hydrogen chloride solution is used. After a high-voltage electrical discharge is passed through this gas mixture, excited dimers or excimers, xenon chloride (XeCl), are produced. These dimer molecules subsequently release photons with an ultraviolet (UV) wavelength. Mirror systems are then utilized to amplify this process and deliver the resulting high-energy laser beam to target tissues. On contact with tissue, this laser beam then modifies it via three major mechanisms, as detailed below:

- Photochemical: Breakage of molecular bonds.

- Photothermal: Vibration of molecular bonds generates heat and leads to the vaporization of intracellular water, causing bubble formation. This ultimately leads to cell rupture.

- Photokinetic/photomechanical: The vapor bubbles generated secondary to the photothermal mechanism coalesce to form larger bubbles, further breaking down plaque tissue.

The breakdown products generated from these biochemical processes are small enough (usually < 10 µm) to be rapidly cleared by the reticuloendothelial system of the body, hence preventing distal embolization.

# Indications

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) currently approved indications for excimer laser coronary angioplasty (ELCA) are

- Balloon uncrossable and un-dilatable lesions

- Multi-focal, thrombotic saphenous vein graft lesions

- Chronic total occlusion (CTO)

- Moderately calcified lesions

- Ostial lesions

- Eccentric lesions

- Long lesions (> 20 mm)

- In-stent restenosis

Besides, there have been reports of ELCA being utilized successfully for other indications, which are listed below:

- Adjunctive to conventional percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) for under-expanded/under-deployed stents, or in cases of large thrombus burden.

- Modification of proximal cap of heavily calcified lesions, when initial attempts to cross with rotablation wire are unsuccessful.

# Contraindications

There are no absolute contraindications for excimer laser coronary angioplasty (ELCA). Relative contraindications include:

- Acute angulation (> 45 degrees)

- Coronary dissection

- Unprotected left main coronary artery

ELCA is also currently not recommended for poorly visualized/heavily calcified lesions and those with a diameter of less than the smallest catheter size available (0.9 mm).

# Equipment

Excimer laser coronary angioplasty (ELCA) equipment includes an excimer laser-generator and catheters of variable sizes capable of delivering this laser energy. There is currently only one cardiovascular laser system approved for use in the United States by the FDA.

ELCA catheters are currently available in four diameters (0.9 mm, 1.4 mm, 1.7 mm, and 2.0 mm), and are of two types based on the arrangement of fiberoptic fibers within the catheter. They can either be concentric around the guidewire lumen or eccentrically localized towards one hemisphere. Most commonly, the 0.9 mm catheter is used. Catheters can be conventional over-the-wire or newer rapid-exchange/monorail catheters. Monorail catheters are currently being utilized more commonly, given their advantages of better tip control and axial force transmission.

# Preparation

Before the initiation and throughout the procedure's length, all staff present inside the room, and the patient is required to wear tinted eye goggles to protect against corneal or retinal damage by the UV laser. The procedure should be done in a room with tinted windows and locked doors, and unauthorized access prohibited.

Once turned on, the excimer laser generator requires around 5 minutes of start-up time. An appropriate catheter is then selected, and its central guidewire lumen flushed. General concepts to consider when choosing a catheter are a) its size should not exceed two-thirds the diameter of the target vessel, and b) it should be able to deliver the intensity of energy needed to treat the target lesion based on the lesion’s severity and consistency. Concentric catheters are most commonly utilized; however, eccentric catheters are recommended for in-stent restenosis, bifurcation lesions, and eccentric lesions since the laser beam can be rotated towards the target lesion using a torque knob.

The proximal catheter end is then attached to the laser unit and its distal end calibrated. Calibration is an automated process, which is achieved by pointing the catheter tip towards the energy detector on the main laser unit and activating the laser. Subsequently, the laser unit enters into a standby mode.

# Technique or Treatment

A standard 0.014-inch PCI guidewire is typically advanced till it crosses the target lesion, after which the catheter is passed over it till its tip is in direct contact with the lesion. This is a major advantage of excimer laser coronary angioplasty (ELCA) over other atherectomy techniques, which usually require dedicated guidewires. The desired fluence, pulse rate, and pulse width settings are then selected. By default, the system calibrates at 45 mJ/mm^2 at 25 Hz, with a pulse width of 135 ns. If resistance is encountered with these default settings, they can be increased in a stepwise fashion. This should be undertaken slowly since higher energies and frequencies can be associated with a higher chance of dissection and perforation complications.

A saline flush protocol is then employed before initiation of lasing. The concept behind this step is that both blood and contrast media consist of macromolecules, including proteins, that can absorb the bulk of the laser energy and lead to the formation of insoluble gas bubbles. This also increases the risk of complications such as intimal dissection and perforation.

It is also recommended that the catheter be advanced at a slow rate (<1 mm/s) within the vessel lumen to allow the plaque tissue sufficient time to adequately absorb the light energy and result in optimal vaporization and debulking.

# Complications

With the optimization of laser catheters and the introduction of safety techniques such as the saline infusion protocol, the incidence of previously seen serious complications such as flow-limiting dissections and vessel perforations has significantly decreased.

# Clinical Significance

Excimer laser coronary angioplasty (ELCA) is a safe and effective technique as an adjunct to conventional PCI and can improve clinical outcomes when used in the appropriate context. As noted previously, its primary application currently is for lesions that are uncrossable or un-dilatable with conventional balloons.

Another important application of ELCA is to debulk thrombotic occlusions in saphenous vein grafts (SVGs). These lesions are prone to distal embolization

The incidence of in-stent restenosis (ISR) has reduced considerably with the advent of drug-eluting stents (DES)

Additionally, since ELCA has been shown to ablate both the luminal and the abluminal plaque tissue

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Since excimer laser coronary angioplasty (ELCA) is still a relatively new procedure, there are no evidence-based guidelines currently to ensure optimal outcomes. A "5**S**approach" has been suggested to achieve the best results from ELCA, which are

- **S**election of patient

- **S**ize of the laser catheter

- **S**ettings (fluence and pulse rate)

- **S**aline infusion protocol

- **S**low advancement