Although Landau-Kleffner syndrome may affect children and adolescents, the syndrome usually manifests itself in children aged 3 to 8 years with previously normal development. Aphasia, EEG alterations, seizures, and behavioral disorders are the main features of the syndrome.

**Aphasia**

In children with previously normal development, the new onset of aphasia is the hallmark of the disease. In particular, aphasia initially manifests as auditory verbal aphasia (receptive aphasia) that precedes the expressive aphasia featuring difficulties in the processing or interpreting verbal and/or non-verbal sounds. Children may also express babbling, neologisms, verbal perseveration, or mutism. Concerning aphasia, the typical presentation of the syndrome is characterized by a child who, despite apparently normal neurodevelopment, begins to have difficulty understanding written and spoken the language. Subsequently, over days, weeks, or months, the young patient manifests expressive difficulties along with impairment of spontaneous language that, in turn, becomes limited and altered.

**Seizures**

Seizures occur in approximately two-thirds of individuals patients. The crises described characteristically demonstrate partial motor crises (more common), generalized clonic crises, and atypical absence seizures (e.g., eye blinking, chewing gestures, as well as lip-smacking, or slight jerking movements of the lips).

**Behavioral Disorders**

Language regression is often associated with social cognitive deficits and behavioral disorders, such as attention deficit, hyperactivity, impulsiveness, and the tendency to get distracted. Emotional lability, anxiety, and depression, sleep disorders, working memory impairment (but not long-term memory), and hypersensitive to sound may complete this clinical picture, which can sometimes be particularly complex.