Injuries to C1 and C2 compose approximately 30% of cervical spine fractures. Fractures of C1 occur through the lateral mass or arch in single or multiple places (multiple arch fractures, Jefferson fracture). Neurological injury rarely results from an isolated C1 fracture due to abundant space surrounding the spinal cord. C1 fractures may be managed in a rigid cervical collar or halo if the transverse alar ligament (TAL) remains intact on MRI. If the TAL is disrupted C1 to C2 posterior fusion should be considered.

C2 fractures can result in a fracture through the body, dens, or pars. If the fracture extends bilaterally through the pars interarticularis, a Hangman fracture is described. Hangman fracture with less than 3mm of displacement and no significant angulation may be treated in a hard cervical collar. If the fracture is displaced greater than 3mm or with greater than 11 degrees of angulation, reduction with halo placement or surgical fixation should be considered.  Associated disruption of the C2 to C3 disc with a Hangman fracture requires surgical fixation. Fracture through the C2 dens can be classified as type I, II, or III. Type I is avulsion of the tip of the dens, type II is a fracture through the base of the dens, and type III is a fracture extending into the C2 vertebral body. Type I and III fractures should be treated in a rigid cervical collar or halo. Type II fractures without risk of nonunion can be considered for hard cervical collar or halo. Risk factors for nonunion include 5mm or more of displacement, greater than 10 degrees of angulation, or age older than 50. Type II fractures at risk for nonunion should be considered for odontoid screw placement or posterior C1 to C2 fusion. All fractures of the C1 to C2 complex are considered unstable and should be treated initially with a hard cervical collar, and then evaluated by a spine surgeon.

Subaxial cervical spine fractures follow similar patterns at each level. Compression fractures result in loss of anterior vertebral body height without canal compromise and neural injury. Burst fractures are a variant of compression fractures that result in retropulsion of the vertebral body into the cervical canal. Of note, C7 burst fractures carry a higher risk of developing kyphotic deformity that other levels of the subaxial cervical spine. Teardrop fractures occur with flexion or flexion-extension of the cervical spine leading to an anterior–inferior fracture of the vertebral body. There are also three-column fractures extending through the anterior vertebral body all the way through to the posterior ligaments, and these are highly unstable. Unilateral facet fractures are controversial, but many are highly unstable or can lead to progressive deformity and warrant surgical evaluation. Any fracture extending into the foramina transversarium from C2 to C6 should be evaluated for the possibility of co-occurring vertebral artery injury.  Surgical fixation of subaxial cervical spine fractures should take into consideration the SLICS scoring system as previously described.

Clay shoveler’s fractures describe fractures of the cervical spinous processes.

Each fracture described should warrant cervical collar placement with surgery indicated for restoration of cervical lordosis, decompression of the spinal cord, or fixation as determined by the instability of ligamentous components.