There are two options for repair, open and laparoscopic.

After appropriately selected anesthesia is delivered, the surgeon makes a 5 cm to 6 cm linear incision parallel to the inguinal ligament overlying the proposed region of the external ring. The surgeon dissects until the fibers of the external oblique are identified. The external oblique fascia is opened parallel to the fibers and carried through the external ring revealing the spermatic cord and possible site of a hernia (usually located in an anteromedial position). The ilioinguinal nerve may be found at this juncture. There is great debate on the preservation vs sacrifice of this nerve, and the surgeon's preference or experience dictates the choice. The surgeon then mobilizes the spermatic cord from the pubic tubercle and identifies the hernia sac as indirect or direct. The primary repair of hernia (Herniotomy), which is the routine in children, is rarely performed in adults. However, it is indicated in cases of gross contamination from a strangulated inguinal hernia or in the presence of a femoral hernia. The Lichtenstein tension-free hernioplasty is the preferred method of repair. Many meshes exist, and each mesh procedure varies based on the product. The basic concept is that the mesh will cover the fascial defect and recreate and strengthen the inguinal floor to prevent further hernias following repair. The external oblique fascia may be reapproximated, as per surgeon preference, as well as the re-creation of the external ring.

There are a few popular non-mesh procedures performed by general surgeons. These include Shouldice repair and Bassini repair. The former is an anterior approach associated and is preferred due to low recurrence rates associated with it. A systematic review by Simons et al. concluded that Shouldice repair is the best conventional method of inguinal hernia repair.

In the present era, most of the surgeons have resorted to mesh hernioplasty, and very few are still performing the conventional non-mesh procedures. Thus, it is very difficult to compare the two techniques. However, a systematic review (published in 2001 and updated in 2018) compares the two techniques in terms of recurrence, complications, operating time, total hospital stay, and the time taken to resume daily activities. It shows that mesh repairs have a low recurrence rate and are associated with a low risk of injury to vital structures including vessels, nerves, and visceral organs. There is a reduced hospital stay associated with mesh repair of inguinal hernia. However, the non-mesh repair is still performed in developing countries due to the issues of cost and availability of mesh.