Protein synthesis occurs through ribosomes in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells, which translate messenger RNA (mRNA) codes into functioning proteins. Prokaryotic cells use the 30S and 50S subunits of ribosomes, and eukaryotic cells use the 40S and 60S subunits of ribosomes. In both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms, the two ribosomal subunits combine at the mRNA template to allow for transfer RNA (tRNA) to bring an amino acid and form cellular proteins via elongation of amino acid chains.

Tetracyclines, and extension minocycline, bind to the 30S ribosomal subunit, preventing the charged tRNA from bringing an amino acid to elongate the amino acid chain and form a cellular protein. Halting this process results in a bacteriostatic effect on the prokaryotic cell, wherein the organism can no longer grow or replicate.

Tetracyclines are lipid-soluble compounds capable of transportation across hydrophobic barriers such as biological membranes. Due to their lipophilicity, they are rapidly absorbed and distributed throughout the organism.

Minocycline is more lipophilic than other tetracyclines, such as doxycycline; thus, it achieves higher concentrations in the central nervous system (CNS) and skin.

Minocycline is available for administration in both oral and parenteral forms. Oral forms are absorbed in the stomach and proximal small intestine. Absorption rates are dependent on the presence of food, particularly products containing divalent cations such as calcium, which chelates minocycline and other tetracyclines rendering them unabsorbable. It can also be administered intravenously (IV). The IV route has seen use in the treatment of pneumonia, bloodstream infections, as well as skin and skin structure infections.