The necessity for the production of an infinite number of gametes increases the specific requirements needed for spermatogenesis to occur: The reproductive lifecycle of the male requires a large amount of stem cell production. A wide array of particular progenitor cells is necessary for the production of enough gametes to establish fertilization. Certain genes specific to spermiogenesis are required for the differentiation of sperm as well as acquiring sperm mobility. The continuous pool of spermatozoa becomes readily available by an advanced level of control and organization. One of the principal functions in male reproduction is carried out by the spermatogonia stem cells. Spermatogonia need stem cells to maintain their numbers by self-renewal and form the necessary progenitor cells required to proceed with spermatogenesis. Germ cells need constant nutrition to be able to differentiate into mature sperm that are capable of fertilization. Unavailability of these factors can cause spermatogenesis to fail ultimately and lead to sperm cell production.

Spermatogenesis is far less efficient in terms of quality management. The loss of germ cells occurs quite often. Also, the ejaculate can have extremely high numbers of malformed spermatozoa. Apoptosis or degeneration allows for the loss of about 75% of the developed germ cells. Only 25% of the germ cells reach the ejaculate, and research reveals that about 50% are malformed. Therefore, the spermatogenic potential that is accessible for reproduction is about 12%.

Recent reports have noticed a decline in the spermatozoa concentrations in the ejaculates of healthy males. This decline has occurred over the last decades, and specific factors affecting embryonal development seem to be the cause. These factors include prenatal influences such as hormones, drugs, radiation, metabolites in the drinking water, and nourishment of the mother. Moreover, the spermatogenetic process of the testis is affected by increased temperatures. These negative influences lead to a reduction in spermatogenesis, which manifests as a reduction in the number of mature spermatids or the formation of malformed spermatids.

Additionally, these influences may cause the process of meiosis to be disturbed. An arrest of spermatogenesis may occur after the creation of primary spermatocytes, and apoptosis of spermatogonia can occur. Rescue of spermatogenesis may arise if the spermatogonia survive. If they do not survive, spermatogenesis comes to a halt, and seminiferous tubules will appear as shadows.

Testicular biopsies evaluate the disturbances of spermatogenesis through histological sections. A suitable technique is known to be semithin sectioning of material embedded in epoxy resin. The excellent preservation of the cells much helps the evaluation of the specific details of the cells.