There are common pathologies seen due to nerve insults. Piriformis syndrome is a common pathology that is the result of sciatic nerve entrapment beneath the piriformis muscle. Sciatic nerve entrapment causes shooting pain, numbness, and weakness in the lower limbs. Since the sciatic nerve runs beneath the piriformis muscle as well as the nerves large size, this syndrome is common among those who sit for prolonged periods of time such as students, truck drivers, and secretaries. Another common pathology results from superior gluteal nerve iatrogenic injury. Sciatic nerve blockade requires penetration of the gluteal muscles for administration, and if not performed correctly, the risk of injury to the superior gluteal nerve is increased. Superior gluteal nerve injury results in gluteus medius and minimus paralysis. This paralysis causes the patient's hip to drop contralateral to the side of nerve injury. Lead poisoning leads to neuropathy of peripheral nerves. The deep fibular nerve is particularly susceptible to lead-induced axonal degeneration, therefor foot-drop is a common finding in patients with severe lead poisoning. Since the genitofemoral nerve is composed of 2 branches, its sensory component is used to evaluate its motor component. Stroking of the inner aspect of the thigh causes stimulation of the genital branch and therefore contraction of the cremasteric muscle and elevation of the testes. This is a standard physical exam technique when evaluating the scrotum and testes for pathology.