Although azithromycin is a generally well-tolerated, efficacious antimicrobial agent with many clinical indications, it is commonly inappropriately prescribed, particularly in the primary care setting. Several large retrospective cohort studies that demonstrated high levels of inappropriate antimicrobial prescribing overall singled out azithromycin as the most frequently misused drug.

Azithromycin is frequently prescribed when there is no clinical indication for antimicrobials and in many instances in which azithromycin is not first-line therapy (e.g., acute otitis media).

Azithromycin is a frequent antimicrobial therapy prescribed in situations in which a narrow-spectrum beta-lactam (e.g., amoxicillin) is the indicated first-line therapy (e.g., acute otitis media).S. pneumoniae isolates, make the widespread use of azithromycin for upper respiratory illness particularly concerning.

One possible association with high rates of azithromycin prescription is patient-reported penicillin allergy.

Healthcare professionals in many different roles can contribute to the appropriate use of azithromycin and all antimicrobial agents. MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs should prescribe azithromycin judiciously and make use of available evidence and society guidelines. Clinicians working with and/or supervising non-physician prescribers should ensure that all prescriptions accord with evidence and guideline-based practice.

While azithromycin is a safe and effective antimicrobial drug, practitioners must take care to prescribe it appropriately. Not only does the appropriate choice of antimicrobial therapy enhance treatment and support public health, but it avoids placing patients at unnecessary risk of adverse effects.