Maternal support with adequate nutrition is important and may include supplementation with hematinics.

Routine obstetric care includes a review every four weeks until 24 weeks and, after that, every two weeks until 32 weeks when weekly evaluations occur. Twin gestations typically conclude around 36 weeks of gestation. Elective delivery in dizygotic twin gestation without complications can be deferred to the 38 to 39-week window. Monochorionic diamniotic twin gestations are best managed expectantly until 34 weeks; after that, delivery becomes an option if there are any significant complications. Typically elective delivery is deferred to the 36 to 37-week window as long as the obstetric course is stable. The mode of delivery depends on prior obstetric history, current obstetric history, as well as fetal presentation. Vaginal delivery is entirely permissible and indeed recommended for cephalic-cephalic presentations and may be considered for cephalic-nonspecific presentations. A breech presentation may indicate an elective cesarean section. Intrapartum obstetric care includes surveillance for dysfunctional labor and risk for postpartum hemorrhage. In the event of premature delivery, appropriate neonatal care should be arranged.

Unique treatment options for complications of monochorionic dichorionic gestation may be necessary, such as laser photoablation of the vascular connections when twin-twin transfusion syndrome occurs.

In monochorionic diamniotic twin gestation cases, the demise of a single fetus places the surviving fetus at risk of acute hypotension and resultant a 10 to 15% risk for death. Surviving fetuses may show signs of visceral ischemic injury, including porencephalic brain cysts or disruption of the anterior abdominal wall. When a fetal demise occurs, in addition to obstetric challenges, there are additional emotional challenges for the couple, and they deserve supportive care. Fetal treatments are best deferred to tertiary centers. More unusual fetal treatments may include photocoagulation of the umbilical cord to optimize the chances for survival of a single fetus when the survival of both the fetuses is not an achievable obstetric goal (such as twin reversed arterial perfusion). In monochorionic monoamniotic twin gestations, severing of the occluded cord may be preferable if cord entanglement is present.