# Continuing Education Activity

Cardiac echocardiography is a safe and non-invasive test that provides the clinical team with important cardiac function data. This functional data is needed to care for patients with many pathologies and used to diagnose a number of diseases. This activity discusses echocardiography procedure details including relevant anatomy, clinical indications, and potential limitations and highlights the role of an interprofessional team in caring for patients requiring this valuable diagnostic test.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications of echocardiography.
- Describe the equipment/personnel needed in performing echocardiography.
- Review the clinical significance of various echocardiographic modalities.
- Outline interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance echocardiography and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Echocardiography is the use of ultrasound to evaluate the structural components of the heart in a minimally invasive strategy. Although, prior to the invention of today's routinely used 2-dimensional echocardiography, there was motion-based (M-mode) echocardiography. In 1953, Inge Edler, regarded as the father of echocardiography, first described M-mode technology, which began the era of diagnostic noninvasive echocardiography.

The most commonly used technique among these is transthoracic echocardiography (TTE). This allows the clinician to obtain real-time sizes, structure, and function of the heart during the cardiac cycle. Another useful and important use of these methods is stress echocardiography. Stress echocardiography is the combination of standard transthoracic echocardiography and either pharmacological or physical stress to the cardiac structures to assess wall motion abnormalities. Physical stresses may include running on a treadmill, and pharmacological stress, including medications.

Echocardiography is a low cost, at times minimally invasive, and readily available test that can provide information that can change the treatment course, and in some cases, provide real-time life-saving information. Many of the clinical uses of echocardiography are multidisciplinary in practice, and the overlap between the different utilities of echocardiogram is large. The addition of contrast to echocardiography, or the addition of strain to TTE are all examples of combinations of these utilities. The utilization of echocardiography is vast and can be applied in a variety of ways and a wide range of situations, and these forms will be discussed in detail.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Echocardiography is one of the most commonly used, non-invasive method for looking at cardiac anatomy. Echocardiography is used to provide thin cross-sections of cardiac structures, this includes; left and right atrium, left and right ventricles, valves, and associated valvular structures.

There are four standard views of the heart chambers that are evaluated when using TTE; these include parasternal long axis, parasternal short axis, apical four-chamber, and subxiphoid. The parasternal long-axis view is obtained by placing the probe left of the sternum at the 4th intercostal space perpendicular to the chest wall. As the heart is rotated left in the chest, the initial chamber visualized is the right ventricular; however, views of the left ventricle left atrium, and aortic outflow tract is also obtained, as well as their associated valves, which include the mitral valve, tricuspid, and aortic valve.

The parasternal short axis view is obtained by positioning the probe 90 degrees from the long axis view. The short axis will obtain a cross-section of the left ventricle, which is useful in assessing left ventricular wall function, as well as it's associated papillary muscles; additionally, a cross-section of the right ventricle can also be visualized.

# Indications

The indications for the use of transthoracic echocardiography is vast, and the basis of using this test is known or suspected cardiac disease. The Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography has published appropriate use criteria in 2019, which covers the criteria in its entirety.

The use of echocardiography in asymptomatic patients includes screening patients who have first degree relatives with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), aortic aneurysms or dissections, and those athletes that have electrocardiographic (ECG) changes. These patients may not have any immediate complaints, but their strong family history should give the clinician a high pretest probability to order an Echocardiogram. For example, patients with HCM may have a family history of sudden cardiac death in 1st-degree relatives at a young age.

Second, the initial evaluation of patients with clinical signs of or symptoms of heart disease. This includes palpitations, syncope, pre-syncope, newly diagnosed bundle branch blocks, arrhythmias, ACS, exertional shortness of breath, and evaluation of pulmonary hypertension.

Third, follow-up on previously diagnosed heart failure or valvular disease. In regards to the former, a re-evaluation of the patient's ejection fraction with echocardiography, especially in those with acute heart failure exacerbations, would provide important information to better treat the patient.

Finally, the evaluation of patent foramen ovale in those with cerebrovascular accidents (CVA).

Bedside echocardiography has many indications in addition to the above listed. Since the early 1990s, bedside echocardiography use by intensivists and emergency medicine physicians has been increasing. Bedside echocardiography is routinely employed in critically ill patients who may or may not have previously diagnosed cardiac disease, but now require vascular support. Bedside echocardiography in the undifferentiated shortness breath can help elucidate cardiac failure vs. pericardial effusion vs. non-cardiac etiology. Some of the most common indications for bedside echocardiography include suspicion for pulmonary embolism, hypotension or respiratory failure of unknown etiology, complications after cardiothoracic surgery, identifications of pericardial effusion, and evaluation of right ventricular dysfunction.

The indications for the use of stress echocardiography is the suspicion for coronary artery disease. This includes patients with stable angina with intermediate probability for coronary artery disease, with a pre-test probability of 15% to 85%.

Transesophageal Echocardiography (TEE) is used because it provides a superior imaging quality of the posterior heart chambers and structures when compared to TTE, can be used during coronary artery bypass graft surgery, aids in placement of transcatheter devices, and may be performed at the bedside in clinically ill patients.

Intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) is used during transcatheter cardiac interventions. This includes closure of atrial septal defects, catheter-directed biopsy, thrombectomies, and during electrophysiological procedures, which include transeptal puncture.

Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) may be performed during cardiac catheterization to directly visualize atherosclerosis within the vessel walls; this is utilized when the extent and severity of stenosis are indeterminant during PCI.

Strain rate (STR) Echocardiography, also known as deformation echocardiography, is indicated when there is high suspicion for wall motion abnormalities. However, TTE is initially used to evaluate wall abnormalities; it is based on visual estimates, which may be subjective because it is operator dependant.

Three-dimensional (3D) echocardiography is used when a clearer image of cardiac structures, and how to relate to each other is required. This is used most often used with presurgical planning for interventional procedures, as it can prove improved views of valvular structures.

Contrast echocardiography has been studied extensively in the assessment of myocardial perfusion and has been found to be of independent prognostic and diagnostic benefit.

# Contraindications

Standard echocardiography does not have absolute contraindications, other than a patient's refusal. It is important to know that patient body habitus may limit the image clarity and amount of useful data that can be obtained.

There are, however, contraindications to stress and transesophageal echocardiography. Some of the common contraindications to stress echocardiography include acute myocardial infarction within two days, severe symptomatic aortic stenosis, heart failure exacerbation, acute pericarditis, uncontrolled arrhythmias, hypertension (more than 200/110 mmHg), and unstable angina not stabilized medically.

# Equipment

The equipment needed for transthoracic echocardiography includes an ultrasound machine with Doppler capabilities, a cardiac ultrasound probe, and an ultrasound gel. When undergoing stress echocardiography, ECG monitoring is required, and medications needed to increase heart rate, including, but not limited to, dobutamine, atropine, adenosine, and regadenoson. Finally, those undergoing transesophageal echocardiography will need possible tracheal intubation and sedation, with potential paralytic agents prior to the procedure.

# Personnel

When performing a transthoracic echocardiogram, a trained cardiovascular technician/sonographer is necessary. In the United States, an individual needs at least an associate's degree to become a cardiovascular sonographer.

When obtaining invasive imaging, an interventional cardiologist must be present because vessel access must be obtained, as well as a catheter must be advanced into the heart. However, within the emergency department and intensive care units, intensivists and emergency medicine physicians who are credentialed in bedside echocardiography are able to utilize echocardiography and interpret the results in the acute setting and administer appropriate measures.

# Preparation

Transthoracic echocardiography needs minimal preparations; however, this includes removing clothing over the chest and potentially cardiac monitoring stickers, and the patient should lay in a decubitus position on their left side. It is important to keep patients modest and covered when possible. Preparations for transesophageal echocardiography are more intensive, as the patient would need to be sedated, and for more difficult studies, the patient may need to be intubated. When performing invasive imaging, the femoral and radial vessel insertion sites, including the groin or wrist, would need to be cleaned, prepped, and draped in a sterile technique. Prior to any procedure, a time out is completed, where the name, date of birth, and procedure being performed is read aloud and agreed upon by all involved.

# Technique or Treatment

When performing transthoracic echocardiography, the patient should be in a left decubitus position. This allows the heart to fall closer to the anterior thoracic wall, making sonography easier. The probe is placed on the skin at multiple positions, including parasternal long axis, parasternal short axis, apical four-chamber, and subxiphoid. The probe is positioned in the intercostal spaces to avoid the scattering effects of bone.

While performing a TEE, the patient is in the supine position, with the head of the bed in a slight angle while and the probe is inserted into the mouth and advanced into the esophagus. A TEE bite block is inserted into the mouth, to allow easier transit of the probe. While performing any invasive imaging techniques, access is obtained at the femoral or radial vessels.

# Complications

There is limited risk associated with TTE. There are, however, risks of esophageal perforation and bleeding with TEE. In those undergoing stress echocardiography, there is a risk of cardiac arrhythmias when administering medications to increase a patient's heart rate. Intracardiac echocardiography has an additional risk of bleeding as venous access must be obtained to insert the catheter.

# Clinical Significance

Transthoracic Echocardiography (TTE): When a patient presents clinically with dyspnea or chest pain, and there is a high pre-test probability that the shortness of breath is of cardiac origin, TTE is recommended. It is useful in identifying the cause, location, and severity of myocardial ischemia, atrial sizes, ejections fraction (EF), left ventricular hypertrophy, and presence of valvular disease.

Bedside Echocardiography: The use of bedside echocardiography is widespread and allows a physician to obtain immediate information in the acute setting. A common use is an assessment of cardiovascular response while hydrating a hypovolemic patient, however, as mentioned above, this gives you information about pre-load, and further clinical assessment must be taken into account.

Transesophageal Echocardiography (TEE): When a patient has a high index of suspicion for infective endocarditis, it is important to have a much clearer image of the valvular structure to identify valvular prolapse, rupture, or infective vegetation on the valves

Stress Echocardiography: When appropriate, stress echocardiography is a great initial modality to assess for cardiac ischemia. First, the patient's heart function is assessed at rest to determine a baseline, next the heart is stressed using either running on a treadmill or pharmacological stressors, including dobutamine, adenosine, or dipyridamole.

Intracardiac Echocardiography (ICE): The use of ICE is less frequent given its invasive technique, cost, steep learning curve, and due to the advancements in TTE and TEE.

Intravascular Ultrasound (IVUS): The mainstay of treatment for coronary artery disease is cardiac catheterization when appropriate, and most commonly, it is performed under the guidance of angiography. Contrast is introduced into the cardiac vasculature while radiography is performed, allowing the visualization of coronary anatomy. This is also the technique interventional cardiologists utilize to guide their wire and assess stenosis. When stenosis is <40%, no intervention is generally required, but with a greater than 70% stenosis, a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is performed.

Strain rate (STR) Echocardiography: TTE is able to detect wall motion abnormalities in those with ischemic or non-ischemic cardiomyopathy; however, when these abnormalities are sub-clinical, STR echocardiography is a more sensitive utility. Early detection in asymptomatic patients is an important use of STR echocardiography, especially in those with diabetes, amyloidosis, and muscular dystrophies.

3-dimensional (3D) Echocardiography: The use of traditional 2D echocardiography is limited due to foreshortened views of the ventricles and atria, and this can underestimate volumes.

Contrast Echocardiography: When a patient has an embolic cerebrovascular accident, the most common origin is cardioembolic. Contrast-enhanced echocardiography is performed to assess for the presence of a patent foramen ovale, which may require surgical closure.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The decision to order an echocardiogram requires an interprofessional team approach. The assessment of fluid status is a physical exam finding that can be performed not only by physicians but also by the nursing staff, and this can be used to help aid in the decision to order an echocardiogram. Interprofessional communication is important when treating any patient, including those with a cardiac history, and it is vital for all staff to continuously assess a patient's fluid status and need for further imaging assessments. Adequate communication about the specific indication for echocardiography for each specific patient, will help ensure optimal views and help improve the clinical utility of this test.