Cheng et al. proposed two formats for designing simulation scenarios to practice crisis resource management (CRM).

This suggests that specific scenarios and educational goals, such as CRM training, may not require such scripted, practiced, trained ESPs to achieve learning objectives. In 2015, Bosse et al. tested the effectiveness of medical student peer role-play (i.e., embedded participants) versus formally trained SPs in a communication scenario designed for summative assessment of medical students via objective structured clinical exams (OSCEs).

Researchers found comparable OSCE performance levels in both groups of medical students using the Calgary-Cambridge Referenced Observation Guide. Additionally, a cost-effectiveness analysis showed that medical students strongly favored peer role-play over trained SPs.

These studies cited the need to have carefully designed sessions and training for the role-playing students, which may resolve any skepticism regarding the usefulness of role-playing. There is also support for achieving learning objectives through the use of role-playing in undergraduate medical education.

A 2005 review of the literature on the topic of SPs versus peer role-play concluded there was a definitive need for well-designed studies to assess communication skill acquisition in various educational settings.

Both the volunteer patients and the SPs had a 30-minute orientation to go over the purpose, timing, and format of the interview.  Both groups were encouraged to answer questions but not provide more detail, thus requiring students to ask more questions. The cost for SPs in this study was three times that of the volunteer patients, and therefore the conclusion was volunteers are more cost-effective. There are also instances in the literature where the knowledge pertinent to specific/specialized skill sets have known limitations, such as the use of trained SPs for the role of physician anesthesiologists in high-fidelity surgical simulations.

If the fidelity of surgical simulation and achievement of learning objectives depends on the realistic depiction of anesthesiologists, a highly-trained physician with a particular skillset, then utilization of actual anesthesiologists could be both essential and more cost-effective versus trained SPs.