To establish the diagnosis of hypercarbia, blood gas analysis is essential. While a venous blood gas can provide information about the pH and an estimate of CO2 retention, the CO2 content in venous blood is naturally higher than arterial blood as it has not passed through the lungs. Arterial blood gas analysis is the preferred technique for diagnosing hypercarbia, with any partial pressure of CO2 (PaCO2) level greater than 45 mmHg qualifying. The next step in evaluation is to refer to the pH from the same sample. If it is within a normal range, there is either a mixed acid-base disorder, or the hypercarbia is chronic. If the pH is less than 7.35, there is respiratory acidosis.

Further evaluation should be driven by history and physical exam findings. A basic metabolic panel is useful to assess for metabolic derangements and better characterize the serum bicarbonate. A urine drug screen is useful if an overdose is suspected. Work up for sepsis and fever should include complete blood count, chest imaging, and blood and sputum cultures. Thyroid function is important to assess as different disease states can contribute to hypercarbia (increased production in thyrotoxicosis, decreased clearance in myxedema coma).

Though less useful in an acute setting, pulmonary function testing can be used to assess for obstructive lung disease or pick up on a subtle decline from a neuromuscular disease like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. If the clinical picture is appropriate, polysomnography could be obtained to evaluate for sleep-disordered breathing such as obesity hypoventilation syndrome.