Basivertebral nerve (BVN) ablation is a minimally invasive spinal procedure targeting the BVN, which is responsible for carrying nociceptive information from damaged vertebral endplates, an entity recently postulated as a source of chronic axial low back pain (LBP).

In the past, other structures were considered as sole contributors to the etiology of chronic axial LBP, such as intervertebral discs (IVD), zygapophyseal facet joints, ligaments, sacroiliac joints, muscles, etc.

Finding the source of chronic axial LBP is clinically challenging, and often 80% of diagnoses are described as non-specific LBP, and in only 20% of cases, an anatomical source can be attributed.

Several studies have reported a high incidence of vertebral endplate damage in up to 43% of subjects suffering from chronic axial LBP symptoms. These tend to manifest differently than when the etiology is from other structures.

Often, vertebral endplate pain patients tend to present with significant functional impairment and debilitating pain while seated, standing, or during spinal flexion (in contrast to extension), with the pain reported as a burning, deep and achy, located in the midline region of the lumbar spine without radicular symptoms, and without motor weakness, numbness or tingling.

Treatment options for chronic axial LBP from damaged vertebral endplates start with conservative care, similar to other treatment algorithms, such as oral analgesics, opioids, and therapeutic exercises. However, conservative methods tend to be ineffective, and the identification and diagnosis with history and physical exam of this subset of patients with pathoanatomical vertebral endplate damage on diagnostic imaging are crucial to optimize outcomes and offer an effective treatment option, such as the BVN ablation.