Diabetic foot ulcers have challenging and serious implications if not adequately managed. It is vital to follow an interprofessional approach when treating patients with diabetes mellitus who present with foot ulcers given their immunocompromised status and low threshold to fight superimposed infections and capacity to heal adequately. Comprehensive history and examination is essential in order to adequately formulate a treatment plan for patients with Diabetic foot ulcers. They should be managed by a team of healthcare professionals including Primary medical doctor, endocrinologist, podiatry, vascular surgery, infectious disease specialist, wound care nurse and pharmacist. The team should work closely in achieving optimal glycemic control and titrating diabetic regimen along with an interprofessional approach for adequate debridement, proper local wound care, redistribution of pressure on the ulcer by mechanical offloading, and control of infection and ischemia. The following approach should be followed in the management of diabetic foot ulcers:

- Primary medical doctor/endocrinologist should assess the wound and adequate referral to Podiatry should be provided. Diabetic foot ulcer should be classified upon initial presentation and monitored for any signs of worsening on regular follow-ups.

- Vascular surgery should be consulted for any evidence of underlying PAD ( Peripheral arterial disease) and signs of limb ischemia. Early revascularization is the key. Revascularization should also be performed in patients with a nonhealing ulcer and any degree of limb ischemia.

- Surgical (sharp) debridement versus utilization of autolytic debridement with hydrogels by wound care specialist should be performed as warranted.

- Infectious disease specialist opionion should be sought for the management of wound infections.

- Regular wound care in a clinic and closely followed by a wound care nurse

- The pharmacist should encourage the patient to discontinue smoking and maintain strict compliance with diabetic medications

- The patient should be seen by a dietitian to ensure that he/she is eating a healthy diet and maintaining a healthy weight.

There is also clear evidence about the effectiveness of hyperbaric oxygen therapy in the patients with Wagner Grade 3 ulcers in speeding healing, preventing amputations and improved transcutaneous oxygen measurement. In order to avoid the morbidity of a diabetic foot infection, the entire team must communicate to ensure that the patient is receiving appropriate therapy and guidance.