Patisiran, a liposomal siRNA molecule, is used to treat patients with polyneuropathy (sensorimotor and autonomic neuropathy) and cardiomyopathy associated with hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis and wild-type transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis (ATTRwt).

Hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis (hATTR) is a rare, multisystem, progressive, and life-threatening disease affecting adults. Therefore, high awareness among healthcare providers is essential in making an early diagnosis and initiating prompt patisiran treatment. Providers educate the patients regarding the adverse effects of patisiran and health conditions requiring immediate consultation with health providers. They also evaluate the efficacy and safety of the patisiran at each follow-up visit. They also refer the patients with ocular symptoms suggestive of vitamin-A deficiency to an ophthalmologist. They encourage pregnant patients to enroll in the pregnancy monitoring registry.

Patisiran infusion can be administered in the clinician's office, infusion center, or home by a qualified health care professional. Pharmacists will verify the drug dosage and administration schedule to ensure patients get the right amount of medicine at the proper intervals. Pharmacists can advise the team members and patients on appropriately storing the medication.

Patients must be highly compliant with the medicine to halt the progress of their medical condition. They will immediately contact their healthcare providers upon experiencing adverse reactions. They need to take vitamin A supplements regularly at recommended daily allowance. In addition, patients could join support groups and advocacy organizations to cope with their emotions. The caregivers will learn about the natural course of the disease to have realistic expectations in the loved one's amyloidosis journey.

Caregivers can utilize the available resources to get assistance to avoid burnout. All team members are responsible for accurately documenting the patient's status and reporting any concerns to the rest of the team, so therapeutic interventions can occur if necessary. Thus, an interprofessional team approach is essential to achieve optimal therapeutic goals. [Level 5]