Topical antibiotics alone or in conjunction with systemic antibiotics are used to treat impetigo. Antibiotic coverage should cover both S aureus and S pyogenes (i.e. GABHS). While untreated impetigo is often self-limiting, antibiotics decrease the duration of illness and spread of lesions. In addition, antibiotic treatment decreases the chances of complications involving kidneys, joints, bones, and lungs, as well as acute rheumatic fever.

For localized, uncomplicated, non-bullous impetigo, topical therapy alone is the treatment of choice.  The crust should be removed with soap and water before the application of topical antibiotic therapy. Mupirocin, retapamulin, and fusidic acid are the treatments of choice.

Systemic antibiotics should be prescribed for all cases of bullous impetigo and cases of non-bullous impetigo with more than five lesions, deep tissue involvement, systemic signs of infection, lymphadenopathy or lesions in the oral cavity. Beta-lactamase-resistant antibiotics such as cephalosporins, amoxicillin-clavulanate, dicloxacillin are the treatment of choice. Cephalexin is commonly used. If culture confirms an infection solely caused by streptococci, oral penicillin is the preferred therapy.

In areas of high prevalence of MRSA  or if cultures are positive for MRSA, clindamycin or doxycycline are the preferred treatments. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is effective against MRSA, but should only be used if group A streptococci are not the causative agent, or in addition to an anti-streptococcal antibiotic.

Children with impetigo should maintain good personal hygiene and avoid other children during the active outbreak. It is important to wash hands, linens, clothes and affected areas that may have come into contact with infected fluids. Sores can be covered with a bandage to help prevent spread by contact. If impetigo is recurrent, evaluation for carriage of the causative bacteria should be performed.  The nose is a common reservoir and carriers can be treated with mupirocin (Bactroban Nasal) applied in the nostrils.