**Methods Available**

Based on the available literature, EC has been in use since 1960 and originally consisted of a high dose of oral estrogen, which soon was phased out due to increased side effects.

**Mechanism of Action**

Copper IUD releases copper ion that is toxic to sperm and oocytes and thereby inhibits fertilization. In addition, the inflammatory response in the endometrium due to Cu-IUD is hostile for the fertilized zygote and potentially inhibits implantation. It is the most effective of all the methods and has additional ongoing contraceptive benefits for up to 10 years after insertion.

**Indications, Contraindications, and Side Effects**

Emergency contraception is used in the following situations:

- As a backup method in case of contraceptive misuse or failure (such as a break in condoms, missed pill, delay in depot shot, or expired implant).

- For prevention of pregnancy in the absence of any form of contraception usage.

- In sexual assault, victims to avoid potential pregnancy.

Following single unprotected sexual intercourse at any point in the menstrual cycle, the risk of pregnancy is around 4 to 6 percent. This increases to 30 percent during the fertile period, which is approximately 5 days before and a day after ovulation. Adolescents and perimenopausal women have unpredictable ovulation. For these reasons, it is recommended that EC use should be encouraged and offered to women with unprotected sexual intercourse (UPSI) at any point throughout the menstrual cycle.

As per the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecology (ACOG) Practice Bulletin on EC, both oral hormonal ECs using UPA, combined estrogen and progestin pills, and Cu IUD should be made available to women for up to 5 days after UPSI when requested. To increase the effectiveness, treatment should be initiated as soon as possible. LNG has decreasing efficacy with time and is labeled for use within 72 hours. Cu-IUD and ulipristal acetate do not have a change in efficacy with time and should be considered as the first line if the patient presents late after UPSI. Some studies have used Cu-IUD up to 10 days after UPSI without any failure.

No exams or pregnancy tests are required for providing emergency contraception with oral methods. Bimanual exam and pregnancy tests are needed only prior to inserting Cu IUD.

**Regimens**

Progestin-only method: Levonorgestrel is available as 2 doses of 0.75 mg tablet given 12 hours apart, a single dose of 1.5 mg, and as two 0.75 mg tablets taken at once. Its efficacy decreases with time and is licensed for use up to 72 hours by the FDA. The risk of pregnancy varies from 0.6 to 3.1%, depending on when it was started. It does not require a prescription and is available over-the-counter (OTC) without age or gender restriction.

Selective progesterone receptor modulator: Ulipristal acetate is a synthetic hormone with a predominant antiprogestin effect that acts by delaying ovulation. A single dose of 30 mg of ulipristal acetate is effective for up to 5 days after UPSI. It requires the prescription from the physician, and its efficacy, which is measured by the risk of pregnancy, is 2% and does not change with time from day one to five. Current United Kingdom guidelines recommend UPA among obese women. This is based on limited evidence showing increased pregnancy among obese women with the use of LNG as EC and altered pharmacokinetics that showed a longer time in achieving steady-state drug levels by LNG. UPA can be used more than once in the same cycle, but women should be counseled about other contraception for regular use as they are at increased risk for unintended pregnancy.

Yuzpe method: Consists of combined estrogen and progestin pills given as 2 doses taken 12 hours apart. Each dose should contain the dose equivalent of a minimum of 100 micrograms of ethinylestradiol and 0.5 mg of LNG using various available combined oral contraceptive (OCP) drugs, as no dedicated combination EC pill is available. This method has lower efficacy than other methods with a pregnancy rate of 2 to 3% and is associated with higher rates of nausea, vomiting, and dizziness. This warrants the need for antiemetics to be given at least 30 minutes before each dose. Used when other methods are not available, it is off-label for EC, with a prescription for up to 5 days after UPSI. As with LNG, the efficacy is better when taken earlier within the first 24 hours compared to later after 72 hours.

Anti-progestin: Consists of oral mifepristone used in low doses of 10 mg, 25 mg, and 50 mg as EC in few countries outside the United States. Its efficacy at EC dosage is comparable to UPA and probably effective even in the post-ovulation phase, similar to Cu-IUD. At higher doses, it acts as an abortifacient, which was the initial indication for this medication. The provider must explain this distinction about doses when prescribed to patients.

Copper intrauterine device: It is the most effective but least utilized method for emergency contraception due to a misconception among patients and providers. It prevents pregnancy in 99 percent of the cases as compared to 75 percent with combined pills, 70 percent with LNG, and 85 percent with UPA. Major stumble to use it as EC is a lack of access to providers within the window of 5 days and fear of dislodging existing pregnancy that might be missed by pregnancy tests done earlier than 2 weeks after implantation occurred. The World Health Organization (WHO) encourages its use up to 12 days, provided the pregnancy test is negative at the time of insertion. Otherwise, it would be an excellent choice in adolescents and couples desiring long-term contraception for up to 10 years.