There are three elevators of the upper eyelid:

- **Levator Palpebrae Superioris**
- It is the primary elevator of the upper eyelid.
- The oculomotor nerve supplies it.
- It originates from the lesser wing of the sphenoid.
- Along its path, it travels above the superior rectus muscle.
- It inserts into the upper eyelid skin, the upper tarsal plate's anterior surface, and the superior conjunctival fornix.

- **Muller’s Muscle**
- It is also known as the superior tarsal muscle.
- It is made of thin fibers of smooth muscle.
- The sympathetic nervous system innervates it.
- It is responsible for 1.5 to 2 mm elevation of the upper eyelid.

- **Frontalis Muscle**
- It acts as an accessory upper eyelid elevator.****
- It is innervated by cranial nerve VII.
- It elevates the brow as well as the upper eyelid.
- It is attached to the skin of the eyebrows.
- It joins the galea aponeurotica below the coronal suture.

Congenital ptosis is associated with levator muscle dysgenesis, wherein the muscle fibers are replaced by adipose tissue and fibrous tissue. The elasticity of the muscle is lost, and it is neither able to contract nor relax properly. In downgaze, the ptotic eyelid in congenital ptosis is at a higher level because of the inability of the levator to relax sufficiently. In acquired ptosis caused by dehiscence of the levator aponeurosis, the upper eyelid is low in downgaze. There is corresponding increased action of the frontalis muscle and Muller muscle when the levator palpebrae superioris is not functioning properly.

Blepharophimosis syndrome is a genetic disorder that is inherited as an autosomal dominant condition. The condition may occur sporadically or from de novo mutations in the FOXL2 gene.