**Extravascular Hemolysis**

Hemolysis of red blood cells can classify as intravascular or extravascular. As the name implies, intravascular hemolysis is the breakdown of red blood cells in vessels. Extravascular hemolysis is the breakdown of red blood cells in the reticuloendothelial system, such as the spleen and liver. In extravascular hemolysis, it is the macrophages that perform the hemolysis. Patients with extravascular hemolysis present with splenomegaly secondary to splenic hypertrophy and jaundice due to the increased levels of unconjugated bilirubin from broken down blood cells. Laboratory results can reveal anemia, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, and an increased reticulocyte count, which reflects a good bone marrow response to the anemia. Because of the increased bilirubin, patients with extravascular hemolysis are at an increased risk of bilirubin gallstones, which can lead to biliary pathology. Conditions that can cause extravascular hemolysis include sickle cell disease, hereditary spherocytosis, hemoglobin C, malaria, IgG immune hemolytic anemia, and beta-thalassemia major. Treatment typically focuses on the underlying cause, with splenectomy providing a cure in some cases.

**Splenomegaly**

Splenomegaly is the abnormal enlargement of the spleen with a length greater than 10 cm. This irregularity can result from multiple types of mechanisms: hypertrophy, infiltration, congestion, myeloproliferative, and neoplastic. RBC work hypertrophy suggests increased normal splenic function by filtering large amounts of abnormal erythrocytes from the circulation. Examples of this type include hereditary spherocytosis and sickle cell anemia.

Meanwhile, immune response work hypertrophy from chronic systemic infections or immune-mediated disorders can also cause splenomegaly. Malignant, benign, or metabolic conditions infiltrate the spleen in cases like sarcoidosis and some neoplasms leading to splenomegaly.  Congestive splenomegaly is secondary to obstruction of blood flow and, therefore, engorged with blood in the red pulp. Myeloproliferative disorders include chronic myeloid metaplasia. Neoplastic origins include chronic lymphocytic leukemia and lymphoma.

Palpation by percussion evaluates for an enlarged spleen. This physical exam is not diagnostic of the disease. Diagnosis is more precise when measured by imaging studies like CT, MRI, or US. Splenomegaly may be idiopathic or secondary to an underlying disease.

**Hyposplenia****/P****ost-Splenectomy****/Asplenia****Immunization****and Antibiotic prophylaxis**

There are a variety of causes for splenic dysfunction ranging from extravascular hemolysis to sickle cell disease and trauma. Due to the spleen playing a large role in the immune system, recognizing splenic dysfunction or preparing to lose the spleen is critical in preventing death secondary to asplenic sepsis. For any patient with splenic dysfunction, they must receive prophylactic vaccination against encapsulated organisms, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitides, and Haemophilus influenzae. Due to the increased risk of a Streptococcus pneumoniae infection following infection from the influenza virus, a- or hypo-splenic patients should receive yearly influenza vaccinations as well. Because vaccinations do not cover all serotypes of the organism, many patients receive either daily prophylactic antibiotics, usually penicillin, or an emergency supply should they develop a fever. The timing of implementation for these practices depends on the reason for splenic dysfunction. In patients with functional asplenia or hyposplenism, such as in sickle cell disease, prophylaxis should begin as soon as possible. In cases of elective spleen surgery, prophylaxis should begin two weeks before surgery. In emergency surgery, it should commence two weeks after surgery.

**Portal Hypertension**

Portal hypertension is a result of increased pressure in the portal venous system, which drains the stomach, intestine, spleen, and pancreas. As portal hypertension worsens, the venous congestion of the splenic vein can cause splenomegaly. The spleen undergoes hyperplasia and fibrosis, which further increases the blood supply to the spleen, exacerbating the condition. With this hyperplasia, there has been evidence that the white pulp increases in size, possibly indicating an alteration in immune system function. Sometimes, a splenorenal shunt can help reduce the burden of portal hypertension by reducing the contribution of blood by the splenic vein.