Following aflibercept administration, patient self-monitoring is essential to detect signs of infection, pain, and/or decreased visual acuity. Patients should be instructed on Amsler grid use to monitor reactivation of Neovascular age-related macular degeneration (NVAMD). Severe complications such as endophthalmitis, retinal detachment, and increased intraocular pressure (IOP) have been associated with intravitreal injection. Intraocular pressure should be monitored before and after intravitreal injection of aflibercept.

Overall systemic exposure is low due to rapid elimination after passing through the vitreous. No drug metabolism studies have been conducted. As a low-molecular-weight glycoprotein, aflibercept is believed to undergo proteolysis and elimination via target-mediated elimination by binding free endogenous VEGF. For a dose of 2 to 4 mg/kg, aflibercept has a half-life (t1/2) of approximately 5 to 6 days after 2 to 4 mg/kg intravitreal injection (IVI).

Few rare toxicities have been reported involving minimal systemic absorption. Single case reports describe intravitreal aflibercept crossing the blood-retina barrier leading to vascular-related thromboembolism, heart attack, stroke, and even death.

Other case studies describe worsening of preexisting chronic kidney disease (CKD), acute interstitial nephritis (AIN) in the background of diabetic glomerulosclerosis, and focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). These are very rare but highlight the potential of deleterious systemic and renal pathological disorders in the setting of intravitreal VEGF blockade. Additionally, patients with macular ischemia should be carefully monitored when considering prolonged anti-VEGF therapy due to an already compromised blood supply.

Despite rarely observed adverse effects, aflibercept has a highly desirable therapeutic profile compared to other anti-VEGF analogs. Aflibercept use is associated with rapid visual improvement, less frequent need for subsequent injection therapy, and prolonged maintenance. Randomized clinical trials of intravitreal aflibercept administration demonstrate superior outcomes of eight-week dosing regimens compared to monthly dosing, resulting in an overall decreased frequency of injections.