The development of the lumbar spine begins around the third week of gestation. The notochord initiates this process by secreting growth factors that stimulate the ectoderm to transform into the neuroectoderm. The process of neurulation produces the neural tube, which ultimately develops into the spinal cord. Errors during neurulation may result in numerous congenital anomalies ranging from mild (spina bifida) to severe (anencephaly).

Also, around the third week, the paraxial mesoderm develops into pairs of somites along either side of the neural tube. Each somite differentiates into a dermomyotome and sclerotome. The sclerotome separates into cell clusters located caudally and cranially. Neurons from the neural tube penetrate these clusters to innervate individual myotomes and dermatomes. The caudally located cell clusters then fuse with the cranially located clusters of the adjacent sclerotome to create the vertebral body. Between each cell cluster, the interverbal disc develops. Simultaneously, sclerotome cells migrate around the neural tube and fuse dorsally, creating the vertebral arch.

Each vertebra undergoes a process of endochondral ossification, in which the mesenchymal cells differentiate into cartilage and eventually bone. Chondrification centers develop around the sixth week, and primary ossification centers in the seventh. These processes are responsible for strengthening the eventual vertebra. Bone remodeling continues throughout the lifespan and is highly dependent on stress and mechanical loads.