# Introduction

The bony integrity of the pelvis is supported by a variety of ligaments that lend crucial flexible strength to the pelvic cavity and support some of the internal pelvic structures.**.**

# Structure and Function

The key ligaments of the pelvis present in both sexes are the sacrotuberous, sacrospinous, and iliolumbar ligaments. Further ligaments include the anterior sacroiliac, anterior sacrococcygeal, posterior sacroiliac, posterior sacrococcygeal, and pectineal ligaments. Further specific female pelvic ligaments are the broad ligament and ligaments of the ovaries and uterus.

**The Sacrotuberous Ligament**

The sacrotuberous ligament is a fan-shaped fibrous band of connective tissue with great strength, providing stability to the posterior pelvis.

**The Sacrospinous Ligament**

The Sacrospinous ligament is a triangular band of connective tissue that lies on the pelvic aspect of the sacrotuberous ligament. It has a broad base with origins at the lower sacrum and upper coccyx. It travels laterally from its base, narrowing as it does so, to attach to the spine of the ischium and has an average length of 46 mm in women and 38 mm in men.

**The Iliolumbar Ligament**

The iliolumbar ligament is composed of thick and strong fibrous bands of connective tissue originating from the tip of the transverse process of the fifth lumbar vertebra. Here, it extends laterally as a superior and inferior band, resembling a V-shape. The superior band inserts at the iliac crest, and the inferior band blends with the front of the anterior sacroiliac ligament on the pelvic surface of the ileum.

**Sacroiliac Ligaments**

The sacroiliac joint complex is reinforced by various ligaments that provide structural support to this important joint within the pelvis. The interosseous sacroiliac ligament provides the largest and most robust support of the sacroiliac joint in both females and males. It attaches at deep pits on the lateral mass of the posterior surface of the sacrum, extending to the ilium n a series of short and very strong fibers. As mentioned above, its anterosuperior surface blends with the iliolumbar ligament. Furthermore, the most superficial fibers of the posterior aspect of the interosseous sacroiliac ligament form the posterior sacroiliac ligament**.**

**Sacrococcygeal Ligaments**

The sacrococcygeal joint is reinforced with anterior, posterior, and lateral ligaments. The anterior sacrococcygeal ligament unifies the anteriormost aspect of the respective bone bones. Posteriorly there are two posterior sacrococcygeal ligaments that perform a similar function on the dorsal aspect of the joint. Finally, two lateral sacrococcygeal ligaments run from the coccygeal transverse processes inferiorly to the angle o the sacrum.

**Ligaments of the Pubic Symphysis**

The pubic symphysis is a midline cartilaginous joint uniting the two pubic bones. Small ligamentous supports to this joint are present in the form of the superior pubic ligament and the arcuate pubic ligament inferiorly. The strength and contribution to joint stability provided by these ligaments are controversial. However, it is accepted that the arcuate pubic ligament is stronger than its superior counterpart.

**Female Pelvic Ligaments**

The broad ligament is a sheet of pelvic peritoneum extending bilaterally from the lateral pelvic sidewalls to the uterus in the midline.

The mesovarium is the part of the broad ligament related to the ovaries. This posterior sheet of broad ligament extends to the hilum of the ovary and contains the neurovascular tissue of the ovary, here as the suspensory ligament of the ovary. The peritoneal fold of the broad ligament does not cover the surface of the ovary, but rather the anterior border of the ovary is attached to the broad ligament.

The mesosalpinx is the part of the broad ligament related to the fallopian tube. Here, the broad ligament folds over and encloses the fallopian tube.

The mesometrium is the part of the broad ligament related to the uterus. From the uterus, the broad ligaments fan out laterally while covering the external iliac vessels. The mesometrium is the largest section of the broad ligament.

**Ligaments Related to the Ovary**

There are two ligaments that are attached to the ovary, namely the (median) ovarian ligament and the suspensory ligament of the ovary. The (median) ovarian ligament is a fibrous band of connective tissue attached to the ovary inferiorly and extends medially to the fundus of the uterus below the attachment of the fallopian tube.

**Ligaments Related to Uterus**

Four ligaments are attached to the uterus: the round ligament, the cardinal ligament, the pubocervical ligament, and the uterosacral ligament. The round ligament of the uterus is attached to the cornu of the uterus.

Other ligaments of the pelvis include the pubovesical ligaments, puboprostatic ligaments, sacrogenital, urachus ligaments, and suspensory ligaments of the penis in males.

# Embryology

Male and female gonads develop from primitive germ cells from the mesothelium of the posterior abdominal wall. Gonadal development begins in the fifth fetal week. The broad ligaments are formed after the fusion of both of the müllerian ducts.

The connective tissue of the pelvis – including the ligaments – develops initially from loose undifferentiated mesenchymal tissue in the 9-12 week-old fetus before forming dense connective tissue between 13 to 20 weeks.

# Clinical Significance

**Pregnancy-related Pelvic Ligament Dysfunction**

Pelvic girdle pain is common in the third trimester of pregnancy, as the gravid uterus exerts more axial load on the pelvic structures. This leads to pelvic ligamentous stretch and pain and is a common cause of significant pain and discomfort in the later stages of pregnancy.

Prolonged or difficult vaginal delivery can cause significant trauma to the pelvic structures. Post-natal pain and pelvic organ prolapse may occur - specifically cystocele, urethrocele, cystourethrocele, enterocele, rectocele, or prolapse of the uterus into the vagina. In asymptomatic patients, conservative management is recommended, which includes vaginal pessaries and Kegel exercises.

**Pudendal Nerve Entrapment**

The pudendal vessels and nerve pass behind the sacrospinous ligament. The pudendal nerve may get trapped between the sacrotuberous and sacrospinous ligaments.

**Ligamentous Dysfunction in Lower Back Pain**

The most common causes of lower back pain (LBP) are muscular-ligamentous sprains and strains, occurring mainly in the lumbosacral region.

Biophysical modeling demonstrates the importance of these ligaments in the support and motion of the lower limbs. When sacrotuberous and sacroiliac tears are modeled, the result is contralateral pelvic instability which likely correlates with functional disability and pain in vivo following ligamentous injury.