There are many androgen receptors in the brain; thus, there are many neural and behavioral effects associated with AAS misuse. Side effects include hyperexcitability, suicidal tendencies, and aggressive behavior. Neurotoxicity-induced apoptosis of neuronal cells was comparable to features of Alzheimer disease and Huntington disease. Researchers observed increased levels of beta-amyloid in individuals with a lengthy history of AAS misuse. Murine models demonstrated that excitotoxic neuronal death, induced by N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) underwent amplification in the presence of testosterone.

Gingival fibroblasts contain a significant number of androgenic receptors. Testosterone converts to DHT in peripheral tissues such as gingival tissues; this is especially evident if the tissue is inflamed, as the number of ARs and amount of DHT rises. Wound healing positively correlates to systemic sex hormones. Young males with above average amounts of testosterone showed impaired wound healing, whereas elderly females with low amounts of free testosterone in the blood showed improved wound healing. A study of 42 AAS users and 50 nonuser controls was performed to see how AAS affects periodontal health. Both participant groups were 19 to 40 years old. Periodontitis was present in a more significant percentage of AAS users (32%) vs. controls (16.7%). Dental plaque was also present more frequently in AAS users than controls. Clinical attachment loss was seen almost 2.4 times more often in AAS users than control nonusers. Researchers also examined the microbiota in AAS users vs. controls. Infection with P. intermedia was 4.9 times more likely in AAS users vs. non-users. Similarly, AAS users were 3.5 times more likely to be infected with A. actinomycetemcomitans than the control group. Finally, fungal cultures showed that AAS users were more likely to have Candida pocketing than nonusers.