# Definition/Introduction

Newborn screening is a state-run healthcare initiative that encompasses the process of parental education, infant screening, appropriate follow-up, diagnostic testing, disease management, and continued evaluation.

The disorders targeted by newborn screening are generally those that, without intervention, would cause significant morbidity, mortality, or intellectual disability.

**Program Structure**

Newborn screening in the United States is organized on a state-by-state basis with guidance from the Recommended Uniform Screening Panel (RUSP).

**Brief History**

Newborn screening was first envisioned in the 1960s with the disease phenylketonuria, which achieved nearly universal screening in the United States by the 1970s.

**Blood Sample**

The largest component of newborn screening involves obtaining a blood sample to screen for metabolic, hematologic, endocrine, and other inheritable disorders. A sample of the infant’s blood is obtained ideally within 24-48 hours of birth, though premature or ill infants may require alterations to this screening timeline.

**Hearing Screen**

An infant’s hearing may be screened by two different non-invasive methods; otoacoustic emissions (OAE) or auditory brainstem response (ABR).

**Pulse Oximetry**

An infant is screened for critical congenital heart defects with peripheral pulse oximetry, which uses light to calculate the percentage of hemoglobin that is bound to oxygen.

Below is a list of the critical congenital heart defects that are the target of pulse oximetry screening.

- Pulmonary atresia

- Tricuspid atresia

- Truncus arteriosus

- Total anomalous pulmonary venous return

- Hypoplastic left heart syndrome

- D-Transposition of the great vessels

- Double outlet right ventricle

- Ebstein anomaly

- Interrupted aortic arch

- Single ventricle complex

- Coarctation of the aorta

- Tetralogy of Fallot

Below is a list of the diseases and disorders included on the Recommended Uniform Screening Panel (RUSP) as of July 2018.

- Metabolic

- Organic acid condition
- Propionic acidemia
- Methylmalonic acidemia
- Isovaleric acidemia
- 3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency
- 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaric aciduria
- Holocarboxylase synthase deficiency
- Beta-ketothiolase deficiency
- Glutaric acidemia type 1

- Fatty acid oxidation disorder

- Carnitine uptake or transport defect
- Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
- Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
- Long-chain L-3 hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
- Trifunctional protein deficiency

- Amino acid disorders

- Argininosuccinic aciduria
- Citrullinemia type 1
- Maple syrup urine disease
- Homocystinuria
- Classic phenylketonuria
- Tyrosinemia type 1

- Endocrine disorders

- Primary congenital hypothyroidism
- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia

- Hemoglobin disorders

- Sickle cell anemia (SS disease)
- Beta thalassemia (S beta)
- SC disease (SC)

- Other

- Biotinidase deficiency
- Critical congenital heart disease
- Cystic fibrosis
- Classic galactosemia
- Glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe)
- Hearing loss
- Severe combined immunodeficiencies
- Mucopolysaccharidosis type 1
- X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy
- Spinal muscular atrophy due to homozygous deletion of exon 7 in SMN1

# Issues of Concern

**General Screening Criteria**

A screen must meet certain established criteria before it can be implemented for mass screening. The original guidelines were articulated by the World Health Organization based on the Wilson and Jungner 1968 publication, which has been expanded in follow-up discussions to incorporate the implications of genomic testing.

**Medical Ethics**

The U.S. newborn screening program attempts to uphold the core pillars of medical ethics: beneficence, non-maleficence, justice, and autonomy. The benefit of newborn screening is clear: early identification of affected infants provides an opportunity to initiate life-saving or life-altering treatment.

**Resource Allocation**

As in all healthcare paradigms, the scarcity of resources forces a strategic plan in utilization. The cost of this mass screening program must be considered against its potential benefits. Factors to consider include the following: prevalence of the disease, cost of testing materials and equipment, the expense of follow-up investigations, the impact of early intervention, and funding for continued research. One example of this cost-benefit balancing act is in the selection of screening cut-off values; designing a less sensitive screen would result in fewer false-positives but at the risk of missing a true disease.

**Technological Advancement**

As technology continues to push the boundaries of the information providers can easily and inexpensively obtain, healthcare teams must meet these advancements with conscientious consideration for the ethical implications.

**Neonatal Intensive Care Unit**

Infants in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) require additional considerations regarding newborn screening. Premature newborns have immature enzymes and metabolic instability, which result in more false-positive results.

# Clinical Significance

**General Disorders**

The disorders of the newborn screening panel each have their own prevalence, and each respective screen has its own sensitivity, specificity, and rates of false positives or negatives. These evaluations are for screening purposes only; should a provider encounter an ill infant, the differential diagnosis may need to be expanded to include disorders that were initially reported as negative on the newborn screen.

**Hearing Loss**

The prevalence of hearing loss is about 0.1% in full-term births and 3% or greater in preterm births.

One common reason an infant fails a hearing screen is an obstruction of the external auditory canal by amniotic fluid.

**Congenital Heart Defects**

Congenital heart defects (CHD) occur in approximately 0.4% to 1% of live births, with up to one-quarter of those categorized as “critical” (CCHD), defined as ductal-dependent heart lesions that require invasive treatment within the first month of life.

Providers caring for infants and even children should bear in mind that a normal pulse oximetry screen in the newborn nursery does not definitively rule out critical cardiac heart defects.

**Summary**

In summary, newborn screening is a far-reaching public health initiative that has reduced infant mortality and morbidity. Through simple point-of-care procedures and a single-prick blood collection, the newborn screen can aid in the detection of hearing loss, critical cardiac heart defects, and numerous metabolic, hematologic, endocrine, and genetic disorders. A provider should never be deterred from pursuing a diagnostic evaluation simply because the screening was negative, as no screen is perfect, and symptoms may evolve over time. Likewise, providers should follow best-practice guidelines to reduce false-positives and the subsequent burden of diagnostic follow-up. Premature infants and those requiring stays in the NICU have unique considerations; providers should consult their team and healthcare organization to determine optimal screening. Communication remains a significant opportunity for improvement; healthcare teams should strive to effectively explain the goals and limitations of these screens to expecting and new caregivers. As research and technology continue to make enormous strides in diagnostic and management strategies, healthcare professionals should remain engaged in the ongoing conversation about the ethical considerations of mass screening.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Newborn screening confers substantial benefits. Early detection of hearing loss has an estimated lifetime economic savings of greater than $400,000 per patient identified.

Newborn screening is an enormous healthcare initiative that requires the dedicated effort of the entire healthcare team. The principle opportunities for improvement involve screening procedures, family education, infant follow-through, and future directions.

**Screening Procedures**

A screening program of this magnitude requires significant administrative support. The equipment must be maintained, with the audiology equipment calibrated yearly.

**Family Education**

The obstetric team may play an increasing role in patient education regarding the process and value of newborn screening. Obstetricians should ensure that each mother has selected a pediatrician early in her second trimester for a seamless postpartum transition of care. Intake and triage staff should verify the current patient contact information. Nurses on the labor and delivery, as well as postpartum units, have perhaps the greatest opportunity to explain to the infant’s caregivers the role of newborn screening and the importance of close follow-up.

**Infant Follow-through**

Pediatricians and family physicians, when encountering positive newborn screening results, will need to promptly order follow-up tests and offer general counseling to the infant’s family. Providers should have a low threshold for referring families to geneticists and other specialists for more advanced counseling, whether concerning the infant’s prognosis or the parents’ future reproductive decisions.

**Future Directions**

Biomedical research is needed to expand the capacity and improve the precision of screening. A pharmaceutical investigation is required to offer effective intervention. As diagnostic and therapeutic technologies advance, specialists are needed to advocate for the inclusion of diseases into the recommended uniform screening panel. Furthermore, representation in government is needed to ensure appropriate screening legislation and adequate funding allocation. As always, the healthcare field should remain engaged in discussions of the ethical implications of newborn screening.