The mandible is made up of a U-shaped body that projects anteroposteriorly. At the posterior ends of the body are the bilateral gonial angles, from which the rami extend vertically towards the articulation with the cranial base.

**Body**

The body of the mandible is the horizontal U-shaped portion of the mandible. The mandibular symphysis is found anteriorly in the midline, where the two constituent fetal bones fuse after birth.

The superior surface of the mandibular body consists of alveolar bone, is lined with tooth sockets, and is covered with mucoperiosteum, which forms the gingivae.

The bilateral mental foramina are an important landmark on the external mandibular surface, as it allows access to the mental nerve for a local anesthetic block. This landmark lies halfway between the upper and lower borders of the mandibular body, most commonly on the imaginary line which would run between the first and second premolars, although this varies with age.

The internal surface of the body is crossed obliquely by the mylohyoid line that starts from just below the posterior border of the third molar and runs anteroinferiorly to fade into the midline.

In the midline of the internal surface of the mandibular body are four mental spines, which serve as attachments for intrinsic tongue muscles.

**Ramus**

The ramus contributes to the lateral portion of the mandible on either side. The anterior border of the ramus terminates superiorly as the coronoid process and the posterior border as the condyle or head of the mandible. The smooth concave mandibular notch separates the two. The condyle of the mandible contributes to the temporomandibular joint, with a biconcave fibrocartilaginous disc intervening between the condyle and the mandibular fossa of the temporal bone.

The lateral surface of the ramus contains a portion of the oblique line, which begins on the external surface of the body inferiorly. This surface also provides the origin for the masseter muscle.

The internal surface of the ramus is punctured by the mandibular foramen, situated halfway between the anterior and posterior borders of the ramus at the level of the occlusal surfaces of the lower teeth, and through which the inferior alveolar nerve and vessels enter the mandibular canal, ultimately terminating at the mental foramen.****The mylohyoid groove is an inferior continuation from the lingula, through which the mylohyoid nerve and vessels travel after piercing the sphenomandibular ligament.

The coronoid process is located at the superior aspect of the ramus. Its anterior border is continuous with that of the ramus, and its posterior border creates the anterior boundary of the mandibular notch. The temporalis muscle and masseter insert on its lateral surface.

The condyloid process is also located at the superior aspect of the ramus and is divided into two parts, the neck and the condyle. The neck is the thinner portion of the condyloid process that projects from the ramus. The condyle is the most superior portion and contributes to the temporomandibular junction by articulating with the articular disk.