# Introduction

Diagnosing cardiac emergencies is one of the most crucial tasks delegated to the emergency provider. The broad differential diagnosis of chest pain must be narrowed down quickly and accurately to perform the life-saving treatments patients require.

Cardiac troponins have been available for clinical use since 1995, when the first cardiac troponin T (cTnT) assay was approved.

# Etiology and Epidemiology

Troponin exists in three distinct molecular forms, corresponding to specific isotypes found in fast-twitch skeletal muscle, slow-twitch skeletal muscle, and heart tissue.

In the myocyte, troponins are found as structural (bound) proteins and as a small free pool that exists in the cytosol, which is about 6% to 8% for cTnT and 3.5% for cTnI.

Before troponin, several different cardiac biomarkers were used to identify myocardial injury.

Troponin measurements were found to have a near 100% sensitivity when checked 6 to 12 hours after the start of chest pain and have a significantly improved specificity for cardiac muscle damage compared to previous biomarkers.

# Pathophysiology

Myocardial infarction occurs when blood flow is blocked in the coronary vessels that supply the heart muscle with oxygen.

A basal amount of troponin is found in the circulation of healthy individuals from the regular turnover of cardiac myocytes.

Troponin levels typically start to elevate in the circulation within two to three hours of the onset of chest pain. The levels will continue to rise until a peak is reached, generally between 12 and 48 hours. The troponin level will then fall to normal over the next four to ten days.

Cardiac troponin T (cTnT) and troponin I (cTnI) have amino acid sequences that differ from the skeletal isoforms and are encoded by unique genes.

In humans, cTnT isoform expression has been demonstrated in skeletal muscle specimens obtained from patients with muscular dystrophy, polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and end-stage renal disease.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

Serum or heparinized plasma may be the sample type for most commercially available assays; whole blood is used for some point-of-care methods.

The binding of heparin to cTnI may reduce immunoreactivity, depending on the heparin concentration in sample collection tubes (e.g., heparin at a concentration of 90 U/mL is reported to cause a decrease of approximately 20% in cTnI concentration).

Results may be confounded if there is poor preanalytical handling of troponin specimens, such as incomplete sample mixing at the time of specimen collection, insufficient sample centrifugation and separation of red cells from serum or plasma, presence of fibrin due to incomplete serum separation, and so forth.

# Diagnostic Tests

In the emergency department setting, it is impossible to follow troponin levels completely from rising to peak to fall.

In STEMIs, patients will have an elevated troponin and one of the following ECG changes: ST-segment elevations greater than 1 mm in contiguous leads with reciprocal changes, new evidence of a left bundle branch block, or ST-segment elevations noted on a posterior ECG.

The non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) is an injury to the cardiac muscle that results in an elevated troponin but lacks the ECG changes that define an ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction.

NSTEMIs present a difficult challenge to the emergency provider. It is possible that a patient with chest pain can initially have a negative troponin with no ECG changes but can still have an NSTEMI because troponin levels do not start to rise until at least 2 to 3 hours after the initial insult.

# Testing Procedures

Several assays for troponin are commercially available. A variety of quantitative and semiquantitative point-of-care methods have also been developed. Current assays for cTnT and cTnI are two- or three-site immunoassays.

cTnI assays are also used at the point of care.

In another cartridge-based reader system, cTnI in EDTA whole blood or plasma is added to the system sample port via a transfer pipette. Red blood cells are separated from the plasma via a filter in the device, and a fixed plasma volume reacts with fluorescent-conjugated anti-cTnI antibodies.

The principle of the cTnT measurement is an ELISA one-step sandwich assay using streptavidin technology and electrochemiluminescence detection.

A photomultiplier measures the emitted chemiluminescence, and results are determined via a calibration curve generated by a two-point calibration and a master curve (5-point calibration) provided via the reagent barcode.

High-sensitivity testing for cardiac troponins was approved for clinical use in the U.S. in 2017, showing significant benefits for diagnosing and excluding acute myocardial infarction.

Two challenges limit the ease of switching from one troponin assay to another in clinical practice or research. First, no primary reference cTnI material is currently available for manufacturers to standardize cTnI assays.

# Interfering Factors

One problem with using troponins to diagnose acute myocardial infarctions is that troponins can be elevated in other conditions as well.

Another cause of elevated troponin levels is cardiac muscle injury due to non-ischemic causes. Direct, blunt trauma to the chest can cause significant myocardial damage and, in turn, can lead to increased troponin.

Another issue that complicates the measurement of troponins for the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarctions is chronic kidney disease (CKD).

A meta-analysis of 14 studies showed that the specificity of an elevated troponin over the 99th percentile was drastically decreased in patients with CKD. It is crucial to know if the troponins are trending over time in these patients.

Troponin bound to heparin causes lower measured troponin plasma concentration compared to serum.

The specificity of the antibody is critical. One of the possible sources of interference for the sandwich-type immunometric troponin assays is endogenous antibodies directed against the proteins of nonhuman species (i.e., heterophile antibodies).

Interfering endogenous antibodies are called heterophile antibodies when there is no clearly defined immunogen, and the antibody reacts with immunoglobulin from two or more species or has RF activity.

Human anti-animal antibodies (HAAA) are high-affinity, specific, polyclonal antibodies produced against a specific animal immunogen whole immunoglobulin of IgG or IgM class.

One stimulus that is increasingly responsible for HAMA production is mouse monoclonal antibodies used in diagnostic image analysis and immune-directed therapy.

Apart from false-positive results, heterophile antibodies can cause falsely low results if they bind to the variable regions of the capture antibody, mimicking the antigen to be measured and preventing troponin from binding.

Autoantibodies also have the potential to cause interference in troponin immunometric assay methods. False-positive or false-negative values may arise, depending on whether the autoantibody-analyte complex partitions into the free or the bound analyte fraction.

More recently, Eriksson and co-workers have suggested the incidence of falsely negative troponin values at low levels to be as high as 3.5%, as indicated by low cTnI recoveries of ≤ 10%. The major effect of this interfering factor occurred when troponin concentration was low. The identity of the interference is unknown but has a molecular weight of 100 to 200 kDa, suggesting it to be protein in nature.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

The current (fourth) Universal Definition of MI Expert Consensus Document updates the definition of MI to accommodate the increased use of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin (hs-cTn). Detection of an elevated cTn value above the 99th percentile upper reference limit (URL) is defined as myocardial injury.

**Type 1 Myocardial Infarction**

The criteria for **type 1 MI**includes the detection of a rise, fall, or rise and fall of cTn with at least one value above the 99th percentile and with at least one of the following:

- Symptoms of acute myocardial ischemia

- New ischemic electrocardiographic (ECG) changes

- Development of pathological Q waves

- Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall motion abnormality in a pattern consistent with an ischemic etiology

- Identification of a coronary thrombus by angiography, including intracoronary imaging or by autopsy

**Type 2 Myocardial Infarction**

The criteria for **type 2 MI**includes detection of a rise, fall, or rise and fall of cTn with at least one value above the 99th percentile and evidence of an imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand unrelated to coronary thrombosis, requiring at least one of the following:

- Symptoms of acute myocardial ischemia

- New ischemic ECG changes

- Development of pathological Q waves

- Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall motion abnormality in a pattern consistent with an ischemic etiology

**Cardiac Procedural Myocardial Injury**

Cardiac procedural myocardial injury is arbitrarily defined by increases in cTn values (>99th percentile URL) in patients with normal baseline values (≤99th percentile URL) or a rise of cTn values >20% of the baseline value when it is above the 99th percentile, but it is stable or falling.

**Coronary Intervention-related Myocardial Infarction**

Coronary intervention-related MI is arbitrarily defined by the elevation of cTn values >5 times the 99th percentile URL in patients with normal baseline values. In patients with elevated pre-procedure cTn in whom the cTn levels are stable (≤20% variation) or falling, the post-procedure cTn must rise by >20%. However, the absolute post-procedural value must still be at least five times the 99th percentile URL. In addition, one of the following elements is required:

- New ischemic ECG changes

- Development of new pathological Q waves

- Angiographic findings are consistent with a procedural flow-limiting complication such as coronary dissection, occlusion of a major epicardial artery or a side branch occlusion or thrombus, disruption of collateral flow, or distal embolization

**Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (CABG)-Related Myocardial Infarction**

CABG-related MI is arbitrarily defined as an elevation of cTn values >10 times the 99th percentile URL in patients with normal baseline cTn values. In patients with elevated pre-procedure cTn in whom cTn levels are stable (≤20% variation) or falling, the post-procedure cTn must rise by >20%. However, the absolute post-procedural value still must be greater than ten times the 99th percentile URL. In addition, one of the following elements is required:

- Development of new pathological Q waves

- Angiographic documented new graft occlusion or new native coronary artery occlusion

- Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall motion abnormality in a pattern consistent with an ischemic etiology

# Clinical Significance

The accurate diagnosis and treatment of cardiac events is an essential component of working in the emergency department.

Elevated troponin levels should always be evaluated in a clinical context.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

For non-waived tests, laboratory regulations require, at the minimum, analysis of at least two levels of control materials once every 24 hours.

The laboratory must participate in the external quality control or proficiency testing (PT) program because it is a regulatory requirement published by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) in the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) regulations.

Quality assurance procedures should be implemented within the laboratory for the reliable and reproducible performance of troponin assays, particularly at low concentrations, to avoid reporting falsely positive results. In addition to regularly monitoring manufacturers’ quality controls, daily measurement of a negative control sample and a low-level control with a troponin concentration close to the 20% CV level (in-house or manufactured if available) can detect assay drift or deterioration of assay performance.

Consider all specimens, control materials, and calibrator materials as potentially infectious. Exercise the usual precautions required for handling all laboratory reagents. Disposal of all waste material should be in accordance with local guidelines.

The new standard for the highly sensitive cardiac troponin (hs-cTn) assay is defined as the ability to detect cTn concentrations precisely with a coefficient of variation, <10 % at or the below the 99th percentile URL and measurable in >50% of normal healthy individuals.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

All healthcare workers, including advanced practice providers, should be familiar with biological markers for myocardial infarction. However, one should never negate the history and physical examination.