Initially, medical computed tomography (CT) was used for 3D imaging in dental applications, but dental cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) quickly became the preferred option. This is because of CBCT's ability to produce volumetric images of the jaw bone at a reasonable cost and radiation dose, as well as its compact size, affordability, and ability to be located nearby or in-office.

It was first used to evaluate impacted teeth, apical lesions, and mandibular and maxillary diseases.

There are several models since the first one that continues to improve. Now they can rotate around the head in a single scan and get 360 pictures using only 17 seconds of accumulated exposure time.

Cone beam computed tomography has numerous advantages compared to other imaging techniques, such as CT scans, panoramic imaging, and intraoral imaging. These benefits have contributed to its widespread usage in the field of dentistry. Specifically, cone beam computed tomography has been effectively utilized in areas such as implantology, endodontics, orthodontics, and pathology assessment because it provides horizontal, vertical, and axial views of structures.

Cone beam computed tomography is also advantageous because it is less expensive, requires less space, has a limited field of view, and has a shorter scanning time. Most importantly, Cone beam computed tomography provides a reduced average radiation dosage compared to CT scans.

Despite its numerous advantages, it is essential to acknowledge the limitations of cone beam computed tomography. For instance, it may have lower contrast and higher radiation dosages when compared to traditional radiographic techniques such as intraoral and panoramic radiography. Therefore, cone beam computed tomography should be restricted to situations where its benefits outweigh the potential risks. Its usage should be limited to cases where it is justifiable.

**How Does Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT) Work?**

Cone beam computed tomography uses an imaging scanner designed for imaging the head and neck and can produce 3D scans of the maxillofacial skeleton. The machine used in cone beam computed tomography is similar in size to the one used for panoramic radiography. Instead of a linear array of detectors, cone beam computed tomography machines use a 2D planar sensor. X-rays are emitted as a large cone covering the area of the head being examined.

Since the cone beam irradiates a large volume area instead of a thin slice, the machine does not need to rotate as often as CT; it turns once, providing all the necessary information to reconstruct the region of interest (ROI). This technique allows dentists to obtain 2D reconstructed images in all planes and 3D reconstructions with minimal exposure to X-radiation.