Ziprasidone administration can occur through multiple routes. It is available as oral capsules in 20 mg, 40 mg, 60, and 80 mg strength. Ziprasidone can also be administered as an intramuscular injection. It is also supplied as a single vial containing 20 mg ziprasidone per mL when reconstituted according to label instructions.

- For the treatment of schizophrenia, if given orally, it should be initially given at 20 mg twice per day with meals. That maximum dosage is 160 mg daily, given 80 mg twice per day if indicated. Medication dose adjustments should occur at no less than two-day intervals as it takes several days to reach steady-state concentration.

- For the treatment of bipolar mania, ziprasidone should be given initially at a dose of 40 to 80 mg twice per day with meals. On the second day of treatment, the dose should be adjusted from 60 mg to 80 mg twice a day. DAfter that, dose adjustments should take place every two days as needed.

- Ziprasidone can be administered intramuscularly for acute agitation in schizophrenia. Ziprasidone is available as mesylate salt for intramuscular injection. The recommendation is to administer the drug at 10 mg to 20 mg dosing with a maximum of 40 mg per day. Dosing is performed as 10 mg every two hours or 20 mg every four hours for a maximum of 40 mg per day.

- The injection should only be administered muscularly and should not intravenously. First, add 1.2 mL of sterile water into the vial and shake until the drug fully dissolves. To give a 20 mg dose, draw 1.0 ml of reconstituted solution. For 10 mg of ziprasidone, pull 0.5 ml of reconstituted solution. Whatever remains in the vial should be discarded, as there are no bacteriostatic or preservative agents in the solution.

- Co-administration of IM and oral ziprasidone is not recommended. Oral capsules should be taken with high-calorie meals to absorb the medicine better.

- Ziprasidone may have a greater capacity to prolong the QT/QTc interval compared to other antipsychotic drugs. This type of QT prolongation in some other drugs may lead to torsade de pointes-type arrhythmia, fatal ventricular tachycardia, and sudden death. Due to this prior knowledge, the healthcare team should consider other alternatives before starting Ziprasidone therapy. Due to its rapid actions, IM formulation is appropriate for patients with only severe or acute agitation.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- Ziprasidone has a half-life of seven hours to ten hours.

- This drug will reach a steady-state concentration within one to three days of dosing.

- The average systemic clearance is 7.5 ml/min/kg.

- A minimal amount of ziprasidone is excreted in the urine. Its elimination is primarily through the liver.

**Specific Population**

**Pregnant Women:**Pregnant women using ziprasidone to be evaluated induvial case by case basis. ACOG recommends the treatment should be continued with the same psychotropic medicine if the benefit outweighs the risk. Antipsychotic medicine use in the third trimester can result in extrapyramidal symptoms and withdrawal symptoms (hypotonia, hypertonia,  agitation, somnolence, respiratory distress) in neonates and infants. If treatment is initiated when a woman is pregnant, alternative agents with a better safety profile than ziprasidone are preferred. Clinicians should enroll pregnant women using ziprasidone in the Atypical Antipsychotics Pregnancy Registry.

**Breastfeeding Women:**According to safety scoring system recommendations, ziprasidone should be used cautiously during breastfeeding. Infants exposed to ziprasidone via breastmilk should be monitored for irritability, excess sedation, poor feeding, and extrapyramidal symptoms (tremors or abnormal muscle movements).

**Hepatic Impairment:**The product label has no data for patients using ziprasidone with hepatic impairment. Since ziprasidone is significantly metabolized via liver, use caution when given to patients with hepatic impairment.

**Renal Impairment:**The manufacturer recommends using intramuscular ziprasidone with caution in patients with renal dysfunction as cyclodextrin is eliminated via renal filtration.

**Geriatric Population:**Ziprasidone is listed as potentially inappropriate medication by Beers Criteria, and use should be discouraged in patients 65 and above due to a higher rate of cognitive decline, an increased risk of stroke, and death in patients with dementia.