Preoperatively, the patient must be in the best optimal condition possible to tolerate the procedure. The patient must be with an empty stomach or "nil per os" (NPO), a Latin phrase that translates to "nothing through the mouth" in the English language. In emergency cases, this is usually not possible. Blood-thinning medications such as antiplatelet or antithrombotics should be discontinued between 3 to 10 days preoperatively, depending on the drug.

Unless otherwise required, most craniotomy procedures are performed under general anesthesia, requiring a case discussion with the anesthesiology team for any pertinent details regarding the etiology to be treated. Sometimes, an awake craniotomy is performed under a local anesthetic agent to be able to communicate with the patient during surgery involving motor and speech areas.

Routine preoperative antibiotics are administered before the procedure starts for wound infection prophylaxis, jointly with other medications that could be necessary, such as anticonvulsant medications or corticosteroids. Initial setup of equipment such as neuronavigation system, surgical microscope, and neuromonitoring are performed. Intensive care unit availability should be discussed preoperatively, as most patients do require this level of care after a craniotomy.

**Anesthesia during craniotomy:**

- General

- Awake

Awake anesthesia (AA) is comparable mostly in terms of operative and functional outcomes to that of GA.

Propofol-maintained and volatile-maintained anesthesia have similar brain relaxation scores, however, mean intracranial pressure (ICP) values were lower, and cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) values were higher with propofol-maintained anesthesia.