There are numerous anatomic variants of the foot, some of which are incidental and of little clinical significance while others are pathologic. Anatomics variants include ossicles, muscles, and variations in alignment. Familiarity with these anatomic variants is important so as not to mistake them with a pathologic process or identify those that may predispose to a pathologic process.

There is some measure of debate in the literature as to the true nature of ossicles. Some evidence suggests that at least some are congenital developmental variants while others believe they are the sequela of prior traumatic injury. The most frequently encountered accessory ossicles of the foot and ankle include the os trigonum, os navicularis, os peroneum, os supranaviculare, and os intermetatarseum. The os trigonum has been implicated in posterior ankle impingement, also referred to as os trigonum syndrome, common in ballet dancers. There are three types of os navicularis, types I and III are asymptomatic while type II has a pseudo articulation with the adjacent navicular bone and can be symptomatic. In severe cases that have failed conservative treatment, the ossicle may undergo excision. Finally, the os peroneum has been shown to be involved with peroneal longus tendon pathology (tendinosis or tears) as well as the painful os peroneum syndrome (POPS). Other ossicles are important because they may be mistaken for pathologies, such as interpreting the os intermetatarsum for the fleck sign in a Lisfranc injury or the os supranaviculare being mistaken for a capsular or chip fracture of the dorsal navicular.

Sesamoids are structurally very similar to accessory ossicles. The most common sesamoids are the medial and lateral hallux sesamoids associated with the first metatarsophalangeal joint. The hallux sesamoids are almost universally present, while sesamoids associated with the lesser metatarsophalangeal joints are less common. The hallux sesamoids can be bipartite or multipartite as normal anatomic variants which clinicians must distinguish from sesamoid fracture or fragmentation associated with avascular necrosis.

The most common accessory muscles of the foot and ankle occur in the ankle. These include the peroneus tertius, peroneus quartus, accessory soleus, and flexor digitoreum accessorius longus (FDAL). The peroneus tertius lies within the anterior compartment laterally and is rarely of clinical significance. The peroneus quartus lies within the posterolateral compartment along the posteromedial border of the peroneus longus tendon. It also is generally asymptomatic although it can be mistaken for tears of the peroneus brevis or longus tendons. Additionally, it has been implicated as a cause for tears of the longus and brevis due to crowding and mass effect. Within the posteromedial compartment beneath the flexor retinaculum lies the FDAL which like other accessory muscles is usually asymptomatic but can be a cause of tarsal tunnel syndrome. Tarsal tunnel syndrome is a compressive neuropathy of the tibial nerve resulting in pain and burning along the medial aspect and sole.

Osseous variations include coalitions and bipartite bones. The most common coalitions of the foot and ankle include talocalcaneal and calcaneonavicular. Coalitions can be fibrous or osseous. Fibrous coalitions are similar to pseudoarticulations and can be symptomatic. Osseous coalitions may cause malalignment of other osseous structures and result in altered weight-bearing, which also may be symptomatic or result in premature osteoarthritis. Coalitions can be difficult to appreciate on radiographs secondary to the normal overlap of osseous structures. However, the research describes some radiographic signs. The continuous "C" sign refers to the radiographic appearance resulting from talocalcaneal coalition. This sign is present when there is a fusion of the posterior subtalar joint. It should is worth noting that fibrous or incomplete coalitions may not result in this radiographic sign and may only be appreciated on CT or MRI. Calcaneonavicular coalition is the result of an elongated anterior process fusing with the navicular, or forming a pseudo articulation. The radiographic sign described with calcaneonavicular coalition is the anteater sign; this is most visible on the lateral or oblique views of the foot. Bipartite bones result from congenital incomplete fusion of ossification centers. One such example is the bipartite medial cuneiform. These are generally incidental symptomatic findings.

Finally, variations in foot alignment can be congenital or acquired. Examples include pes cavus (high arch), pes planus (flat foot), midfoot laxity or collapse (combination of pes planus and plantar angulation of the talus often occurs in association with hindfoot valgus), hindfoot valgus, and hallux valgus to name a few. A complete discussion of foot alignment is beyond the scope of this article. Acquired pes planus and midfoot collapse have been associated with posterior tibialis and spring ligament dysfunction as both of these structures support the arch of the foot. Hallux valgus deformity is a malalignment of the first ray which can cause widening of the forefoot, altered weight-bearing, bunion formation, and osteoarthritis.