Antithrombin has two specific binding sites- the reactive site consisting of the reactive center loop (RCL) which binds proteases such as thrombin, factor Xa, IXa, and the heparin-binding domain which, as the name suggests, binds heparin.

The reactive center loop of antithrombin located at the arginine residue at 393 and the serine residue at 394 near the carboxyl-terminal functions to bind to the active site of proteases through a complex mechanism involving a conformational change of the antithrombin reactive site.

The inhibitor-protease complex is then rapidly removed from the circulation no more than 5 minutes after formation, which removes thrombin from the circulation, disrupting the clotting effect of the coagulation cascade. While the exact mechanism is still uncertain, evidence may suggest receptors on hepatocytes to be involved in the removal of the complex from the plasma.

The formation of the antithrombin-protease complex, while irreversible, is a naturally slow and inefficient reaction. The process can be rapidly increased up to 1000-fold with the presence of sulfated polysaccharides in the form of heparin and heparan sulfate.

The heparin-binding domain located on the surface of antithrombin, on the other hand, contains positively charged arginine and lysine which bind to the negatively charged domains of the heparin pentasaccharide sequence through partially an allosteric mechanism.

The successful binding of heparin activates a conformational change within the antithrombin, which increases its affinity towards protease, promotes the formation of the antithrombin-protease complex, and ultimately inhibits blood coagulation.

Allosteric activation induced by heparin to the antithrombin serpin structure has been the object of extensive study, and while the kinetics of the reaction is quite complex, generally the allosteric activation of antithrombin induces structural changes within the RCL, the heparin-binding site, and the hydrophobic core that constitutes the antithrombin. The exact interactions involved in the conformational change are still a topic for research and revision.