For acute pain and swelling, treatment should be individualized. This includes splints, cold or ice packs, partial or non-weight-bearing braces, non-steroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), or other analgesics. If the joint has a large effusion causing pain, drainage may be an effective treatment. The fluid sample should be obtained and tested/cultured before starting antibiotics. Intra-articular steroids should be held until infection, or other contraindications are first ruled out.

- Septic joint: Once the lab studies have been sent, start intravenous (IV) antibiotics for the suspected infective agent. The most common bacterial causes include staphylococci (40%), streptococci (28%), gram-negative bacilli (19%), mycobacteria (8 percent), gram-negative cocci (3%), gram-positive bacilli (1%), and anaerobes (1%). Also, an orthopedic consult may be necessary. Drainage of the joint is associated with rapid recovery and low morbidity. Arthroscopy allows visualization of the joint, provides the ability to lyse adhesions, drains any purulent pockets, and can facilitate the debridement of necrotic material if needed.

- Ligamentous injuries: The patient can be placed in a knee brace with an outpatient referral to an orthopedic surgeon.

- Fractures: These may need a referral to a surgeon depending on severity. The Salter-Harris classification can be used for pediatric fractures involving the growth plate.

- Rheumatologic conditions: Anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs) or acetaminophen can be used, and the patient should be referred to a rheumatologist.

- Reactive Arthritis: The primary infection should be treated with the appropriate antibiotic. NSAIDs and acetaminophen can be used for pain.