MM is essentially a stage in the spectrum of monoclonal gammopathy. It is thought to arise from a pre-malignant, asymptomatic phase of clonal plasma cell growth called monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS). MGUS is defined as detecting monoclonal immunoglobulins in the blood or urine without evidence of end-organ damage. This is quite common and is known to be detectable in over 3% of persons above age 50. It appears that the cell of origin is a post-germinal center plasma cell. his is typically a benign condition, although as noted above, it has a risk of progression to MM of about 1% per year.

The exact causes of MGUS development and progression to MM remain unknown. However, as noted above, genetic alterations may cause an increased expression of promoter genes or resistance to apoptosis, both resulting in higher plasma cell proliferation and population. Under the "second hit" hypothesis, progression could also be a consequence of additional cytogenetic lesions gained by the original plasma cell clone, caused either by genetic instability or abnormalities in the hematopoietic microenvironment.

Regardless of the molecular driver, once there is excess monoclonal immunoglobulins, hyperviscosity, platelet dysfunction, and renal tubular damage can occur, leading to neurologic derangements, bleeding, and renal failure respectively. one marrow occupation by the expanding plasma cell clone usually manifests as anemia, thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia. In addition, the interaction between myeloma cells and the bone microenvironment ultimately leads to the activation of osteoclasts and suppression of osteoblasts, resulting in bone loss. Several intracellular and intercellular signaling cascades, numerous chemokines, and interleukins are implicated in this complex process.