The initial step in managing benign paroxysmal positional vertigo is patient education and proper counseling.

The Epley maneuver can be performed after using the Dix-Hallpike maneuver to localize which side is problematic. This series of positional changes helps dislodge otoconia from the otolithic membrane and back into the utricle, removing the disturbance and symptomatology. As aforementioned, the Dix-Hallpike and Epley are not always tolerated by patients with BPPV, in which case treatment is symptomatic. Antihistamines address vertigo by suppressing labyrinth excitability and vestibular end-organ receptors. The antihistamine best supported in the literature for vertigo is meclizine, 25 mg to 100 mg daily. Vertigo associated with BPPV is typically abrupt in onset, very brief, and truly paroxysmal, just as the name suggests, and medications may not be particularly beneficial. Hence, routine medical management with meclizine is not indicated unless the frequency of vertigo spells is high and disruptive to daily function. Nausea and vomiting is another common complaint with BPPV and can be treated with anti-emetics as needed: ondansetron, metoclopramide, or promethazine/prochlorperazine. Patients with recurrent BPPV should be provided with ENT referral for further evaluation as there are lateral and horizontal canal variants of BPPV that require specific repositioning maneuvers different from the Epley.

**Repositioning Maneuvers**

The first-line treatment option for posterior canal BPPV is a repositioning maneuver designed to rid the affected semicircular canal of any debris. The repositioning maneuvers are efficacious in improving posterior canal BPPV.

- Severe cervical disease

- Suspected vertebrobasilar disease

- Unstable cardiovascular disease

- High-grade carotid stenosis

There are many variants of PRM, such as the Semont or liberatory maneuver, the Epley maneuver, and the 3-position maneuver.

In a patient with right-sided BPPV, the Epley procedure will be done as follows:

- Start with the sitting position, and the head is turned in the direction of the affected side. To move the particles, a mastoid bone oscillator is kept behind the affected ear with the help of a headband.

- Position 1 - The patient reclines slowly to the supine position, with head turned 45 degrees to the affected side. The rate is altered to achieve a point of no nystagmus and no symptoms. This usually takes approximately 30 seconds.

- Position 2 - The patient lies supine, 15 degrees Trendelenburg, and head turned 45 degrees toward the affected side. The patient reclines more to the Dix-Hallpike position on the ipsilateral side. It takes around 10 seconds. Then the patient stays in the Dix-Hallpike position for another 20 seconds with the affected ear down.

- Position 3 - The patient lies supine, 15 degrees Trendelenburg, and head turned 45 degrees toward the opposite side. After this, the patient's head is slowly turned from position 3 to the opposite side.

- Position 4 - The patient lies on the side with the opposite shoulder down, head turned 45 degrees toward the contralateral side. The body is then rolled to bring the shoulders perpendicular to the floor with the affected ear up. Next, the head is turned more so that the nose comes at an angle of 45 degrees below the horizon. This takes 40 seconds more.

- Position 5 - The patient is brought back to the sitting position, and the head is turned away from the affected side.

- Ending position - In the end, the head is brought back to the midline. At this point, the headband and the mastoid bone oscillator are removed.

There are some adverse effects of repositioning maneuvers that the providers should be aware of, such as:

- Conversion of posterior BPPV to a lateral or anterior canal BPPV during a maneuver

- Emesis

- Prolonged autonomic dysfunction

- Imbalance

**Surgical Treatment**

Most patients with BPPV will get better with repositioning maneuvers or resolve completely. However, surgical intervention is reserved for refractory cases. There are two surgical options for BPPV:

- Singular neurectomy

- Posterior canal occlusion

The recommended surgical option is posterior canal occlusion because it has proven to be highly effective and safe.