# Continuing Education Activity

Biologic response modifiers (BRMs), also known as immunomodulators, are the class of medications that target the disease-causing mechanism. They are used in autoimmune diseases as first-line medications or after the failure of conventional agents. Serious infections are the most feared complications and require screening before initiation, and monitoring while patients are taking the medications. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of various autoimmune conditions with the use of BRMs and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with these medications.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the indications for biologic response modifiers.
- Identify the adverse events associated with biologic response modifiers.
- Review the importance of monitoring patients taking biologic response modifiers.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients receiving biologic response modifiers.

# Indications

Biologic response modifiers (BRMs), also known as immunomodulators or cytokine inhibitors, are naturally occurring substances in our body that can also be manufactured in the laboratory. Autoimmune diseases incur a substantial economic burden to the patients and society. BRMs target the disease-causing mechanism and have now become revolutionary in the treatment of many autoimmune phenomena. Unsatisfactory response or evidence of disease progression despite treatment with conventional therapy mandates the use of BRM alone or in combination with traditional treatment.

Knowing the fact that TNF-alpha, interleukin (IL)-17, IL-1 are vital mediators of graft versus host disease,

TNF inhibitors, e.g., infliximab, etanercept, adalimumab, certolizumab, and golimumab has been FDA approved for use in RA, ulcerative colitis (UC), Crohn disease (CD), AS, JIA, plaque psoriasis and, psoriatic arthritis. Adalimumab also has approval for hidradenitis suppurativa and uveitis. Non-FDA-approved indications include pyoderma gangrenosum, pustular psoriasis, and GVHD(etanercept). Interleukin-1 inhibitor, e.g., anakinra, is FDA approved for RA and neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease. IL-2 inhibitor, e.g., aldesleukin, is used in metastatic renal cell carcinoma and melanoma. Tocilizumab is an interleukin-6 inhibitor used in giant cell arteritis, JIA, and RA. Secukinumab that targets interleukin-17 is FDA approved for psoriasis (plaque and arthritis), and AS. Ustekinumab blocks interleukin 12/23 and has been FDA-approved for plaque psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, and CD. Abatacept (T-cell co-stimulation blocker) has approval for use in RA, JIA, and Psoriatic arthritis. Rituximab is FDA approved for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, non-Hodgkins lymphoma, RA, granulomatous polyangiitis, and pemphigus vulgaris. Off label uses include Burkitt lymphoma, CNS lymphoma, GVHD, lupus nephritis, and Hodgkin lymphoma. Tofacitinib is Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors indicated for psoriatic arthritis, RA, and UC.

# Mechanism of Action

CD4-T cells can differentiate into T helper cells Th1 and Th2. Th1 cells participate in cell-mediated inflammation by producing interferon-gamma, TNF, and IL 2 that target intracellular pathogens. Th2 cells participate in humoral immunity that stimulates antibody production by B cells to produce IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13 that target extracellular pathogens. These cytokines are involved in the mediation of inflammatory response, infection, autoimmunity, transplant rejection, and GVHD.

# Administration

Biologic response modifier therapy is administered either by intravenous (IV) or subcutaneous (SC) route. IV is usually done in the hospital or outpatient setting, while SC is generally self-administered by patients or by health care professionals.

# Adverse Effects

The adverse effects of biologic response modifier therapy could be secondary to stimulation, suppression, or disruption of immune homeostasis.

Since T cell-mediated response is involved in the destruction of pathogens, inhibition of immune response by BRM increases the risk of asymptomatic to life-threatening infection due to the virus, bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, and protozoa.Mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB), non-mycobacterial TB, Histoplasma, Cryptococcus, Coccidioides, Blastomyces, Pulmonary actinomycosis,Pneumocystis carinii,Aspergillus, Candida, Listeria, Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Several biologics also increase the risk of malignancies, such as Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma, leukemia, non-melanoma skin cancer.

Disruption of immune homeostasis causes a paradoxical effect in various tissues leading to autoimmunity. Various BRM has associations with a lupus-like syndrome, antiphospholipid syndrome, vasculitis, dermatomyositis, polymyositis, peripheral neuropathy, multiple sclerosis, autoimmune hepatitis, optic neuritis, uveitis, and interstitial lung disease.

# Contraindications

Biologic response modifiers should not be taken by patients who have active infections, demyelinating diseases, e.g., (multiple sclerosis, optic neuritis), and immunodeficiency syndromes. The use of TNF alfa blockers in chronic granulomatous disease-associated colitis was found to increase rates of severe infections and even mortality.

BRM should also be avoided in patients with chronic recurrent infections and untreated latent TB. TNF inhibitors should be avoided or used with caution in a patient with CHF.

# Monitoring

Before starting biologic response modifier therapy, patients should undergo evaluation for latent TB with the past medical history of TB, tuberculin skin test, chest X-ray, and TB interferon. Latent TB should have treatment for nine months, and treatment with BRM can be started one month after the treatment initiation. This approach has demonstrated to decrease the rate of reactivation of TB.

All patients taking BRM should have monitoring for both treatment-related efficacy and safety. The patient's symptom relief, physical exam, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, autoimmune markers, radiography, CBC, and LFT can be used to monitor efficacy and safety.

# Toxicity

Biologic response modifiers can often cause bone marrow suppression, hepatotoxicity, cardiopulmonary and renal dysfunction, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and often death. Toxicity is usually due to immune system activation and is manageable by premedication or adjusting dose.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Early treatment with a biologic response modifier improves outcomes and prevents disability related to autoimmune diseases; however, currently, no clinical predictors or biomarkers are available to guide physicians to select BRM for an individual patient. Not all patients with the same illness respond to particular BRM. Genetic polymorphism in the genes encoding the receptors that the BRM targets affect the efficacy of BRM. Performing genetic tests before starting the treatment may help in choosing a specific BRM for a particular patient.

It is crucial to consider patient-related factors, e.g., patient convenience, local availability, patient's understanding of risks of medication, route, the frequency of administration, and cost-effectiveness while choosing BRM. The patient should be actively involved while choosing and making a treatment decision, and they should be aware of the adverse effects of the medication under consideration.

Nursing can help the patient with administration instructions and a discussion about possible side effects. The pharmacist must verify the dosing of the agent, check for drug-drug interactions, and also counsel the patient on signs of potential adverse effects. Nursing and pharmacy both need to have an open line of communication with the prescriber to adjust treatment if necessary.

BRM therapy requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level V]