A complete rectal exam is essential for the accurate diagnosis of fistula-in-ano. It is important to rule out other anorectal pathology and confirm the diagnosis of a fistula. Due to patient discomfort, this exam is often performed under anesthesia in the operating room. This allows for a complete examination as well as treatment in the same setting. The rectal exam should include inspection of the perianal skin and any external openings. A digital rectal exam should be performed to evaluate for any masses as well as sphincter tone. The internal opening may also be palpable within the anal canal. Anoscopy may be used to locate and evaluate the internal opening. Fistula probes help identify the tract in most cases, but if unsuccessful, injection of hydrogen peroxide may lead to the identification of the internal opening.

Classification of anal fistulas is based on anatomy, specifically in relation to the sphincter complex. In 1976, Dr. Parks published a paper describing a classification system for anal fistulas that is still widely used today. Four types were described: intersphincteric, transsphincteric, suprasphincteric, and extrasphincteric.

- Intersphincteric (45%) – The fistula penetrates through the internal sphincter but spares the external sphincter.

- Transphincteric (30%) – The fistula passes through both the internal and external sphincters.

- Suprasphincteric (20%) – The fistula penetrates through the internal sphincter and then extends superiorly in the plane between the sphincters to pass above the external sphincter before extending to the perineum. This classification includes horseshoe abscesses.

- Extrasphincteric (5%) – This fistula is very rare. It forms a connection from the rectum to the perineum that extends laterally to the internal and external sphincter. These can be the most difficult to treat due to the need to preserve the sphincter complex.

The classification of the fistula is often diagnosed during an exam under anesthesia in the setting of a simple fistula. Evaluation of complex fistulas, including recurrent disease and fistulas in the setting of perianal Crohn disease, may benefit from pre-operative imaging. MRI, endoanal ultrasound, fistulography, and CT are all proven to contribute to an accurate diagnosis, with MRI being the most sensitive (>90%). A combination of two imaging modalities increases the diagnostic accuracy to 100%.