Compromise in myocardial blood flow results in ischemia, which subsequently activates inflammatory pathways that cause a spectrum of myocardial injury. This injury can be reversible in the case of myocardial stunning or hibernation, but chronic or severe ischemia results in apoptosis and necrosis at the cellular level resulting in irreversible fibrosis. Based on their severity, these changes manifest as regional wall motion abnormalities on echocardiography, CCTA or MRI, and/or perfusion defects on myocardial perfusion imaging.

Infarct-avid imaging has an increasing role in the noninvasive evaluation of coronary artery disease. Unlike echocardiography or CCTA, cardiac SPECT imaging utilizes the difference in the redistribution of radioactive tracer uptake by myocardium both at rest and with exercise or vasodilator stress to identify areas of potentially reversible ischemia.

Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging assesses uptake of F-fluorodeoxyglucose (F-FDG), a glucose analog. Under ischemic conditions, myocytes convert to glucose-based metabolism over fatty acids; new areas with FDG uptake suggest regional ischemia. Various comparative studies have found PET imaging with slightly better sensitivity (92%) than SPECT imaging (85%) with better spatial resolution and lower radiation. Despite these small differences, a randomized trial suggested similar results outcomes with the clinical decision using SPECT versus PET-based techniques.

Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) is another noninvasive technique that can detect areas of ischemia and infarction but is commonly utilized in evaluating inflammatory and infiltrative processes affecting myocardium and pericardium. Furthermore, concurrent cardiac gating allows the measurement of right and left ventricular function. A cardinal feature of CMR is the late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) percentage of wall thickness, which has >90% specificity of predicting myocardial viability.

Both invasive coronary angiography with cardiac catheterization and coronary CT angiography (CCTA) evaluate anatomic defects of the coronary vessels such as anomalous coronaries or coronary atherosclerosis. Both techniques require the injection of iodinated contrast to characterize the lumen of coronary vessels. Although coronary CTA can offer detailed plaque characterization and identify culprit lesions, ultimately, coronary angiography is the gold standard technique that offers both diagnostic and therapeutic intervention.