**Cardiovascular System**

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is one of the most common congenital defects, with most (approximately 80%) occurring due to multifactorial causes arising through various combinations of genetic and environmental issues and about 20% attributed to chromosomal abnormalities or teratogens. Down syndrome and velocardiofacial syndrome are the two most commonly seen syndromes in patients with congenital heart disease.

There are two main categories of CHDs; cyanotic and acyanotic.

- Cyanotic - right-to-left shunts

- Tetralogy of Fallot
- Transposition of the great vessels
- Tricuspid atresia
- Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR)
- Truncus arteriosus

- Acyanotic - further classified into:

- Left-to-right shunts

- Atrial septal defect (ASD)
- Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
- Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)


- Outflow obstruction

- Pulmonary stenosis
- Aortic stenosis
- Coarctation of the aorta

In the cases of shunts, the severity of the symptoms is determined by the size of the shunt and the amount of blood being shunted. Small left-to-right (acyanotic) shunts are typically benign and do not require surgical intervention. However, larger left-to-right shunts will eventually need surgical intervention to avoid chronic volume overload of the heart and, eventually, pulmonary arterial hypertension. Also, if these shunts are not fixed, a left-to-right shunt can evolve and cause a reversal of blood flow from right to left, leading to Eisenmenger syndrome.

**Pulmonary**

It is well known that the adequate development of the fetal lung and surfactant secretion is an essential adaptation in preparation for birth and extrauterine life. From approximately weeks 22-28 of gestation, surfactant begins to be synthesized. Pulmonary surfactant is a composition of proteins and lipids found within the fluid lining the alveolar surface of the lungs. The primary role of surfactant is to prevent alveolar collapse at low lung volumes.

- Preterm (birth prior to 37 weeks gestation)

- Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (NRDS)
- Cause: Deficiency of pulmonary surfactant
- Clinical features: tachypnea, hypoxia, cyanosis, decreased breath sounds
- Complications: bronchopulmonary dysplasia, pneumothorax


- Apnea of prematurity (AOP)
- Causes: immature medullary respiratory center and/or weak airway or breathing muscles
- Clinical features: cessation of breathing for > 20 seconds and typically accompanied by bradycardia

- Cesarean section

- Transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN)
- Cause: delayed resorption of fetal lung fluid
- Clinical features: tachypnea, diffuse crackles on auscultation

**Endocrine**

The endocrine system is typically adequately developed at birth, and no immediate endocrine abnormalities occur. However, there exist particular circumstances in which abnormalities may be seen at the time of birth.

- If a pregnant mother bearing a female child is treated with an androgenic hormone or develops an androgenic tumor during pregnancy, this can lead to masculinization of the female sexual organs and hermaphroditism.

- Poorly managed maternal type 2 diabetes mellitus is the most common cause of large for gestational age (LGA) newborns, as high insulin levels stimulate fetal growth and contribute to increased birth weight. However, infants born to mothers with uncontrolled type 1 diabetes mellitus are typically small for gestational age due to a lack of insulin secretion and have a high mortality rate if they do not make it to full term. If they do not survive, 75% of these deaths are due to respiratory distress syndrome.

- Women with hyperthyroidism, or those treated with excess thyroid hormone, are more likely to give birth to an infant with temporary hypothyroidism. If a fetus lacks thyroid hormone secretion, it may develop cretin dwarfism, which involves poor bone growth and mental retardation. However, if the woman had a thyroidectomy before pregnancy, her pituitary gland may secrete excess quantities of thyrotropin during gestation, and the infant may be born with temporary hyperthyroidism.

**Neonatal Jaundice**

Bilirubin formed in the fetus can cross the placenta into the mother and be excreted through the liver of the mother. Immediately after birth, the only means for the neonate to rid itself of excess bilirubin is through its own liver, which functions poorly for the first week or so of life and is incapable of conjugating significant quantities of bilirubin with glucuronic acid for excretion into the bile. Approximately 60% of term and 80% of preterm infants develop what is known as "physiologic jaundice" in the first 1-2 weeks after birth, which includes yellowing the skin, sclera, and mucous membranes. Physiologic jaundice appears after the first 24 hours of life, is characterized by a peak bilirubin concentration < 15 mg/dL, and is typically a mild, self-limiting condition that resolves without treatment. On the other hand, pathologic jaundice is characterized by jaundice appearing within the first 24 hours of life, a peak bilirubin concentration > 15 mg/dL, and persistence of jaundice beyond one week in term infants and two weeks in preterm infants. Causes of pathologic jaundice include sepsis, hemolytic disease, polycythemia, bruising (e.g., cephalohematoma), metabolic disorders, and inborn errors of metabolism (e.g., Crigler-Najjar syndrome).