**Variability of Vital Signs in the Geriatric Age Group**

Since vital signs are an indication of the changes in physiological processes, they tend to change with age. With age, core body temperature tends to be lower, and the ability of the body to change with different kinds of stressors becomes minimized. Even subtle variation from the core body temperature can be a significant finding as fever in an older patient often indicates a more severe infection and is associated with increased rates of life-threatening consequences.

There can be a decrease in response to changes in the oxygen and carbon dioxide at the molecular level along with anatomical changes resulting due to stiffness of muscles and compliance of the chest wall. Respiratory rate sometimes might be the most neglected of the vital signs reported in hospitalized patients but is more sensitive than other vital signs in picking up a critically ill patient.

The aging blood vessels also lead to higher arterial stiffness, leading to higher systolic blood pressure and increased pulse pressure. There is also the issue of orthostatic hypotension due to decreased autonomic responsiveness. This response becomes exaggerated with the use of polypharmacy and reduced fluid intake. Thus, it is imperative to check orthostatic vitals in this population. Resting heart rate, in contrast, is often observed to increase with age due to deconditioning and autonomic dysregulation.

**Limitations of Vital Signs**

Accurately measuring vital signs is a clinical skill that needs time and practice to refine. A review of literature is abundant about the inter-observer variability observed and reported secondary to lack of this skill. Clinicians should be wary of this and always re-check the vital signs themselves if there is a profound or unexpected change. Clinics and organizations should continuously strive to check and educate their nursing and ancillary staff to sharpen these skills.