A detailed history and physical are necessary for every patient, which should include home medications, as well as past medical and surgical history.  Also, a social history which should consist of past or present tobacco use, alcohol use, and if the patient consumes caffeine, illicit drugs, or stimulants. A past medical history significant for chronic lung disease, pulmonary hypertension, or other conditions can predispose the patient to atrial tachycardia. Chronic alcohol use or withdrawal can also be associated with atrial tachycardia. Cardiac surgeries can lead to atrial tissue scarring that may be arrhythmogenic.

Patients can present with atrial tachycardias in various ways. Atrial tachycardia can present on telemetry of patients who may be asymptomatic or asleep. As focal atrial tachycardias tend to occur secondary to an underlying disease process, the patient presentation will reflect primary chief complaints.

Patients with atrial tachycardia may complain of palpitations or sensations of fast heart rate, lightheadedness, chest pain or pressure, or shortness of breath. Symptom intensity will be related to the rate as well as the patient’s cardiovascular status. The patient may complain of irregular heart rate if the patient’s tachycardia is sufficient to produce an intermittent AV block.

Symptoms may occur in paroxysms or can be persistent. Symptoms may be related to the consumption of caffeinated products (including coffee, tea, energy drinks or chocolate) or stimulants like ephedrine. Symptoms can also be initiated or exacerbated by stress and exercise. Adenosine administration may cause transient AV block, but does not terminate focal atrial tachycardia.

Persistent focal atrial tachycardia can result in cardiomyopathy, which may lead to symptoms of dyspnea with exertion, increased lower extremity edema, and chest pain. Although the clinical course is typically benign, there is some risk of sudden cardiac death.

The physical exam can demonstrate regular or irregular tachycardia with a heart rate greater than 100 BPM. If the patient’s atrial tachycardia includes a variable block, the intensity of S1 may vary from beat to beat. Excessive A waves may be present on observation of the jugular venous pulse.