As mentioned above, RYGB was initially thought to result in weight loss both by a restrictive and malabsorptive mechanism. However, the mechanism in which the operation works is quite complex, including an increase in energy expenditure and alteration in the hormonal network, gut microbiota, and metabolic efficiency.

Ghrelin, also known as the hunger hormone, produces an orexigenic state and thus has been of great interest in obesity and bariatric surgery research. The production of this hormone is by cells located in the gastric fundus that is predominantly excluded in RYGB, postulating a decreased postsurgical circulating level. However, there have been inconsistencies in bariatric research with some studies showing no change in levels of ghrelin after bariatric surgery, while some were showing an increase as seen in individuals with weight loss. Studies, including that by le Roux et al., report that concomitant vagotomy in RYGB patients may inhibit the effect on ghrelin on appetite stimulation.

Patients who undergo RGYB are typically reported to experience approximately 60% to 70% excess body weight loss, with over 75% control of comorbidities. In a study published in NEJM looking at 12-year weight and metabolic outcomes after gastric bypass, the adjusted mean change from baseline body weight in surgical group was -45.0 kg, -36.3 kg and -35.0 kg at 2, 6 and 12 years, while that in the two nonsurgical groups (1: no surgery due to insurance reasons; 2: did not seek surgery) at 12 years was -2.9 kg and 0.0 kg respectively. Similarly, higher rates of remission in the surgical group when evaluating preoperative comorbidities- type 2 diabetes (51% at 12 years), hypertension, and hyperlipidemia.