Patients who sustain arthropod bites or stings are often asymptomatic and initially unaware of their occurrence. Therefore, it is important to gather a detailed history including occupation, recreational activities, sexual activity, travel, animal contact, or contact with others with similar symptoms. A history of the sudden onset of pain or itching, especially with concomitant visualization of the implicated arthropod, provides strong supportive evidence.

Patients with vital sign abnormalities, or who present with any evidence of cardiorespiratory distress must have an immediate assessment of the airway, breathing and circulatory status. Common findings in anaphylaxis include urticaria, angioedema, tachycardia, respiratory distress, hypotension, and wheezing. If there is no evidence of anaphylaxis or manifestations of severe venom toxicity a detailed exam of the area of involvement should be performed.

Bites and stings most commonly present as erythematous, sometimes edematous, papules that may be solitary, grouped or generalized depending on the arthropod involved. There is usually a pruritic eruption at the site of the bite or sting and other common findings, including local erythema, wheals, and urticaria, are often present. Those with intensely pruritic lesions may develop skin excoriation from scratching, and evidence of secondary bacterial infection may be present. A detailed exam should be performed to evaluate for the presence of arthropods such as ticks, lice (including head, body and pubic), myiasis, or scabies. Occasionally an arthropod stinger, especially following a bee sting, may be found and should be removed.

The clinician should assess for manifestations of vector-borne diseases with the knowledge that associated clinical findings may not manifest for weeks, months or years following an arthropod bite.