Third-generation cephalosporins administration can be oral, intramuscular, or intravenous. Well-absorbed oral compounds include: cefixime, ceftibuten, cefdinir, cefpodoxime, and cefditoren and are useful in outpatient settings. Except for ceftibuten and cefdinir, all the oral compounds are esters and are hydrolyzed by esterases in the gastrointestinal tract for absorption.

Pharmacokinetically, some third-generation compounds are poorly absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract and are administered only intramuscularly or intravenously. These agents are ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, and cefotaxime. The protein binding varies from 17% for ceftazidime to 96% for ceftriaxone. This latter has a high protein binding capacity and the longest-half life among antibiotics in this generation when administered as a once-daily dose.

Cephalosporins have excellent penetration into most body fluids and the extracellular fluid of most tissues, especially in the presence of inflammation (which increases diffusion). It involves therapeutic levels in the blood, urine, bile, lung, peritoneal fluid, and skin blisters. Consequently, ceftazidime is also helpful as an inhalational agent in bronchiectasis, ventilator-associated pneumonia, and post-transplant airway infections.

Concerning metabolism, cefotaxime is metabolized to a biologically active form. This compound, known as desacetylcefotaxime, has good antibacterial properties, penetration into extravascular tissue, and synergy with cefotaxime. Nevertheless, its activity is eight-fold weaker than cefotaxime.

Third-generation cephalosporins are eliminated by the renal or biliary system. In particular, most agents are excreted primarily by the kidneys, while the biliary system eliminates cefoperazone for up 70%. Finally, ceftriaxone has a dual mechanism of excretion with about 40% of secretion in the bile.

**In Adults, Dosages (Per Os, PO; Intravenous, IV; Intramuscular, IM)**

- Cefpodoxime proxetil PO: 100-400 mg, q12h.

- Cefditoren pivoxil PO: 200-400 mg, q12h.

- Ceftibuten PO: 400 mg, q24h.

- Cefdinir PO: 300-600 mg, q12-24h.

- Cefotaxime IV/IM: 1-2 g, q4-8h.

- Ceftizoxime IV/IM: 1-2 g, q8-12h.

- Ceftriaxone IV/IM: 1-2 g, q12-24h.

- Cefoperazone IV/IM: 1-2 g, q12h.

- Ceftazidime IV/IM: 1-2 g, q8h.

**In Pediatric**

- Cefpodoxime proxetil PO:10 mg/kg/d, q12h.

- Cefditoren pivoxil PO: Not recommended.

- Ceftibuten PO: 9 mg/kg/d, q24h.

- Cefdinir PO: 7-14 mg/kg/d, q12-24h.

- Cefotaxime IV/IM: 100-150 mg/kg/d, q4-6h.

- Ceftizoxime IV/IM: 100-200 mg/kg/d, q6-8h.

- Ceftriaxone IV/IM: 50-100 mg/kg/d, q12-24h.

- Cefoperazone IV/IM: 100-150 mg/kg/d, q8-12h.

- Ceftazidime IV/IM: 75-150 mg/kg/d, q8h.