A basic understanding of the penile anatomy is required to appreciate the etiology and pathophysiology of Peyronie disease.

In Peyronie disease, a fibrous plaque forms in the tunica albuginea of the corpora cavernosa. This inelastic plaque changes the smooth upward curvature of the erect penis to a more kinked appearance. The exact mechanism the plaque forms is yet to be definitively established; however, many studies and theories have attempted to shed some light on the pathophysiology.

A generally accepted theory is that the plaque forms as a result of trauma to the penis. When the penis is abnormally squeezed or bent, the buckling forces result in overstretching and eventual delamination of the tunica albuginea fibers where the septum attaches. There is also damage to the microvasculature resulting in extravasation of blood, and a subsequent inflammatory cascade is triggered. The inflammatory process begins with a change of collagen from type I to type III collagen in the tunica albuginea; fibrin is deposited. Invading macrophages release elastase which breaks down the elastic fibers in the sheath of the corpora cavernosa, thus reducing the elastic properties of the tunica albuginea.

This theory explains to some extent why PD occurs following penile trauma. Unfortunately, many patients do not recall any significant trauma. Other theories have been suggested to explain the formation of the plaques including, microvasculature injury, chromosomal instability of fibroblasts involved in plaque formation, aberrations in the inducible nitric oxide pathways, and patient human leukocyte antigen (HLA) subtype.

- Penile injury

Previous injury to the penis is a strong predictor of developing PD. Genital or perineal trauma, iatrogenic injury, including catheterization, cystoscopy, and TURP, are all linked to increased risks of PD.

- Connective tissue disorders

PD is commonly associated with other fibroproliferative diseases such as Dupuytren contracture and plantar fasciitis

- Family history

The genetic factors contributing to PD are complex, as summarised in a review by Gabrielsen.

- Hypogonadism

Hypogonadism may increase the chances of developing PD and the severity of the disease. Moreno et al.

- Diabetes

A study by Arafa et al.

- Smoking and alcohol

There is some evidence to suggest that smoking is related to PD, although the correlation between the amount of smoking and risk is unclear. Similarly, the literature remains divisive with regards to alcohol, with a study by Bjekic

- Age

Men in their 60s are most commonly affected by PD