There are 2 main types of secretory glands: exocrine glands and endocrine glands. Exocrine glands remain connected with the surface epithelium and secrete their products through ducts. They are subclassified as merocrine (or eccrine), apocrine, and holocrine. Apocrine glands are nonfunctional before puberty, at which time they grow and commence secretion. Various glands in the body practice apocrine secretion and are therefore considered apocrine glands, such as mammary glands. Apocrine glands are distributed in the axillae, anogenital region, periumbilical region, areolae, external auditory canals, and on the eyelids. Some apocrine glands have specific names, for example, those on the eyelids are referred to as Moll’s glands, and those on the external auditory meatus are termed ceruminous glands. While they can be found in many locations on the body, they secrete specific products at each distinct location. Although the exact function of apocrine glands varies depending on the gland's location, apocrine glands are believed to be an evolutionary remnant of an odorous organ of animals. For example, the scent glands of the skunk are modified apocrine-type structures.

The distinct characteristic of apocrine glands is that they secrete their product through decapitation, which entails membrane budding of the apical cytoplasm. This process involves 3 distinct phases. First, the apical cap is formed. This is followed by formation of a dividing membrane at the base of the apical cap. Finally, tubules form parallel to the dividing membrane, which creates both a base for the secreted apical cap, as well as a roof for the remaining secretory cell.