There are varying modes of delivery for vaccines to be administered. The methods include oral, intranasal spray, subcutaneous, nasal, and intramuscular. The methods of delivery with administration instructions are usually outlined on the labels of the vaccines themselves. A majority of vaccines are given intramuscularly. Below is a list of vaccines that have other modes of delivery:

- Oral - rotavirus

- Intranasal spray - live attenuated influenza.

- Subcutaneous – MMR and MMRV, varicella, meningococcal

- Intramuscular (IM) injections should be given with a 22 to 25 gauge hypodermic needle. A patient's age and weight determine the length and position of the injection.

**Age**

- Less than one month: 5/8" length needle into the anterolateral (upper, outer) portion of either thigh bilaterally

- 1 to 12 months: 1" length needle into the anterolateral part of either thigh

- 1 to 2 years: 1 to 1.25" length needle into the anterolateral area of either thigh or 5/8 to 1" length needle into the upper outer portion muscle of the arm (deltoid) on either side.

- 3 to 18 years: 5/8 to 1" length needle into the deltoid or 1 to 1.25" length needle into the anterolateral portion of the thigh bilaterally

**Weight**

- Weightless than 130 lbs: 5/8-1" length needle into the deltoid

- Weight between 130 to 152 lbs: 1" length needle into the deltoid

- Weight above 150 lbs (below 200 lbs for women, below 260 lbs men): 1 to 1.5" length needle into the deltoid

- Weight above 200 lbs women, 250 lbs men: 1.5" length needle into the deltoid