Anti-mullerian hormone serves as a marker for ovarian reserve. It is used to determine the age at menopause and ovarian insufficiency. The number of primordial follicles is fixed at birth in females, but the follicles remain dormant until puberty. The dormant follicles do not produce AMH, but once recruited for development, AMH gets secreted by preantral and small antral follicles.

Measuring ovarian reserve predicts pregnancy chances in women, which is essential in couples dealing with infertility. Additionally, It has been useful in monitoring the fertility potential of women with cancer by measuring the serum levels before and after treatment to assess chemotherapy's effect on the ovaries. Serum AMH, which is secreted by granulosa cells of ovaries, can be used to diagnose ovarian granulosa cell tumors, monitor efficacy of surgery, and assess for recurrence.

Serum AMH is a marker of the function of Sertoli cells, while testosterone is a marker of the function of Leydig cells. In persistent Mullerian duct syndrome, serum testosterone is normal, and AMH is undetectable or normal. Normal levels suggest normal production and means that the mutation is present in the receptor of AMH. Low or undetectable levels suggest reduced production and that the mutation exists in the AMH gene. If both testosterone and AMH levels are undetectable, this is suggestive of a lack of testicular function such as in anorchia or Klinefelter syndrome. Both are also low in mixed disorders of sex development because fetal hypogonadism results in dysfunction of Leydig and Sertoli cells.

The anti-mullerian hormone also plays a role as a biochemical marker for testing testicular dysfunction in cryptorchid males. The levels of AMH tend to be significantly lower in bilateral undescended testis compared to unilateral.