Preparation for surgery centers around determining the patient's goals, what changes the patient's anatomy will support, and having a candid discussion about what to expect in the perioperative period. In addition to taking a thorough history to determine the patient's candidacy for surgery and minimize the risk of a general anesthetic, it is important to pay particular attention to the patient's clotting risk. Most patients requiring facial surgery for gender affirmation will be undergoing facial feminization, which is usually performed in patients receiving estrogen therapy; estrogens increase the risk of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.

In many regions, gender affirmation surgery is often unavailable outside of urban areas with academic medical centers. Patients may need to travel relatively long distances to receive care, further compounding the risk of thromboembolic events in the perioperative period. For this reason, many surgeons recommend that patients pause hormone therapy for two weeks prior to surgery. Preoperative hormonal therapy is critical for both transgender men and women; however, in the case of transgender men, testosterone administration for one to two years may obviate the need for facial surgery due to the development of secondary sex characteristics it produces.

Imaging is also frequently obtained to aid preoperative planning, both photographic and radiographic. Standard photography similar to that employed for patients undergoing aging face surgery and rhinoplasty is recommended, ideally performed with a digital single-lens reflex camera in a dedicated photography lab with dual flashes and the patient positioned in the Frankfort horizontal plane. Multiple views are necessary from different angles and at different magnifications to inform preoperative planning and provide the surgeon reference images intraoperatively as well as comparison images postoperatively.

Computed tomography (CT) scanning can also be beneficial for planning osteotomies, as it can determine the thickness of the frontal bone and inform the selection of cranioplasty technique and facilitate identification of the borders of the frontal sinus. Additionally, CT scans can be used to plan the reduction of the mandibular angles and the chin to avoid injury to the inferior alveolar nerve, particularly when three-dimensional reformatting of the images is performed. Those same reformatted images can be used for preoperative surgical simulation, which may be combined with 3D printing technology to produce cutting guides that potentially improve the symmetry and consistency of surgical outcomes.