After induction of anesthesia and intubation, the laparoscopic cholecystectomy may begin.

First, insufflation of the abdomen is achieved to 15 mmHg using carbon dioxide. Next, four small incisions are made in the abdomen for trocar placement (supraumbilical x1, subxiphoid x1, and right subcostal x2). Utilizing a camera (laparoscope) and long instruments the gallbladder is retracted over the liver. This allows for exposure of the proposed region of the hepatocystic triangle. Careful dissection is carried out to achieve the critical view of safety. This view is defined as (1) clearance of fibrous and fatty tissue from the hepatocystic triangle, (2) the presence of only two tubular structures entering into the base of the gallbladder, and (3) the separation of the lower third of the gallbladder from the liver to visualize the cystic plate. Once this view is adequately achieved, the operating surgeon can proceed with confidence that he/she has isolated the cystic duct and cystic artery. Both structures are carefully clipped and transected. Electrocautery or harmonic scalpel is then used to separate the gallbladder from the liver bed completely. Hemostasis should be achieved after the abdomen is allowed to deflate to 8 mmHg for 2 minutes. This technique is employed to avoid missing potential venous bleeding that can be tamponaded by elevated intra-abdominal pressure (15 mmHg). The gallbladder is removed from the abdomen in a specimen pouch. All trocars should be removed under direct visualization. Closure of port sites is surgeon specific; this author recommends fascial closure of trocar sites greater than 5 mm to avoid incisional hernias in the postoperative period.