The arterial supply for the osteocutaneous radial forearm flap is the radial artery. Both the radial artery and the ulnar artery arise from the bifurcation of the brachial artery within the antecubital fossa. This bifurcation is the uppermost limit where the artery can be taken for microvascular anastomosis without compromising the distal extremity. The average diameter of the artery at that point is about 3 mm. The average length of the pedicle ranges between 14 cm and 22 cm in an adult. The vascular pedicle of the free flap sits in the lateral intermuscular septum between the brachioradialis muscle and the flexor carpi radialis. The flap's skin paddle is centered over the distal one-third of the lateral forearm, wherein lie the fasciocutaneous perforators from the radial artery to the skin paddle. The periosteal feeding vessels from the radial artery to the radius lie within the lateral intermuscular septum as well, and it is important to avoid disrupting the architecture of the septum to ensure the harvested bone has an adequate blood supply.

Patient candidacy for this flap is determined by the viability of the distal extremity (i.e., the hand and digits) with only the ulnar artery supplying it. The radial artery ultimately ends in the distal wrist, where it enters the hand as the deep palmar arch. The ulnar artery ends in the distal wrist as the superficial palmar arch. The flow between the superficial and deep palmar arches is what connects the blood supply from radial and ulnar arteries in the hand. Severeal different patterns of vascular anastomosis between the superficial and deep palmar arches have been described.

A variety of clinical tests can be performed to assess the viability of the distal extremity on ulnar arterial flow alone.

The primary venous drainage of the flap is provided by paired venae comitantes that run with the radial artery in the deep venous system of the flap between the brachioradialis muscle and the flexor carpi radialis. The skin paddle may also drain through a superficial venous plexus into the cephalic vein. This superficial system lies superficial to the brachioradialis muscle and will often join the deep system just distal to the antecubital fossa. The venous system may be harvested and anastomosed as a single system or split into primary (deep) and secondary (superficial) systems to drain the flap. These separate systems allow for the use of one single or two independent drainage systems in the neck (e.g., facial vein and external jugular vein). The typical length of the venous pedicle is about 18 to 20 cm.

The superficial branch of the radial nerve is a sensory nerve that provides cutaneous innervation to the thumb and dorsal hand and is a consistent landmark in radial forearm flap harvest. It is important to identify this nerve in order to reduce morbidity. The nerve is identified in the distal wrist during the elevation of the skin paddle along the radial/lateral aspect. The identity of the nerve can be confirmed by tracing it back to where it emerges from the brachioradialis muscle. It is common to have some degree of cutaneous anesthesia around the thumb postoperatively, due to intraoperative manipulation of sensory nerve branches from the superficial branch of the radial nerve entering the skin paddle, but long-term numbness of the thumb results from a technical error intraoperatively.

The lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve provides sensation to the lateral half of the volar forearm. This nerve is usually transected, and with little consequence, because the skin it innervates is harvested as the skin paddle. At the recipient site, however, the nerve can be used to provide a sensate flap.

A large skin paddle can be harvested, but it too has limitations. Nearly all the skin of the forearm can be harvested and supplied by the radial artery, but doing so would significantly alter lymphatic drainage of the hand. A 3-5 cm wide strip of skin should be preserved on the posterior extensor compartment to avoid lymphedema in the hand. Up to 30 cm of skin can be harvested along the length of the forearm, with a maximum width of about 15 cm. Primary closure can be achieved with skin paddle widths of 1-2 cm. Most OCRFFFs harvested for head and neck reconstruction have skin paddles too large for primary closure of the harvest site defect and generally require a skin graft. Additionally, when harvesting an osteocutaneous radial forearm free flap instead of a fasciocutaneous flap, is important to preserve the distal forearm skin at the level of the styloid process of the radius so as to minimize the chance of hardware complications after the radius is plated. With the fasciocutaneous flap, the distal forearm incision is made within a crease distal to the styloid process of the radius. In the osteocutaneous version of the flap, the distal incision should be placed on the forearm 1-2 cm more proximal. Alternatively, the incision may be placed in the crease, and the pronator quadratus muscle may be used as a flap to cover the distal plate.

One of the disadvantages of OCRFFF harvest is donor site morbidity, the magnitude of which correlates with the size and quality of the harvested radius. The radius is critical to wrist and hand function. The length of harvestable bone is limited to 10-12 cm, depending on where the pronator teres muscle inserts on the radius. This muscle can be released at its insertion point in order to gain additional bone length, but doing so increases the risk of postoperative morbidity, especially with the flexor digitorum, flexor pollicis longus, and pronator quadratus already being incised in order to harvest bone. If it must be disrupted, the pronator teres should be resuspended from the reconstruction plate after bone harvest is complete. The partial thickness segment of the radius harvested is generally limited to 40-50% of the cross-sectional area of the bone.

Biomechanical studies have investigated the effect of partial radial ostectomy in the context of the OCRFFF. One study demonstrated that, compared to an intact cadaveric human radius, the radius that remained after partial thickness harvest had a breaking strength of 24% that of the control group.