**Safety Characteristics and Hazards of Vaporizers**

It is typically rare to have problems of any kind with anesthetic vaporizers, due to the huge engineering efforts for manufacturing these masterpieces. Many of the hazards related to anesthetic vaporizers are preventable and are more so related to inadequate manipulation by the provider.

**Incorrect Agent Filling**

Many modern vaporizers have agent-specific inputs, making incorrect filling a user error. Vaporizers are, therefore labeled with colors to help reduce the probability of incorrect filling. The consequences of filling the vaporizer with the wrong anesthetic agent include overdose, as could be observed with desflurane, or underdose which could occur with the other halogenated liquids.

**Tipping**

Inclination of a variable bypass vaporizer more than 45ยบ during transportation or replacement can cause the anesthetic liquid to flow into the variable bypass chamber. Once the dial is open, anesthetic liquid in the bypass chamber increases the concentration of anesthetic gas beyond what is marked on the dial. This situation is particularly dangerous for the patient and can last for an amount of time that is difficult to predict. The solution is to increase vaporization in the bypass chamber by decreasing the concentration marked on the dial and simultaneously increase the FGF to 10 L/min for 20-30 minutes.

**Simultaneous Administration of More Than One Vapor**

Since newer anesthetic machines with interlock safety devices do not allow the user to open two dials at the same time, this issue is somewhat anecdotal. Some older modules allow users to remove the central vaporizer, deactivating the interlock mechanism and permitting administration of more than one vapor at a time.

**Overfilling the Vaporizer**

Newer vaporizers have a hole at the appropriate level to prevent overfilling. However, older vaporizers can still be overfilled. The excess anesthetic liquid will flow into the bypass chamber and, once the dial is open, potentially increase the concentration of anesthetic gas for an unpredictable amount of time. There is also a case report of vaporizer malfunctioning secondary to overfilling where the wicks of the vaporizer were completely covered by the anesthetic liquid, preventing appropriate evaporation.

**Vapor Leak into the Fresh Gas Line**

The size of the leak depends on the ambient temperature and configuration of internal ports. Leakage is usually too small to produce a clinical effect. However, it can trigger an episode of malignant hyperthermia in patients with a known or unknown predisposition.

**Leaks**

The majority of gas leaks will be identified by checking the low-pressure system before using the anesthetic machine with a patient, and sometimes all that is needed is tightening a loose filler cap. The most concerning consequence of an unknown leakage is the administration of light anesthesia. Several case reports exist reporting this issue, with most of them having in common the inappropriate positioning of vaporizers on the back bar of the anesthesia machine. Others report inappropriate adjustment in the mounting system due to a missing rubber O-ring. Additionally, incompatibility between vaporizers and interlocks from different manufacturers could be the cause of leakage. Timely identification of this problem is facilitated by checking the anesthetic machine with the vaporizer in the ON and OFF positions.