# Introduction

Ocular astigmatism accounts for 13% of the total refractive errors encountered in patients.

The cause of astigmatism is still not known; several etiologies, including genetics, the pressure of eyelids over the globe, tension due to extraocular muscles, and visual feedback mechanisms, have been attributed.

Initially, the estimation of corneal astigmatism was based on the measurement of anterior corneal curvature by keratometry and videokeratography. The calculation of the refractive power was based on empirical estimation of the posterior corneal surface.

Modern-day cataract surgery has emerged as a refractive procedure that aims to eliminate spherical and cylindrical power and achieve spectacle independence.

The various methods of correcting corneal astigmatism during cataract surgery include toric intraocular lenses (IOL), the placement of the clear corneal phacoemulsification incision on the steeper corneal axis, paired opposite clear corneal incisions over the steeper meridian, and limbal relaxing incisions over the steeper meridians.

Toric IOLs are considered the most predictable way of correcting corneal astigmatism.

# Indications

Toric IOLs are ideal for candidates with preexisting corneal astigmatism greater than 1 D.

- Age-related cataracts with corneal astigmatism: Toric IOLs are indicated in patients with preexisting corneal astigmatism of >1.00 D and a significant grade of cataract planned for cataract surgery.

- Corneal ectatic disorders: Patients with mild-to-moderate grades of keratoconus and other ectasias with regular astigmatism, which has been stable over time, are also suitable candidates. Off-label use of customized IOLs may also benefit patients with irregular astigmatism but should be prescribed only after assessing patient expectations.

- In patients who have undergone penetrating keratoplasty and who have high levels of irregular astigmatism and stable keratometry post-suture removal, customized or conventional toric IOLs can be implanted.

- They may also be used in patients with stable astigmatism due to corneal scars following healed corneal ulcers, pterygium excision, and corneal tear repairs.

# Contraindications

For patients with preexisting zonulopathy due to various congenital and acquired causes and zonular strength is a prerequisite for IOL stability.

Corneal scars and irregular astigmatism are relative contraindications for the placement of toric IOLs. They may not be relieved of astigmatism completely, but the magnitude of astigmatism may be reduced and may be taken up after adequate counseling depending on patient expectations.

Poorly dilating pupils may hamper visualization for adequate alignment.

Patients with preexisting retinal pathologies and who have undergone vitreoretinal surgical procedures may not be suitable candidates as their visual outcomes may be compromised due to the retinal pathologies.

Intraoperative posterior capsular rent is a relative contraindication as it may lead to IOL decentration or tilt in the postoperative period.

Patients with unrealistic visual expectations.

# Equipment

This table summarises the types of equipment required to perform various steps to implant a toric IOL.

Computing total corneal astigmatism

Schiempflug imaging devices, scanning slit devices, anterior segment optical coherence tomography, and ray tracing devices

Manual Reference marking: Weighted thread, Geuder-Gerten****pendulum marker, Nuijts-Solomon bubble marker, or  tonometer marker



**Manual Marking**

Intraoperative axis marking: Mendez gauge, beveled degree gauge

Marking of the desired axis: Nuijts Solomon bubble marker, Cionni toric marker

**FLACS guided marking**

A Femtosecond laser can mark the axis in patients undergoing FLACS.

**Image-guided marking systems**

Various image-guided marking systems like Verion, iTrace, true guide, Callisto, and Z aligns.

**Toric IOL design**

They are single-piece hydrophobic acrylic IOLs with dot or line axis markings on their posterior surface. These markings indicate the flatter axis and must be aligned with the pre-operative markings. They are more stable when compared with silicone IOLs.

With greater than 5-degree misalignment seen in only 6.9% of the cases. Silicone IOLs with C-shaped haptics had a rotation in an anticlockwise direction within two weeks of the postoperative period.

# Personnel

Trained optometrists are required to perform pre-operative workup of the patient, including measurement of uncorrected and best-corrected visual acuity, refraction, and ocular biometry, including axial length and keratometry values. An anesthetic evaluation is required to assess the patient's fitness for the planned procedure.

The surgery is generally performed under local anesthesia, but anxious patients may require sedation to complete the procedure. Patients with systemic medical conditions like cardiac and neurological pathologies may require monitoring throughout the surgery.

An ophthalmologist usually performs standard phacoemulsification or a femtosecond laser-assisted cataract surgery (FLACS) to implant the intraocular lens. A skilled operating theatre assistant usually assists while performing the surgery. The ward nurses or the ophthalmologist can do postoperative care and counseling.

# Preparation

**Patient Selection**

The patient should be thoroughly evaluated clinically to grade the cataract assess pupillary dilatation and tear film status, and rule out significant anterior and posterior segment disorders. Any dry eye or ocular surface disorders should be addressed adequately before cataract surgery. The patient is clearly explained about the surgical procedure and what to expect on the day of surgery. Informed written consent is obtained from the patient.

**Steps in Preparing For Toric IOL Implantation**

- Computing total corneal astigmatism

- Spherical power calculation

- Pre-planning of incision and IOL alignment

- Phacoemulsification/ FLACS for implanting IOL

- Post-surgical care

**Computing Total Corneal Astigmatism**

Preoperative estimation of anterior and posterior corneal astigmatism is essential to calculate the IOL power. It can be calculated using one of the abovementioned devices or the Baylor toric nomogram to estimate corneal astigmatism.

**Spherical Power Calculation**

Intraocular lens power calculation should consider the posterior corneal curvature, effective lens position, and surgically induced astigmatism.

The Barrett toric calculator has better predictability since it considers both estimated lens position and posterior corneal power.

**Pre-Planning of Incision and IOL Alignment**

Axis marking is essential to implant the toric IOLs in the desired axis and achieve optimal visual outcomes. It helps in planning the incision and in the intraoperative alignment of the IOL. The marking can be done manually or using advanced technologies like intra-operative marking systems and intraoperative aberrometry-based methods. Various online calculators and formulae are available for calculating the IOL power and axis of implantation. They include AcrySof online toric calculator, iTRACE calculator, TECNIS calculator, and the Hollday formula.

Various commercial brands of toric IOLs are available, and a choice of a particular IOL depends on availability, financial considerations, and surgeon preference refraction. The IOL with the least amount of residual astigmatism is chosen. Overcorrection of corneal astigmatism leads to postoperative residual astigmatism acting in an axis perpendicular to the preoperatively measured axis, termed as flipping of the axis.

# Technique or Treatment

**Steps of IOL Implantation**

**1. Anaesthesia**

The patient can be operated on under topical, sub-tenon or peribulbar anesthesia, depending on the patient's and the surgeon's comfort.

**2. Intra-operative axis alignment and toric axis marking**

**Manual Marking**

This 3-step technique consists of preoperative reference marking by free hand marking, slit lamp, or a Nuijt-Solomon bubble marker. This is done preoperatively under topical anesthesia. The ocular surface should be dry and excess drops or tear fluid should be removed. Primary gaze in a sitting position is preferred as a change in position from lying down to sitting can cause significant cyclotorsion. The second step is the intra-operative alignment of the horizontal axis using a Mendez gauge. The third step is the intraoperative marking of the desired axis, along which the IOL markings should be aligned.

**FLACS Assisted Marking**

It aids in making two markings 180 degrees apart in the steep axis. The advantages included avoidance of parallax error found with manual markings and aiding in making astigmatically neutral arcuate incisions.

**Image-guided Marking**

Various image-guided systems are available to overcome the disadvantages associated with the manual marking of the axis. These images capture high-resolution images of the iris architecture, iris, and limbal vessels, which serve as landmarks to plan the incisions intraoperatively. They help plan the location of clear corneal incisions, limbal relaxing incisions, and capsulorhexis. They may also help optimize the results based on the individual surgeon’s surgically induced astigmatism (SIA).

Placido disc-based topography with ray tracing aberrometer may provide power maps, corneal curvatures, and internal, corneal, and total higher-order aberrations. Considering the SIA, they have an inbuilt toric IOL power calculator that guides the incision placement.

**3. Wound Construction**

Clear corneal incisions that do not leak and are self-sealing are placed in astigmatically neutral sites, and their placement may be guided by the systems mentioned above.

**4. Capsulorhexis**

Adequate-sized continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis covering 0.5 mm of the edges is essential to prevent postoperative rotation. A centered round rhexis is required for ideal IOL positioning. A large rhexis may lead to instability of IOL.

**5. Removal of Lens Material**

The lens material is removed by phacoemulsification, and cortex wash is done. Thorough polishing of the capsule is done to prevent posterior capsular opacification, which may cause IOL tilt and visual discomfort to the patient.

**6. IOL Implantation**

A cohesive viscoelastic is preferred over a dispersive viscoelastic to inflate the bag for IOL implantation, considering the ease of removal. The IOL is implanted into the bag with the axis markings left around 3 to 5 degrees anticlockwise to the final lens position.

If the patient is operated on under topical anesthesia, they are asked to fix at the microscope light, and the IOL is perfectly centered based on the first Purkinje image. The viscoelastic is removed completely from the anterior chamber and behind the IOL in the bag, and the wound is hydrated before the final rotation of the IOL is made to align with the axis. Intraoperative aberrometry is advantageous in estimating the residual astigmatism of the eye and adjusting the IOL position intraoperatively.

**7. Postoperative Care**

The patient is asked to maintain a supine position an hour after surgery to avoid changes in the IOL position. The postoperative IOL alignment can be confirmed by refraction, dilated examination to look for the IOL axis, keratometry, and ray tracing aberrometer. Postoperative steroids are prescribed in tapering doses.

# Complications

The complication unique to toric IOL implantation is IOL misalignment. IOL alignment is influenced by various factors, including marking technique, capsulorhexis size, coverage of IOL edge by rhexis margins, corneal incision sealing at the end of the surgery, rotational stability of IOL, and surgeon experience.

IOL misalignment may occur secondary to either incorrect calculation of the IOL axis, incorrect placement of the IOL intraoperatively, or due to postoperative rotation. When the misalignment exceeds 30 degrees, it may induce a cylindrical power in a new meridian. One degree of misalignment leads to a 3% loss of effective power, and 30 degrees of misalignment results in the loss of the entire toric effect with significantly worse visual acuity.

Postoperative IOL rotation may occur as early as one hour to up to ten days post-surgery. Incomplete removal of the viscoelastic from the bag results in early postoperative rotation, and late postoperative rotations may occur due to IOL design, rhexis extension, large bag size, axial length, and inadequate coverage of IOL by the rhexis margins. With-the-rule astigmatisms were associated with a higher rate of postoperative rotations.

Realignment of the IOL has to be considered in cases with more than 10 degrees of malalignment. An intraoperative marking indicates the new target axis in relation to the current misaligned axis. A side port incision is made, and a long cannula is mounted on a syringe filled with the balanced salt solution is used to rotate the IOL to the desired position.

The complications inherent to routine phacoemulsification may be encountered while or after the surgery for implanting toric IOLs.

**Intraoperative Complications**

- Corneal wounds, burns, leaky corneal wounds

- Iris prolapse, iris chaffing by the phacoemulsification probe

- Smaller rhexis, large rhexis, rhexis margin run out

- Posterior capsular rent

- The nucleus or cortical matter drops into the vitreous

- Intraoperative zonular dialysis

- Suprachoroidal hemorrhage

**Postoperative Complications**

**Early**

- Corneal edema, striate keratopathy

- Raised intraocular pressure

- Ocular hypotony due to wound leak

- Toxic anterior segment syndrome

- Hyphaema

- Residual lens material

- Refractive surprise

**Late**

- Posterior capsular opacification

- Cystoid macular edema

- Endophthalmitis

- Retinal detachment

- Subluxation/ dislocation of intraocular lens

- Corneal decompensation/ bullous keratopathy

- Recurrent uveitis

# Clinical Significance

Toric IOLs result in better patient satisfaction, and uncorrected visual acuity of 20/40 or better is achieved in most patients.

Appropriate pre-operative workups for patient selection, intraoperative IOL alignment, and incidence of intraoperative and postoperative complications determine the outcomes of post-toric IOL implantation. The facilitation of posterior corneal power measurement by newer investigations has made estimations of both anterior and posterior corneal curvature possible. Femtosecond laser-assisted cataract surgery, when combined with implantation of toric IOLs, may significantly reduce higher-order aberrations and superior visual outcomes.

Newer advanced toric IOLs have better stability limiting postoperative rotation and predictable visual outcomes. They may have an extended spectrum of indications like irregular astigmatism, higher corneal astigmatisms, post keratoplasty, and corneal ectatic cases.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A coordinated interprofessional team approach is essential for ensuring optimum outcomes with toric IOL implantation. The optometrist evaluates the best-corrected spectacle refraction and performs corneal topography and optical biometry required for IOL power and axis calculation.

They upload the patient's values in online toric IOL calculators and generate patient reports pre-operatively which helps in deciding the axis of implantation and the planning of incisions. The operating theatre personnel ensures the appropriate IOL and other instruments required for the pre-operative marking and performing phacoemulsification. An ophthalmologist/ optometrist or trained personnel can perform the pre-operative axis marking on the patient.

A trained ophthalmologist performs the surgery under peribulbar/sub-tenon/ topical anesthesia. An anesthetist may be required to monitor the patient intraoperatively in patients with systemic ailments and in anxious or uncooperative patients to provide intravenous sedation.

The postoperative care of the patient is taken care of by the ward nurses who counsel the patient regarding the dosage and the procedure of administration of topical medications and other postoperative instructions. The optometrist and ophthalmologist can do the postoperative follow-up of patients at routine intervals.