The impact of the social world on physiology and health is a topic of intrigue to scientists in a variety of disciplines. Social interactions may directly affect biological functioning by providing a zeitgeber (i.e., time-giver) to set or reset our biological clocks.

Societal roles, for example, the social role of a mother or spouse, may provide one with a sense of social identity and thereby influence health behaviors, such as exercising or smoking cessation. The provision of information regarding the importance of treatment adherence may be another way in which our social structure exerts a direct impact.

Physiological stress response systems tend to become less efficient with age. Chronic or frequently repeated stress response activation stress may also bring about hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal dysregulation. This affects the responsivity of the axis, reducing the flexibility of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal stress response mechanism. Chronic dysregulation of these systems may hamper the body’s natural disease defenses. As a result, psychological stress may be implicated in disease onset, development, and course.

Individuals reporting better social support demonstrate preserved hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis efficiency, an association that may be even more pronounced among older males.

**Social Relationship Interventions**

Existing social relationships appear to exert a strong impact on the psyche and physiology. Understandably, attempts to increase these factors have garnered significant attention in recent decades. Social support interventions, by nature work, to "mobilize the social environment" to meet an individual's needs better.