**Competence**

Competence is determined by a judge, not an EMS provider. A known legal incompetence ruling does favor a future lack of decision-making capacity, but a patient may retain his legal "competence" regarding medical matters, even if deemed incompetent.  For example, a patient may be deemed incompetent to make financial decisions but may be able to make their own medical decisions. A legal declaration of incompetence may be global, or it may be limited (e.g., to financial matters, personal care, or medical decisions). A surrogate should be named and have the appropriate paperwork in these situations.

**Minors**

Minors can have the capacity for medical decision making, but the age they are deemed eligible to have the ability to make their own decisions varies by state law.  The age where a minor is considered to be able to make their own medical decision may vary based on the situation. For example, many states allow a minor to make medical decisions at an earlier age if the issue is "sexually related," (i.e., pregnancy, STI), drug use/abuse concerns, or if the minor is legally emancipated.

**Dementia**

A patient may carry a diagnosis of dementia, but still, have the capacity for medical decision making. The diagnosis should prompt the EMS provider to more carefully evaluate the patient's capacity to make a decision. EMS providers must assess each situation and always default toward beneficence if there is a question or concern regarding capacity.

Each patient has the right to self-determination for medical care, and the right of refusal of treatment, as long as they demonstrate the capacity to make such decisions. The patient can choose options for their care, and EMS personnel cannot decline to provide care based on the patient's refusals. A patient with the capacity to decide must have sufficient information regarding the condition and risks.  The patient must understand a decision needs to be made, and comprehend the risks, burdens, and benefits of the options. The information must be conveyed by the provider, be free from coercion, and should include any further information or translations as required to facilitate patient understanding and communication of their choice.

A patient's legally determined competency can affect the assessment of their capacity, but does not on its own exclusively determine the patient's ability to make their own decisions.