Organizational-, participant-, and debriefer-specific barriers can adversely influence inter-professional team SBT debriefings.  At the organizational level, both a lack of institutional support for SBT and the absence of an appropriate learning structure for it can undermine SBT activities. Manifestations may include off-limit topics of discussion or the absence of a safe learning environment. Identifying and recruiting a champion within the leadership group can address these difficult issues. Participant-specific barriers can arise due to learner-specific characteristics or situation-specific issues that lead to difficulties with participants during the debriefing process. Learner-specific examples include the shy participant, the indifferent participant, the dominating participant with poor insight, and the dominating participant showing off.  Situation-specific examples include participants who react emotionally or defensively because of the scenario.

Debriefer-specific barriers to effective debriefing in inter-professional team SBT can arise due to a lack of knowledge of the facilitator related to debriefing technique, human factors, or teamwork dynamics. Additionally, they can result from the inherent cognitive biases, heuristics, and errors of attribution of the facilitators themselves.  Furthermore, the debriefer may fail to create a learning environment with the necessary psychological safety needed to allow participants to contribute.  Finally, the facilitator may end up focusing on “who is right” instead of “what is right.”

Employing the Debriefing Duties can help a facilitator in avoiding debriefer-specific barriers. These duties are threefold: Make it Safe, Make it Stick, Make it Last.  In making it safe, the facilitator engages the learner, creates an inviting learning environment, and establishes psychological safety.  In making it stick, the debriefer guides the participants to identify their performance gaps and develop solutions to them.  Finally, in making it last, the facilitator challenges each participant to identify at least one take-home learning point on which to work in the clinical environment.

Despite the widespread acceptance of simulation as an integral teaching modality, many educators have little or no formal training in debriefing and may struggle to facilitate effectively. There are several practical guides to model a successful debriefing process. Self-guided debriefing refers to the use of cognitive aids as a basis for reflection and formative self-assessment.