The two vascular structures within the carotid sheath are the common carotid artery, which becomes the external carotid artery, and the internal jugular vein.

At the base of the carotid sheath, the common carotid artery arises on the left side from the arch of the aorta directly and on the right side from the brachiocephalic trunk. Proximal to its bifurcation, there are no branches from the common carotid artery. The bifurcation of the common carotid artery commonly occurs at the level of the thyroid cartilage (C4 level).

The external carotid artery exits the carotid sheath at this point to travel within the parotid gland. The internal carotid artery continues within the sheath and is initially bulbous as it contains within its arterial wall the carotid sinus, a baroreceptor regulating blood pressure. The carotid body is a separate structure situated behind the bifurcation. This chemoreceptor is primarily receptive to changes in oxygen partial pressures and is thus involved in respiratory reflexes. The glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves innervate both the carotid sinus and the carotid body. The common carotid artery gives off no branches of its own and enters the skull base through the carotid canal in the anteromedial part of the temporal bone.

The internal jugular vein is a continuation of the sigmoid sinus and begins its descent towards the heart at the jugular foramen, running with the vagus nerve. It travels within the carotid sheath, lateral to the internal carotid and common carotid arteries in its descent, draining into the subclavian vein, ultimately forming the brachiocephalic vein. While moving posteriorly, the internal jugular vein receives venous blood from the facial, lingual, superior thyroid, and middle thyroid veins.

Deep cervical lymph nodes are also contained within the carotid sheath; specifically, those within levels II (upper internal jugular), III (middle internal jugular), and IV (lower internal jugular) of the neck, comprising together the group of nodes termed the deep cervical chain.