Two major adverse drug reactions of statins (including fluvastatin) are hepatotoxicity and myopathy. Hepatotoxicity can range from an elevation of transaminase levels to clinically apparent hepatic injury. The idiosyncratic, clinically apparent liver injury is due to a hypersensitivity reaction. In most instances, the elevated serum transaminase levels during fluvastatin therapy are self-limited. Discontinuation is recommended for elevations above ten times and persistent elevations above five times the ULN(upper limit of normal).

Myopathy is a major adverse drug reaction that leads to statin intolerance and discontinuation. Myopathy should be considered in any patient with diffuse myalgias, muscle tenderness or weakness, and marked elevation of CPK. Fluvastatin should be stopped if markedly elevated CPK levels occur or myopathy is diagnosed or suspected.

In addition, fluvastatin's adverse drug reactions according to system organ classification(SOC) include

- General: Fatigue

- Skin: Rash, dermatitis, pruritis, and eczema

- Neurologic: Headache, dizziness, forgetfulness, confusion, and neuropathy

- Psychiatric: Insomnia

- Endocrine: Increased risk of diabetes mellitus

- Eyes: Ophthalmoplegia

- Ear, nose, and throat: Sinusitis, rhinitis, and pharyngitis

- Pulmonary: Interstitial lung disease and bronchitis

- Gastrointestinal: Nausea, vomiting, constipation, diarrhea, dyspepsia, pancreatitis, hepatitis, cholestatic jaundice, cirrhosis, anorexia, and  fatal and nonfatal hepatic failure

- Genitourinary: Urinary tract infection

- Reproductive: Erectile dysfunction and gynecomastia