Cerebral contusions are usually seen in the temporal and frontal lobes, even though other sites can be implicated through a coup (beneath the impact) and contrecoup (opposite to impact). The brain contusions are lesions with a hemorrhagic character that begins in the brain cortical area and, more commonly, at crests of the gyri of the cerebrum. They can progress to the subcortical white matter in the more severe forms of injury. Despite the primary cortical area's preference, they can also develop at the white/gray border with expansion into overlying grey matter. The occurrence of hemorrhage within the contusion can cause ischemia and edema in the local area, which progresses to destruction of tissues, necrosis of neuronal structures, and cavitation with overlying reactive gliosis.

There are many instances where the progression and expansion of the hemorrhagic components in the areas surrounding the initial contusion have been observed. Contusion progression occurred with a frequency of 63%-70%.

In TBI, the contused brain is one of the major sources of the release of the tissue factor. Recent studies have proposed that the cerebrum's vasculature is mechanosensitive, activating endothelial cells in the penumbra that did not suffer the contusion core's initial damaging effect. In this situation, the contusion penumbra experiences activation of two transcription factors (endothelial mechanosensitive mechanisms), which are the specificity protein 1 (transcription factor1) and nuclear factor kappaB.

The nuclear factor kappaB leads to apoptosis, whereas the specificity factor 1 causes fragmentation of the vessels. It has also been related to dysfunction or damage of vascular entities, causing microvascular failure and endothelial necrosis.

The initial trauma from the brain injury can lead to immediate cell death through necrosis. The cell lyses and releases harmful substances such as inflammatory chemokines and cytokines, reactive oxygen species, and proteases. There is a release of inflammatory mediators, pro-inflammatory cytokines, blood-brain barrier breakdown, and subsequent cerebral edema development. Secondary injury from excitatory amino acids, including glutamate and aspartate, increased intercellular cytosolic calcium concentration, acidosis, and free radical production. Glutamate excitotoxicity can cause persistent membrane depolarization, which activates ion channels, particularly the N-methyl-D-aspartate channel. Secondary to the permanent opening of N-methyl-D-aspartate channels, sodium and calcium penetrate cells while potassium is extruded to the extracellular space.

Free radicals cause genetic material injury, with downregulation of genes and mitochondrial disruption. This results in ion dyshomeostasis and consequent neuronal and astrocytic swelling, terminating with cell death. Once the autoregulatory mechanisms have been abolished, cerebral blood flow (CBF) passively follows changes in arterial blood pressure (ABP) and impaired cerebral pressure. In the central core area, the cerebral blood flow is 4.7 ml/100g/min, and in the peripheral zone is 16-18 ml/100g/min.

Brain edema formation is started with vasogenic edema resulting from the breakdown of the blood-brain barrier and extravasations of fluid into the extracellular space, which sets in only after 12-24 hours. Then a secondary injury caused by a cascade of mechanisms initiated at the moment of injury sets in after 24 to 72 hours and progresses for 7-10 days. A third phase occurs with the lysis of red blood cells in the intracerebral clot.