The inguinal lymph nodes are groups of lymph nodes that lie below the inguinal ligament. They classify into two groups, superficial and deep inguinal groups of lymph nodes. Each further divides into upper medial, upper lateral and lower vertical groups. The skin, fasciae, and abdominal wall drain into the superficial inguinal group of lymph nodes. The upper medial group of the superficial inguinal lymph nodes drains the anterior abdominal wall below the umbilicus, up to the perineum, external genitalia, and anal canal. The upper lateral group drains the skin and fasciae of the upper part of the thigh, buttock, and even the lower part of the back. The lower vertical group drains the skin and the fasciae of the lower limb. All the superficial lymph nodes drain later into deep inguinal lymph nodes. The deep inguinal lymph nodes drain not only the superficial inguinal nodes but also deep lymphatics of the lower limb along with the glans penis. All deep nodes finally drain into the external iliac group of lymph nodes.

On the other hand, the abdominal organs, and other deeper structures drain into abdominal lymph nodes like the pre-aortic, para-aortic, common iliac, internal and external iliac groups of lymph nodes.

The lymphatic drainage of the stomach has gained much importance, primarily because of its cancer spread.

The liver drains its lymph into the hepatic, caval, posterior mediastinal, and celiac lymph nodes.

The abdomen is also the site of the largest secondary lymphoid organ, the spleen. This spleen is seen in the left hypochondrium, wedged between the diaphragm and the stomach. It is directed downwards, forwards and laterally along the long axis of the 10th rib. Its hilum is closely related to the tail of the pancreas and covered by a lienorenal ligament. The spleen plays an essential supporting role in the immune system by fighting bacteria and viruses. It facilitates interactions between antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and lymphocytes. APCs regulates the T and B cell responses to the antigenic targets.

The gut is a potential site of exposure to microorganisms. Hence we find a wide distribution of lymphocytes within the wall of intestine sometimes well aggregated in the form of follicles and sometimes well scattered throughout the mucosa. This is known as a gut-associated lymphoid system (GALT), which is seen especially in the esophagus, intestines, and appendix. In the lamina propria and submucosa of ileum, the lymphocytes become highly aggregated to form lymphoid nodules know as Peyer’s patches. There are around 30 patches, and each patch consists of approximately 100 to 200 nodules seen with the naked eyes. The Peyer’s patches are dome-shaped, covered by epithelium containing M cell, and are devoid of villi. No absorptive cells are seen here.

The lymphatic drainage of the pelvic organs like the female reproductive organs (uterus, cervix, and vagina) is into the internal and external iliac nodes. However, the ovary and the fallopian tube drain into the paraaortic nodes.

The thoracic duct is the large lymphatic vessel, and the principal lymphatic vessel, which drains most of the body, including chyle from the abdomen, begins from the abdomen just below the diaphragm in the form of saccular dilation, the Cisterna Chyli (Chyle Cistern).