Lumbar radiculopathy pain is a significant but often self-limited injury to the nerve roots of the lumbar spine. The condition affects millions of people and has enormous morbidity because of the pain. Thus the condition is best managed by an inter-professional team.

Rarely, the condition correlates with a few severe complications, including severe spondylolisthesis and cauda equina syndrome. These complications often require surgical intervention and advanced imaging modalities. Severe symptoms must receive treatment immediately, as permanent damage may occur, leading to decreased quality of life and increased healthcare costs. Thus, it is imperative to identify the risk factors and perform a thorough assessment of the patient with radicular pain and monitor for progression of symptoms. A team approach is an ideal way to limit the complications of such an injury.

Evaluation of a patient with lumbar radicular pain by the primary care provider to rule out severe radiculopathy or alarm symptoms is the recommended first step.

Conservative management should commence when symptoms are mild or moderate, including moderate activity, stretches, and pharmacological management. A pharmacist should evaluate dosing and perform medication reconciliation to preclude any drug-drug interactions, potential dependence on certain pain medications and alert the healthcare team regarding any concerns.

- The patient should follow up with primary care physicians one to two weeks following the initial injury to monitor for progression of the nerve damage.

- If symptoms worsen on follow-up or there is a concern for the development of severe radiculopathy, referral to neurosurgery or hospitalization for possible spinal decompression.

- If radicular symptoms persist three weeks after injury, physical therapy referral can be a consideration.

- When symptoms persist for greater than six-week duration, imaging such as MRI or CT scan are options for better visualization of the nerve roots.

- The patient should consult with a dietitian and eat a healthy diet and maintain a healthy weight.

- The pharmacist should encourage the patient to quit smoking, as this may help with the healing process. Further, the pharmacist should educate the patient on pain management and available options.

- Persistent pain at six weeks' follow-up may warrant a referral to interventional pain management or neurosurgery for an epidural steroid injection.

- If mild to moderate symptoms continue at three months following the onset of symptoms, referral for possible surgical intervention merits consideration as well.

The interprofessional healthcare team should openly discuss the management of each patient so that the patient receives optimal care delivery. This area is where nursing can play a crucial role by verifying patient compliance, monitoring for progress (or lack of) with the present treatment plan, and monitoring for adverse medication effects; communicating any areas of concern to the treating physician. Only through open, interprofessional communication can optimal management of radicular low back pain occur. [Level 5]

While surgery does work, it is usually not the first-choice treatment unless the patient has cauda equina syndrome. Further, there is no guarantee that surgery will bring the desired results.