**Comparison With Other Scales of Mental Status**

Other scales for assessing mental status exist and may be superior to AVPU in specific settings.

The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) and the Richmond Sedation and Agitation Scale (RASS) are two scales used for assessing mental status. One study showed that both GCS and RASS in admitted patients were significantly more accurate predictors of mortality than AVPU. Further, the routine tracking of GCS and/or RASS on the wards may improve the accuracy of detecting patients with deteriorating clinical status.

The ACDU Scale (alertness, confusion, drowsiness, and unresponsiveness) is another 4-point scale similar to AVPU. One study showed that ACDU might be superior for the simple ward assessment of seriously ill patients compared to AVPU. Additionally, median GCS scores associated with ACDU were 15, 13, 10, and 6. The median values of ACDU were more evenly distributed than AVPU when researchers compared both scales to GCS. This even distribution may indicate that ACDU is superior at identifying early deterioration in the conscious level when they occur in critically ill ward patients than AVPU.

The Simplified Motor Score (SMS) categorizes and scores patients in the following three categories: obeys commands, localizes pain, and withdraws to pain or worse. It is useful in evaluating patients in the pre-hospital and acute care setting for possible traumatic brain injury. One study has shown it to have the best interrater reliability for assessing the altered loss of consciousness (LOC) of traumatic and non-traumatic causes among AVPU, GCS, and ACDU.