The first step in the management of patients with organophosphate poisoning is putting on personal protective equipment. These patients may still have the compound on them, and you must protect yourself from exposure. Secondly, you must decontaminate the patient. This means removing and destroying all clothing because it may be contaminated even after washing. The patient’s skin needs to be flushed with water. Dry agents such as flour, sand, or bentonite also can be used to decontaminate the skin. In the case of ingestion, vomiting and diarrhea may limit the amount of substance absorbed but should never be induced. Activated charcoal can be given if the patient presents within 1 hour of ingestion, but studies have not shown a benefit.

Airway control is vital. In some patients, intubation may be required due to bronchospasm, seizures, or bronchorrhea. During intubation, succinylcholine must be avoided as it may prolong the paralysis. The reason is that succinylcholine is also degraded by acetylcholine esterase.

Good intravenous access, cardiac monitoring, and pulse oximetry are the standard of care.

The definitive treatment for organophosphate poisoning is atropine, which competes with acetylcholine at the muscarinic receptors. The initial dose for adults is 2 to 5 mg IV or 0.05 mg/kg IV for children until reaching the adult dose. If the patient does not respond to the treatment, double the dose every 3 to 5 minutes until respiratory secretions have cleared and there is no bronchoconstriction. In patients with severe poisoning, it may take hundreds of milligrams of atropine given in bolus or continuous infusion over several days before the patient improves.

Pralidoxime (2-PAM) also should be given to affect the nicotinic receptors since atropine only works on muscarinic receptors. Pralidoxime works by reactivating the phosphorylated AChE by binding to the organophosphate. However, to work, it has to be given within 48 hours of the poisoning. The agent does not depress the respiratory center and can be combined with atropine. Evidence about the use of oximes to treat organophosphate poisoning is inconsistent, and interpretation is difficult. Until this is better understood and other treatments become available, all patients poisoned with organophosphorus agents should be treated with an oxime.

Atropine must be given before 2-PAM to avoid worsening of muscarinic-mediated symptoms. A bolus of at least 30 mg/kg in adults or 20 to 50 mg/kg for children should be given over 30 minutes. Rapid administration can cause cardiac arrest. After the bolus, a continuous infusion of at least 8 mg/kg/hr for adults and 10 to 20 mg/kg/hr for children should be started and may be needed for several days.

Patients with seizures may benefit from benzodiazepines.