Reactive arthritis is a multiorgan disorder best managed by a team of healthcare professionals that includes a rheumatologist, ophthalmologist, gastroenterologist, physical therapist, nurse, and pharmacist. While evaluating, general physicians should not shy away from exploring the detailed history of sexual contacts and genital symptoms.

There is no cure for reactive arthritis, and the treatment is supportive. All patients should be encouraged to become physically active, and a physical therapy consult should be obtained.

The pharmacist should educate the patient on the types of drugs used, their benefits, and their side effects. If patients are prescribed steroids, the side effects must be closely monitored, and the drugs tapered as soon as the clinical symptoms subside.

A consult with a dermatologist is recommended to assess skin lesions and recommend treatment.

The key feature is patient education to help improve physical conditioning, function, and quality of life. The patient should participate in regular exercises to improve exercise endurance and prevent joint stiffness. Also, the nurse practitioner should educate the patient about safe sex practices to prevent STDs. Because the disorder can induce anxiety and depression, a mental health nurse should follow these patients and offer counsel.

Finally, all patients with reactive arthritis should follow up with an ophthalmologist since they remain at high risk for visual problems.

**Outcomes**

The progression of reactive arthritis is variable, but in most people, the disorder is self-limited, with the resolution of the symptoms occurring by 6 to 18 months. Mortality is very rare today and is usually due to the treatments. In general, causes related to sexually transmitted infections have a worse outcome than those caused by gastrointestinal infections. Despite a cure, recurrences are known to occur in 25 to 50% of cases, especially those who are HLA-B27 positive. Reactivation may signal a new infection or stress. About 20% of patients will have a long-term disease that results in enthesitis and destructive arthritis. Elevation of ESR, lack of response to NSAIDs, and the hip joint involvement usually indicate poor outcomes.