The purpose of the New Mexico Medical Practice Act is to promote and preserve public health, safety, and welfare by regulating allopathic and osteopathic physicians. In order to assure physicians are aware and understand the New Mexico Practice, each New Mexico licensee is required to review the New Mexico Practice Act and receive 1 hour of AMA PRA Category 1 Credit(TM). Additional training and following state guidelines are believed to improve medical practice and should be included in residency and medical school curriculums.

The following provides a summary of the continuing education requirement. Additional information should be obtained from the New Mexico Medical Board.

**Allopathic MDs**are required to complete a minimum of 75 hours of continuing medical education (CME) every three years,**one hour of which must be earned by reviewing the New Mexico Medical Practice Act.**Licensees who hold a New Mexico Controlled Substance Registration and a Federal DEA registration are required to complete 5 hours of CME in pain management and prescribing of controlled substances every triennial cycle. These 5 hours of CME in pain management may apply toward the 75 hours required.

**Osteopathic DOs**are required to complete 75 hours of CME every three years, 30 of which must be AOA Category 1-A credits, and a maximum of 45 hours may beAMA PRA Category 1 Credit™, and **one hour of which must be earned by reviewing the New Mexico Osteopathic Medical Practice Act**. Licensees who hold a license to prescribe opioids and hold a Federal DEA registration are required to complete 6 hours in non-cancer pain management that includes a review of the 16.17.4 NMAC every renewal.

This course assists allopathic and osteopathic physicians in their review of the New Mexico Practice Act.  Osteopathic DO and allopathic MD physicians are currently governed by two separate boards governed by New Mexico Professional and Occupational Licenses code.  However, reflecting national trends, the rules governing practice between DO and MD physicians are becomming closely aligned.  The practical and ethical conduct required of New Mexico physicians is very similar for DO and MD physicians.  The New Mexico Board of Osteopathic Medicine website is an excellent resource for more information regarding DO physicians.  Specific osteopathic rules and regulations and the New Mexico code can be found on the board's website.