The treatment of viral encephalitis is primarily supportive as there is no specific medical therapy for most central nervous system viral infections. A very important exception to this is HSV encephalitis. When started early, acyclovir has been shown to significantly decrease mortality and morbidity and limit the severity of long-term behavioral and cognitive impairment of HSV encephalitis. Therefore, empirically, it is recommended that physicians start all patients with suspected encephalitis on acyclovir. The recommended dose is 10 mg/kg intravenously (IV) every 8 hours for 14 to 21 days. Although not as effective as it is with HSV, nucleoside analogs are used for other herpesviruses as well. Acyclovir 10 to 15 mg/kg IV every 8 hours for 10 to 14 days, with possible adjunctive corticosteroids in immunocompetent patients, is recommended for varicella-zoster virus. The recommended treatment for CMV encephalitis is a combination of ganciclovir 5 mg/kg IV every 12 hours and foscarnet 60 mg/kg IV every 8 hours or 90 mg/kg IV every 12 hours for 21 days.

Another important component of the management of patients with viral encephalitis is serial intracranial pressure (ICP) monitoring. Elevated ICP is associated with poor prognosis. Although there is limited data on their efficacy in viral encephalitis, steroids and mannitol can be given to relieve increased ICP.

Seizures may need to be managed with valproic acid or phenytoin. For status epilepticus, one may require benzodiazepines. For behavior alterations, one may need to use antipsychotics for a short time.