**Interaction Between Gut Microbiota and the Gut-Brain Axis**

The SCFAs produced by gut microbiota also interact with gut hormone signaling to affect eating behavior. These SCFAs interact with the host metabolism by binding to specific G-protein coupled receptors (GPR), including GPR41 and GPR43, causing the release of the peptide tyrosine-tyrosine (PYY), which enters circulation and interacts with the hypothalamus to reduce overall food intake.

One specific SCFA, butyrate, is believed to reduce energy expenditure by increasing plasma glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP), and PYY.

Literature also shows that gut microbiota may be directly involved in stimulating the vagal nerve, at least partially through the release of GLP-1, PYY, and cholecystokinin (CCK) by enteroendocrine cells which transmits information from the gut to the hypothalamus to regulate appetite and energy homeostasis.

Gut microbiota also influences the release of serotonin and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), which control host appetite and energy regulation.

**Gut Microbiota and Fatty Liver Disease**

Gut microbiota dysbiosis has also been linked with fatty liver disease (FLD) associated with obesity.Bacteroides populations, and hepatic fibrosis correlates with increased Ruminococcus.

Gut microbiota are also indirectly involved with triglyceride deposition in the liver via interactions with fasting-induced adiposity factor (FIAF). FIAF is a lipoprotein lipase inhibitor released by enterocytes whose expression is inhibited by gut microbiota.