The pelvic outlet is an approximately diamond-shaped space that marks the inferior margin of the true pelvis. This opening in the pelvis has boundaries that mirror the perineal triangle boundaries, as the two spaces share a common base.

Anatomic boundaries of the pelvic outlet:

- Anterior: inferior margin of the pubic symphysis

- Anteriolateral: inferior rami of the pubis and ischial tuberosities

- Posterolateral: inferior margins of the sacrotuberous ligaments

- Posterior: anterior border of the coccyx

Three diameters can describe measurements of the pelvic outlet: anteroposterior, posterior sagittal, and transverse (intertuberous). The anteroposterior (AP) diameter, from the pubic symphysis to the sacrococcygeal joint, is the largest diameter of the pelvic outlet and typically measures between 9.5 to 12.5 cm. This measurement can vary widely due to the mobility of the coccyx. The transverse diameter, between the ischial tuberosities, is generally between 8 to 11 cm. In males, all measurements are slightly shorter relative to body size than in females. In females, these diameters are important in pelvimetry and have demonstrated to increase during labor to facilitate the delivery of a fetus through the pelvic outlet.

The bony pelvis and the pelvic outlet have several functions. The pelvis provides protection for the internal pelvic organs contained within the pelvic cavity. The bony pelvis has many structural functions from a load-bearing perspective, supporting the weight of the body, stabilizing the upper trunk, and coordinating movements as the legs maneuver. Several ligaments join the bones of the pelvis and segment the openings within the bones, which aid in cushioning the weight of the body and allow for some mobility during the labor. The bony pelvis acts as the attachment site for several ligaments, trunk, and lower limb muscles. Foramens, or openings within the bony structure of the pelvis, permit passage of nerves and vasculature between the upper and lower body. The terminal segments of the vagina, the urinary and gastrointestinal tracts transverse the opening of the pelvic outlet. In females, the pelvic outlet also offers support and guidance for a fetus through the birth canal.