Patients with critical limb ischemia/chronic limb-threatening ischemia (CLI/CLTI) at risk for developing gangrene will present with limb pain that has progressed from intermittent claudication with exertion to chronic rest pain. The pain may be worsened in an elevated leg and improved in the dependent position due to compromised blood flow. If a concurrent neuropathy is present (most commonly from diabetes), then there may not be a consistent history of pain, and tissue loss may be the first presentation of ischemia.

On physical exam, patients with ischemic gangrene will have rubor of the affected extremity when dependent, and early pallor with elevation. Capillary refill will be reduced, and there may be a loss of overlying hair. Ankle pulses are frequently absent. The location of tissue loss may help identify the cause; ischemic tissue loss typically involves the toes and distal foot; venous ulcerations often overlie the malleoli; neuropathic ulcerations usually start on areas of pressure along with the sole.

Wet gangrene should be suspected if there is associated drainage and edema in the setting of a patient with a previous foot ulcer or tissue injury secondary to diabetes or ischemia. Additionally, plantar tenderness increases the concern for a possible deep foot abscess and should be evaluated thoroughly.

Severe acute limb ischemia will present with significant lower extremity pain, sensory loss (ranging from mild at the toes to permanent diffuse nerve damage), and paralysis of the affected limb. The arterial flow will be inaudible initially, followed by inaudible venous flow as the disease process progresses.

Gas gangrene presents with pain, edema, the development of hemorrhagic bullae, and color changes ranging from a pale coloration to a bronze-purplish red coloration. The patient often has an associated history of trauma or recent surgical intervention.Streptococcus pyogenes (group A streptococcus), may start as an erythematous initial lesion and progress to a dusky skin coloration with overlying hemorrhagic bullae within 24 to 72 hours of injury. Once the skin becomes gangrenous and starts sloughing, there is a high mortality risk. Patients with necrotizing infections of any type often present with edema, fever, malaise, and pain out of proportion to exam findings – this subtle presentation increases the risk of delayed diagnosis, and high clinical suspicion is essential.