Pulmonary tuberculosis is the most common involvement in active tuberculosis. Extrapulmonary tuberculosis is seen in 10-42% of patients, depending on various host and bacterial factors.

In pulmonary tuberculosis, the most commonly reported symptom is a chronic cough. Cough most of the time is productive, sometimes mixed with blood. Constitutional symptoms like fever, weight loss, lymphadenopathy, and night sweats are commonly reported. Extrapulmonary tuberculosis can affect any organ and can have a varied presentation.

When the clinical suspicion is high, further history should be obtained evaluating for risk factors of active tuberculosis:

- History of HIV infection - Degree of immunosuppression influence the clinical manifestations.

- History of prior tuberculosis treatment

- History of a positive purified protein derivative of the tuberculin test result

- Emigration from or travel to an area where tuberculosis is endemic

- Contact with a person who has active TB

The presentation of secondary tuberculosis is different from that of primary progressive disease as the hypersensitivity, and tissue reaction is more severe in secondary tuberculosis. Primary tuberculosis often causes middle and lower lung field opacities associated with mediastinal adenopathy. Whereas secondary tuberculosis commonly involves upper lobes, causing opacities, cavities, or fibrotic scar tissue.

The active disease could also result in systemic dissemination of tubercles and manifest as miliary tuberculosis, which resembles millet-shaped lesions on radiographic images of the chest. Tuberculosis could also spread into the bowel, spine (Pott disease), or central nervous system (tubercular meningitis). Pleural tuberculosis is considered extrapulmonary tuberculosis. HIV co-infected patients with immunosuppression are at increased risk for extrapulmonary and disseminated tuberculosis.

Physical examination depends on the organs involved. In the case of pulmonary TB, a patient can have crepitations, and bronchial breath sounds, especially over the upper lobes or affected area indicating cavity or consolidation. Signs of extrapulmonary TB are varied and can include:

- Lymphadenopathy

- Cutaneous lesions

- Pleural effusion

- Neurological deficit

- Confusion, coma

- Chorioretinitis

- Vertebral collapse