IG is available either as 5% (50 mg/dL) or 10% (100 mg/dL) liquid or as lyophilized preparations. As the name suggests, IVIG is administered intravenously, and the half-life of a typical intravenous immunoglobulin infusion is about 3 to 4 weeks. The dosage, peak concentrations achieved, and frequency of dosing, as elaborated in the text, appear in summary form in Table 2.

**Low-dose replacement therapy**: In PIs, IVIG is usually administered at replacement doses of 400 to 600 mg/kg per month, achieving plasma levels of 1200 to 1400 mg/dL.

**High-dose immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory therapy**: For immunomodulation, higher doses of IVIG are necessary, ranging from 1000 to 3000 mg/kg of body weight to achieve peak plasma concentrations of 2500 to 3500 mg/dL. The optimal dosage, duration, and frequency are usually determined based on the indication, response to treatment, adverse effects, relapse rate, infectious episodes, patient preferences, and affordability. In general, a high-dose IVIG protocol, usually but not always, involves an initial dose, maintenance dose, tapering/intensifying dose, and discontinuation.

**Hyperimmune therapy**: The dosage of hyperimmune IVIG varies with every indication, but some generalizations are possible. The most common means of administration is as a single intramuscular dose after the suspected exposure to a particular pathogen, and the earlier it is administered after exposure, the better the outcome. In addition to the intramuscular route, some of these immune sera are given as IVIG therapy. They may also be administered in a multi-dose regimen; for example, 750 mg/kg of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) IVIG is given every month to infants in RSV season. The dosage can also increase in cases of immunocompromised and immunosuppressed patients.

**Infusion rate:**is another important parameter to consider in IVIG therapy, especially in patients new to IVIG therapy. Infusions are started at a rate of 0.5 to 1 mL/kg/hour for the first 15 to 30 minutes, and if no adverse reaction occurs, then the rate can be increased subsequently every 15 to 30 minutes to a maximum of 3 to 6 mL/kg/hour.

Pharmacokinetic profiles of IVIG products show a considerable interindividual variability and also vary in different disease states; for example, in bone marrow recipients, the reported half-life of IVIG is around 2 to 6 days.

SCIG therapy can be a consideration in the event of any systemic adverse effects and poor venous access. SCIG is usually administered at a lower dose of 100 to 200 mg/kg and is administered much more frequently, i.e., every week or two weeks, and achieves a better nadir (trough level) than IVIG that achieves higher peak levels.