Using SD allows for a quick overview of a population as long as the population follows a normal (Gaussian) distribution. In these populations, we know that 1 SD covers 68% of observations, 2 SD covers 95% of observations, and 3 SD covers 99.7% of observations.

A hypothetical example will help clarify this point: Say a study looking at the effect of a new chemotherapy agent on life expectancy concludes that it increases life expectancy by 5 years.

A mean of 5 years could be achieved by widely different data sets. For example, everyone in the sample could have shown an increase between 4 to 6 years in life expectancy. However, another data set that would satisfy this mean would be if half the sample showed no statistical increase in life expectancy while the other half had an increase of 10 years. Including an SD can help readers quickly resolve this ambiguity as the former case would have a small SD while the latter would have a large SD. This allows readers to interpret the results of the study more accurately.

Furthermore, finding a “normal” range of measurements within medicine is often a key piece of information. One example would be the range of a laboratory value (such as full blood count) expected if the measurement was conducted in healthy individuals. Often this is the 95% reference range, where 2.5% of values will be lesser than the reference range, and 2.5% of values will be greater than the reference range. This makes the SD extremely useful in data sets that follow a normal distribution because it can quickly calculate the range in which 95% of values lie.

Another advantage of reporting the SD is that it reports the scatter within the data in the same units as the data itself. This is in contrast to the variance of the data set, which is equivalent to the square of the SD, and hence its units are the units of the data squared. Therefore, although the variance can be useful in certain scenarios, it is generally not used in data description. Through sharing the same unit, the SD allows for the data to be more easily interpreted.

It is also important to know the disadvantages of using an SD. The main issue is in data sets where there are extreme values or severe skewness, as these results can influence the mean and SD by a significant amount. Consequently, in scenarios where the data set does not follow a normal (Gaussian) distribution, other measures of dispersion are often used. Most commonly, the interquartile range (IQR) is used alongside the median of the dataset. This is due to the IQR being significantly more resistant to extreme values, as when calculating the IQR, only the data between the first and third quartiles are factored in. The data between the first and third quartile represents the middle 50% of values, so any unusually high or low values will not affect the calculation of the IQR. This gives a more accurate picture of the data set’s distribution than the SD.