Absorption: Danazol, like other steroids, is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal system. Peak plasma concentration of danazol is reached within 2 to 8 hours post oral administration of 400 mg tablet, with a median Tmax value of 4 hours. Steady-state concentrations require twice-daily dosing of danazol for six days.

Distribution: Danazol is lipophilic and hence has the potential to penetrate deep tissue compartments.

Metabolism and Excretion: Danazol is extensively metabolized in the liver to 2-hydroxymethyl ethisterone. It is mainly excreted in the urine, and a small amount is excreted in the feces. Danazol appears to be metabolized into two primary metabolites; these are 2-hydroxymethyl danazol and ethisterone. It has both urinary and fecal excretion, with urinary excretion accounting for the primary mode of excretion of the primary metabolites, while almost ten different products have been identified in feces. The half-life of danazol has been reported to be at a mean of 9.7 hours, while in patients with endometriosis, six months treatment with 200 mg tablets of danazol three times daily reported the half-life of danazol to be 23.7 hours.

Danazol has multiple mechanisms of action by which it exerts its effect. It is a synthetic steroid and possesses some structural similarities with testosterone. Therefore, some of the biological effects of danazol are related to and in line with other androgens.

Apart from the androgenic mode of action, danazol has also been shown to induce apoptosis and cytotoxicity and affect the expression of apoptosis regulating proteins in leukemic cells, where it has shown results in inducing apoptosis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.