**Lab Investigations**

- Baseline investigations which include complete blood count, renal and liver function tests can be sent for initial scrutiny. An abnormality would be detected in cases where a hepatic extension is suspected along with a deterioration in renal function as the tumor divides at a rapid pace.

- Epstein Barr virus has been invariably involved in the pathogenesis of the disease process. To establish an association, serum IgA levels are to be ordered. These carry both diagnostic and prognostic significance for the disease process.

**Imaging Studies**

- CT scan: A local tumor can be visualized extending from the roof of the pharynx. CT scan is the modality of choice as far as bone invasion, and intracranial extension is to be visualized. However, radiation exposure and its limited value in terms of soft tissue extension and nodal metastasis make MRI the preferred modality.

- MRI scan: MRI is the superior modality for assessing the tumor extension into the musculature and the nodal metastasis. The tumor bulk, along with local invasion, can be easily visualized and does not pose any threat of radiation.

- PET scan: It is the modality of choice for assessing remission and for investigating recurrence. PET-CT scan can augment the extent of distant metastasis as it is a whole-body scan. However, MRI can provide a greater level of local delineation, making it still the investigation of choice for local spread.

**Endoscopic Evaluation and Histopathological Analysis**

- The tumor can be visualized via nasopharyngoscopy, and the local extension along with tumor size can be assessed, and biopsy can be taken. However, the assessment may be hindered if the mass is too large to access the nasal passage.