The management of dextro-transposition of the great arteries can be challenging. While the correction of D-TGA is mostly the responsibility of a pediatric cardiothoracic surgeon, other specialists need to be involved in the care of the patient. Interventional pediatric cardiology needs to be consulted immediately for evaluation of cyanosis in a newborn which may facilitate the administration of prostaglandin E1 and balloon atrial septostomy.  Interventional cardiology will also be able to concomitantly perform angiography to determine which anomalies of the coronary arteries are present. During treatment and following discharge, general pediatrics should be involved in the care of the infant for routine preventative care and neurodevelopmental screening. If deficiencies in neurodevelopment are found on annual testing, pediatric neurology and psychiatry will need to be consulted as well. The pharmacist pre-operatively should assist with medication reconciliation and pain management.

In order to obtain the best outcomes the nurse caring for a patient with corrected TGA will monitor for:

- Cardiac dysrhythmias or heart palpitations

- New heart murmurs, bruits, or extra heart sounds

- Fatigue, shortness of breath, or chest pain

- An increasing or decreasing blood pressure

- A decrease in oxygen saturation or development of cyanosis

- Swelling in the lower extremities

These symptoms may signal a serious complication, and should be addressed promptly with the clinical team.

Additionally, the nurse should expect to perform frequent physical, cardiac, respiratory, and neurological assessments, monitor vital signs and hemodynamics, and check fluid and electrolyte status.  Patient and family education will be important during the pre-op, post-op, and discharge period. The best outcomes are achieved when the nurse, pharmacist, and surgeons work together to evaluate and monitor the patient and provide patient and family education in a coordinated manner. [Level V]