Surgery has been the mainstay treatment of breast cancer for several decades.  Multiple trials in the last several decades have led to the evolution away from radical approaches towards less extreme, breast-conserving procedures.  Often, the surgical treatment of breast cancer is accompanied by adjuvant or neoadjuvant therapy, including hormonal therapy, chemotherapy, and/or radiation therapy.

The NSABP B-06 randomized patients with stage I or II disease with tumors less than 4 cm to mastectomy vs. lumpectomy alone vs. lumpectomy with radiation. Overall survival showed no difference between the groups, but recurrence rates were significantly increased in lumpectomy-alone groups at 39.2% after 20 years. The standard of care has become lumpectomy with radiation in breast-conserving groups. Indications for breast-conserving surgery include DCIS/Tis and T1-2 tumors, if no contraindications to adjuvant radiation therapy, small tumors amenable to resection with clear margins, and acceptable cosmesis. Previous studies have cited a tumor size of 5 cm as a cutoff. However, treatment should be patient-specific, and women with larger breasts may still be eligible for breast-conserving surgery with a large tumor if the patient has sufficient breast size. Therefore, treatment decisions should vary on a case-by-case basis.

Mastectomy, on the other hand, involves the complete removal of breast tissue.  Multiple indications for mastectomy exist. These include patients with advanced disease, including T2 (greater than 5 cm) tumors, multicentric or multifocal disease, chest wall involvement, or inflammatory breast cancer, which is generally considered T4 disease. Another indication for mastectomy includes patients with Paget disease, indicating tumor cells of the epidermis of the nipple-areolar complex. Up to 90% of patients with Paget disease have associated cancer in another area of the unilateral breast. In patients without additional cancer elsewhere in the breast, central lumpectomy with sentinel lymph node biopsy is a viable option if followed by whole breast radiation treatment. Mastectomy is also the indicated approach in patients who initially undergo breast-conserving surgery and have persistently positive margins, as well as patients who previously underwent breast-conserving surgery and radiation and develop a recurrence or new primary cancer in the unilateral breast.

Prophylactic mastectomies have increased in the past several years; this is partially due to a gross misunderstanding of the overall likelihood of developing contralateral breast cancer. Contralateral prophylactic mastectomy is generally most recommended in patients who have an increased lifetime risk for developing contralateral breast cancer.  This situation includes patients who are BRCA positive, have a strong family history, or any young patient with biologically aggressive breast disease.

Some patients elect to have skin-sparing mastectomies, particularly if electing for reconstructive options. Patients who are eligible for skin-sparing mastectomies include those in which adequate margins are achievable with this approach.

In the discussion of the surgical treatment of breast cancer, the management of the axilla is an integral component with constantly evolving recommendations. Of note, excision of lymph nodes only provides staging and prognostic value, rather than treatment. Overall, recommendations have changed toward doing less over time, and several landmark studies have paved the path towards current axillary management.  The overall goal has been determining how to avoid overtreatment of the axilla, thus minimizing associated complications of axillary dissection, including lymphedema. The NSABP B-32 trial, for example, examined patients who received axillary lymph node dissection only in the setting of positive sentinel lymph nodes.  This approach remained the standard of care for over a decade. Multiple studies, including the NSABP B-32 trial, however, demonstrated that many women with one positive sentinel lymph node did not have further positive lymph nodes upon completion dissection.

On the other hand, a complete axillary dissection is necessary in certain circumstances. It is recommended at the time of the primary procedure in patients who have locally advanced (clinical stage T4) or inflammatory breast cancer, high-risk T3 breast cancer, occult cancer with proven metastasis in the axilla, positive sentinel lymph nodes which are outside the Z0011 selection criteria (i.e., more than two lymph nodes are positive, matted nodes, mastectomy, breast conservation therapy without whole-breast radiation therapy), failed sentinel lymph node mapping, axillary recurrence following previous treatment for breast cancer, and in those with persistently positive sentinel lymph nodes following neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Additionally, it is a requirement in any clinically node-positive patients. In other words, these patients have biopsy-proven metastasis in an axillary lymph node, and no neoadjuvant chemotherapy is planned.