For patients who are Rh-negative and also have a negative antibody screen, it is important to try and prevent them from becoming sensitized during the pregnancy course. Possible reasons a patient may become exposed to fetal blood and thus sensitized include miscarriage, amniocentesis, vaginal bleeding, placental abruption, and abdominal trauma. If any of these instances occur, RhoGAM (anti-D immunoglobulin or Rhesus factor IgG) should be administered.

If the antibody screen for Rh comes back positive during the initial prenatal visit, the titer is checked as well. Antibody titers of 1:16 and greater have been associated with fetal hydrops. If paternity is not in question, blood type can be performed on the father of the baby to determine whether the fetus is at risk. However, because approximately 5% of all pregnancies have unknown or incorrect paternity, the safest course is to treat all pregnancies as if the fetus is at risk.

Throughout pregnancy, the antibody titer is followed approximately every 4 weeks. As long as it remains less than 1:16, the pregnancy can be managed expectantly. However, if it exceeds 1:16, serial amniocentesis should be started as early as 16 to 20 weeks. At the first amniocentesis, fetal cells can be collected and analyzed for the Rh antigen to determine fetal Rh status. If negative, the pregnancy can be followed expectantly. However, if the fetus is Rh-positive, fetal anemia is screened for, using fetal middle cerebral artery (MCA) Doppler measurements.

Historically, prior to the use of MCA Doppler, the evaluation of Rh-positive fetus in an Rh-negative woman with positive titers 1:16 or greater was done with serial amniocenteses to assess the amniotic fluid by a spectrophotometer.