The severity of symptoms and likely even the number of symptoms present are influenced by the degree, location, and time from the onset of the obstruction. The presence of pain is common in urinary tract obstructions. Patients may present with abdominal and/or flank pain. The location, quality, severity, and modifying factors of the discomfort may help to aid in determining the location and underlying cause. For example, dull flank pain with sharp radiation into the lower quadrant or groin may suggest ureterolithiasis as the underlying cause of obstruction.

Nocturia, dysuria, urinary urgency or frequency, and decreased force of urinary stream should suggest benign prostatic hypertrophy/hyperplasia or prostatic adenocarcinoma. Fever should increase your concern for concomitant urinary tract infection and, possibly, septicemia. Prostatic malignancy should be considered in the presence of recent unintentional weight loss, night sweats, and hematuria with a nodular prostate on examination. Radiation and other treatments for prior malignancies can increase scarring in the GU tract and produce obstruction. Gastrointestinal symptoms of constipation, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may aid in diagnosing fecal impaction, bowel obstruction, or a colonic mass as contributing factors to the urinary tract obstructions. Recent surgeries (e.g., appendectomy, hysterectomy) can suggest ureteral injury. As evidenced above, providers must perform a complete history and a thorough review of systems.

A complete examination should be performed, focusing on the abdomen and genitalia. The presence of a distended bladder should direct the clinician to the possibility of urinary retention. A digital rectal examination may reveal prostatic enlargement or fecal impaction. An assessment of strength, sensation, reflexes, and muscle tone can be informative. A thorough history and physical examination will often point towards the underlying etiology.