The toxic potential of hydrocarbons depends on the following:

- **Physical Characteristics**
- Viscosity: thickness of a liquid. Fluids with low viscosity flow more easily.
- Surface tension: the ability of liquid molecules to cohere to each other.
- Volatility: the ability of a liquid or solid to vaporize.

- **Chemical Characteristics**
- Aliphatic
- Aromatic
- Halogenated

- **Presence of Toxic Additives**
- Pesticides
- Heavy metals

- **Routes of Exposure**
- Inhalation
- Ingestion
- Topical

- 
**Concentration**

- 
**Dose**

Toluene and benzene are highly volatile aromatic hydrocarbons with a usual route of exposure in the form of inhalation. Inhalation of an aromatic hydrocarbon can result in systemic absorption and the potential for significant toxicity.

**Pulmonary Toxicity**

All hydrocarbons, including toluene and benzene, can cause chemical pneumonitis by direct contact with the pulmonary parenchyma and destroying alveolar and capillary membranes. This results in vascular permeability and edema.

**Cardiac Toxicity**

All hydrocarbons can cause life-threatening dysrhythmias, such as ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation.

**Central Nervous System Toxicity**

Toluene causes euphoria followed by depression.

**Renal and Metabolic Toxicities**

Toluene specifically causes renal tubular acidosis. The typical metabolic profile is a normal anion gap hyperchloremic acidosis with hypokalemia and a urine pH of 5.5. Toluene’s metabolites, hippuric acid and benzoic acid, are possibly the cause for an elevated anion gap metabolic acidosis. In addition, toluene also causes hypokalemia leading to muscle weakness and if low enough, muscle paralysis. Rhabdomyolysis is a common complication.

**Hematological Toxicities**

Exposure to benzene is associated with an increased incidence of hematologic disorders, such as aplastic anemia, acute myelogenous leukemia, and multiple myeloma.