Weight loss cannot be achieved without a caloric deficit.

Several factors are assessed when creating a weight loss plan. One of the first things calculated is a total daily energy expenditure (TDEE), which is largely based on basal metabolic rate (BMR). This is also known as resting energy expenditure (REE). The remaining portion is made up of the non-resting energy expenditure (NREE), which is subdivided to exercise activity thermogenesis (EAT), non-exercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT), and thermic effect of food (TEF). Using TDEE maintenance, calories are calculated, the total calories per day to maintain your current weight.

Delving further into the microscopic level, several hormones play prominent roles concerning energy expenditure. Two hormones directly linked to hunger are leptin and ghrelin. High levels of leptin are associated with satiety and energy expenditure. Ghrelin elevations are related to hunger and stimulating appetite. Triiodothyronine (T3) elevations are related to metabolic rate. Insulin regulates macronutrient metabolism and inhibits muscle protein breakdown.

There are many theories as to why weight loss plateaus occur. One popular theory is the "set point" theory. This theory suggests biological control of body weight is regulated by feedback loops from peripheral organs and tissue, such as leptin secretion from adipose tissue, back to the central nervous system to rebalance and maintain homeostasis. Another theory is a "settling point," which reflects metabolic adaptations to energy imbalance without specific feedback control.

Several studies confirm this phenomenon exists, and more research is needed to understand better why exactly on a micro-level. A leading theory on the biological level is that BMR decreases when you lose weight; lowering the TDEE is a greater amount than expected relative to the loss of body mass.

On a metabolic level, a series of chemical reactions occur to derive ATP. This process involves uncoupling proteins (UCPs), where energy substrate oxidation occurs along with oxygen consumption. This process contributes to energy expenditure and is thought to be a considerable portion of BMR. Hormonally, anabolic, anorexigenic, and thermogenic hormones are decreased with decreased energy intake, while orexigenic and catabolic hormones are increased. Ultimately this leads to decreased energy expenditure and increased hunger.