Achieving bedside nurse buy-in can be a challenging process when approaching shared governance. The increased level of work and time commitment associated with beginning a shared governance structure adds to the difficulty of receiving buy-in from bedside nurses.

Involving the nurses who work off shifts such as nights and weekends can provide and organization with concern. Reaching this population requires planning and diligence to meet their needs and expectations. A dedicated plan with follow-through is necessary to facilitate the involvement of these off shift nurses. Some ideas to achieve this would be to offer shared governance council meetings on nights and weekends, scheduling meetings during these off shifts every few months, and seeking out volunteers to be the advocate in reaching this group of nurses.

Nursing leadership must take time to provide education about the process, bring bedside nurses to the table from the start, and instill trust. Training is necessary to build a foundational knowledge of what shared governance is and how it will benefit the nursing staff and patients within the healthcare system. Having these nurses participate from the beginning will help build confidence in the process and assist with buy-in. Nurses participating also helps to begin the trust-building sooner, which will give the bedside nurses a greater sense of confidence and ownership of the shared governance structure.

Robust processes and procedures to support growth are vital to the success of any new program, but this is especially true of shared governance. Following the PDSA improvement cycle will assist an organization with developing sustainable policies and procedures during the shared governance planning, implementation, and evaluation stages. Tracking and monitoring are vital components to achieving and sustaining success.