American Heart Association (AHA) estimated that there were 6.2 million people with HF in the United States between 2013 and 2016.

Careful monitoring of the patient's clinical condition, daily weight, fluids intake, urine output, electrolytes, i.e., potassium and magnesium, kidney function monitoring with serum creatinine and serum blood urea nitrogen level is vital to monitor the response of furosemide. For example, if indicated for diuresis with furosemide, replete electrolytes lead to electrolyte depletion, and adjust the dose or even hold off on furosemide if laboratory work shows signs of kidney dysfunction. Similarly, patients who are on furosemide treatment in an ambulatory care setting need close monitoring to evaluate the response to treatment, intermittent electrolytes and kidney function monitoring to replete electrolytes and manage the dose of furosemide as indicated, and to assess for other adverse effects of the furosemide treatment and manage it accordingly.

While the clinician, NP, or PA will make the initial decision to treat with furosemide, the entire healthcare team must put forth an interprofessional effort to maintain therapy. Nursing will be on the front lines for inpatient or outpatient monitoring. They can also be the first to assess therapeutic effectiveness and watch for adverse drug reactions. Pharmacists should verify that dosing is appropriate, and to do so, they will need to have received renal and liver function testing results from the team. The pharmacist should also look for drug-drug interactions and alert the clinician or nurse if any are present. The pharmacy can also assist the clinician with therapy changes to address the braking phenomenon and ceiling effect. Clinicians can optimize furosemide therapy with a coordinated interprofessional team effort for positive patient results. [Level 5]