The secretion of gonadal hormones such as testosterone via testes in males and estrogen via ovaries in females is mainly regulated by the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis (HPG axis). The hypothalamus initially secretes gonadotropic releasing hormone (GnRH), which stimulates the anterior pituitary release of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). FSH and LH go on to directly stimulate the testes and ovaries. The stimulation of the testes increases plasma levels of testosterone, while the stimulation of the ovaries increases plasma levels of estrogen. Increasing levels of testosterone and estrogen both have feedback inhibitory effects on the GnRH release from the hypothalamus. The inhibition of GnRH essentially causes a downward cascade of inhibition on the HPG axis, thus decreasing all associated downstream hormones such as LH, FSH, testosterone, estrogen, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEAS), growth hormone (GH). Opioid agonists have been shown to act via this same feedback inhibitory fashion on the hypothalamus, while opioid antagonists have been shown to stimulate GnRH release.

It is important to note the origin of androgen production in females as primarily via the adrenal glands. This may explain why DHEAS, secreted by the adrenal glands, is a better measure for adrenal androgen function in females. It is well known that just one month of sustained opioid therapy regardless of opioid class may be sufficient to reduce DHEAS levels in a significant fashion.

As stated above, the reduced production of adrenally synthesized DHEAS signifies decreased cellular activity or perhaps atrophy of adrenal origin. Many case reports have documented the suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA axis). Adrenal glands may have a blunted response to corticotrophin hormone, which may not allow the body to synthesize appropriate levels of cortisol when necessary, thus placing this patient population at increased risk of adrenal crisis and/or adrenal insufficiency at times of increased physiological stress such as surgery and sickness.