Huntington disease falls into a differential diagnosis for dementia, chorea, and psychiatric disturbances.

**Non inherited conditions:**

- Tardive dyskinesia

- Thyrotoxicosis

- Cerebral lupus

- Levodopa-induced dyskinesia

- Group A beta-hemolytic streptococcus.

**Inherited conditions:**

1) Chorea-acanthocytosis:

- Autosomal recessive.

- Due to mutations in the VPS13A gene, that codes for chorein, a protein involved in intracellular protein sorting.

- Clinical features include facio-bucco-linguo-masticatory chorea, dystonia, and dyskinesia that are aggravated by feeding, accompanied by tongue protrusion and self-mutilating tongue. Patients might also present with violent neck spasms with sudden flexion/extension.

- The progressive movement disorder, along with cognitive and behavioral changes are similar to HD. However, unlike HD, the presence of myopathy, acanthocytosis, as well as the mean age of onset of 30 years, are differentiating features

2) McLeod syndrome:

- X-linked recessive.

- It is caused by mutations in the XK gene.

- It affects the basal ganglia, muscles, myocardium, and peripheral nerves. Chorea may involve the facio-buccal region, but tongue or lip biting, dysphagia, or parkinsonism is rarely seen.

- Cognitive and psychiatric disturbances overlap with HD while the presence of acanthocytosis, compensated hemolysis, as well as McLeod blood group phenotype (absence of expression of Kell antigen on erythrocytes) help to distinguish it from HD.

3) Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration:

- Autosomal recessive.

- It is caused by mutations of the PANK2 gene, that codes for pantothenate kinase. This enzyme plays a role in the synthesis of coenzyme A from vitamin B5 and is associated with lipid metabolism.

- The age of onset is before 6 years and presents with generalized dystonia with bucco-facial and lingual involvement. Parkinsonism, choreoathetosis, and pyramidal signs might also be observed. A later onset of symptoms with lesser severe presentation might also be seen with rigidity, focal arm dystonia, or cognitive and behavioral problems.

4) Wilson disease:

- Presents with orofacial dystonia associated with parkinsonism in the setting of generalized dystonia that could pose a diagnostic challenge.

5) Huntington disease-like 1:

- Autosomal dominant.

- Range of clinical features that overlap with Huntington disease.

- Earlier onset of action, as well as slower progression, can be used as differentiating features.

6)Huntington disease-like 2:

- Autosomal dominant.

- These are clinically indistinguishable from HD.

- Prevalence is highest among and exclusive to patients of African descent

7) Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17:

- Autosomal dominant.

- Overlapping features with HD include chorea, dementia, and psychiatric disturbances. Cerebellar ataxia is a prominent movement disorder.

8) Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy:

- Autosomal dominant.

- Also presents with progressive movement disorders and dementia, psychiatric disturbances are common.

- Ataxia and myoclonus are more prominent movement disorders.