Liver biopsy is a very safe procedure in the hands of skilled operators.  The overall rate of serious complications was approximately 1% in two large series, while in another, overall mortality risk was estimated to be 0.2%. The usual indicators of complications requiring overnight hospital observation are severe abdominal or shoulder tip pain not relieved with one dose of parenteral analgesic, hypotension, or tachycardia following the procedure.

**Pain**

This is the most common complication after liver biopsy. It can be seen in up to 84% of the patients. It is most common at the site of the biopsy or the right shoulder (this often indicates a subcapsular hematoma), or both. In most patients, it is usually controlled with analgesics. Severe persistent pain should alert the physician to investigate serious causes of pain like bile peritonitis, hemorrhage. The patient may require admission and radiological assessment.

**Bleeding**

The risk of fatal hemorrhage in patients without malignant disease is 0.04%, and the risk of nonfatal hemorrhage is 0.16%. In those with malignancy, the risk of nonfatal hemorrhage is 0.4% and 0.57% for nonfatal hemorrhage. Three types of bleeding can be seen:

- Free intraperitoneal bleed: This can be secondary to liver laceration with deep breathing during the intercostal procedure, perforation of distended portal or hepatic veins or aberrant arteries, or inadvertent puncture of a major intrahepatic blood vessel. The patients usually present with hemodynamic instability, severe abdominal pain, and a rapid drop in hemoglobin. It is imperative to recognize this complication early. The patient should be admitted, resuscitated, and both a interventional radiology and surgeon should be consulted.  Angiographic embolization is usually successful in controlling the bleeding, but in rare cases, surgical intervention might be required, particularly in the transplant patient who carries a higher risk for major bile duct injury with arterial embolization. Rarely bleeding can be intrathoracic from an intercostal artery.

- Intrahepatic/subcapsular hematoma: These can be seen even in asymptomatic patients. Bleeding usually presents with pain, tachycardia, and a mild drop in hemoglobin with the rise in serum transaminases.  If large, they can cause right upper quadrant tenderness and hepatomegaly, and appear as triangular hyper dense segments in the arterial phase of CT scan. Most patients can be managed with conservative treatment, and radiological or surgical intervention is rarely required.

- Hemobilia:  It usually presents with the classical triad of gastrointestinal bleeding, biliary pain, and jaundice. The bleeding is usually arterial in origin but can be venous in patients with preexisting portal hypertension. It can vary in severity from the occult to exsanguinating hemorrhage. Hemobilia rarely presents acutely and most commonly presents after a median of 5 days with the gradual erosion of a biopsy-induced hematoma or pseudoaneurysm into the bile duct. The presentation can vary from hemodynamically significant bleeding to chronic anemia.  Imaging or endoscopy can make a diagnosis. Treatment depends on the severity of the bleed. Hemodynamically significant radiologic intervention may be required. ERCP might be needed in some cases to remove clotted blood from the bile duct, causing obstruction and cholangitis.

**Transient Bacteremia**

This is usually clinically insignificant except in patients with obstructive jaundice like primary sclerosing cholangitis or in the post-transplant setting. Currently, there is no recommendation for treating with prophylactic antibiotics and treatment can be offered on a case by case basis.

**Bile Peritonitis**

This can occur with the inadvertent puncture of the gallbladder or in patients with obstructive jaundice and dilated bile ducts. It usually presents with abdominal pain, fever, leukocytosis. It can also be painless in some patients. Biliary scintigraphy demonstrates the leak. Treatment is usually with fluids and antibiotics. Very rarely, endoscopic procedures like ERCP or surgery may be required.

**Miscellaneous**

Cardiovascular complications, especially in patients with preexisting heart disease, arteriovenous fistula, pneumothorax, are other rare reported complications. Carcinoid crisis can occur after the percutaneous biopsy.