Patients with floating knee injuries should undergo evaluation according to standard protocols for trauma and as per clinical presentation. If polytrauma was involved, then the basic ATLS protocol should be implemented first. Therefore, most urgent needs should be addressed first before any intervention elsewhere, which includes examining the patient's airway, breathing, circulation, disability, and exposure to harmful substances or situations (ABCDE’s). Generally, standard trauma workup will be a requirement in most instances and stabilization of a critically ill patient will need to be first before any intervention to musculoskeletal complaints.  Once the patient is stable, and other life-threatening injuries have been dealt with or ruled out, focusing on other injuries such as the floating knee is then indicated.

Ensuring the patient is neurovascularly intact is one of the most important things for which to check. Examining sensation in all dermatomes of the lower extremity as well as pulses of the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial artery should be tested first after addressing any circulation matters. Posterior displacement of the distal femur may also cause damage to the adjacent popliteal artery. If this is suspected, a Doppler ultrasound should be conducted to rule out intimal tears.

Imaging in the form of plain film radiograph is the best initial tool for diagnosis.  X-rays will allow an initial gestalt view of the affected limb to rule in/out any obvious fractures. CT scan is a diagnostic option to further investigate any complicated fractures, including the severity of comminution and bone loss and can assist in the planning of fixation techniques and predicting any complications that may arise. Due to the high incidence of ligamentous injuries associated with floating knee type injuries, an MRI may also be necessary.