Chronic fatigue syndrome frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma. The hallmark symptom is the post-exertional fatigue associated with numerous neurological, cardiovascular, respiratory, and gastrointestinal complaints. Patients can also exhibit uncontrolled anxiety, panic attacks, and impaired social functioning. Chronic fatigue syndrome is a diagnosis made on clinical examination after excluding other possible etiologies. Therefore, it is essential to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists, including a pain specialist, psychiatrist, psychotherapist, nursing staff, other clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, or PAs), and possibly a physical therapist and/or pharmacist, depending on the treatment course taken. Even though chronic fatigue syndrome has fatigue as one of the three mandatory symptoms, it is a complex multisystem neurological disease with evidence of inflammation in the brain. As the term myalgic encephalomyelitis indicates, a neurology consultation can be useful when indicated.

All interprofessional team members must follow the patient and record and progress or deterioration of their condition and inform other team members so changes in the management approach can occur if necessary. Open communication and diligent documentation are essential to the interprofessional strategy so that all team members can access the same patient data. This will help drive better outcomes. [Level 5]

The primary non-pharmacological treatment modalities are cognitive behavior therapy and graded exercise therapy. There is a wide range of medications that can be used for CFS. They range from NSAIDs to antidepressants; therefore, a pharmacy consult is in order. The pharmacist can perform medication reconciliation and check medication dosing, reporting any concerns to the other team members as appropriate.

A broad range of differential diagnoses should be considered before diagnosing chronic fatigue syndrome. However, consultation with an interprofessional healthcare team is recommended to improve outcomes.