**Blood vessels of the Anterior Cervical Region**

The deep midline viscera of this region are the larynx and thyroid gland. The two lateral stalks of neuro-vasculature largely supply these two areas.

Below the subcutaneous platysma and investing layer of the deep cervical fascia in the middle reveals a vast network of blood vessels that supply not only this area but the entire body.

Of note, this area contains the carotid sheath, which is a thick fascial layer emerging posterior from the sternocleidomastoid. It then ascends the length of the carotid triangle, and its contents pass behind the posterior belly of the digastric and continue into the lateral cervical region of the neck. This sheath encases the following vessels: common carotid artery (a superior portion), both proximal portions of the internal and external carotid arteries, the internal jugular vein and the vagus nerve.

The common carotid artery can be found anteromedial to the internal jugular vein, and this artery then bifurcates into the internal and external carotid arteries between C3 and C4, at the superior border of the thyroid cartilage.

The internal carotid artery ascends posterior to the external carotid artery to enter the cranium and supply the head with blood. The external carotid artery branches immediately post-bifurcation and supplies the majority of structures in the neck.

The four most proximal branches of the external carotid supply several neck structures, while the remaining four of eight branches provide blood supply elsewhere in the body. The superior thyroid artery branches anteriorly and descends to supply the superior pole of the thyroid gland, as well as the thyrohyoid and cricothyroid muscles, and the internal larynx as the superior laryngeal artery branch.

The posterior aspect of the external carotid artery yields the ascending pharyngeal artery, which dives deep through the pre-tracheal fascia and supplies the pharyngeal constrictor muscles.

Another anterior surface branch of the external carotid is the lingual artery, just deep to the mylohyoid muscle to supply tongue muscles and the sublingual salivary gland.

The last of the four anterior cervical branches of the external carotid is the facial artery, which branches off the external carotid just superior to the lingual artery. After passing deep to the posterior belly of the digastric muscle, it continues superficially to the mylohyoid muscle and hooks over the inferior edge of the mandible, anterior to the masseter muscle. Many numerous branches of the facial artery supply the face, soft palate, and submandibular salivary glands on either side.

**Lymphatic Drainage of the Anterior Cervical Region**

The anterior cervical neck region is also home to many lymph nodes that drain the head and neck structures and are essential for metastasis of head and neck cancers and spread of head and neck infections.

Lymphatic drainage of this area of the neck is vast. It includes the anterior superficial and deep cervical lymph nodes, which further drain the sternocleidomastoid region. The anterior cervical lymph nodes and lateral jugular lymph nodes drain the nuchal region and the larynx, trachea, and thyroid regions.

Facial lymphatic drainage in the area includes the submandibular nodes, which are deep to the submandibular gland within the submandibular triangle and drain the oral cavity and lower face soft tissue structures. Another important lymphatic drainage basin of the anterior cervical neck is the submental lymph nodes, which lie in the submental triangle and drain the floor of the mouth, tongue apex, and lower lip.

Most importantly, circulation and lymphatics unify in proximity to the anterior cervical region. The entire body drains into the thoracic duct, and that drains into the left internal jugular and subclavian veins. However, the head and neck, right upper limb, and hemithorax all drain lymphatics into the right lymphatic duct and then into the right internal jugular and subclavian veins.