The prostate gland is located at the base of the penis in the pelvis. From a lateral, anatomic view, it is adjacent and anterior to the rectum as well as inferior to the urinary bladder.

The tissue is predominantly glandular, producing an alkaline secretion that constitutes about 25 to 30% of the seminal fluid.

Malignancy arising from the gland is classified as an adenocarcinoma. The commonest metastatic sites are the draining regional lymph nodes and the bony skeleton.

The stages of malignant neoplasia are well-studied. It begins with prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) and/or atypical small acinar proliferation (ASAP), progresses to localized malignancy, then to advanced cancer with local invasion, and finally to florid metastatic disease.

The genome and epigenome play a crucial role in the initiation and progression of prostatic malignancy. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have shown that about 31.5% of the familial relative risk (FRR) is attributed to 167 common variants or susceptible loci in the genome, and approximately 6% are due to BRCA2 and HOXB13. The first GWAS (2006) found single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 8q24 loci, which are believed to influence the oncogene MYC.

Besides HOXB13 and BRCA2, familial mutations have also been found in ATM, CHEK2, BRCA1, RAD51D, and PALB2 genes.

As for common somatic variants found in prostatic cancer, the following are implicated:

- Deletions in APC, CHD1, ETS2, NKX3.1, and SETD2.

- Deletions/mutations in ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, ERF, KMT2A, KMT2C, KMT2D, KDM1A, KDM3A, KDM6A, NCOR1, NCOR2, PTEN, RB1, SMAD4, SMARCA1, SMARCB1, and TP53.

- Amplification/mutation/splice variant mutations in AR.

- Fusion/deletion in ERG and ETVs.

- Mutations in EZH2, FOXA1, IDH1, and SPOP.

- Amplification in MYC, MYCN, and SETDB1.

The E26 transformation-specific (ETS) family of transcription factors is particularly important in prostate cancer, as TMPRSS2-ERG fusion is seen in ~50% of localized malignancies.ERG and ETVs are members of the ETS family of transcription factors.)

The molecular biology of metastatic prostate cancer is typified by novel EMT (Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition) processes.

- Bone metastasis is supported by stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1/ CXCL12) and the CXCR4 receptor for homing and invasion of tumor cells.

- Hematopoietic stem cells locate and bind to niche via annexin A2 (ANXA2) that is found to be overexpressed in prostate cancer cells.

- Tumor-derived exosomes carrying integrins have been implicated in organotropic metastasis.

- Increased RANK-RANKL signaling within prostate tumor cells has significantly promoted skeletal metastasis.