Fractures of bones have varying clinical significance ranging from simple fractures, for which supportive measures, reduction, splinting, or casting is indicated, to potentially complicated fractures, which may become surgical cases.  One such example of a potential surgical emergency is a blowout fracture of the orbital floor, which may lead to globe muscle entrapment, diplopia, and subsequent activation of the oculocardiac reflex.

Novel technologies in the field of augmented reality are being utilized experimentally to help train orthopedic surgeons to perform operations.Journal of Orthopedic Research by Gonzalez et al. called for a greater diversity of tests to be performed to assess the performance of cementless total knee replacements. The authors argue that finite elemental studies, which are typically done to evaluate the interaction between implants and bone, should utilize additional parameters aside from peak load, which is the traditional metric.

Other clinical issues that may arise within the skeletal system are primary malignant neoplasms such as osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, chondrosarcoma, multiple myeloma, fibrosarcoma, and malignant giant cell tumors.  A bone may also become infected with pathogenic microorganisms, a condition known as osteomyelitis, which is often seeded by a dead piece of bone tissue known as a sequestrum. Avascular necrosis is another potential clinical condition. In this scenario, the bone loses its blood supply and undergoes necrosis, leading to dead bone tissue retained in the body. The femoral head is particularly susceptible due to its blood supply as is the scaphoid when displaced in a fracture because of its retrograde blood supply — a weakness of bone due to loss of density results in osteoporosis, a condition typically seen in the elderly. Dietary deficiencies in vitamin D can lead to rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults.  These conditions present with weak, soft bones, bone pain, and often the characteristic bent shins seen in children with rickets. When vitamin D is not available at physiologically adequate levels, the osteoid secreted by osteoblasts is not mineralized, leading to these conditions.

The above does not represent an exhaustive account of each of the potential clinical scenarios in which the skeletal system may play a role as that is beyond the scope of this article.  It should, however, allow for a base-level understanding of the structure and function of bone, and why it is essential for clinicians to consider this dynamic organ system.