Following are some necessary prerequisites needed to carry out the procedure of wound grafting successfully:

- Watson knife, Goulian blade

- Scalpel

- Electrocautery

- Dermatome

- Mineral oil

- Skin mesher

- Suture or staples

An appropriate team includes a well-trained surgeon, an anesthesiologist, a scrub tech, and a scrub nurse.

Preparation of the wound bed is essential to a successful procedure. Early excision and debridement to healthy tissue are vital to ensuring that the graft will heal. The standard of care for successful grafting is a 95% graft take. Removing eschar and necrotic tissue in a timely manner will lower the risk of developing a wound infection. This is essential to preventing the loss of the graft. Early excision has also been proven to decrease the number of contractures, scarring, skin tightness, and patients often are rehabilitated faster.

The eschar is removed in layers until healthy tissue is identified by diffuse punctate bleeding with a Watson knife or Goulian blade. This is known as tangential excision. Fascial excision allows for faster resection and provides a plane that is ready for grafting but can lead to subpar cosmetic results. Wounds over joints need early excision and grafting to help prevent excessive contracture.

Before placing the graft, all granulation tissue should be excised as it can have a significant bacterial burden and will prevent adherence of the graft. Skin margins should be freshened to expose healthy dermis. Hemostasis must be ensured to prevent the formation of a hematoma, failing the graft.