Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, is targeted in the treatment of anxiety disorder, insomnia, epilepsy, and other conditions. In particular, these drugs alter GABAergic function by targeting the GABA-A and GABA-B receptors.

Not only does dopamine play an important role in multiple physiological processes, but it also has a role in the pathology of psychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases. Disturbances in the neurotransmission of dopamine are implicated in schizophrenia, psychosis, depression, Tourette syndrome, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Regarding neurodegenerative diseases, dopamine is related to Parkinson disease, multiple sclerosis, and Huntington disease. There has been ample research on the role of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson disease. Currently, research suggests that the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta is involved in the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease.

Serotonin, a neurotransmitter that controls several neuropsychiatric processes, has been implicated in the pathogenesis of depression. Research has shown that patients with endogenous depression have low plasma levels of tryptophan, a precursor of serotonin. Furthermore, postmortem studies found an association between decreased serotonin levels in the brain and suicide, among depressed patients. In light of this, quite a few drugs have been developed that target serotonin in the treatment of depression. For example, tricyclic antidepressants work by increasing serotonin levels in the synapse.

Norepinephrine is involved in the pathogenesis of neuropsychiatric disorders. Changes in locus coeruleus firing, dysregulation of norepinephrine function, synaptic receptor regulation, and norepinephrine availability are what result in pathogenesis. Conditions related to norepinephrine dysfunction include anxiety disorders, mood disorders, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, Alzheimer’s disease, and posttraumatic stress disorder. Furthermore, many symptoms in these disorders are directly attributable to norepinephrine dysfunction in the neural circuitry.

A prominent contributor to the pathogenesis of IgE-mediated diseases is the neurotransmitter histamine. Produced in mast cells, histamine exerts its effects in the body by binding to certain histamine receptors. Two of the cardinal features of asthma, bronchospasm, and mucosal edema, are directly related to histamine receptor stimulation.