# Introduction

Skeletal scintigraphy, commonly referred to as a bone scan (BS), is a valuable and versatile nuclear medicine tool. The examination is most commonly performed using the radiotracer Technetium-99m (Tc99m) complexed to a diphosphonate, either methylene diphosphonate (MDP) forming Tc99m-MDP or hydroxydiphosphonate (HDP) forming Tc99m-HDP. Tc99m is the most common radionuclide used in nuclear medicine for labeling because it is relatively inexpensive and has favorable characteristics for imaging such as good spatial resolution, an ideal photopeak (140 keV) for gamma cameras and possessing a relatively short half-life (6 hours) that allows adequate time for image acquisition without excessive radiation dose to patients. The Tc99m-phosphonates first entered practice in 1971 by Subramanian and colleagues with several subsequent variations produced until the development of Tc 99m-MDP in 1975, which remains the dominant radiotracer in skeletal scintigraphy.

There has been a relatively recent re-emergence of fluorine-18 sodium fluoride (F18-NaF) positron emission tomography (PET) for metabolic bone imaging, secondary to temporary shortages of Tc99m and the proliferation of PET-CT technology. A calcium analog, F18-NaF was introduced in 1963, and its 511 keV photons could be imaged with general-purpose rectilinear scanners or early positron detectors.

The advantages of modern F18-NaF PET-CT over the Tc99m-phosphonates BS include increased spatial resolution, improved target to background ratio, and increased sensitivity. Disadvantages include higher cost, slightly higher radiation dose, and potentially higher false positive rate due to increased uptake at sites of degenerative changes.

# Procedures

Skeletal scintigraphy starts with the intravenous injection of Tc99m-MDP followed by imaging at multiple time points, or phases. The adult dose of Tc99m is 10 to 30 millicuries (mCi) or 370 to 1110 megabecquerels (MBq). The dose for children under 5 years is 0.2 to 0.3 mCi per kg or 7 to 11 MBq per kg. Protocols exist with as few as one or as many as four phases of imaging: flow phase, blood pool phase, delayed phase, and 4th phase. The 4th phase, acquired 24-hours after radiotracer injection, is not commonly performed but can be helpful in patients with peripheral vascular disease and concern for osteomyelitis.

Delayed-phase images are typically obtained as anterior and posterior projections of either the whole body and/or using spot images. Whole body images are helpful for non-focal complaints (i.e., concern for bony metastases, diffuse arthralgia, or elevated alkaline phosphatase of indeterminate etiology) while spot images are preferred for focal issues (rule out tibial stress fracture, unexplained rib pain or assess an indeterminate sclerotic femur lesion seen on x-ray). Spot images are smaller, field-of-view acquisitions that have the advantage of better spatial resolution and may be obtained in multiple projections (anterior/posterior, lateral, anterior/posterior oblique) to assist in anatomic localization of any abnormal radiotracer uptake. If anatomic localization is inadequate on spot images or is in an area of complex anatomy, a single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) can be performed with or without a conventional computed tomography (CT), referred to as a SPECT/CT. This allows the fusion of the gamma camera-generated images from the Tc99m-MDP SPECT with the conventional CT images for precise anatomic localization.

# Indications

Skeletal scintigraphy has a wide variety of indications.

**Most Common**

- Detection or follow-up of osseous metastases

- Detection of radiographically occult injury

- Evaluating for the presence of osteomyelitis

- Assessing for prosthetic hardware infection or loosening

**Less Common**

- Evaluating a primary bone lesion

- Evaluating for avascular necrosis/bone infarcts

- Assessing bone graft viability

- Diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome

- Screening for child abuse

- Determining the distribution of osteoblastic activity in preparation of radionuclide therapy for bone metastases

- Evaluating arthritides

- Investigating indeterminate radiographic, laboratory, or clinical findings that suggest skeletal involvement

# Normal and Critical Findings

An understanding of the normal anatomic distribution of Tc99m-MDP is important for interpreting skeletal scintigraphy. Symmetric uptake should be seen throughout the osseous structures of a healthy adult. In children, additional intense uptake is present in the physes of the long bones, which represent the normal growth centers. Common areas of benign increased radiotracer accumulation are present at the acromioclavicular joints, sternoclavicular joints, sternomanubrial junction, sacroiliac joints, and pubic symphysis as well as in articular surfaces of the shoulders, hips, knees, ankles, and feet. This is likely due to the constant bony remodeling of the weight-bearing surfaces of the joints and the propensity of degenerative changes in these areas. Also, primarily in adult patients, focal increased uptake is frequently seen in the maxillary and mandibular regions due to underlying dental disease which causes reactive osteogenesis. Similarly, uptake can be present in the nasopharyngeal region of the facial bones in individuals with chronic sinus disease.

Extraosseous activity is seen in the kidneys and bladder due to the normal renal excretion of T99m-MDP. If the kidneys and bladder are not seen, this should raise suspicion of the so-called “superscan.” A superscan implies diffusely increased osseous uptake due to metastatic disease (most commonly breast or prostate cancer) or metabolic bone disease which is so intense that little or no renal excretion of the radiotracer occurs.

**Critical Findings**

- Detection of osseous metastatic disease: most frequently occurring in the axial and proximal appendicular skeleton corresponding with sites of red marrow

- Detection of stress fracture: most commonly seen in lower body such as tibia, metatarsals and femoral necks, a site particularly critical due to the risk of progression to a displaced fracture

- Detection of osteomyelitis or hardware infection

- Detection of occult fractures in evaluation for child abuse (generally in children older than 1 year): typically seen in ribs and extremities, though it should be noted that bone scintigraphy has a low sensitivity for detection of pediatric skull fractures and classic metaphyseal corner fractures

- Detection of avascular necrosis: history of sickle cell disease or chronic steroid use should raise suspicion for this entity

- Detection of incidental soft tissue uptake: may represent occult malignancy such breast cancer, malignant pleural effusion, soft tissue sarcoma, or metastatic disease in the liver

- Identification of the presence of kidneys on every bone scan; if the kidneys are not seen, a superscan should be suspected

# Interfering Factors

The primary interfering factor in skeletal scintigraphy is poor renal function. Adequate evaluation of a bone scan requires clearance of the radiotracer from the soft tissues by the kidneys so that the image produced is composed mostly of gamma rays originating from Tc99m-MDP complexed with the hydroxyapatite of bone. If the kidneys are not functioning properly, the visualization of bone is limited by overlying extraosseous activity in the soft tissues which decreases target-to-background. This factor might be mitigated by obtaining a 24-hour delayed acquisition, often referred to as the fourth phase, which gives the kidneys more time to clear non-osseous uptake. This technique suffers from the limitation of T99m having a half-life of 6 hours which leaves only 6.25% of the initial activity of T99m for imaging at 24 hours. Due to similar reasons, patient dehydration can impede renal clearance of activity from the soft tissues. Thus, it is beneficial to have patients orally hydrate during the 2 to 6 hours between injection of the radiotracer and acquisition of the delayed images.

A second interfering factor in skeletal scintigraphy is the potential for poor labeling of Tc99m with MDP. Poor labeling results in unbound Tc99m-pertechnetate, commonly referred to as “free technetium” or “free tech.” Free technetium will localize to the salivary glands, thyroid, and stomach which may confound interpretation. This potential problem exists with all Tc99m labeled radiotracers and is not specific to skeletal scintigraphy.

A third interfering factor in skeletal scintigraphy is the “flare phenomenon.” This is a pattern of uptake where the osseous metastatic disease may appear worsened in the 2 to 6 months following chemotherapy. New lesions may be seen while pre-existing lesions can appear larger or more intense.

# Complications

Skeletal scintigraphy relies on intravenous administration. Most of the common complications of this examination originate from a failure of proper injection.

Extravasation of the injected Tc99m-MDP into the soft tissues causes the following three problems:

-  Minimal radiotracer reaches the bones and thus severely degrades visibility of osteoblastic pathology.

- The extravasated radiotracer is taken up by the lymphatic system which complicates same-day re-injection due to retention in lymph nodes which may obscure underlying bone pathology.

- The intense tracer uptake coming from the injection site degrades the image of the skeleton due to the image being derived from extraneous photons arising from the site of extravasation.

Arterial injection may also rarely occur which produces the "glove" phenomenon. The glove phenomenon is characterized by significant asymmetric uptake extending from the arterial injection site down into the fingers.

# Patient Safety and Education

Skeletal scintigraphy uses ionizing radiation in the form of gamma rays produced from the radiotracer Tc99m. The effective whole body dose of radiation for adults from this examination is 0.0057 millisieverts (mSv) per MBq which translates to approximately 4 mSv for a 20 mCi dose of Tc99m-MDP.

A small amount of Tc99m-pertechnetate is secreted in breast milk, but the estimated fetal dose is below 1 mSv (100 mrem).

# Clinical Significance

Skeletal scintigraphy is a versatile medical imaging tool, providing a highly sensitive examination for bone pathology, particularly in the detection of stress injury and radiographically occult fractures. A negative bone scan at 72 hours excludes a fracture in the appendicular skeleton with a sensitivity of 95% to 100%. Note that healing fractures may display increased uptake long after the initial trauma, with 60 to 80% of fractures returning to normal on bone scan in one year and 95% of fractures returning to normal by 3 years.

A bone scan can be very helpful in the evaluation of osteomyelitis. The exam is very sensitive, up to 94%; this results in an excellent negative predictive value.

The sensitivity of bone scan for metastatic disease varies for each primary tumor. The specifics of sensitivity and specificity for each type of malignancy is beyond the scope of this article; however, the study is most accurate in the setting of osteoblastic metastases and least accurate with malignancies that typically produce osteolytic bone lesions. Given such, the common malignancies for which bone scintigraphy is known to have a high sensitivity for identifying bone metastases include breast, prostate, and lung cancer. The common malignancies for which bone scintigraphy is known to have a low sensitivity for detection of osseous metastases include multiple myeloma, renal cell carcinoma, and thyroid carcinoma.