**Popular Surgical Risk Prediction Models**

Several surgical risk-predicting models have been used in routine clinical practice. The present review does not aim to perform an extensive comparative analysis between them but instead introduces those most commonly used. All available models were created and validated on a unique sample of patients, utilize different predictors, and intend to predict different outcomes, which complicates a direct comparison between them. It also should be remembered that the risk prediction system refers to populations rather than individuals, meaning that an “individual risk” is a large statistical assumption.

**American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) Risk Assessment Model**(Table 1)

In 1941, the American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) developed an elaborate classification of patients' physical status, which has undergone several revisions. The application of this classification (Table 1) has become standard practice worldwide before any surgical procedure that involves an anesthesiologist. ASA functional class is a valid and reliable tool to assess a patient’s preoperative general health

ASA functional class is commonly believed to be one way to estimate surgical risk since anesthesia is an integral part of a surgical procedure. However, the main purpose of the ASA score is not to predict the outcome since the score is semi-quantitative, quite subjective.

All available operative risk prediction models can be separated into two groups:

- Scoring systems to predict cardiac risk

- Scoring systems to predict overall surgical risk

**Revised Cardiac Risk Index Model**(Table 2)

Major adverse cardiovascular events are important determinants of postoperative morbidity and mortality in stable patients undergoing non-cardiac surgical procedures.

The incidence of a major cardiac event correlates with the amount of predictors: 0 predictors = 0.4%, 1 predictor = 0.9%, 2 predictors = 6.6%, and 3 predictors = >11%. A systematic review demonstrated that the RCRI discriminates moderately well (AUC = 0.75) between patients at low versus high risk for cardiac events after mixed noncardiac surgery.

**American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (ACS NSQIP) Based Model**(Table 3)

Another cardiac risk prediction model has been developed based on the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (ACS NSQIP) database, including 211,410 patients to predict myocardial infarction or cardiac arrest within 30 days after surgery.

It is generally recommended to use one of the above-mentioned models to predict cardiac risk. For low-risk patients, no further preoperative testing is warranted. For patients at higher cardiac risk, a question should be raised whether further cardiovascular testing would change management. A stepwise approach to perioperative cardiac assessment has been elaborated and validated by the American Heart Association and the American College of Cardiology.

**Physiological and Operative Severity Score for Enumeration of Mortality and Morbidity (****POSSUM****) Model**(Table 3)

POSSUM became one of the first models suggested to calculate the risk of operative mortality and morbidity in general surgery.

There is evidence that the POSSUM score may overestimate current mortality and morbidity after surgery.

**The American College of Surgeons****National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (ACS NSQIP) M****odel**

ACS NSQIP was created to collect high-quality standardized data on preoperative risk factors and postoperative complications from participating hospitals within the United States. Information from 393 hospitals and 1,414,006 patients was collected and successfully used to develop a universal surgical risk calculator to predict one of 9 adverse outcomes within 30 days after surgery based on 21 patient-related variables and the planned surgical procedure according to the Current Procedural Terminology code (CPT code).

**ACS NSQIP Variables Used in the Universal Surgical Risk Calculator**(Table 4)

**ACS NSQIP Outcomes**(