Skin irritation in the form of peeling and erythema is the most common adverse effect from topical vitamin A use. The peeling from topical retinoids is secondary to the hyper-proliferation of the epidermis mediated by retinoic acid receptor stimulation

The risk of teratogenicity from the use of topical retinoids is extremely low given that systemic absorption has been inconsequential in animal and human studies

With regards to systemic retinoid usage, teratogenicity is the most worrisome adverse effect. Teratogenic findings include craniofacial (cleft lip/palate), cardiac (transposition of the great vessels), thymic, and central nervous system (microcephaly, hydrocephalus) abnormalities

Acute retinoid toxicity has resulted in mucocutaneous and laboratory abnormalities. Mucocutaneous effects include dry lips, cheilitis, and dry oral, ophthalmic, and nasal mucosa. The putative mechanism is decreased sebum production, reduced epidermal thickness, and altered barrier function. Other cutaneous effects seen include overall skin dryness and pruritus, peeling of palms and soles, and fingertip fissuring. Telogen effluvium may be seen with higher doses.

Chronic retinoid toxicity can affect many organ systems. Bone effects include changes such as bone spurs, calcinosis, and bone resorption with resulting hypercalcemia

Hypertriglyceridemia is the most common systemic effect of retinoids. Both triglyceride and cholesterol levels have been found to be elevated in patients using bexarotene, isotretinoin, etretinate, and acitretin. Total and LDL elevations may occur

Elevated serum transaminases may occur with oral retinoid usage. These elevations more often occur with etretinate or acitretin as compared to isotretinoin and bexarotene. These elevations typically occur 2-8 weeks after initiation of therapy with normalization over another 2-4 weeks. Liver damage leading to fibrosis and hepatic stellate cell activation have both been seen in patients with hypervitaminosis A

No causal association exists between isotretinoin and depression, psychosis, or suicide attempts, although a link had been previously suggested