The major differential diagnosis of ALHE is Kimura disease. These two conditions were previously considered as manifestations of the same entity. Epidemiological, clinical and histopathological particularities subsequently distinguished them from each other. Kimura disease occurs in young Asian men. It presents with solitary or multiple large subcutaneous masses with deeper localization. The lesions typically involve the salivary glands in the periauricular or submandibular region. It is commonly accompanied by regional lymphadenopathy. Laboratory workup often finds peripheral blood eosinophilia and elevated IgE. Nephrotic syndrome is more associated with Kimura's disease than with ALHE. On histopathology, hyperplastic lymphoid follicles with prominent germinal centers and eosinophilic infiltrate are conspicuous features of Kimura's disease. Vascular proliferation is present, but it is less notable than in ALHE and lacks the characteristic plump epithelioid endothelial cells.

ALHE should also be distinguished from pyogenic granuloma, which presents as an eruptive papule, sometimes eroded or ulcerated, with an epidermal collarette. Histologically, it consists of capillary-sized vessels separated by fibromyxoid stroma, contrasting with the immature blood vessels with hobnailing seen in ALHE.

Clinically, ALHE can look very similar to nodular Kaposi sarcoma. However, the histopathological distinction is usually easy. Kaposi sarcoma is composed of spindle cell proliferation with stiltlike vascular spaces that stain positively with human herpesvirus 8.

Another differential diagnosis is angiosarcoma, especially in its epithelioid variant. The latter has more rapid growth, an aggressive course, and histologically shows vigorous mitotic activity, polymorphism, and nuclear hyperchromasia.

ALHE can also be confused with epithelioid hemangioendothelioma. The presence of myxohyaline stroma separating strand, cords, and nests of vacuolated endothelial cells, the lack of lymphoid or eosinophilic infiltrate and the presence of mitoses, and nuclear atypia can address the diagnosis.

Granuloma faciale usually presents as a red-brown plaque located on the face and refractory to treatments. Eosinophil infiltrate may be present on histology, but chronic leukocytoclastic vasculitis, fibrin deposition, and fibrosis permit to differentiate the diagnosis.