While not serving any specific functions, this space allows for the transit of several important structures through different foramina. The foramen rotundum connects the PPF to the middle cranial fossa. The pterygoid canal, also known as the vidian canal, connects the PPF to the middle cranial fossa. The palatovaginal canal connects the PPF with the nasal cavity and nasopharynx. Anteriorly, the inferior orbital fissure connects the PPF to the orbit. Medially, the sphenopalatine foramen provides access to the nasal cavity. Laterally, the pterygomaxillary fissure connects the PPF to the infratemporal fossa. Inferiorly, the greater palatine canal connects the PPF to the oral cavity.

The pterygopalatine fossa also contains multiple important structures. This fossa contains the pterygopalatine ganglion. Nerve roots from the maxillary nerve suspend this ganglion. The PPF contains the terminal third segment of the maxillary artery. Furthermore, the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve (CN V2) and the vidian nerve (the nerve of the pterygoid canal), which is a combination of the greater petrosal nerve and the deep petrosal nerve, traverse through the PPF as well.

The PPF is bounded by the maxillary, palatine, and sphenoid bones. The posterior wall of the maxillary sinus comprises the anterior border, and the palatine bone makes up its floor and anteromedial wall. The roof is made up of the sphenoid bone. More specifically, the sphenoid body and the orbital process of the palatine bone make up the superior boundary. The posterior wall of the maxillary antrum forms the anterior boundary. The pterygoid process and greater wing of the sphenoid constitute the posterior boundary. The medial boundary is made up of the palatine bone and nasal mucoperiosteum. Finally, the temporalis muscle via the pterygomaxillary fissure makes up the lateral boundary of the PPF.

The vascular and nervous structures are located anteroinferiorly and posterosuperiorly within the pterygopalatine fossa. The sphenopalatine artery, which is a branch of the internal maxillary artery, is found between the sphenoid and palatine bones and enters the nasal cavity at the sphenopalatine foramen. The maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve and the vidian nerve enter from the posterior wall of the PPF. The maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve moves through the foramen rotundum. The vidian nerve traverses through the pterygoid canal. They come together to form the pterygopalatine ganglion and then branch into the infraorbital nerve and the greater and lesser palatine nerves. The infraorbital nerve exits through the inferior orbital fissure and the greater and lesser palatine nerves pass through the greater and lesser palatine foramina respectively.

Posterior to the PPF, pneumatization of the lateral portion of the sphenoid bone results in the formation of a lateral sphenoid recess. This finding is observed in 25% to 48% of individuals. The roof of the lateral sphenoid recess can lie directly beneath the temporal lobe, and this is a common location for middle cranial fossa encephaloceles.