Video laryngoscopy has revolutionized airway management. The premise is that of looking around the corner, which is the tongue, instead of aligning the oral, pharyngeal, and laryngeal axes. The Cormack-Lehane views of the larynx are often one to two grades improved with higher first-pass success.

When attempting intubation with video laryngoscopy, it is not often due to the inability to see the glottic opening if difficulty is encountered; it is in the delivery of the endotracheal tube. The patient’s head should be in a neutral position with a “limited” glottic view. The classic sniffing position may make intubation more difficult.

There are two different types of video laryngoscopes - non-channeled and channeled video laryngoscopes. Non-channeled ones are those more frequently available. Channeled scopes have a more acute angle and a conduit that guides the endotracheal tube towards the glottic opening. This results in the least neck movement and is especially useful in a patient with an unstable cervical spine injury. In reviewing the literature, the term video laryngoscopy is used generically without always delineating which type.

Additionally, there are several techniques for using supraglottic airways as a conduit for intubation successfully.  Using an intubating laryngeal mask airway with a specially designed endotracheal tube that is passed blindly through the supraglottic airway is one way.  This type of supraglottic airway is especially useful in obese patients.

Another tactic for securing the airway through a supraglottic airway device is by loading an endotracheal tube or airway exchange catheter over a fiberoptic scope and then driving the flexible scope through the supraglottic airway device so that the endotracheal tube or exchange catheter can be placed in the trachea.