**Physical protection**: Given that the integumentary is the covering of the human body, its most apparent function is physical protection. The skin itself is a tightly knit network of cells, with each layer contributing to its strength. The epidermis has an outermost layer created by layers of dead keratin that can withstand wear and tear of the outer environment, while the dermis provides the epidermis with blood supply and has nerves that bring danger to attention amongst other functions. The hypodermis provides physical cushioning to any mechanical trauma through adipose storage, and the glands secrete protective films throughout the body. The nails protect the digits, which are prone to repeated trauma by creating a hard covering, and hairs throughout the body filter harmful particles from entering the eyes, ears, nose, etc.

**Immunity**: The skin is the body’s first line of defense as it acts as the physical barrier that prevents direct entry of pathogens. Cells are connected through junction proteins with reinforcement by keratin filaments.

Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) and lipids on the skin also act as a biomolecular barrier that disrupts bacterial membranes. AMPs, such as defensins and cathelicidins, are produced by various cells in the skin, such as dendritic cells, macrophages, glands, etc., and are activated by proteolytic cleavage with stimulation. Lipids, such as sphingomyelin and glucosylceramides, are stored in lamellar bodies found in the stratum corneum and display antimicrobial activity.

An additional aspect of the skin’s immunity lies in the resident immune cells. Both myeloid and lymphoid cells are present in the skin, and some, such as the Langerhans cells or dermal dendritic cells, possess the capability to travel to the periphery and activate the greater immune system.

**Wound healing**: When our body undergoes trauma with a resulting injury, the integumentary system orchestrates the wound healing process through hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation, and remodeling.

Hemostasis occurs through tissue factor located in subendothelial spaces of the skin, which triggers the coagulation cascade to form a fibrin clot.

In the following inflammatory phase, immune cells such as neutrophils and monocytes will infiltrate the injury site to attack pathogens and clear out debris.

The proliferative phase involves the multiplication of resident cells such as keratinocytes and fibroblasts that contribute to the formation of granulation tissue. Through a matrix of immune cells and the eventual formation of a collagen network by fibroblasts and myofibroblasts, the new extracellular matrix forms.

The final remodeling phase consists of apoptosis as cells are no longer needed and excess structures are broken down in efforts to restore the original architecture. Macrophages secrete matrix metalloproteases that remove excess collagen, and remaining immature collagen matures to finalize the extracellular matrix.

**Vitamin D synthesis:**The primary sources of vitamin D are sun exposure and oral intake. With ultraviolet sunlight exposure, 7-dehydrocholesterol converts to vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) in the skin. Cholecalciferol is then hydroxylated in the liver, then kidney into its active metabolite form, 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D (calcitriol).

**Regulation of body temperature:**The skin has a large surface area that is highly vascularized, which allows it to conserve and release heat through vasoconstriction and vasodilation, respectively. When body temperatures rise, blood vessels dilate to increase blood flow and maximize the dissipation of heat.

**Sensation**: Skin innervation is by various sensory nerve endings that discriminate pain, temperature, touch, and vibration. Mediation of innocuous touch in glabrous skin by four types of mechanoreceptors—Meissner corpuscle, Pacinian corpuscle, Ruffini endings, and Merkel cells.