Buspirone is classified in the azapirone drug class. It has a strong affinity for serotonin 5HT1a receptors, where it acts as a partial agonist, which some researchers believe produces the preponderance of clinical effects. It also has a weak affinity for serotonin 5HT2 receptors and acts as a weak antagonist on dopamine D2 autoreceptors. There is no effect on benzodiazepine GABA receptors. The underlying mechanism behind how the partial 5HT1a agonism translates into clinical results remains largely unknown. It is proposed from increased serotonergic activity in the amygdala and other parts of the brain's anxiety/fear circuitry. Due to the delayed anxiolytic effects seen clinically, buspirone likely provides relief through adaptations in 5HT1a receptors.

Buspirone is primarily used to treat generalized anxiety disorder; however, it appears that buspirone may be useful in various other neurological and psychiatric disorders. Examples include attenuating side effects of Parkinson's disease therapy, ataxia, depression, social phobia, behavior disturbances following brain injury, and those accompanying Alzheimer disease, dementia, and attention deficit disorders. Although additional effectiveness studies are warranted before using buspirone for the disorders mentioned above.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Buspirone is rapidly absorbed and undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism. Peak plasma levels are attained within 40 to 90 minutes.

**Distribution:**Buspirone has approximately 86% plasma protein binding.

**Metabolism:**Buspirone is metabolized primarily by oxidation by CYP3A4 and converts to hydroxylated derivatives and a pharmacologically active metabolite, 1-pyrimidinylpiperazine (1-PP).

**Excretion:**The elimination half-life of unchanged buspirone is approximately 2 to 3 hours. Buspirone is excreted in the urine as metabolites(29% to 63%); fecal excretion accounts for 18% to 38% of the dose.