**Palpation**

Before arterial catheterization, the operator must prepare the patient and locate the vessel via one of the methods discussed below. Once located, the operator may proceed with a direct puncture of the artery with the chosen device. The insertion angle will vary by anatomical site, and the degree of difficulty will be affected by the depth of the artery in the subcutaneous tissue.

**The Allen Test**

The Allen test is traditionally performed before catheterization of the radial artery. This test aims to provide assurance that the collateral ulnar arterial blood flow is sufficient to avoid distal ischemic injury. To perform this test, the radial and ulnar pulses are simultaneously occluded by manual palpation for 10 to 15 seconds or until blanching of the palm is noted. Then, the ulnar arterial occlusion is released. If the blanching resolves quickly, the patency of the ulnar artery is enough to perfuse the hand despite a complete or partial occlusion of the radial artery.

**Doppler Auditory Assistance**

In addition to palpating the arterial pulse, an auditory Doppler device can aid the operator in refining the point of entry for the access needle. This device may be beneficial in situations of low blood pressure when feeble pulsations make arterial pulse localization difficult.

**Ultrasound Guidance**

Using ultrasound guidance during the catheterization of the radial artery has been associated with a high success rate. The number of attempts needed to achieve successful catheterization is significantly reduced using ultrasound guidance. This is particularly true in the infant and pediatric age groups, where repeated catheterization attempts increase the complication rate. In addition, the ultrasound-guided measurement of the internal arterial diameter may inform the choice of catheter size. This measurement may be particularly important in pediatric patients because of the different artery caliber expected in this population. Ultrasound-guided arterial cannulation has now become the standard of care.

**Seldinger Technique**

The Seldinger technique allows the operator to gain access to the arterial lumen with the help of a guidewire. After localization of the pulse by palpation, doppler, or ultrasound guidance, the vessel is punctured with an introducer needle. Once pulsatile blood flow is detected, the guidewire is quickly inserted into the hub of the needle to gain access to the artery. Once sufficiently advanced, the introducer needle is removed. The opposite end of the guidewire is threaded into the sharp or distal end of the arterial catheter, sliding it until it is completely flush with the skin. The guidewire is removed and inspected for complete integrity of the tip. The Seldinger technique is particularly useful for the access of central vessels that run deeper into the extremity.

**Catheter Over the Needle**

The traditional technique of peripheral venous catheterization can also be used to access peripheral arteries that are more superficial and readily palpable. After localization, the artery is directly punctured with the catheter-over-the-needle device at the proper angle. Once arterial blood flow is detected, the operator slides the catheter over the needle in a forward motion before removing the needle.

**Securing the Arterial Catheter**

After the successful placement of the catheter and the connection of the transducer apparatus, the procedure team must secure the catheter to prevent accidental dislodgement and exposure to infection and minimize excessive motion of the adjacent joint that may interfere with the accurate monitoring. This procedure is also useful to increase the longevity of the catheter, avoiding a repeat procedure. Transparent adhesive dressings are preferred as they permit direct visualization of the insertion site. If the wrist is the site of insertion, the hand is kept slightly extended with a soft roll fixated between the dorsum of the wrist and a rigid board where the hand and forearm will be affixed. The connection tubing takes a loop around the thumb and is secured a second time to the forearm. To obtain an accurate blood pressure reading, the monitoring device must be set to "zero" while the transducer hub is leveled at the height of the atrium.

**Arterial Catheter Monitoring**

The positioning of the transducer and dampening of the monitoring system can affect the data obtained from arterial catheterization; interpretation is required. For instance, if the transducer is positioned too low relative to the catheter, the pressure value will be abnormally high. In contrast, if the transducer is positioned too high relative to the catheter, the pressure data will be too low.

Dampening of the system can result in falsely low or high systolic or diastolic pressure; this can be seen in the waveforms of the arterial line. If the arterial line has inadequate dampening, there will be an underestimation of the diastolic pressure and an overestimation of the systolic pressure. If the arterial line is overdampened, there will be an accurate diastolic pressure with a falsely-low systolic pressure. A clot or fibrin in the catheter tip can also result in an overdampened system.