In recent years, the signs and symptoms of stroke have been increasingly publicized using the pneumonic FAST (facial weakness, arm weakness, speech problems, and time to call). Consequently, a larger population can identify the pertinent characteristics when they see these changes in their friends and family. Further promotion regarding the importance of immediate medical attention may help reduce morbidity and mortality from an ICH.

Various patient-specific risk factors are reversible if patients are made aware of their significance. Hypertensive patients should be made aware of the importance of keeping their blood pressure controlled. Smokers and those who drink large quantities of alcohol should recognize their increased risk for vascular pathologies. One of the more significant risk factors in recent times is the increased population of patients on anticoagulant and antiplatelet medications. Those on medication that can be checked with regular blood tests, such as Warfarin, should undergo routine testing. Patients and their healthcare team should be prompt in managing raised INR to reduce the risk of unwanted bleeding.

Following an ICH, patients and their families should be informed that the disability seen in those who survive acute ICH can be significant to prepare them for a life of dependence. Patients who undergo open brain surgery or those who have seizures will have regulations on their driving status for different time periods depending on their condition and county of residence.