The various imaging modalities have provided great insights into the anatomical and functional status of the retina. They are precious in screening and early diagnosis of the disease. Lambertus et al. reported that almost a quarter of patients diagnosed with childhood-onset STGD1 did not have any clinically-identifiable retinal lesions at presentation.

i) Colour fundus photography (Figure 1) is helpful in the documentation and monitoring of the type of retinal changes and extent of the disease. The Fishman classification is based on color fundus photographs.

ii) Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA): The hallmark finding is the "dark choroid," which appears as a highlighted retinal blood vessel against a hypofluorescent choroid. It is considered a diagnostic feature and is present in at least 80 percent of patients. It occurs due to blockage of background choroidal fluorescence due to the presence of lipofuscin in the RPE cells. Flecks appear hypofluorescent due to the blocked transmission but may appear hyperfluorescent in the presence of atrophy. They can be seen on FFA before they become clinically visible. The regions of RPE atrophy appear hyperfluorescent due to transmission defects. In patients with severe or late-stage disease, a peripapillary dark choroid ring sign help establish the diagnosis.

iii) Infrared imaging: The flecks typically appear hyperreflective, while the resorbing flecks appear hyporeflective. The macular atrophy region appears hyperreflective, usually surrounded by a darker ring.

iv) OCT: OCT findings include thinning of the outer retinal layers and disruption of the EZ. The flecks appear as subretinal and intraretinal hyperreflective deposits.

Querques et al. categorized flecks into two types. have devised a newer classification describing five subtypes of flecks.

class C flecks breakthrough into the ONL. Class A to C represent the type 1 flecks per the previous classification. Class D flecks are present only within the ONL, while the deposits in the outer retinal layers disappear. They represent the type 2 flecks as per the previous classification. Class E flecks represent atypical drusen-like lesions.

The other OCT changes noted even before the fundoscopy changes are visible include a subfoveal optical gap and thickening of the ELM.et al. described the progression of this optical gap in three stages. Stage 1 represents the mild disruption of the EZ in the foveal region, stage 2 represents additional photoreceptor loss, and stage 3 represents the involvement of even the inner retinal layers.

Cai et al. demonstrated that the total area of EZ loss gradually expanded at around 0.31mm/year. proposed that it could signify a Muller cell response,et al. suggested that it could represent the migration and retraction of the inner segment of the photoreceptors.

Multiple studies have used enhanced depth imaging (EDI) OCT and swept-source (SS)-OCT to study the choroidal thickness in STGD1 patients. Many studies have revealed that the choroid thickness reduces, affecting mainly the small choroidal vessels. Similarly, the choroidal vascularity index is significantly reduced. Four patterns of choroidal morphology have been described. Pattern 1 is characterized by a normal-appearing choroid, pattern 2 by a reduction of the thickness of either Sattler or Haller layer, pattern 3 by a reduction of the thickness of both Sattler and Haller layers, and pattern 4 by a reduction of both Sattler and Haller layers with choroidal caverns. These patterns positively correlated with degenerative retinal changes on OCT and signs of progression.

Other than thickness, the presence of hyperreflective foci has also been noted in the choroid. Piri et al. demonstrated that the number of hyperreflective foci in the Bruch membrane/ RPE complex, choriocapillaris, and Sattler layer correlated with increasing disease severity in terms of central macular thickness, visual acuity, and duration of the disease.

v) OCT-Angiography (OCTA): Studies have demonstrated reduced superficial and deep vessel densities and attenuation of the choriocapillaris vessel density. It may also be useful for diagnosing choroidal neovascular membrane (CNVM), which is a rare and late complication

vi) FAF: Both short-wavelength FAF (SW-FAF) and near infrared-wavelength (NIR-FAF) are used for monitoring the disease progression. Flecks are seen on SW-FAF as hyper AF (Figure 2), while they appear hypo AF on NIR-FAF. Flecks can be seen on NIR-FAF before they appear on SW-FAF. The atrophic areas show decreased AF on both types of scans, with the area appearing larger on NIR-FAF than on SW-FAF. This may be because of the lipofuscin released by the degenerating photoreceptors, which may produce a falsely normal image despite the presence of multiple atrophic RPE lesions. HyperAF lesions on SW-FAF are usually the earliest features and may appear before flecks become visible. The RPE loss has been noted to expand at a rate of 0.28 to 1.58 mm/year.

Fujinami et al. classified the AF appearance on SW-AF images into three types. Type 1 is characterized by localized low foveal AF signal surrounded by a homogenous AF background. Type 2 appears as localized low macular AF surrounded by a homogenous AF background. Type 3 is identified as multiple areas of low AF signal at the posterior pole and a heterogenous AF.

The rate of atrophy enlargement (RAE) in each of the three types was estimated to be 0.06, 0.67, and 4.37 mm/year, respectively. Kuehlewein et al. have divided the lesions into definitely decreased AF (DDAF) and questionably decreased AF (QDAF). While DDAF is described as lesions with darkness ≥90% of the darkness of the optic nerve head (ONH), QDAF is defined as lesions with darkness level 50 to 90% of the ONH.

The ProgStart study report number 5 showed that around 50% of the eyes which did not present with DDAF developed the lesion in less than five years (median 4.93 years).et al. described a classification for the ultra-widefield (UWF) FAF.

Quantitative AF (qAF) was first described by Delori et al.

vii) AOSLO: Areas with increased spacing between the photoreceptor (both rods and cones) are observed. These findings suggest that photoreceptor degeneration is the primary pathology rather than an event secondary to RPE cell death. Song et al. demonstrated centrifugal progression of the disease.

viii) Visual field (VF): VF testing shows a progressive central scotoma. Loss of mid and peripheral VF fields is usually associated with more severe disease. Schroeder et al. classified the visual field severity into three groups. Group 1 has a central scotoma within 10°, group 2 has central scotomas within 10-35°, and group 3 has only 'temporal residues.'

ix) Microperimetry (MP): The ProgStar study showed that visual acuity is not a sensitive outcome measure for monitoring the disease in various treatment trials. Visual field testing also tends to miss small scotomas. Patients with STGD1 show varying degrees of reduced sensitivity on MP, depending on the stage of the disease. The macular sensitivity is reduced in the areas with flecks and abnormal AF.

The ProgStar study found that the mean sensitivity reduces by around 0.68 dB yearly.