The American Burn Association recommends burn center referrals for patients with:

- partial thickness burns greater than 10% total body surface area

- full thickness burns

- burns of the face, hands, feet, genitalia, or major joints

- chemical burns, electrical, or lighting strike injuries

- significant inhalation injuries

- burns in patients with multiple medical disorders

- burns in patients with associated traumatic injuries

Patients being transferred to burn centers do not need extensive debridement or topical antibiotics before transfer.  Whether transferring or referring to a burn center, you should contact them before beginning extensive local burn care treatments.

Minor burns which you plan to treat can be approached using the “C” of burn care:

- **Cooling**- Small areas of burn can be cooled with tap water or saline solution to prevent progression of burning and to reduce pain.

- **Cleaning**– Mild soap and water or mild antibacterial wash. Debate continues over the best treatment for blisters. However, large blisters are debrided while small blisters and blisters involving the palms or soles are left intact.

- **Covering**– Topical antibiotic ointments or cream with absorbent dressing or specialized burn dressing materials are commonly used.

- **Comfort**– Over-the-counter pain medications or prescription pain medications when needed. Splints can also provide support and comfort for certain burned areas.

For burns classified as severe (> 20% TBSA), fluid resuscitation should be initiated to maintain urine output > 0.5 mL/kg/hour.  One commonly used fluid resuscitation formula is the Parkland formula. The total amount of fluid to be given during the initial 24 hours = 4 ml of LR × patient’s weight (kg) × % TBSA.  Half of the calculated amount is administered during the first eight hours beginning when the patient was initially burned. For example, if a 70 kg patient has a 30% TBSA partial thickness burn they will need 8400 mL Lactated Ringer solution in the first 24 hours with 4200 mL of that total in the first 8 hours [(4 mL) × (70 kg) × (30% TBSA) = 8,400 mL LR]. Remember that the fluid resuscitation formula for burns is only an estimate and the patient may need more or less fluid based on vital signs, urine output, other injuries or other medical conditions (see Burns, Resuscitation, and Management for discussion of the management of severely burned patients).

In patients with moderate to severe flame burns and with suspicion for inhalation injury, carboxyhemoglobin levels should be checked, and patients should be placed on high flow oxygen until carbon monoxide poisoning is ruled out.  If carbon monoxide poisoning is confirmed, continue treatment with high-flow oxygen and consider hyperbaric oxygen in select cases (see Hyperbaric, Carbon Monoxide Toxicity chapter). Cyanide poisoning can also occur from smoke inhalation and can be treated with hydroxocobalamin (see Inhalation Injury chapter).