**Actinic Keratosis**

UV-A and UV-B have been implicated in the molecular damage that leads to the development of AK, BCC, and SCC. Mutations of the p53 gene influenced by UV radiation have been seen in AKs. UV-A light can create reactive oxygen species that damage cellular structures, and UV-B light can cause thymidine-dimer creation, resulting in DNA damage.

The proposed mechanisms behind this UV-induced DNA damage have led some to refer to AK as squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in situ. Additionally, immunosuppression has also led to the development of AKs.

**Basal Cell Carcinoma**

UV radiation and smoking have been implicated as the major risk factor for developing BCC due to DNA damage.

**Squamous Cell Carcinoma & Keratoacanthoma**

SCC falls on a spectrum of disorders ranging from precursors (e.g., actinic keratosis) to SCC. As in BCC, UV radiation is implicated as the major risk factor for developing SCC through DNA damage to the p53 tumor suppressor gene.

Keratoacanthoma often presents as a dome-shaped lesion with central hyperkeratosis and ulceration. Clinically, it is characterized by rapid growth followed by spontaneous involution. However, there are no pathognomonic characteristics that differentiate SCC and KAs.

**Sebaceous Carcinoma**

Although the exact pathogenesis of SC is unknown, multiple associations have been documented in the literature. Muir-Torre syndrome (MTS) is an autosomal dominant disorder with cutaneous malignancies such as SC and internal systemic malignancies such as colorectal and endometrial carcinoma.

Mutations in the TP53 gene have also been implicated in the development of periocular SC. A review of 15 patients with SC of the eyelid demonstrated that 66.7% contained point mutations in the p53 gene.

The high gene mutation rate of p53 might aid in obtaining an immunohistochemical (IHC) diagnosis of SC. Alterations in the expression of ERBB2, adhesion proteins (i.e., E-cadherin), and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers have also been demonstrated.

**Melanoma**

The pathophysiology for melanoma is multifaceted, and knowledge of the various responsible mutations continues to grow. UV signatures are one of the most well-documented features of melanoma. These are defined as C-to-T transitions at dipyrimidine sites.

50% of patients with advanced melanoma have BRAF mutations. The RAF isoforms are proteins involved with the activation of downstream pathways; the BRAF mutation leads to an 800-fold increase in kinase activity, leading to increased cellular proliferation.

**Merkel Cell Carcinoma**

MCC is poorly understood and multifarious. As previously mentioned, the Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) has been implicated in developing MCC. Approximately 80% of MCC samples are associated with MCPyV. MCC can be further classified into virus-positive or virus-negative, as each demonstrates different characteristics and mutation-related changes. One of the more notable differences is that virus-positive cell lines exhibit a down-regulation of MHC-I proteins on the cell surface, inhibiting targeted tumor cell destruction.

Immunosuppression is a well-documented and impressive risk factor for the development of cutaneous MCC; however, the associated incidence remains unclear. There is a demonstrated link between UV exposure and increased rates of MCC in sun-exposed skin. Additionally, using psoralens and the associated UV-A light has shown an increased incidence of MCC.