The interprofessional team which provides care for the dying patient consists of several different team members, each with their unique roles. The hospice physician directs the care of the dying patient. However, it is essential to consult with an interprofessional healthcare team. These include nurses, therapists, social workers, and spiritual providers. Nurses provide direct patient care and medication administration as well as a continual assessment of the progression of symptoms. Respiratory therapists administer oxygen therapy and monitor the deterioration of the respiratory system. Physical and occupational therapists work with the patient to enhance the functional activities of daily living. Social workers direct patients and families to social resources and facilitate the application and delivery of these resources. Spiritual providers support the spirituality and religiosity of the dying patient.

Interprofessional care requires effective communication among team members and can be streamlined using communications tools such as SBAR and Milestones Communication Approach.

For the best patient outcomes to take place, all healthcare team members must understand their roles for the patients and those of the other disciplines involved with patient care. Understanding how their part of care integrates with the scope and standards of others is paramount to functioning effectively as a team. When healthcare team members clearly understand their roles and the roles of their colleagues, patient outcomes are enhanced.

End of life care requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, therapists, counselors, pharmacists, and even other non-medical staff, as well as the patient and their family, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. Every member of the interprofessional team should communicate with the team so that one universal message is sent to the family and patient. [Level 5]