The patient’s skin should be prepped with alcohol or chlorhexidine prior to the procedure. Due to the risk of flammability, alcohol should be completely dry prior to beginning treatment. The treatment area should be anesthetized with either topical or local anesthesia. Due to the unpredictable treatment response, a test area can be performed prior to treatment of the entire area. The intraoperative endpoint is immediate ash-white color caused by steam and gas bubbles. This is due to rapid heating of the particles, which typically resolves within 30 minutes following the procedure. The lowest possible fluence should be used to achieve this endpoint, minimizing surrounding epidermal damage. Picosecond lasers typically require lower fluences due to the shorter pulse duration.

Occasionally, paradoxical darkening of various tattoo pigments, specifically white, tan, red, or pink, can occur due to the oxidation of ferric oxide to ferrous oxide contained within the tattoo pigment. Pinpoint bleeding also may be observed and may indicate that the settings are too high.

Additionally, the R20 method can be a successful treatment option where four exposures to the laser are performed at 20-minute intervals. Also, a combination of lasers can be used out for optimal removal, including ablative lasers which may help improve paradoxical darkening as well as allergic tattoo reactions.  For paradoxical darkening that is highly resistant to further laser surgery, surgical removal of the tattoo may be necessary.