Because patients are generally reluctant to disclose their herbal supplementation, it is crucial to develop a trusting relationship that would allow patients to discuss dietary supplement use without reservation. All interprofessional healthcare team members need to be on the same page regarding herbal supplements, share information through open communication between team members, and deliver a consistent message to the patient. This approach will optimize therapeutic efficacy and reduce potential adverse effects. [Level 5].

In detecting possible interactions between supplements and drugs, thorough notes should be taken on herbal supplement usage, including initiation and discontinuation.

Clinicians need to understand whether an herbal supplement affects a prescribed drug's clinical effect without affecting its dosage or whether it is affecting the concentration in the blood and, therefore, its pharmacologic action (pharmacokinetics). This understanding will lead to a more informed decision on whether to change the dosage of a drug or discontinue the supplement(s) in question altogether. Nurses need to include these agents in the patient's medication record. The pharmacist can consult with the clinician to check for interactions, as these are often not benign substances and can alter drug therapy. Providing continuing medical education (CME) and/or further research into herbal supplement-prescription drug interactions would increase understanding and benefit the patient-physician relationship.