# Introduction

The deep petrosal nerve is a branch from the internal carotid plexus.

In foramen lacerum, the deep petrosal nerve joins with the greater petrosal nerve to form the vidian nerve also called the nerve of the pterygoid canal.

# Structure and Function

The deep petrosal nerve carries postganglionic sympathetic nerve fibers that originated in the intermediate gray horn of the spinal cord, traveled through the sympathetic chain, then synapsed in the superior cervical ganglion. After synapse, the nerve fibers traveled in the carotid plexus eventually to form the deep petrosal nerve.

During its path in the foramen lacerum, the deep petrosal combines with the greater petrosal, which carries parasympathetic fibers from the superior salivary nucleus of the pons.

# Embryology

Neural crest cells migrate during development to form peripheral parasympathetic and sympathetic ganglia. The sympathetic fibers of the deep petrosal develop before the parasympathetic system.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The deep petrosal nerve is supplied by the internal carotid and the artery of the pterygoid canal, which is a branch of the maxillary artery.

# Nerves

The deep petrosal nerve innervates the blood vessels and secretomotor aspects of the

- Lacrimal gland

- Oral mucosa

- Nasal mucosa

# Physiologic Variants

The deep petrosal nerve delivers sympathetic information to the blood vessels of the lacrimal glands, oral cavity, and the nasal cavity. These sympathetic fibers that typically make up the deep petrosal nerve have variations in origin and pathway. Some fibers travel on the internal carotid plexus to the deep petrosal/ vidian, while others travel on the maxillary artery plexus of the external carotid artery right to the pterygopalatine ganglion.

There are some variations of where the nerve fibers of the vidian nerve enter the pterygopalatine ganglion as well. Firstly, about 30% of people have a partitioned pterygopalatine ganglion, and the other 70% of people have a single pterygopalatine ganglion. Of those with partitioned pterygopalatine ganglions, two-thirds receive the vidian nerve fibers on the lower partition of the ganglion; the other third receives nerve fibers to the upper partition of the ganglion. Of those with single pterygopalatine ganglions, a fifth receive the vidian nerve fibers on the lower partition of the ganglion; the remaining people receive vidian nerve fibers on the upper partition of the ganglion.

# Surgical Considerations

In some patients, the pterygoid canal superior to the level of the anterior genu of the petrous internal carotid artery. This variant is significant for surgeons who normally take an inferior medial approach for pterygoid canal and vidian nerve procedures.

# Clinical Significance

Cluster headaches can involve both the parasympathetic and sympathetic fibers from the greater petrosal and deep petrosal, respectively. A cluster headache can involve both sides of the autonomic system, sympathetic and parasympathetic.

The deep petrosal can be damaged at several different parts either traumatically or iatrogenically. Trauma to the skull can injure the nerve at various points depending on where the trauma occurs. Trauma to the neck and carotid can also damage the sympathetic plexus before it forms the deep petrosal nerve. Iatrogenic injuries include those to the carotid plexus from a neck surgery such as dissection, those that may occur during sphenoidal surgery, and vidian neurectomy.

# Other Issues

A more detailed description of the foramen lacerum and pterygoid canal: The anatomy of the foramen lacerum, carotid canal, and pterygoid canal can be difficult to visualize. As the internal carotid enters the skull, it does not travel straight superiorly. As the internal carotid enters through the carotid canal, there is a slight bend to the vessel. It is this "bent" part that runs over the cartilage filled foramen lacerum. The internal carotid once again travels superiorly. The deep petrosal nerve runs with the internal carotid as it courses over the cartilaginous section of the foramen lacerum. The deep petrosal then combines with the greater petrosal, which comes from the seventh cranial nerve from the brainstem. From there, the deep and greater petrosal nerves combine and travel through the pterygoid canal which opens from the same area as the foramen lacerum and carotid canal.