In most individuals, the early stages of posterior vitreous detachment are asymptomatic and not detected clinically until the separation of vitreous from optic disc margins produces symptoms.

The patient mostly presents with symptoms of flashes of light (photopsia) and floaters (myodesopsia). Nineteen percent of patients presenting with flashes or floaters alone have posterior vitreous detachment.****Floaters are small, mobile vitreous particles evident against a bright background. 67% of patients with posterior vitreous detachment complain of blurring of vision.

Patients with symptoms of PVD need to be assessed carefully. Complete retinal examination, including visualization of ora Serrata for 360 degrees (by scleral indentation while using indirect ophthalmoscopy) along with slit-lamp biomicroscopy, should be performed. The detailed examination reveals a detached posterior hyaloid membrane. It appears like a crumpled translucent membrane in mid vitreous. The diagnosis of complete PVD is usually made on the basis of the presence of the Weiss ring.

Anomalous PVD (APVD) is the condition in which the liquefaction of vitreous humor is more than the vitreoretinal dehiscence. The consequences of APVD vary with the site of its presence as follows

- At retinal periphery: causes retinal tears

- At macula: causes vitreomacular traction, macular pucker, or macular hole

- At optic disc or retina: leads to vitreopapillary traction and plays a crucial role in neovascularization of optic disc and retina