Progesterone is primarily responsible for preventing pregnancy. The main mechanism of action is the prevention of ovulation; they inhibit follicular development and prevent ovulation.

Estrogen has some effect with inhibiting follicular development because of its negative feedback on the anterior pituitary with slowed FSH secretion; it’s just not as prominent as the progesterone’s effect. Another primary mechanism of action is progesterone’s ability to inhibit sperm from penetrating through the cervix and upper genital tract by making the cervical mucous unfriendly.

**Combined Oral Contraceptive (COC)**

The usual estrogen component is combined with a different generation of progestin components with varying degrees of androgenic and progestogenic potential. The combination is prescribed based on desirable effects and risk of adverse events with progestin component and dose of estrogen and progestin component.

- **Estrogen component:**Estradiol, Ethinylestradiol, or Estetrol

- **First-generation progestin:**Norethindrone acetate, Ethynodiol diacetate, Lynestrenol, Norethynodrel

- **Second generation progestin:**Levonorgestrel,dl-Norgestrel

- **Third generation progestin:**Norgestimate, Gestodene, Desogestrel

- **Unclassified progestin:**Drospirenone, Cyproterone acetate

**Progesterone only Pill (POP)**

While multiple types of progestin pills are available in the US, most frequently formulations have drospirenone or norethindrone. Drospirenone suppresses ovulation and also has anti-mineralocorticoid activity. While norethindrone primarily acts by thickening cervical mucus to inhibit sperm penetration, suppressing ovulation, decreasing the mid-cycle LH and FSH peaks, which slows the movement of the ovum through fallopian tubes, and alters endometrium thickness. Some progestin compounds have more potent antiandrogenic properties and, therefore more effective in treating polycystic ovary syndrome, hirsutism, and acne.