During a tilted position, blood flows into splanchnic and lower extremities veins. The blood volume in the central compartment is diminished. The nervous system increases the release of catecholamines and later activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and may increase the release of other neuropeptides like vasopressin, endothelin, and adrenomedullin to maintain homeostasis. The insufficiency of the autonomic nervous system and neurohumoral mechanism may lead to a decrease in blood pressure. Moreover, unknown mechanisms may trigger neurocardiogenic reflex, which may result in vasodilatation and cardio inhibition. Peripheral and central mechanisms may cause neurocardiogenic reflex.

The reduced fluid intake increases the susceptibility to hemodynamic disturbances during the test. Furthermore, venous catheterization and the medical environment may facilitate the occurrence of the neurocardiogenic reflex.

The syncope may be preceded by prodromal symptoms like sweating, blurred vision, hot and cold flashes, weakness, loss of hearing, and nausea. Sometimes the loss of consciousness is sudden without prodromal symptoms even if the blood pressure and heart rate slowly decreased before syncope. The duration of unconsciousness is usually up to 20 seconds, but it may sometimes be longer, especially when tilt table downtime is prolonged or there is a very long pause of up to 60 seconds. During syncope, the patient's eyes are usually open, and urine incontinence, jerking movements, eye deviations, and vocalizations may occur. The patient is not able to maintain an upright position. If belts do not hold them, patients will fall. After regaining consciousness, a patient may recall some dreams, especially after a more extended period of unconsciousness.

Some patients may deny the presence of loss of consciousness, but they admit that they do not recall the moment the tilt table lowered.

The patient may have nausea and vomiting after syncope. It usually lasts up to 15 to 30 minutes. Some patients report weakness after the test, which can last several hours, but often, the patient can stand up after 10 to 15 minutes.