The main aim of treatment of TIA is to decrease the risk of subsequent stroke or TIA. Early treatment after a TIA can significantly reduce the risk of early stroke. Post TIA, the risk of stroke within 3 months has been reported to be around 20%, with approximately 50% of these strokes occurring within the first 2 days after the initial presentation. It is extremely important to evaluate the vessel status and look for atrial fibrillation when a patient comes with TIA. This will significantly reduce future strokes. Management of TIAs should focus on treating underlying etiologies.

Studies in the new millennium already confirmed the importance of expedited evaluation and treatment plus the polytherapy approach. The EXPRESS study in the UK has shown the importance of early intervention versus regular treatment by reducing 80% of the stroke risk.

More recent studies in China (CHANCE trial) and the multinational POINTE trail also confirmed dual antiplatelet with aspirin and clopidogrel for 3 weeks to 1 month followed by a single antiplatelet agent is the best scheme for antiplatelet therapy.

The other part of the treatment will depend on the underlying etiology of the TIA. Revascularization is recommended for symptomatic cervical internal carotid artery stenosis of 70% or higher. Carotid endarterectomy may have a slight benefit to risk ratio compared with endovascular intervention and stenting. Whether to operate on patients with 50-69% stenosis will depend more on the surgeon's complication rates given the vast improvement in the efficacy of aggressive medical therapy. SAPPRIS trial showed that endovascular Wingspan stenting of intracranial major arterial stenosis of 70-99% stenosis is not better than aggressive medical therapy alone.

Oral anticoagulation is indicated for patients with atrial fibrillation or other sources of cardioembolic sources of TIA.