Multiple theories exist regarding the cause of developmental dysplasia of the hip, including mechanical factors, hormone-induced joint laxity, genetic inheritance, and primary acetabular dysplasia. The mechanical force of abnormal hip flexion with breech delivery can cause dislocation of the femoral head. There is an increased incidence of dysplasia in cultures that swaddle infants with the mechanically forced in constant extension.

Joint laxity has also been proposed as a contributing factor in developmental dysplasia of the hip. The maternal hormone relaxin may cause ligamentous laxity in utero, allowing for neonatal femoral head dislocation. Genetic inheritance is thought to be a contributing factor in patients with a positive family history of developmental dysplasia of the hip. Primary acetabular dysplasia is also proposed as a risk factor for developmental dysplasia of the hip.

Regardless of the etiology, initial pediatric hip instability leads to developmental dysplasia of the hip. The typical deficiency is in the anterior or anterolateral acetabulum. Pediatric hip dysplasia leads to subluxation and gradual dislocation. A thickened ridge of articular cartilage can develop with repetitive subluxation of the femoral head, called the limbus.

Chronic dislocation of the pediatric hip causes anatomic changes and the development of secondary barriers to hip reduction. Anatomic changes include femoral head flattening, increased acetabular and femoral anteversion, increased obliquity of the acetabular roof, decreased concavity of the acetabular roof, and medial acetabular wall thickening. Barriers to reduction include transverse acetabular ligament hypertrophy, ligamentum teres thickening, pulvinar thickening, and an hourglass configuration of the hip capsule and iliopsoas.

Soft tissue contracture and alterations in the femoral head and acetabular growth cause secondary changes in the hip joint. A shallow acetabulum and femoral anteversion are the most consistent findings in developmental dysplasia of the hip—persistent hip subluxation results in progressive femoral head and acetabular deformation. Secondary soft tissue adaptations develop at the labrum, limbus, ligamentum teres, pulvinar, transverse acetabular ligament, iliopsoas tendon, and hip joint capsule.

The labrum is a fibrocartilaginous structure around the acetabular rim. The labrum contributes to acetabular rim growth and enhances acetabular depth. The labrum can become inverted and mechanically block a concentric hip reduction in developmental dysplasia of the hip.

The labrum is gradually everted with femoral head superior migration, causing capsular tissue to become interposed between the femoral head and outer acetabular wall. Mechanical forces cause fibrous tissue formation, which unites with the acetabular hyaline cartilage at the acetabular rim. This resulting structure, called the limbus, is a pathologic response to abnormal forces at the hip. The limbus may prevent hip concentric reduction. The labrum is best evaluated with hip arthrography.

In persistent hip dislocation, the ligamentum teres lengthens and hypertrophies and can block concentric femoral head reduction. The pulvinar is a fibrous fatty tissue found within the acetabulum. The pulvinar may also block concentric femoral head reduction. Femoral head closed reduction within the acetabulum results in spontaneous pulvinar regression. The femoral head open reduction includes resection of the hypertrophied ligamentum teres and pulvinar for adequate reduction.

The transverse acetabular ligament is located at the caudal perimeter of the acetabulum. The transverse acetabular ligament is a significant block to hip reduction as it contracts in persistent hip dislocations. The transverse acetabular ligament must be incised for adequate hip reduction. The hip capsule is stretched in chronic hip dislocations. The stretched capsule can become constricted by the iliopsoas tendon. These secondary adaptations assume an hourglass configuration on arthrography that prevent hip reduction.

Multiple secondary structures may block a concentric hip reduction in developmental dysplasia of the hip. These secondary adaptions include an inverted labrum, limbus formation, hypertrophied ligamentum teres, pulvinar, contracted capsule, contracted transverse acetabular ligament, and contracted iliopsoas.

Hip arthrography allows for optimal determination of any soft tissue interposition between the acetabulum and displaced femoral head.

Congruency of the hip joint is determined by the width of the medial dye pool and the amount of dye around the femoral head on arthrography. The width of the medial dye pool should be < 6 mm between the acetabulum and femoral head when attempting closed reduction. The chance of a soft tissue block to reduction is high if the medial dye pool is > 6 mm.