The early stages of ALS may be difficult to diagnose if there is a lack of associated clinical findings. NCS and needle EMG can be thought of as an extension of the neurological examination. Clinicians should always obtain a detailed history and perform a thorough physical examination before recommending an electrodiagnostic study. Imaging and laboratory testing should also be done to rule out possible brain/spinal cord tumors, multiple sclerosis, myelopathies, radiculopathies, myasthenia gravis, inflammatory myopathies, multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block, and other diseases which may present similarly to ALS.

Clinicians should also explain to patients how the testing will be conducted as the study, particularly the needle EMG portion, can be an uncomfortable experience for some patients. Of note, the limb should be kept warm as colder body temperature can lead to erroneous findings such as decreased conduction velocities, prolonged latencies, increased duration, and increased amplitudes of sensory nerve action potentials and compound muscle action potentials.

NCS includes both sensory and motor testing and is performed by placing electrodes onto the desired area of study and stimulating the nerve that innervates that area. The waveform that is generated should be examined for any abnormalities. Needle EMG is performed by inserting a needle into a muscle and observing that muscle's electrical activity without any stimulation. For NCS of ALS, at least one upper and one lower limb should be tested with both sensory and motor studies. F waves studies should also be performed. If there is a concern for multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block, then stimulation should be done proximally with various upper and lower extremity nerves.

Needle EMG should be performed on areas where LMN signs (atrophy, weakness, flaccid paralysis, absent reflexes) are present. There should be testing of proximal and distal muscles of at least three limbs for the needle study, with muscles that have a minimum of two different nerve innervations. At a minimum, one bulbar muscle should be tested as well as two thoracic paraspinal muscles.