**Asthma**

Treatment of an acute asthma exacerbation targets the main components of the underlying pathophysiology: airway inflammation, smooth muscle constriction, edema, and mucus production. The standard initial therapy includes oxygen, intermittent dosing of a short-acting beta-2 agonist (i.e., albuterol), an inhaled anticholinergic (i.e., ipratropium bromide), and corticosteroids. Mucus plugging and atelectasis provoke ventilation-perfusion mismatch, leading to hypoxemia. Patients may paradoxically have a worsening of hypoxemia with the use of beta-2 agonists, as they eliminate the body’s compensatory mechanism of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. With the increased insensible losses from the respiratory tract, intravenous fluids will be necessary. If the acute exacerbation is worsening, a bolus dose of magnesium sulfate can be given as a rescue. Magnesium sulfate causes smooth muscle relaxation by inhibiting calcium uptake, thereby causing bronchodilation. Additionally, it inhibits mast cells degranulation and histamine release, reducing inflammation and edema.

Children with status asthmaticus (a severe asthma exacerbation that is refractory to standard treatment and potentially fatal) require admission to the pediatric intensive care unit. Continuous albuterol nebulization is initiated and enacts on the beta-2 adrenergic receptors in the lungs, resulting in bronchiole smooth muscle relaxation and dilation. Meanwhile, the patient requires monitoring for albuterol’s side effects: restlessness, tachycardia (due to the inadvertent effect of the drug on beta-1 receptors), arrhythmias, nausea, hypokalemia (from potassium shifting intracellularly), hyperglycemia, and tremors. If the patient is not improving with continuous albuterol, it may be due to the drug not reaching its targeted small airways, as the severity of bronchospasm is limiting gas flow and tidal volume. In this setting, an intravenous beta-2 agonist, terbutaline, can be used. An initial loading dose of terbutaline is given subcutaneously or intravenously, followed by a continuous intravenous infusion. This beta-agonist is preferred over epinephrine, as it has a more favorable side effect profile that is similar to albuterol. Rarely, myocardial ischemia can occur; this should be monitored with daily electrocardiograms. Repeated boluses or a continuous infusion of magnesium sulfate can also be added to the child’s regimen. Ketamine is an anesthetic, sedative, and analgesic working as an antagonist to the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor and has bronchodilatory effects. A bolus dose of ketamine followed by an infusion intravenously can serve as both a bronchodilator and sedative while on non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV) or invasive mechanical ventilatory support.

Intubation and invasive mechanical ventilatory support are reserved for the most severe cases of status asthmaticus, in which maximal medical therapy has been exhausted, and an indication of persistent hypoxia, severe acidosis, or altered mental status exists. It is avoided if possible, as manipulation of the airway in the setting of bronchial hyperresponsiveness can worsen the obstruction and hypercapnia. It is also difficult to ventilate this patient population due to airway obstruction and impeded exhalation, putting them at risk for barotrauma. If invasive mechanical ventilation is necessary, use a lung-protective strategy. Permissive hypercapnia should be tolerated. Using a ventilator mode with a decelerating flow pattern, such as pressure-regulated volume control, can be helpful in mechanically ventilated patients in status asthmaticus.

Methylxanthines, such as theophylline, have historically been used in the treatment of status asthmaticus due to their bronchodilatory effects. Additionally, they have anti-inflammatory and immune modulation properties.

**Bronchiolitis**

The mainstay of treatment of bronchiolitis is supportive care with supplemental oxygen, hydration, and clearing the airways of secretions. Some children’s respiratory support requires escalation to invasive mechanical ventilation. Alpha and/or beta-adrenergic agents with bronchodilatory effects, such as albuterol and epinephrine, are not recommended in the treatment of wheezing in bronchiolitis.

Nebulized hypertonic saline is not recommended for use in infants with bronchiolitis in the emergency department setting. Due to inconsistent outcomes in randomized controlled trials, a nebulized hypertonic saline is an option in hospitalized infants and children with bronchiolitis; however, note that this therapy has not been studied in critically ill children. Bronchospasm is a potential adverse effect of nebulized hypertonic saline, so it is typically co-administered with an inhaled bronchodilator. Corticosteroids are not a recommended intervention in the treatment of bronchiolitis.

**Anaphylaxis**

Early recognition of anaphylaxis is paramount. Prompt treatment with epinephrine is necessary to prevent the progression of anaphylaxis to a state of life-threatening respiratory and/or hemodynamic compromise. If anaphylaxis is suspected, treatment should not be delayed, as anaphylaxis severity and rate of progression is unpredictable.

First assess the airway, breathing, and circulation of the patient. Place the child on a cardiorespiratory monitor, provide supplemental oxygen, and acquire intravenous or intraosseous access for aggressive volume resuscitation. Epinephrine is the most important treatment. As readily as possible, administer intramuscular epinephrine to the anterolateral surface of the child’s mid-thigh.