Variation in static occlusion seen in the general population can be further described using various classifications. In 1899, Edward Angle introduced his classification of occlusion.

**Angle’s Classifications**

**Class**

**Description**

I

the mesiobuccal cusp of the first maxillary molar sits in the buccal groove of the first mandibular molar

II

the mesiobuccal cusp of the first maxillary molar is mesial to the buccal groove of the first mandibular molar

III

the mesiobuccal cusp of the first maxillary molar is distal to the buccal groove of the first mandibular molar

There are variations in native occlusion in the population. 52% of the population is Angle’s class I. While 26.2% are classified as Angle class II and 2.6% being Angle’s class III. This classification system is imperfect, leaving 21% of the population not clearly falling into any Angle classes.

Transverse and vertical relationships between maxillary and mandibular dentition can be described as well.

**Lingual-labial/buccal Relationship**

**Designation**

**Description**

Normal

Maxillary dentition is labial/buccal to mandibular dentition

Anterior crossbite

Anterior maxillary dentition is lingual to mandibular dentition

Posterior crossbite

Posterior maxillary dentition is lingual to mandibular dentition

**Vertical Relationship**

**Designation**

**Description**

Normal

Anterior maxillary dentition extends 2-3 mm inferior to the occlusal surface of mandibular dentition.

Open bite

Lack of occlusal contact

Overbite

Anterior maxillary dentition extends beyond 3 mm inferior to the occlusal surface of mandibular dentition.

Overjet differs from overbite as overjet is the measure of how far anterior the maxillary dentition is in front of the mandibular dentition.