The nodular development pattern of follicular lymphoma, which mirrors the typical germinal centers of secondary lymphoid follicles and obliterates the typical lymphoid architecture, is one of the most conspicuous morphologic characteristics of follicular lymphoma. In contrast to normal reactive follicles, the nodules in follicular lymphoma are often densely packed and of varying size and form. The neoplastic follicles may be present throughout the tumor tissue or just in a section, with a diffuse component comprising the remainder of the tumor.

Centrocytes are small cleaved follicular cells with elongated or cleaved nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, and scant pale cytoplasm. Centroblasts are noncleaved follicular center cells with round or oval nuclei, vesicular chromatin, often multiple peripheral nucleoli, and a narrow rim of basophilic cytoplasm. Centrocytes typically predominate in follicular lymphoma, and centroblasts are usually in the minority. WHO classifies follicular lymphoma into grades 1,2, and 3a/3b based on the cell counting method of centroblasts.

Malignant follicles include T-cells and densely structured networks of follicular dendritic cells, similar to those seen in normal germinal centers. The polarization of normal reactive germinal centers into dark zones rich in centroblasts and light zones rich in centrocytes is absent in neoplastic follicles. Interfollicular spaces in follicular lymphomas may house both normal T-cells and a varied percentage of malignant cells. In general, neoplastic follicles have a smaller Ki-67+ proportion (a sign of proliferation) than reactive follicles. The number of mitotic figures and cells that are positive for the Ki-67 marker rises with increasing grade.

The immunophenotype of follicular lymphoma is confirmed by flow cytometry or immunohistochemistry. The tumor cells have surface immunoglobulin expression, with 50-60% of cells expressing IgM. Either kappa or lambda light chains are present. Cells are positive for B-cell antigens, including CD19, CD20, CD79a, and CD10. No expression of CD5, CD43, and CD11c is noted.