Retinoids bind cytosolic retinoic acid-binding protein (CRABP) that acts as the intracellular carrier transporting it to the nucleus. In the nucleus, retinoids impact transcription by binding two families of nuclear receptors: retinoic acid receptors (RARs) and retinoid X receptors (RXR). RAR and RXR families contain three receptor subtypes: alpha, beta, and gamma that are encoded by different genes. RAR can bind with RXR forming a heterodimer. RXR can bind with itself, forming a homodimer, or bind with other nuclear receptors such as thyroid hormone receptor, vitamin D3 receptor, and peripheral peroxidase-activated receptor (PPAR). Dimers of RAR/RXR or RXR/RXR bind to DNA regulatory sequences in the promoter region, retinoid acid response elements (RAREs). Once the ligand binds, it undergoes a conformational change to release co-repressors and recruit co-activators. The retinoid-receptor complex may antagonize the action of other transcription factors, thus working indirectly. Acitretin competes with RA for CRABP. Acitretin can activate but does not bind to multiple RARs.

Acitretin has anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferative effects. It normalizes keratinocyte differentiation in the epithelium. It also hinders the expression of proinflammatory cytokines like interleukin-6 (IL-6), migration inhibitory factor-related protein-8 (MRP-8), and interferon-gamma. The agent acts by binding and activating all nuclear subtypes of retinoid X-receptors and retinoic acid receptors.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Generally administered with food and reaches peak plasma concentration in 2.7 hours (2-5 hours).

**Plasma Protein Binding:**99.9%

**Metabolism:**The initial metabolism of acitretin involves isomerization; this differs from isotretinoin, where the initial metabolism is oxidation. Acitretin converts to isoacitretin. Acitretin is ultimately eliminated in the bile as beta-glucuronide derivatives or through the kidneys as soluble metabolites. Acitretin can undergo reverse metabolism to etretinate when acitretin is used in combination with alcohol.

**Excretion:**Its metabolites, as well as conjugates of acitretin and cis-acitretin, are excreted in the feces (34% to 54%) and urine (16% to 53%).

**Terminal Elimination Half-life:**Following multiple-dose, acitretin has a half-life of 49 hours, and cis-acitretin has 63 hours.