In infants with antenatal hydronephrosis, the management approach depends on the persistence of postnatal hydronephrosis, bilateral involvement, and the severity of hydronephrosis.

Bilateral hydronephrosis is due to obstruction distal to the urinary bladder. Posterior urethral valves are the most common cause of bilateral hydroureteronephrosis. A voiding cystourethrogram should be performed for further diagnosis. A renal pelvic diameter > 15 mm in a newborn is considered severe hydronephrosis. They carry a greater risk of severe renal impairment. Mild to moderate cases resolve by 18 months of age.

Infants with antenatal hydronephrosis are at high risk of developing pyelonephritis with a stronger association in girls.

The cause of hydronephrosis drives specific treatment. A high possibility of renal dysfunction, suspicion for infection leading to severe sepsis, and symptoms of severe pain, nausea, and vomiting warrant urgent treatment of hydronephrosis.

Placement of a urinary catheter is important when lower urinary tract obstruction at the bladder level is highly suspected. Cystoscopy guided ureteral stent placement is a common procedure for various intrinsic and extrinsic causes of hydronephrosis at the ureter level. Fluoroscopy guided percutaneous nephrostomy tube placement is a less invasive procedure performed by interventional radiologists when ureteral stent placement is contraindicated or cannot be done.

Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy is used to treat renal stones in the renal pelvis to prevent future hydronephrosis and obstruction. Surgery is also required for some cases with extrinsic compression from pelvic, retroperitoneal tumors, and aortic aneurysms, etc.