Management of granulomatous hepatitis should be initiated, keeping the underlying cause in mind. Asymptomatic, incidental, or idiopathic granulomas may be monitored with regular follow up assessments and/or liver function tests. Most patients with symptomatic idiopathic granulomatous hepatitis respond well to corticosteroids. However, prior to initiating immunosuppression with corticosteroids, tuberculosis must be ruled out. Glucocorticoid therapy consists of prednisone 20 to 40 mg daily and is gradually tapered off over 4 to 8 weeks. A second course may be given if required. Methotrexate and infliximab may be alternatives for patients in which corticosteroids are not preferred or are contraindicated. In those who do not respond to corticosteroids, further evaluation for atypical infections, lymphoma, or other malignancies should be considered. Discontinuing the use of the drug or exposure to the toxin implicated may result in the resolution of the hepatic granulomas.

Hepatic sarcoidosis management is tailored individually, as some patients may not require specific treatment, while others may require lifelong therapy. Corticosteroids are the mainstay of therapy and are first-line for idiopathic granulomatous hepatitis as well. Methotrexate, chloroquine, azathioprine, and ursodeoxycholic acid are second-line agents in the treatment of sarcoidosis or idiopathic granulomatous hepatitis. Only 5% of sarcoidosis involving the liver requires therapy, although symptoms due to portal hypertension will require a liver transplant. However, the requirement for liver transplant is rare as the majority respond well to systemic therapy. It is important to keep in mind that the use of interferon therapy in patients with both sarcoidosis and hepatitis C may result in either development or worsening of granulomatous disease. Some studies suggest steroid use in the first 6 months of presentation for any manifestation of sarcoidosis may have a >50% chance of developing chronic disease while <10% with no systemic therapy will require chronic therapy.

Ursodeoxycholic acid may help in symptom resolution of pruritus in sarcoidosis and PBC caused by cholestatic jaundice. Ursodeoxycholic acid therapy has been shown to reduce the progression of PBC and results in histologic improvement. It improves overall and transplantation-free survival. For those patients that do undergo liver transplantation in PBC, outcomes are excellent, with a 1-year survival rate of greater than 90%.

Infectious causes rely on appropriate antibiotic therapy. Granulomas associated with tuberculosis should be treated with rifampin, isoniazid (INH), pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. Histoplasmosis and coccidioidomycosis associated granulomas are treated with amphotericin or flucytosine. It is important to keep in mind that INH is associated with hepatic injury and so liver function tests and renal function should be monitored on a regular basis. INH should be used in combination with pyridoxine therapy to prevent the development of peripheral neuropathy. Treatment of BCG-associated infection comprises a similar drug regimen to active pulmonary TB (rifampin, isoniazid, and ethambutol) as it is susceptible to most anti-TB drugs except pyrazinamide.