The ophthalmic evaluation includes slit-lamp biomicroscopy, fundoscopy, fundus photo, fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA), and OCT scan of the macula.

Ocular alignment should be noted to rule out the presence of strabismus since long-standing chronic Retinal traction detachment can be associated with sensory exotropia, which may denote a poor visual prognosis. Pupillary reflex should be noted to rule out the relative afferent pupillary defect. Inaccurate projection of ray gives a poor visual prognosis.

Iris and angle neovascularization should be looked for in the un-dilated state to find the presence of neovascularization. The presence and grade of cataracts should be noted since this will help in the decision of simultaneous cataract surgery.

The exact localization of the fibrovascular membranes, neovascular tufts, large-caliber neovascularization fronds, areas of tractional detachments, subretinal bands, presence of preretinal and subretinal bleed should be noted in the preoperative workup. In the presence of the RTD, the formation of a break in the retina converts it into a combined retinal detachment (CRD). In the preoperative workup, localization of the break may not be noted, and the clues for combined retinal detachment are convex retinal surface, sudden loss of vision, progression to ora serrata, and relatively less tangential traction. Intraoperatively the break(s) can be usually identified at the base of a proliferation where there is maximum anteroposterior traction. CRD cases should be operated early because a delay in the surgery will result in increased accumulation of subretinal fluid and difficulty in membrane removal due to more approximation of the retina with the membranes and mobility of the retina.

**Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (OCT)**imaging is helpful in assessing the level and severity of the membranes than other modalities.

Color photographs, red-free photographs, and wide-angle fundus photographs are helpful in the preoperative workup and documentation of the pathology like location and extent of RTD, SRB, preretinal and subretinal hemorrhages, and ischemic retinal vessels.

**Wide-angle fundus autofluorescence (FAF)**can help in visualization of the laser free area of the retina where additional PRP can be done preoperatively.

**Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA)**can be done in doubtful cases where exact cause to RTD can not be found out due to the absence of clinically evident neovascularization. Also, FFA helps in delineating the areas of peripheral and macular ischemia, which will prognosticate the visual outcome in these cases.

**Ultrasound B scan (USG-B scan)**is a time tested investigational modality in the preoperative workup of the RTD cases. This helps in identifications of the areas of traction and retinal detachment, state of posterior vitreous detachment (PVD), presence of vitreous, subretinal, or preretinal hemorrhage, especially in the presence of a hazy media. There have been 2 types of description of RTD in ultrasound B scan. The detached retina may be tented by a narrow vitreoretinal adhesion causing an 'x' pattern in USG B scan and a broad vitreoretinal adhesion causing an 'H' shaped pattern in USG B scan.

The systemic evaluation includes fasting and postprandial blood sugar, HbA1c, blood urea, serum creatinine, systemic blood pressure measurement, the hemoglobin level, lipid profile, and urinary microalbumin. Along with the ophthalmic evaluation, the patient should receive a tailored approach to all systemic involvements and consult concerned specialists.