The following conditions can present with symptoms similar to peptic ulcer disease and it is important to be familiar with their clinical presentation in order to make the correct diagnosis.

- Gastritis - an inflammatory process of the gastric mucosa from immune-mediated or infectious etiology presenting with upper abdominal pain and nausea. Clinical presentation is very similar to that of peptic ulcer disease.

- Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) - patients usually describe a burning sensation in the epigastrium and lower retrosternal area, excessive salivation, or intermittent regurgitation of food material.

- Gastric cancer - apart from abdominal pain, patients usually describe alarm symptoms like weight loss, melena, recurrent vomiting, or evidence of malignancy elsewhere in case of metastasis.

- Pancreatitis - epigastric or right upper quadrant pain that is more persistent and severe, worse in the supine position, and patients usually have a history of alcoholism or gallstones.

- Biliary colic - intermittent, severe deep pain in the right upper quadrant or epigastrium precipitated by fatty meals.

- Cholecystitis - right upper quadrant or epigastric pain that usually lasts for hours and is exacerbated by fatty meals and is associated with nausea and vomiting. Fever, tachycardia, positive Murphy sign, leukocytosis, and abnormal liver functions help further distinguish this from biliary colic.

These are some potentially life-threatening conditions that can also have similar presentations.

- Myocardial infarction - especially in the inferior wall and right ventricular involvement, sometimes patients can present with epigastric pain with nausea and vomiting.

- Mesenteric ischemia - while acute mesenteric ischemia presents with severe, acute onset abdominal pain; the chronic variant usually presents with ongoing post-prandial epigastric pain

- Mesenteric vasculitis - unexplained abdominal symptoms with or without lower gastrointestinal bleeding in a patient with other features from underlying systemic vasculitis should raise the suspicion of mesenteric vasculitis.