Generally, in case of overdosage, forced vomiting and gastric lavage would be valuable for up to two hours after administration. Transient hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity could occur and should resolve after drug withdrawal.

- Oral doses of cyclosporine up to 10 grams (about 150 mg/kg) have been reported to be tolerable, with relatively mild symptoms including but not limited to drowsiness, headache, and tachycardia. However, moderate to severe reversible renal impairment has been reported as well. In premature neonates, accidental overdosage can happen when the drug is administered intramuscularly. Management for cyclosporine overdosage is mostly supportive and symptomatic.

- Tacrolimus is considered to be an overdose when it exceeds the regular dose by thirty times. Almost all patients recover completely. Adverse reactions include tremors, abnormal renal function, high blood pressure, and peripheral edema. Lethargy and transient urticaria have been reported in the acute setting. Management is largely supportive and symptomatic treatment as the drug cannot be dialyzed. Charcoal hemoperfusion to remove the drug is not well reported. The use of activated charcoal in an acute overdose is recommended with insufficient evidence.

- There have been no reported cases of pimecrolimus overdosage as well as there are no reports of accidental oral intake. However, if oral ingestion occurs, the patient should seek medical intervention.

- Voclosporin is a relatively newer drug; hence there is no literature about its toxicity.