The central position of PPC opacity is governed by the lenticular anatomy and the time and type of embryonal insult. The nutrition of the growing lens is dependent on tunica vasculosa lentis (TVL), a vascular network supplied by the hyaloid artery. It has been thought that PPC is a product of hyaloid artery persistence or lenticular invasion by mesoblastic tissue. Still, the exact mechanism for PPC remains a mystery. One school of thought is that it is due to gene mutation. It has been suggested that when the lens fibers fail to develop normally, it results in the formation of an opacity closely adherent to the posterior pole of the capsule.

PPC is comprised of dysplastic lenticular fibers, and these fibers migrate towards the posterior pole of the capsule from the equator, resulting in central lens opacity. These degenerative changes along with extracellular material result in the formation of onion ring-like central plaque-shaped discoid posterior pole opacity called the PPC. The posterior capsule is already thin, and when a PPC adheres to it, it results in extreme thinning and a fragile posterior capsule that is prone to dehiscence or rupture during intraocular maneuvers.

PPC has been associated with posterior capsule congenital defects in approximately 20%. Hence, based on the pathophysiologic mechanism, it can be inferred that posterior capsular rent in these cases is probably due to two main reasons. First is dense adherence of the discoid opacity centrally to the thin posterior capsule, and second, the posterior capsule is already very fragile that it gives way even with minimal surgical manipulation.