The pathologies associated with the lung are diverse, with significant variations in disease presentation. This is primarily due to the exposure of this organ to the outside environment. Lung pathologies can be broadly classified as obstructive lung diseases or restrictive lung diseases.

This includes bronchial diseases, infectious diseases, interstitial lung diseases, neoplasm, vascular diseases, congenital abnormalities, etc. The destruction of lung parenchymal tissue presents chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and emphysema due to chronic inflammation

In some obstructive diseases such as bronchitis, hyperplasia of goblet cells occurs, while in bronchiectasis, the bronchi are markedly dilated. Restrictive disorders, on the other hand, are marked by the fibrous deposits that restrict lung function. Interstitial restrictive lung diseases are characterized by inflammation or scarring of the lung tissue or filling of the air spaces with exudate and debris. Extrapulmonary restrictive diseases show thickening of alveolar septa and epithelium and are associated with an endothelial injury.

In its acute phase, restrictive lung disease demonstrates endothelial damage. In some disorders, they also show epithelial damage with fibrosis of the exudate and expansion of the interstitium through generalized fibrosis.  Chronic restrictive lung diseases are marked by **diffuse interstitial**changes that are more prominent than the morphological changes. Many of the chronic restrictive lung diseases, particularly in later stages, are characterized by**interstitial fibrosis**leading to a classic**honeycomb-like appearance of the lung****.**