**Surgical Repair of the Tricuspid Valve**

Tricuspid regurgitation is the most common reason for surgical tricuspid valve repair. Patients with secondary (functional) TR most likely undergo repair while patients with primary TR are not considered suitable candidates for repair due to pathology involving multiple leaflets, and replacement has better results. The aim of TV repair is reducing annular diameter, increasing valvular adaptation, and reducing RV afterload. Important anatomic considerations for the surgeon include the presence of the atrioventricular node (AVN) and conducting system within the triangle of Koch demarcated as the base of the septal leaflet, coronary sinus orifice, and tendon of Todaro. The tricuspid annulus is also related to the base of the aortic valve, the membranous interventricular septum, the right coronary artery, the fibrous body, and the lateral atrioventricular junction.

**A. Suture Tricuspid Valve Annuloplasty**

The first suture annuloplasty technique was described by Kay to treat secondary TR. In this technique, sutures are placed in a way to completely exclude the posterior tricuspid leaflet and converting the valve into a bicuspid valve.

**B. Ring Annuloplasty of the Tricuspid Valve**

Carpentier introduced the technique of using a rigid or semi-rigid ring to reinforce and fixating the tricuspid annulus in systole in an attempt to restore the physiological geometry of the TV. The size of the ring is normally decided by measuring the distance from anteroseptal commissure to posteroseptal commissure.

**C. Clover Technique for Tricuspid Valve Repair**

Alfieri proposed stitching together the middle points of all the leaflets (similar concept as Alfieri stitch for mitral valve) and adding ring annuloplasty to decrease TV annular diameter. This technique gives the valve a clover shape, and so the procedure is known as the clover technique. This has been used in both primary and secondary TR.

Other surgical techniques for tricuspid valve repair are used in primary TR and depend on the mechanism and involved pathology. It ranges from surgical intervention and repair of leaflets when there is a prolapse or flail segment, chordal transposition, or neo chord when there is chordal rupture, and sliding papillary muscle repair when there is a diseased or elongated papillary muscle.

**Transcatheter Repair of the Tricuspid Valve**

Though it has been shown that untreated tricuspid regurgitation has adverse outcomes, most of the patients with sole tricuspid pathology still receive conservative treatment due to the high risk involved with the surgery. For this reason and because of the success of treating other valve problems, the percutaneous transcatheter tricuspid repair is gaining attention. There are many innovative technologies under investigation for transcatheter tricuspid valve repair targeting leaflet coaptation, annuloplasty, and prosthetic valve deployment. Currently, the most widely used technique is the off-label use of the edge-to-edge clip repair system.

Three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is required for the successful placement of the clips. The other challenge is the steering of the clip system, as it is not designed to be used for the tricuspid valve. Percutaneous transcatheter tricuspid repair techniques can be broadly divided into the following categories:

- Direct suture annuloplasty

- Direct ring annuloplasty

- Coaptation enhancement

The inferior vena cava is located very close to the tricuspid valve and septum, making it very challenging to steer the system perpendicular to the valve for clip deployment.

There are transcatheter annuloplasty devices under investigation for the treatment of functional TR, where transcatheter direct annuloplasty can be performed by anchoring a ring whose size can be controlled according to the desired diameter.