The American Heart Association published its updated guidelines for infective endocarditis in 2015.

- Native valve highly susceptible (MIC less than or equal to 0.12 mcg/ml) viridans group streptococci (VGS) infective endocarditis

- VGS and S. gallolyticus (bovis) with MIC greater than 0.12 to less than 0.5 mcg/ml

- A defective and Granulicatella species, and VGS with penicillin MIC greater than or equal to 0.5 mcg/ml

- VGS or S. gallolyticus involving prosthetic material

- Staphylococci, Staphylococci involving prosthetic material

- Enterococci, HACEK micro-organisms

- Non-HACEK gram-negative bacilli, culture-negative endocarditis, and fungi

Recommendations for antimicrobial therapy, according to the causative pathogen are complex and well summarized in the 2015 American Heart Association practice guidelines.S. viridans and enterococci need to be covered, and the usual treatment involves IV penicillin (2.4 g, every 4 hours) for up to 4 weeks with gentamicin (1 mg/kg, every 12 hours) for 2 weeks (for suspected aminoglycoside-susceptible enterococci).

Adjunctive therapy with aminoglycosides for native valve infective endocarditis is not recommended because of the risk of renal toxicity and because it doesn’t decrease mortality. Likewise, rifampin is not recommended because of the risk of hepatotoxicity. However, if the culprit is aminoglycoside-susceptible enterococci, then gentamicin can be added to the regimen.S. aureus needs to be covered. The treatment includes nafcillin for methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) or cefazolin if patients are allergic to nafcillin. For methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), vancomycin is the recommended antibiotic. The alternative is daptomycin, which requires closer monitoring for dosing. Candida and Aspergillus may respond to medical therapy 5-fluorouracil and amphotericin B respectively, however, these patients frequently require surgical therapy. Among patients with mechanical valve endocarditis who have experienced a central nervous system embolic event, it is reasonable to discontinue for 2 weeks all forms of anticoagulation.

If medical therapy fails, surgical intervention is often necessary. Class I indications for surgery in patients with infective endocarditis include valvular dysfunction with symptoms of congestive heart failure, left-sided infective endocarditis caused by Staphylococcus aureus, fungal, or other highly resistant microorganisms, infective endocarditis with conduction defects or heart block, annular or aortic abscess, persistent infection 5 to 7 days after initiation of antibiotic therapy

Indications for Surgery

- CHF that is refractory to treatment

- Fungal endocarditis

- Recurrent septic emboli despite antibiotic treatment

- Persistent sepsis despite antibiotic treatment

- Rupture sinus of Valsalva aneurysm

- Conduction defect due to a septal abscess

There are several options for treating aortic valve endocarditis depending on the surgeon's experience and preferences. In the past, cryopreserved homografts were often utilized and had good outcomes. But these homografts have fallen out of favor because of recalcification and the need for another surgery. In addition, the implantation of a homograft does require skill. Today, aortic valve endocarditis is managed with the use of biological stentless valves. These valves have a long shelf life and are available in many sizes. However, they still require some technical skills to get the best outcomes.

For native valve endocarditis limited to the leaflets/cusps, repair should be performed whenever feasible (Class I)