Intragastric balloon therapy is performed within the endoscopy suite. Light sedation using propofol is often used. If concerns of airway protection are present, general anesthesia can be utilized instead. Light sedation is provided to the patient and then prepped for endoscopy. An endoscopic evaluation of the lower, distal esophagus and the stomach is performed to ensure the absence of any ulcers or large hiatal hernias.

Next, the deflated balloon is slid down the esophagus into the stomach and followed using the endoscope. Once the balloon is in an appropriate position, the central wire from the balloon is removed. The catheter is connected to a syringe to fill the balloon. The balloon is typically filled 50 mL at a time under endoscopic supervision. The balloon is filled to 500 mL, but this is dependent on the balloon type. The filling catheter is detached with the deployment of the balloon. The balloon has a self-sealing valve to prevent leaks.

The catheter is removed with the balloon staying within the stomach cavity. The endoscope should be slid easily around the balloon to ensure that the balloon is not too snug within the stomach or wedged with the potential to cause an outlet obstruction in the stomach. In terms of recovery, the patient spends a few hours after insertion of the intragastric balloon in the hospital, where they typically receive IV fluids and anti-emetic medications.

If the patient tolerates the balloon well, they are discharged the same day. The recommended nutritional guidelines vary, but immediately after the procedure, the patient is on a clear liquid diet which is advanced to a complete liquid diet that includes protein shakes. The following diet would be a puréed food diet and then advance to a soft diet up to a regular diet. The time frames on the advancement of diet are provider-specific, but adequate time is necessary to allow the stomach to adjust to the intragastric balloon.

When discussing the removal of the balloon, a provider can also use a clear liquid diet a couple of days before removing it to ensure emptying of the stomach is adequate. The time when balloon removal occurs is dependent on which type of balloon was used, as discussed above.