After establishing the cause of vitreous hemorrhage, the management is individually tailored.

**Conservative**

In cases with unknown causes and fresh VH with an attached retina, one can wait and advise the patient to maintain a head-end elevated position for the blood to settle inferiorly. We can re-evaluate after 3 to 7 days, to look for the cause with a clearer media. In cases where an etiology is known, like in post-laser, recurrent VH post vitrectomy, Terson syndrome, and an attached retina, one can observe for 2 to 4 weeks for resolution of VH and also monitor for any retinal detachment. Patients with active new vessels may be advised to avoid heavy works and exercise.

**Photocoagulation**

Laser photocoagulation is planned for proliferative retinopathies and should begin as soon as any retina is visible. Both indirect and slit lamp delivery systems can be used depending upon the clarity of the media.

Panretinal photocoagulation (PRP) is the mainstay treatment in PDR. It reduces the release of angiogenic factors (vascular endothelial growth factor/VEGF, platelet-derived growth factor/PDGF) by converting ischemic retina into anoxic.

The landmark Diabetic Retinopathy Study (DRS) found that in PDR cases, the risk of severe vision loss was 15.9% in control eyes, whereas it was 6.4% in eyes in which PRP was done. It concluded that PRP significantly reduced the chances of severe vision loss in PDR, mainly high-risk cases.

- NVD (neovascularization of the optic disc) greater than one-third to one-fourth of disc area even without vitreous hemorrhage (VH) or preretinal hemorrhage (PRH)

- Any NVD with VH or PRH

- Neovascularization elsewhere (NVE) greater than half of a disc area with VH or PRH

For severe NPDR or PDR without high-risk features, the study was inconclusive whether observation with close follow up or early treatment was better.

The Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) suggested that in older patients with Type 2 DM with severe NPDR or early PDR, a prompt laser was better than deferral when compared to young patients with type 1 diabetes.

The Central Vein Occlusion Study (CVOS) recommended that scatter PRP has to be done in cases with CRVO only after the development of neovascularization of iris/angle and not prophylactically.Branched Retinal Vein Occlusion Study (BVOS), scatter retinal photocoagulation has to be done only after the development of neovascularization, as 60% of cases may never develop neovascularisation and VH.

In cases with retinal breaks, a barrage laser is planned.

**Cryotherapy and Diathermy**

Peripheral retinal cryotherapy may be done to ablate peripheral ischemic retina. After 360 degrees conjunctival peritomy, the four recti muscles are bridled. Under direct visualization of the retina with an indirect ophthalmoscope, the cryoprobe is kept at the level of insertions of recti. The endpoint is the direct visualization of retinal whitening. 2 to 3 such rows of cryo are applied posteriorly, one spot size apart, and are repeated 360 degrees. At the end of the procedure, bridle sutures are removed, and conjunctiva sutured.****

It disrupts the blood-retinal barrier and increases the clearance of blood and blood products. However, it causes a lot of inflammation and hence, is avoided in cases with a tractional component and in eyes where the laser has not been tried. Post vitrectomy recurrent hemorrhage from sclerotomy sites and anterior hyaloid proliferation remain the best indication for anterior retinal cryotherapy.

Diathermy has more side effects and is more difficult to perform than cryotherapy. Hence, it is obsolete these days.

**Posterior Hyaloidotomy**

For the rapid resolution of premacular subhyaloid hemorrhage, which can cause a sudden profound drop in vision, Nd: YAG hyaloidotomy has been tried. The etiologies mostly include Valsalva retinopathy, retinal macroaneurysm, retinal vein occlusion, and proliferative diabetic retinopathy. The hyaloidotomy is performed with the help of a Q switched Nd:YAG laser 1064 nm (photo-disruptive laser) with the help of Goldmann-Bussaca/area centralis lens. The laser beam is focused on the anterior surface of premacular hemorrhage at its inferior margin away from the fovea and retinal vessels. There should be an adequate separation of the posterior hyaloid face and underlying retina at the area of laser to prevent iatrogenic damage to the retina. This creates an opening over the surface, causing the rapid streaming of blood into the vitreous cavity. If only a little blood is released after the first shot, 2 to 3 more shots can be applied adjacent to it. The energy may vary from 2.1 to 11.5 mJ.

**Pars Plana Vitrectomy (PPV)**

Vitreous Haemorrhage associated with retinal detachment (RD), endophthalmitis, long-standing hemorrhage, open globe injury, VH due to neovascular AMD/IPCV, one-eyed patients, bilateral cases, secondary glaucoma (ghost cell, hemolytic, hemosiderotic glaucoma), children who are at risk of developing amblyopia are indications for surgery**.**

In Proliferative diabetic retinopathy, vitrectomy, along with pan-retinal photocoagulation, helps in halting neovascularisation as they have no scaffold to grow. The Diabetic Vitrectomy study concluded that early vitrectomy was helpful in Type 1 DM (diabetes mellitus) patients with severe vision loss and non-clearing VH of at least 1 month.

In retinal vein occlusions, vitreous hemorrhage is more common in BRVO than CRVO. In cases where VH does not resolve within 1 to 3 months of follow up, vitrectomy with sectoral photocoagulation is helpful.

**Anti VEGF**

Many surgeons use anti-VEGF agents preoperatively (1 to 7 days prior) before vitrectomy to reduce the risk of an intraoperative and postoperative bleed and to help in intraoperative tissue dissection in proliferative retinopathy cases. It is also indicated in cases with VH due to nAMD/IPCV.

In cases with no view due to VH, where PRP is not possible, anti-VEGF injections have been tried to induce regression of neovascularization and reduce the risk of a fresh bleed.Protocol S (DRCR.net) has suggested in its 2 years follow up report, that visual acuity in PDR eyes treated with anti-VEGF (Ranibizumab) with deferred PRP (panretinal photocoagulation) was non-inferior to the ones promptly treated with PRP.

In cases with neovascularization of iris/ angle with or without glaucoma, where PRP is difficult due to poor dilatation of the pupil, anti-VEGF injections may be used.

**Experimental Treatment Strategies**

A variety of treatments in the form of intravitreal injections of streptokinase, streptodornase, tissue plasminogen activator, gas, urokinase, induction of hemolysis by ultrasound has been tried. However, none of the methods has been used in clinical practice.

**Management of the Cause and Systemic Diseases**

Optimal control of systemic diseases and morbidities associated with VH needs to be achieved. Patients with active inflammation (retinal vasculitis/uveitis) with vitreous hemorrhage may need systemic, periocular, or intraocular steroids.