A confirmed case of giardiasis is defined by the CDC as "the detection of Giardia organisms, antigen, or DNA in stool, intestinal fluid, tissue samples, biopsy specimens or other biological sample."

Giardia Lamblia enteritis is diagnosed definitively through microscopic identification of the pathogen in a stool sample. Because Giardia is often shed intermittently, examining stool samples collected over a period of several days is most sensitive. [7] The traditional ova and parasite exam includes a permanent stained smear; however, because the microscopic examination takes time, resources, multiple samples, and a trained eye, immunoassays have become the main diagnostic tool.

The direct fluorescence immunoassay (DFA) detects proteins of intact organisms and is reported to have highest sensitivity and specificity (96% to 100%; 99.8% to 100%), followed by the enzyme immunoassay (EIA) which detects stool antigens at sensitivity of 94% to 97% and specificity of 96% to 100%. Results of these exams may be obtained in 1 to 2 hours.

Rapid immunoassays are the most time-efficient, with results about in 10 minutes; however, they have a low sensitivity, especially in infections with a low concentration of the Giardia parasite, and should not replace DFA or direct microscopy.

PCR used to detect giardia DNA in stool samples is as specific and sensitive as antigen detection and is more sensitive than microscopy, but it has not as of yet replaced the latter as gold standard. It is the only method available to classify the assemblage of the parasite.

In hard-to-diagnose cases, duodenal aspirate may also be examined in place of stool samples.