DMD is a genetic disease due to the mutation of the dystrophin gene, located on chromosome Xp21. It is inherited as an X- linked recessive trait; however, approximately 30% of cases are due to new mutations.

Mutations in the dystrophin gene result in diseases known as dystrophinopathies, which encompass Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Becker muscular dystrophy, and an intermediate form. Mutations result in a limited production of the dystrophin protein, which results in loss of the myofiber membrane integrity with repeated cycles of necrosis and regeneration. Fibrous connective tissue and fat progressively replace muscle leading to clinical features.

Carrier females show no evidence of muscular weakness; however, symptomatic female carriers have been described. About 2.5% to 20% of female carriers may be affected. This can be explained by the Lyon hypothesis in which the normal X chromosome becomes inactivated, and the X chromosome with the mutation is expressed.

Female carriers can become symptomatic if they are associated with Turners syndrome (45X) or mosaic Turner karyotype, balanced X autosome translocations with breakpoints within the dystrophin gene and preferential inactivation of the normal X, and females with a normal karyotype but with nonrandom X chromosome inactivation with diminished expression of the normal dystrophin allele.

The dystrophin gene is one of the largest genes in the human genome. Containing 79 exons of a coding sequence and 2.5 Mb of DNA, this gene codes for the protein dystrophin measuring 427 kDa.

Most mutations are deletions and duplications, and this accounts for 70% to 80% of the mutations. Point mutations are seen in 20% to 30% of patients.

Dystrophin is expressed in the striated and cardiac muscle, as well as the brain and the retina. The distribution in the brain is less than that in the muscle; however, this does explain some of the central nervous system manifestations of this disease.