Although CSF leaks can arise from the skull base, these types of leaks do not typically cause orthostatic headaches and are more associated with high (rather than low) CSF pressure when spontaneous or head trauma and post-surgical procedures.

The mechanism of CSF leaks after head trauma and surgical procedures is mainly due to the breach in the intervening layers of mucosa, bone, dura, and arachnoid membrane, which results in rhinorrhea - the flow of CSF into the nose.

Spinal CSF leaks are currently recognized to occur through three primary mechanisms: meningeal diverticula, ventral dural tears, and CSF-venous fistulas (CVFs).

Meningeal diverticula: areas of dural dehiscence that permit protrusion of the leptomeninges through the dural defect, creating a fragile outpunching-prone rupture. Some diverticula involve large meningeal tears that allow rapid egress of CSF, whereas others produce slow weeping of CSF with the Valsalva maneuver.

Ventral dural tears are more commonly caused by calcified disk protrusions or sharp endplate osteophytes that incise the dura, producing a longitudinally oriented tear. Leaks from ventral tears are often rapid, resulting in extensive epidural CSF collections.

CSF - Venous Fistula: In this entity, there is a direct connection between the spinal subarachnoid space and the draining paraspinal vein that allows rapid loss of CSF into the venous circulation. The CSF is usually reabsorbed at the level of spinal nerve roots by the arachnoid villi regulated by vacuoles. In contrast, the CSF loss due to CVFs is unregulated, resulting in CSF volume depletion and intracranial hypotension. The thoracic spine is the most common location for CVFs.