History must be obtained from the patient and their close friends, family members, or caregivers. Patients may present with symptoms of changes in behavior, getting lost in familiar neighborhoods, memory loss, mood changes, aggression, social withdrawal, self-neglect, cognitive difficulty, personality changes, difficulty performing tasks, forgetfulness, difficulty in communication, loss of independence, etc. A detailed history should include past medical, family, medication, and substance use history and defining observed symptoms of cognitive decline. Often patients will report different awareness of the deficits than caregivers or companions will report. In addition to further characterization of the cognitive changes, it is important to evaluate their current functional abilities and any changes in their ability to perform daily tasks.

It is also vitally important to evaluate any safety concerns that arise from the cognitive changes. For example, is the patient still driving, and are they doing so safely? Have there been any episodes of wandering or getting lost? If there was a fire in the house, could they get out safely? Can they still use the telephone? Are they vulnerable to financial or physical abuse? Are there firearms in the home to which they have access?

In addition to symptoms of dementia, the following atypical symptoms may be seen in the following conditions:

- In patients with Lewy body dementia, symptoms of well-formed visual hallucinations, REM sleep behavior disorder, typical parkinsonian symptoms, and fluctuating cognition, attention, and alertness.

- In patients with frontotemporal dementia, behavior changes, including disinhibition and apathy, and speech difficulties may be seen.

- In patients with Creutzfeld-Jakob disease, symptoms of myoclonus, visual changes, ataxia, and memory and behavior changes are seen.

- In patients with Huntington disease, symptoms of chorea, irritability, and depression can be present.

- In patients with vascular dementia, deficits can occur in stepwise declines.

- In patients with Parkinson disease dementia, symptoms of parkinsonism characterized by bradykinesia, resting tremor, and muscle rigidity are found. In addition, visual hallucinations and delusions may also be seen, especially in the late stages.

Patients with atypical parkinsonian syndromes also bear mentioning. Multiple system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy, and corticobasal syndrome have symptoms of parkinsonism in addition to other characteristic findings. Multiple system atrophy has symptoms of autonomic failure and cerebellar ataxia. Progressive supranuclear palsy has symptoms of frequent falls (often backward) and vertical supranuclear gaze palsy. Corticobasal syndrome has progressive asymmetric muscle rigidity and alien limb phenomenon.

The physical exam should be comprehensive, including a complete neurological exam including gait analysis.