The recommended x-ray views are anteroposterior and lateral views of the affected area. Usually, the findings are anterior eccentric lytic tibial lesions in children that often lead to tibial bowing. The location is usually in the diaphysis of the tibia with no periosteal reaction. It is usually confined to the anterior cortex. The essential radiographic priority is to differentiate OFD from adamantinoma.

Osteofibrous dysplasia is mostly found in the diaphysis of the tibia in patients aged <20 years. It usually involves the anterior cortex of the tibia and may cause anterior bowing of the tibia. OFD mainly manifests as an intracortical lytic lesion in the tibia, which has well-circumscribed edges and is occasionally surrounded by a zone of sclerosis. Multiple lucencies may be present within the cortex and in between some sclerotic areas. The involved cortex of the tibia may be expanded or thickened. Periosteal reaction is very rare, but if present, it is thick and solid appearing. OFD rarely progresses radiographically during childhood, and progression stops when the child reaches skeletal maturity.

The typical radiographic findings of OFD show eccentric, well-circumscribed osteolytic lesions with a sclerotic border in the anterior cortex of the tibial diaphysis. As the tumor progresses, it shows a longitudinal spread to the metaphysis. Cortical expansion and intramedullary extension may occur and can lead to an anterior bowing deformity of the tibia. While radiographic findings of OFD are well-known, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings of OFD have not been fully described in the literature.

OFD typically appears as an osteolytic lesion with lobular loculations and a bubbly appearance with well-circumscribed sclerotic edges. It usually involves the anterior diaphyseal cortex of the tibia or fibula with nearby cortical expansion. Intramedullary involvement and anterior bowing deformity are common complications as the lesion progresses.

On MRI, the signal intensity of OFD is intermediate on T1 and intermediate to high on T2- weighted images. The cells, collagen density, and degree of mineralization in the osteoid matrix may cause the signal intensity. Additional hemorrhagic or cystic, myxoid change and even cartilaginous differentiation can modify the signal intensity and contribute to a heterogeneous signal intensity on T2-weighted images. However, OFD does not always show such different signal intensity patterns and is similar to other tumors with fibroblastic stroma. The relatively well-enhanced pattern is likely a reflection of rich fibrovascular stroma, and it is similar to other fibrous tumors.

MRI may help in differentiating other tumors or tumor-like lesions, which can simulate OFD in radiological features. Regarding small and unilocular OFD, osteoid osteoma, intracortical abscess, and intracortical hemangioma are the primary differential diagnoses. Regarding multilocular OFD, the differential diagnosis includes adamantinoma, an aneurysmal bone cyst, intracortical fibrous dysplasia, and osteoblastoma.

Osteoid osteoma:****Compared to OFD, osteoid osteoma shows more extensive marrow and soft tissue edema concerning its nidus size. An intracortical abscess shows peripheral rim enhancement compared with the diffuse enhancement pattern of OFD on contrast-enhanced MR images.

Intracortical hemangioma contains lattice-like coarse trabeculations and fatty components.

Aneurysmal bone cyst commonly shows fluid levels and marginal septal enhancement, while OFD shows diffuse enhancement.

Osteoblastoma, which involves the long bones, frequently accompanies extensive perilesional marrow and soft tissue edema.

Cortical-based fibrous dysplasia is common, especially in the tibia. Fibrous dysplasia is known to have hyper- or hypointense signals in T2 images depending on the components and exhibit a central or rim enhancement pattern.

Adamantinoma has nearly the same signals as OFD on the x-ray. However, MRI findings may provide further information to differentiate both lesions.

OFD exhibits different imaging features from lesions restricted to the cortex to more aggressive lesions with full intramedullary involvement or perilesional marrow edema. The variable MRI findings of OFD may provide the basis for differentiating OFD from adamantinoma and other bone lesions simulating as OFD.