The authors have utilized the following techniques and found them to be effective. The authors recognize that there are many successful strategies which have been employed to perform this block and alternative techniques may be equally appropriate.

- Explain the procedure and obtaining written consent as noted above.

- Document detailed neurovascular exam.

- Ensure all needed supplies are at the bedside.

- Perform timeout procedure with additional clinician or nurse.

- Administer a small dose of intravenous anxiolytic if appropriate and deemed necessary.

- Identify the neurovascular bundle utilizing ultrasound with the probe marker to the patient's right and mark the femoral artery with the surgical marking pen.

- Place sterile gloves, and with the help of an assistant, apply a sterile probe cover to the ultrasound.

- Clean the area using an antiseptic solution in the usual sterile fashion and place small sterile drapes.

- Again, identify the femoral vessels with ultrasound and then slide the probe laterally, away from the neurovascular bundle. This is done while at all times, keeping the fascia iliaca in view.

- Place a small amount of 1% lidocaine using the 30-gauge short needle to form a skin wheal in the intended area of injection.

- Fill a large syringe connected to a spinal needle or nerve block needle with long-acting local anesthetic.  Be sure not to exceed maximum dosing of local anesthetic. The authors have found that 20 mL of 0.5% bupivacaine mixed with 10 mL of sodium chloride solution is generally safe and effective for an average sized adult.

- Insert the needle in the area of the previously created skin wheal in an in-plane technique. The needle tip should be in constant view under dynamic ultrasound guidance. Advance the needle until the fascia iliaca has just been punctured.

- Withdraw/aspirate to ensure that there is no blood return indicating entrance into a vessel.

- Carefully inject a small amount of anesthetic and observe the separation of the fascia iliaca from the underlying muscle planes.  Continue to inject and aspirate every 5 mL to ensure correct placement. The anesthetic should flow easily into the space with a minimal amount of resistance. There should never be any blood return when checking aspiration. The provider may periodically elect to move the transducer more medially to view the anesthetic surrounding the femoral nerve directly. If this is done, the injection should pause, and the needle should be held in place without any advancement or retraction until the ultrasound is moved back to view the needle tip.

- During the procedure, the clinician should frequently evaluate the cardiac monitor for any signs of ectopy.  If any ectopy is noted, the injection should immediately cease.  Additionally, the clinician may want to ask the patient about any symptoms of local anesthetic toxicity such as lightheadedness, dizziness, perioral numbness or tingling.  This assessment should repeat at the end of the procedure.  If any signs of local anesthetic toxicity are observed, help should be requested and Intralipid should be considered.

- Following the procedure, a repeat neurovascular exam should be documented in the procedure note completed. The clinician should note the time of the block in their procedure note, as well as marking it with a surgical marking pen at the site of injection.