In the initial study examining Dressler syndrome in 1956, William Dressler suggested that the syndrome would occur in approximately 3% to 4% of patients with myocardial infarction (MI). However, with modern improvements in managing acute myocardial infarctions, the condition is seen in much fewer patients. This may be attributable to successful interventions resulting in a reduction in the size of the infarct and subsequently damaged myocardium, thereby preventing the immune-mediated response seen in Dressler syndrome.

The risk of developing Dressler syndrome tends to be greater in post-MI patients who have suffered a more extensive infarction. Also, relapses are more likely to occur if a patient has already had a previous Dressler syndrome episode. Additional predisposing factors for Dressler syndrome include:

- viral infections

- surgeries involving more significant myocardial damage

- younger age

- prior history of pericarditis

- prior treatment with prednisone

- B negative blood type

- and use of halothane anesthesia

In terms of viral infections, a seasonal variation in the incidence of the condition has been noted, where the condition is seen more commonly when the prevalence of a viral infection in the community is greatest too. Though elevated viral titers are found in patients experiencing associated Dressler syndrome, viral components have not been isolated from the pericardium itself or the pleural effusion of these patients.

Surgeries that result in greater damage to the myocardium (e.g., aortic valve replacement) are more likely to result in Dressler syndrome than those that cause less myocardial injury (e.g., mitral valve replacement). It is, however, important to note that Dressler syndrome can occur in patients that have undergone surgeries resulting in minimal trauma to the myocardium (e.g., needle puncture of a ventricle, CABG). Therefore, it is difficult to determine whether the extent of myocardial damage predicts the incidence of Dressler syndrome.

Finally, patients undergoing cardiac surgery that have a higher risk for developing Dressler syndrome are:

- younger age

- have a B-negative blood type

- prior history of pericarditis or treatment with prednisone

The above should raise clinical suspicion, and practitioners should be cautious to note early signs of the condition (e.g., chest pain, persistent de novo fever).