Although breast cancer mortality rates have decreased in the past few decades, breast cancer remains the most commonly diagnosed cancer in women. The tumor, node, and metastasis (TNM) classification is utilized in breast cancer staging. The tumor or T stage refers to the primary tumor's actual size typically evaluated via conventional techniques such as MRI, ultrasound, and mammography. The nodal or N stage refers to axillary nodal staging. Axillary nodes are commonly first evaluated on mammography and ultrasound. Sentinel lymph node biopsy has become a standard approach with intraoperative histopathological analysis. Metastasis or M stage refers to identifying extra-axillary lymph nodes involvement and distant metastatic disease and is the major contribution of FDG PET.

A retrospective study analyzed breast cancer patients who underwent cancer staging performed initially clinically. Histopathological results followed by PET/CT examinations found 35% of patients' cancer staging was modified following PET imaging evaluation. The study reported that 68% of patients were upstaged to stage 3B following FDG PET/CT imaging.

The location and number of extra-axillary metastatic lymph nodes are an important prognostic indicator in breast cancer. The knowledge of their presence changes the stage and the management of the disease. Similarly, bony metastasis is frequently observed, especially in breast cancer, and might be evaluated via Tc99MDP bone scan; however, studies have found that FDG PET has a higher rate of specificity and a greater potential for monitoring treatment response.