Tibial plateau fractures should be suspected in patients presenting with knee pain, possible deformity, edema, and a suspected mechanism of injury or risk factors that predispose to this type of fracture.

Patients with very high energy mechanisms of injury may present to the trauma bay and undergo complete ATLS evaluation, and prioritization should always be given to evaluating ABCs and stabilizing the patient. A pulseless distal extremity is an orthopedic emergency. Complete physical exam of a potential tibial fracture should include an examination of the entire knee, comparison to the contralateral (presumably uninjured) knee, with special attention to the following:

- Skin: The skin should be examined circumferentially to evaluate for an open fracture, lacerations, or puncture wounds.

- Knee effusion: If there is a significant effusion, the knee may be aspirated to evaluate for hemarthrosis, and for the presence of lipids or bone marrow elements, suggesting intraarticular fracture.

- Neurovascular exam: Sensation, motor function, and distal pulses should be assessed. There should be a low threshold to measure Ankle-brachial indices should there be a difference in pulses between extremities.

- Compartments: All compartments should be palpated; a firm, tense compartment suggests compartment syndrome, which can be further evaluated by measuring intracompartmental pressure.

- Laxity tests: More than 10 degrees of laxity at the joint line with varus/valgus stress testing suggests a tear of the collateral ligaments. Laxity below the joint line is indicative of a displaced fracture.

- The range of motion: Range of motion and strength may be very difficult to assess secondary to pain.