PSGN should be suspected in all children with hypertension and heart failure, even in the absence of hematuria or a history of a preceding sore throat or pyoderma.

**Laboratory investigations are the most useful in PSGN assessment.**

- Evidence of a preceding streptococcal infection is determined by measuring anti-streptolysin titer (ASO), and anti-nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotidase (anti-NAD) which tend to rise following pharyngitis. Other antibodies such as anti-DNAse B and anti-hyaluronidase (AHase) are usually elevated after both pharyngitis and skin infections. ASO titer is the most frequently used test, while the most sensitive is the streptozyme test; which includes measuring the titers of all the antibodies mentioned above. ASO titers can be falsely low in patients treated with antibiotics for streptococcal infections.

- Serum complement level (C3) is usually low due to its consumption in the inflammatory reaction. Mostly, the decrease in C3 concentration occurs before serum ASO has risen.

- Urine analysis: shows macroscopic or microscopic hematuria, RBC casts, mild proteinuria. Only 5% of patients with PSGN have massive proteinuria that indicates nephrotic syndrome. White blood cell casts, hyaline, and cellular casts are usually present in the urine analysis.

- Renal Function Tests: Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine typically elevate during the acute phase. These values usually return to normal later.

- In patients with heart failure and PSGN, NT-proBNP levels are elevated along with the findings of pulmonary congestion on the chest x-ray.

**Renal biopsy is not recommended for diagnosing patients with PSGN and is performed only when other glomerular pathologies are suspected. Renal biopsy is indicated when:**

- Progressive decline in the Renal function

- Anuric renal failure

- When there is no latent period between the acute glomerulonephritis and streptococcal infection

- If the complement levels are normal

- When there is no rise in antistreptococcal antibodies

**Imaging Studies**

- Ultrasonography: Kidneys are enlarged only in a few patients.

- The chest x-ray may show pulmonary congestion in patients with symptoms consistent with volume overload or heart failure.