Humeroulnar dislocations are caused by higher-energy mechanisms than simple dislocations and involve greater instability.

In the setting of fracture-dislocation, Hotchkiss's modification of the Mason classification system is as follows: type I fractures are non-operative, type II require fixation, while type III mandate arthroplasty. Dislocations with radial head and coronoid fractures (terrible triad) pose an increasing threat of persistent instability and posttraumatic arthritis. Coronoid fractures can be subclassified by location and size into tip fractures, anteromedial, or basal fractures, as in O'Driscoll and colleagues' nomenclature.

Type I tip fractures involve less than 2 mm of coronoid height, while type II are greater than 2 mm. Anterior and basal fractures are commonly seen with varus posteromedial rotational injuries and olecranon fracture-dislocations. Anteromedial fractures are divided into three categories: type I involving the anteromedial rim, type II of the anteromedial rim and tip, and subtype III of the anteromedial rim and sublime tubercle.

Basal fracture subtype I involve the coronoid body, indicated by at least 50% of the coronoid height, and subtype II is associated with olecranon fractures. It has been previously studied and correlated that elbow stability is proportional to the size and location of the coronoid fracture, the extent of radial head comminution, and the severity of the ligamentous disruption.

The next phase along the continuum of instability and complexity includes disruption of the semilunar notch, dislocation and/or fracture of the radial head, and coronoid fracture. This olecranon fracture-dislocation pathology may exhibit disruption of all osseous stabilizers of the elbow. Coronoid fractures here are generally one large piece (>50% of height). These processes are subdivided into anterior and posterior injuries that, additionally, follow different mechanistic injury patterns.

Transolecranon fracture-dislocation patterns are defined by a complex olecranon or proximal ulnar fracture and dislocation of the forearm, with the maintenance of the proximal radioulnar relationship - a distinct entity in comparison to Monteggia fractures, in which the radioulnar connection is dissociated. These injuries, fortunately, are less common. They are caused by high-energy direct forearm blows and are associated with concomitant ipsilateral elbow injuries in over 80% of cases.

Whether the forearm is dislocated anteriorly or posteriorly is dependent upon the mechanism and directionality of the insult. The elbow is rendered stable following the reduction of proximal ulna anatomy, and outcomes favor a good recovery of forearm rotation. Operative techniques utilizing tension band wiring reliant on an articular surface buttress are frequently complicated, with arthrosis in up to 70% of cases and ulnar nerve dysfunction in almost 25% of patients.

Monteggia fracture-dislocations are generally seen in elderly, frail women with osteopenia/osteoporosis following a low-energy fall directly onto the elbow and are composed of a posterior radial head dislocation, a proximal ulnar fracture, and basal type II coronoid fracture, in addition to humeroulnar instability. In contrast to other varieties of fracture-dislocations, this pathological entity may exhibit persistent instability despite full and complete restoration of bony stabilizers. Posterior Monteggia injuries can be classified as type A fractures involving the coronoid process, type B fractures of the ulnar metaphysis, type C fractures of the ulnar diaphysis, and type D, which are complex, comminuted fractures of the proximal ulna.

Varus posteromedial rotational injuries subsequent to a fall on an outstretched arm with the shoulder in flexion and abduction, subsequently creating a varus posteromedial rotational force, is a less common variant. Coronoid fractures here follow the above-mentioned classification system of type I involving the anteromedial rim, subtype II involving the tip and comminution, or sublime tubercle disruption in type III. This pathology is rarely associated with radial head fracture. It is important to note that the fracture pattern of instability may be very subtle, increasing the chances of missed joint incongruity and thus leading to the rapid development of arthrosis.