History - Initial evaluation starts with a detailed history, which should include family history, prenatal, and perinatal history. The developmental history of the child, as well as of the parents, can also aid in the diagnosis.

Physical examination -****A detailed physical examination, along with a comprehensive neurologic examination, must be done. Paying attention to dysmorphic features or any associated congenital malformations. The shape and size of the head must be included as well. Muscular strength should be evaluated in a child with hypotonia. It should also be determined if the hypotonia has progressed since onset or has remained static. The infant's tone can be assessed by using 4 maneuvers. 1) Vertical suspension, 2) Horizontal suspension, 3) "The Scarf Sign," and 4) "Pull to sit" maneuver.

- In vertical suspension, an infant is held under the arms. A hypotonic infant would slip through the examiner's hands. This mainly assesses the appendicular tone.

- The horizontal suspension is tested by lifting the infant in a prone position with a hand over the chest and abdomen. Typically, an alert and a term infant would have some flexion of arms and legs along with the ability to hold the head above the horizontal for some time. An infant with hypotonia would form an inverted "U" posture.

- "Scarf sign" assesses the appendicular tone in the shoulders. In this, the infant lies supine, and the hand is pulled across the chest as far as it can go before encountering resistance. Usually, in a term infant resistance is encountered when the elbow reaches the midline. In a hypotonic infant, the elbow can go beyond the midline before any resistance is encountered.

- The "pull to sit" maneuver involves pulling a supine infant to a sitting position. Head lag can be noticed in newborns, but it should disappear by 2 months of age. Hypotonic infants would have a significant head lag. This maneuver mainly gives information about the axial tone in the neck and back muscles. The strength of shoulder and arms can also be assessed with the "pull to sit" maneuver as the infants have flexion of arms while attempting it.

It is usually challenging to determine muscle strength in an infant. Weakness may be manifest as decreased spontaneous movements. This can be tested by evaluating the cry, suck reflex, spontaneous movements, facial expressions, antigravity movements, and respiratory effort. When assessing weakness in an infant, the course and area of involvement must be noted as well.

Patients with central hypotonia usually have a depressed level of consciousness, normal muscle strength, reflexes may be normal or exaggerated, and the persistence of primitive reflex and clonus. They may also have dysmorphic features and congenital abnormalities, pointing towards a syndromic cause of hypotonia. These findings vary in severity and prevalence, depending on the underlying cause.

In the case of peripheral hypotonia, the patient has a variable degree of impairment in the ability to move the extremities against gravity. The infant is usually alert, has a normal sleep-wake pattern, and responds to the surroundings appropriately. There is usually no cognitive impairment; however, gross and fine motor skills might be delayed. The reflexes are usually reduced or absent.