Disorders of neurohypophysis frequently present a diagnostic dilemma. Patients may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms such as vomiting, nausea, hypernatremia, hyponatremia, and diuresis. The cause of disorders of the neurohypophysis may be due to a myriad of diagnoses, including tumoral, traumatic, inflammatory, infectious, and metabolic etiologies. The etiology is difficult to know without proper imaging studies.

The primary physician is usually the person in charge of the initial evaluation of the patient. The physician will determine if it is an emergency or non-emergent situation, and this will depend on the presenting symptoms. Usually, an acute presentation is associated with more aggressive symptoms and treatment, while chronic presentation can be managed more conservatively. The management will depend on the type of neurohypophysis disorder.

While the endocrinologist is almost always involved in the care of patients with disorders of the neurohypophysis, it is essential to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that include a neurosurgeon and a neurologist. The nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional group as they will monitor the patient's vital signs and assist with the education of the patient and family. The pharmacist will provide analgesics, antiemetics, appropriate antibiotics, antiepileptic, and antidiuretic medications. The neuroradiologist can assist in determining the cause. Women of childbearing age presenting with disorders of the neurohypophysis can experience issues during labor and later with breastfeeding.

The outcomes of disorders of the neurohypophysis depend on the cause. However, to improve outcomes, prompt consultation with an interprofessional group of specialists is recommended. The care provided to the patient must use an integrated care pathway combined with an evidence-based approach to planning and evaluation of activities.