Patients diagnosed with hypospadias should be referred for surgical evaluation within the first weeks of life. If parents want circumcisions for their newborns, the presence of any penile abnormality should contraindicate the procedure, given that the foreskin is used in the arthroplasties.

Proximal hypospadias is usually associated with additional genito-urinary malformations. One of the first interventions is to order a karyotype, if there is associated cryptorchidism of one or both testes, to rule out an intersex condition. In this situation, patients require renal, bladder, and an abdominal ultrasound to assess internal organs and or associated malformations.

Midshaft and distal hypospadias once diagnosed should prompt surgical evaluation but do not require imaging or additional workup, given that this patient has the same risk of having renal anomalies as the general population.

The main objectives of surgical correction of hypospadias are to straighten the penis with an adequate caliber of the meatus to give an appearance resembling a typical circumcised penis or a penis with a foreskin and an adequate cosmetic result from the repair.

Surgical correction is the mainstay treatment of proximal hypospadias. In proximal penile, penoscrotal, and scrotal hypospadias with chordee, the patient commonly undergoes a two-stage repair with initial surgery consisting of urethroplasty and penile straightening with subsequent urethral plate tabularization.

In some cases, patients before surgical repair undergo systemic treatment with testosterone derivatives to increase the penile size and allow better tubularization and avoid or decrease dehiscence, although there are no specific guidelines for the use of testosterone.

Surgery is recommended when the patient is between 6 and 18 months of life to limit psychological stress and behavioral problems that have been seen in patients who undergo the treatment later in life.

Late repairs are usually associated with more complications including urethrocutaneous fistulas. The repair of hypospadias is complex and involves many steps.