**Visual Field Defects**

- Ipsilateral monocular visual loss: This is due to a lesion in the optic nerve, causing complete visual field loss in the ipsilateral eye.

- Bitemporal hemianopia: This can be due to a lesion of the optic chiasm or compression of the optic chiasm, as is seen in pituitary adenomas and craniopharyngiomas disturbing the medial portions of each optic nerve as they cross here. With one eye closed, the other eye loses vision in the temporal visual field.

- Unilateral anopia: This is due to a lesion in the optic tract on the side of the anopia.

- Homonymous hemianopia: This is due to a lesion in the optic radiations in the visual cortex on the contralateral side of the anopia

- Homonymous hemianopia with macular sparing: This is due to a posterior cerebral artery (PCA) stroke. The PCA supplies the occipital cortex, where visual processing for the contralateral side takes place. A PCA stroke will, therefore, lead to contralateral homonymous hemianopia. The reason the macula is spared is that the macula has a dual blood supply from both the middle cerebral artery (MCA) and the posterior cerebral artery.

- Upper quadrantanopia: This can be due to a lesion in the temporal lobe or a middle cerebral artery (MCA) stroke in the contralateral side of the anopia.

- Lower quadrantanopia: This can be due to a lesion in the parietal lobe or an MCA stroke in the contralateral side of the anopia.

- Central scotoma: This defect of central vision occurs in lesions of the macula, such as macular degeneration, cystoid macular edema, and inflammatory macular disease.

**The ipsilateral monocular visual loss**can be permanent or transient. In the latter case, we speak of "amaurosis fugax" or "transient monocular blindness." Amaurosis fugax is generally due to interruption of blood flow (ischemia) at the level of the optical pathways, for example, caused by retinal embolism or by severe homolateral carotid atheroma stenosis (usually near the common carotid artery bifurcation) or other causes of ischemia in the visual cortex or optic nerve. Possible causes are:

- Retinal embolism

- TIA (transient ischemic attack)

- Cerebrovascular accident

- Traumatic brain injury (e.g., falls, motor vehicle collisions, etc.)

- Dissection of the internal carotid artery

- Giant cell arteritis

- Emboligenic heart disease

- Coagulopathies

- Retinal migraine

- Carotid artery stenosis

- Inflammatory processes

- Optic atrophy

- Atherosclerosis

- Cerebral ischemia

- Essential thrombocythemia

- Degenerative changes in the optical pathways

- Tumors of the optical or brain pathways

In some cases, amaurosis fugax is idiopathic: it is not possible to highlight the cause of this manifestation, particularly in young subjects. In such cases, a spasm of the central artery of the retina is often thought of as an etiological factor.

The term **hemianopia**or hemianopsia refers to a visual impairment characterized by the inability to perceive half of the visual field. The disorder can affect one eye or both; we can speak of lateral or vertical hemianopsia and superior or inferior hemianopsia (altitudinal or horizontal hemianopsia). The disorder can affect one eye or both. There is lateral or vertical hemianopsia and superior or inferior hemianopsia (altitudinal or horizontal hemianopsia). Other definitions include heteronymous bitemporal (loss of the temporal visual field of each eye due to a median lesion of the optic chiasma); binasal heteronymous hemianopsia (the left half of the visual field of the right eye and the right half of the visual field of the left eye is negatively affected due to bilateral lesions affecting both edges of the optic chiasm, which is rare; hemianopia homonymous (loss of the right / left visual field due to an injury to the left/right optic tract); and quadrantanopia (the loss of a single quadrant of the visual field).

**The scotoma**can be relative or absolute; in the first case, the alteration is related to a decrease in the sensitivity of the retina (one is no longer able to perceive some or all colors, except for white), while in the second case, this sensitivity, in some areas, is of the all absent (the image is no longer perceived or in any case, perceived minimally). The disorder can affect one or both eyes. The term derives from the Greek ("skotos," darkness, dark). The scotoma can also be negative or positive; in the first case, it is a non-vision area within the visual field (the subject perceives a dark spot on the fixed objects). In the second case, there is the perception of an intermittent bright spot of variable color. A scotoma is generally referred to as a pathological alteration of vision, but it should be specified that there is also a physiological scotoma, the so-called blind spot or blind area of Mariotte; it is a point of the eye where vision is absent, the so-called optical papilla, an area where photoreceptors are absent. Examination of the visual field (campimetry), the scotoma is graphically represented as a black area located centrally or peripherally). Scotoma is one of the symptoms of various diseases affecting the functionality of the eye, and the ocular structures involved may be different; the main causes include:

- Macular pathologies

- Retinal detachment

- Cataract

- Glaucoma

- Optic nerve alterations

- Retinal hemorrhages

In some cases, the scotomas are secondary to brain tumors, ischemias, or intoxications; it is one of the main manifestations of migraine with aura. In many cases, it is the symptom that precedes the attack. In rare cases, the disorder has an iatrogenic origin. That is, it is caused by taking some medicines (for example, streptomycin). There are other classifications of scotoma: sparkling scotoma (a dark spot surrounded by small colored stripes with intermittent brightness); central scotoma (a dark-colored spot in the center of vision and can be a senile maculopathy, an infectious or inflammatory process); central-cecal scotoma (affects both the central fixation point and the blind spot; normally the area involved is small, but then tends to grow); peripheral scotoma; paracentral scotoma; annular scotoma; Bjerrum scotoma (the blind area has an arched shape).

**Pituitary Adenomas:**Pituitary adenomas are benign growths of the pituitary gland. The pituitary gland sits in the sella turcica, directly inferior to the optic chiasm. Pituitary adenomas can be functioning (produce hormones) or non-functioning (not producing hormones). Some examples of functioning pituitary adenomas can lead to hyperprolactinemia, acromegaly, or Cushing disease. Non-functioning pituitary adenomas often lead to a mass-effect. They can compress the optic chiasm leading to bitemporal hemianopia and headache.

**Glaucoma:**Glaucoma is a disease that is characterized by the degeneration of the optic nerve. The classic finding is optic disk atrophy with cupping, which means the outer portion of the optic nerve is thinning. The most common cause of glaucoma is an increase in the intraocular pressure (IOP); however, it is not necessary to have a high IOP to diagnose it.

**Vigabatrin:**Vigabatrin is an anti-epileptic drug used to treat refractory, complex partial seizures in adults who have failed. Vigabatrin has been shown to cause permanent peripheral visual field loss. Although the mechanism for how this happens is not fully understood, it most likely involves the toxicity of both retinal photoreceptors and ganglion cells.