The variable behavior of myocardial intracellular pH in the presence of bicarbonate is because of the increase in myocardial intracellular pH caused by stretch. Myocardial stretch induces angiotensin II and endothelin release, which causes the release of endothelin type-I and activates the sodium-hydrogen antiporter I. The expected intracellular alkalization is minimized in the presence of bicarbonate because angiotensin II also activates the sodium-independent chloride/bicarbonate exchanger. However, an increase in sodium is caused by hyperactivity of the sodium-hydrogen antiporter I after stretch, despite the compensation in myocardial intracellular pH by the simultaneous activation of the sodium-independent chloride/bicarbonate exchanger. The slow increase in developed force occurs when there is an increase in sodium, and its suppression also prevents the slow flow response.

The increase in sodium, induced by the activation of the sodium-hydrogen antiporter I, causes a secondary rise in the calcium transient via sodium/calcium exchanger. The increase in the calcium transient, which underlies the slow flow response, is secondary to the rise in sodium. Previous studies showed that there are no significant changes in the calcium transient during the fast response in developed force, whereas the slow flow response accompanies an increase in both the peak systolic calcium and the calcium transient.

Therefore, the increase in the calcium transient after muscle stretch is a consequence of the rise in sodium. The increase in sodium results from sodium-hydrogen antiporter I activation by an autocrine-paracrine mechanism.