While there is a historical reference to surgical removal of the breast dating back to the 18 century, William Halsted described his radical mastectomy technique in 1894, where “suspected tissue should be removed in one piece.”

John Madden described the current standard for a mastectomy in 1972. This technique involves making an elliptical incision circumscribing the breast and including the nipple areolar complex while keeping the site of the tumor as a central landmark.

As reconstructive techniques have evolved and become more popular, some patients who choose to have breast reconstruction may be candidates for skin-sparing and nipple-sparing mastectomy. Regardless of approach, oncologic principles take precedence over cosmetic concerns. As the name suggests, skin-sparing mastectomy is designed to preserve a healthy skin envelope for immediate breast reconstruction, provided adequate margins can be achieved. Nipple-sparing mastectomy allows the removal of the mammary tissue and pectoral fascia while preserving the nipple-areolar complex and the entire skin envelope of the breast. This surgical approach is done only in patients undergoing immediate breast reconstruction. With this approach, it is critical to preserve blood supply to the nipple areolar complex to prevent flap ischemia or breakdown.

With all described mastectomy techniques, uniform flaps are created by dissecting just above the superficial layer of the superficial fascia of the breast. There has been much controversy over the ideal flap thickness, with the ultimate goal of removing all possible breast tissue while preserving skin viability.