# Introduction

The spontaneous respiratory drive is among the most vital evolutionary qualities in mammalian existence, and the neurocircuitry and physiology behind the human respiratory drive are complex. While the motivation to inspire oxygen is certainly evident, there is also the consideration that the over-expansion of the lungs via inspiratory drive can be damaging, and therefore requires monitoring and inhibition. Among these interactions, the most widely recognized description of such reflexive respiratory control was first conceptualized by Ewald Hering, and Joseph Breuer in 1868, who illustrated that sustained lung inflation triggers reflexive expiration to prevent over-inflation related lung injury. Since its discovery, the Hering-Breuer reflex (HBR) has been thoroughly investigated within the realm of physiology and pathology and is consistently identical across other mammalian species.

Although adults demonstrated reduced ability to illustrate the Hering Breuer reflex, it is much more prominent among preterm infants and newborns. Furthermore, the HBR may play a vital function, as there are suggestions that it plays a role in controlling lung volume at an early age.

Herein, we discuss the physiologic mechanism behind the Herin-Breuer reflex, the neural circuitry involved, its role in human development, and the clinical and pathologic sequelae associated with malfunctioning with this system.

# Development

Since its discovery, the HBR is considered major regulatory feedback for stimulating and maintaining rhythmic respiratory activity. As such, the HBR is an important respiratory control mechanism, particularly in newborns.

Despite this physiologic change and reduced need for the HBR to establish a respiratory rhythm, the HBR does still maintain important functionality among juvenile and adult animals. Primarily, sensory feedback regarding the tidal volume and lung expansion appear to be responsible for altering breathing patterns secondary to behavioral and emotional stressors (such as prolonged vocalization or abrupt physical exercise).

# Function

When considering mammalian survival and evolution, the motivation to inspire is paramount; however, one must consider that too much inspiration can also be harmful. Therefore, this balance requires close monitoring. The Hering-Breuer reflex fulfills this function. This function is particularly useful in adults. Also, infants and neonates possess a separate necessity for the Hering Breuer reflex in the form of maintaining a rhythmic breathing pattern.

# Mechanism

The neurologic mechanism behind the Hering Breuer reflex is complex and is a prime example of an inhibitory feedback loop. In human adults, the reflex begins with prolonged inspiration well exceeding eupneic tidal volume. This thoracic expansion subsequently and gradually activates, slowly adapting pulmonary stretch receptors. These receptors relay a signal through the vagus nerve (on a breath-by-breath basis) to "pump" cells" located within the ventrolateral nucleus of the solitary tract.

# Related Testing

Despite the clinical significance behind the Hering Breuer reflex (especially with regards to obstructive sleep apnea and traumatic related vagotomy), there is limited research to date regarding possible diagnostic testing to assess its viability in vivo.

# Clinical Significance

Several conditions and syndromes hold relevance to the Hering Breuer reflex. For one, understanding the neural circuitry and interplay among airway mechanoreceptor reflexes have been extensively studied in the past due to their clinical relevance in maintaining airway protection and upper airway motor tone. One potential clinical circumstance includes sleep and the possible dysregulation in patients who suffer from obstructive sleep apnea.

Second, as discussed previously, the HBR loop maintains breathing pattern stabilization in neonates and even in preterm infants.

Another clinical circumstance with regards to the HBR is removing feedback altogether (via reduced vagal nerve stimulation or vagotomy). Research has shown such an occurrence to reduce the respiratory rhythm while increasing the inspiratory amplitude and prolonging the duration of expiration.