# Introduction

Spinal immobilization with a backboard and cervical collar for patients with suspected spine injury became common practice in the 1960s. This decision was driven by the increase in automobile accidents as automobiles became more commonplace, and a position paper was published by the American Academy of Orthopedics endorsing its use without evidence that spinal immobilization improved outcomes.

**Indications**

A joint position paper between the American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma (ACS-COT), American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP), and the National Association of EMS Physicians (NAEMSP) in 2018 outlined the uniform recommendations for spinal motion restriction in the care of trauma patients.

In the pediatric population, there is no indication based on age alone for the use of spinal motion restriction.

# Issues of Concern

**Contraindications**

Spinal motion restriction should not be used in the patient with penetrating trauma. In their 2010 publication, Haut et al. reviewed 45,284 patients entered into the National Trauma Data Bank (NTDB). They found that patients with penetrating trauma who underwent spinal immobilization in the field (defined as placement of a cervical collar and/or longboard) had mortality rates twice as high as those who did not.

**Complications**

The earlier ubiquitous use of the backboard revealed several significant complications, leading to an evidence-based transition from immobilization with a backboard to the current use of spinal motion restriction. The forceful strapping of patients against a rigid backboard is not compatible with the natural curvature of the spine, and such restriction may increase unwanted flexion, extension, and rotation. This effect is more pronounced in populations such as the elderly or those with ankylosing spondylitis who develop marked kyphosis or lordosis.

In a 2014 systematic review in The Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, five studies showed an increase in pain scores following immobilization.

When utilizing the backboard as a movement tool from extrication to ambulance, providers should monitor respiratory status closely. Studies have shown significant respiratory restriction in healthy patients who were strapped to a backboard with cervical collars. This restriction was greater in elderly kyphotic patients placed in a cervical collar.

# Clinical Significance

Spinal motion restriction is the use of a cervical collar and cot to maintain neutral alignment of the spine during transport of the patient with concern for spinal injury. The goal is to reduce excessive movement of the spine that may worsen existing spinal trauma and neurologic deficit. While backboards may work for the initial extrication and movement of a patient, it is preferable to bring the cot or stretcher to the ambulatory patient and instruct them to lie down. Do not perform a vertical backboard takedown. The backboard requires removal as soon as practical before transport by emergency medical services (EMS) to the hospital. Recent studies suggest that full spinal immobilization does not limit motion during prehospital transportation as much as previously thought. While this was most notable in the non-compliant patient, the increased movement was seen in the compliant patient population.

Not all patients will be able to lie flat on their back on a stretcher. An alert patient with nausea and vomiting may need to have their head of the bed elevated or be rolled on their side to avoid aspiration. If a patient requires intubation, elevating the head of the bed has been demonstrated to improve oxygenation and hemodynamic stability.

While most spinal injuries are due to high force mechanisms, special care is necessary for geriatric patients (age 65 and older) who may present without typical physical exam findings (i.e., midline neck pain) after a ground-level fall (GLF). A 2013 retrospective review of 12,805 geriatric trauma patients found cervical spine fractures in over half of geriatric patients with ground-level falls. Overall, geriatric patients were more likely to sustain upper cervical fractures than non-geriatric patients, and researchers found GLFs to cause both isolated cervical fractures and significant intracranial pathology.