A transient visual loss is used to indicate loss of visual function lasting less than 24 hours. A proper history regarding timing, pattern, provoking factors, and associated symptoms can often provide a clue to the cause of the episode.

1. Emboli

The patient usually describes a curtain of darkness that rises or falls in one eye, lasting 20 to 30 minutes. TVL can occur due to embolic occlusion of the retinal, optic disc, and choroidal blood vessels. Often, the emboli may be visible on ophthalmoscopic examination. The emboli may be cholesterol, platelet-fibrin, or calcium in type. The presence of an embolus warrants thorough vascular and cardiac evaluation.

2. Retinal vein occlusion

TVL has been described as heralding an impending CRVO. The episodes last 2 to 4 hours and are described by the patient as cloudiness of vision. Ophthalmoscopy demonstrates engorged retinal veins.

3. Giant cell arteritis

TVL is a fairly common presentation in patients with giant cell arteritis. The visual loss is usually of short duration(2 to 4 minutes), may be postural, may recur many times, and may be associated with photopsia. There may be associated features like headaches, jaw claudication, scalp tenderness, fever, polymyalgia rheumatic, etc.

4. Ocular ischemic syndrome

Carotid artery diseases can cause Ocular ischemic syndrome. Unlike embolism, the visual symptoms have a gradual onset and can last for seconds to minutes. It is often precipitated by exposure to bright light. Other signs of Ocular ischemic syndrome may be seen like dilated conjunctival and episcleral vessels, AC reaction, narrow retinal arteries, and dilated retinal veins.

5. Hypoperfusion

The reduced cardiac output or systemic hypotension can cause TVL, which is characteristically binocular and may be accompanied by lightheadedness and confusion.

6. Retinal migraine

The International Headache Society diagnostic criteria for a retinal migraine require at least two attacks of fully reversible monocular positive visual phenomena such as flashing lights or scintillating scotoma and/or negative symptoms associated with a headache that fulfills diagnostic criteria for migraine without aura. Mostly the visual loss is transient, lasting 5 to 20 minutes, and may recur several times during the day.

7. Retinal vasospasm

Episodes of TVL in retinal vasospasm are similar to a retinal migraine but without the associated headache. RAPD may be associated, or retinal vasospasm may be seen on ophthalmoscopy during the attack. Other than the conditions mentioned above, other entities that may be associated with TVL include hypercoagulable states, orbitopathies and even, dry eye disease.