Under general anesthesia with the patient positioned supine, the team identifies the surgical site and laterality. The information provided by the previous preoperative venous doppler mapping should be available. For better positioning, the clinician flexes the knee from 90 to 120 degrees with mild external rotation of the hip joint on the ipsilateral side. Towels should support the leg at the posterior aspect of the knee (popliteal region).

The skin incision of approximately two centimeters is made on the medial side of the lower limb one inch above or below the medial tibial tuberosity based on surgeon preference and the mapping. Following identification of the GSV, regular surgical dissection occurs to free the proximal part of the vein and to double-check the suitability of the conduit before starting the procedure. A balloon port is advanced through the incision to seal the tunnel and to prevent the escape of carbon dioxide. The endoscope is introduced into the subcutaneous tissue tunnel created by the device carefully and under vision. Some centers highly recommend starting low dose heparin at this step to prevent thrombus formation inside the conduit.

Carbon dioxide insufflation starts at between 10 and 13 mmHg to facilitate the dissection process and to keep the tunnel opened. The dissection should be gentle to avoid injuries of the wall of the conduit or avulsion of vessel branches. After completing the dissection above and below the knee (or as required) according to the requested number of conduits, the endoscopic electrocautery functions to cut and cauterize the venous tributaries and free the vein from the surrounding adventitia. Small incisions are made at the groin and above the medial malleolus to divide the conduit, allowing its extraction at the site of the original incision. Both proximal and distal ends of the GSV are transfixed with (3-0) silk sutures and clipped with medium titanium clips.

The tunnel gets checked one last time for proper hemostasis. Then pack the tunnel with an antibiotic soaked swab for five minutes before the closure. Some centers routinely consider inserting a surgical drain in the tunnel, while others only use drains in emergencies, or in patients expected to bleed postoperatively. All wounds should get sutured appropriately using absorbable sutures and staplers. The limb should be tightly bandaged with an average amount of pressure to keep the field hemostatic.

Once outside the body, the vein should be cannulated and inspected precisely for any tears, thrombus, or avulsed branches. All branches should be clipped with small clips, while tears can be fixed with (7-0) nonabsorbable sutures. The conduit should be kept in a solution, typically heparinized saline, until the time it is ready to be used in the anastomosis.