Obesity is a chronic metabolic disease caused by increased body fat stores. In clinical practice, it is defined as a body mass index (BMI) of 30 kg/m^2 or higher. Pediatric obesity is defined as a body mass index (BMI) equal to or greater than the 95th percentile for age and sex. Per the World Health Organization, worldwide obesity has tripled in the last 50 years. In 2016, more than 650 million adults aged 18 years and older were obese. It is estimated that by 2030, approximately 20% of the world population will be obese, and 38% will be overweight.

The definition of obesity and its classification has been changing internationally. European guidelines are now putting more emphasis on waist circumference and BMI. Per the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), increased BMI is classified as a BMI of 25 to 29.9 being overweight, 30 to 34.9 is class 1 obesity, 35 to 39.9 is class 2 obesity, and greater than 40 is class 3.

This condition is often associated with an elevated risk of chronic medical conditions such as type 2 diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, stroke, hypertension, obstructive sleep apnea, and even some cancers. Obesity affects almost every organ system in the human body. It can be either a consequence of metabolic effects of adipose tissue or sometimes increased body mass itself.

Researchers have a clear understanding of disease mechanisms for most endocrine disorders, but this is not the case with obesity. It is believed that the fundamental cause of obesity is a disproportion between calories consumed and expended. However, changes in physical activity and dietary patterns are often related to environmental and societal changes.