Heart failure remains a major burden in the US, with multiple patients at risk of death or recurrent hospitalization. An estimated 8 million people in the US will have heart failure by 2030.

Vericiguat is typically prescribed by clinicians (MD, DO, NP, PA) as part of the interprofessional healthcare team. The clinician plays the most crucial role in the overall care of heart failure patients with multiple comorbidities. Consultation with a cardiologist or heart failure specialist is highly recommended for high-risk patient populations for treatment optimization. Pharmacists have an important role in medication reconciliation and adverse drug reaction counseling. Specialist nurses play an important role in monitoring fluid status for patients with heart failure and reporting any adverse effects of vericiguat therapy to clinicians. Critical care physicians and HF specialists are crucial in stabilizing patients with acute decompensated heart failure requiring vasopressors and inotropes. Early hospital readmission in patients with heart failure is quite common. In the United States, approximately 30% of patients are re-hospitalized within 90 days of discharge. Hence optimization of heart failure treatment is crucial at discharge, where HF specialists and pharmacists can play a crucial role.

A systemic review and meta-analysis involving 19 randomized controlled trials showed that a multidisciplinary, interprofessional approach between primary care physicians, specialists, nurses, social workers, cardiologists, and pharmacist is crucial. Meta-analysis results indicated a significant reduction in mortality, heart failure readmissions, and all-cause readmissions involving the primary care provider model.