The diagnosis and management of osteomalacia are best with an interprofessional team. The key is patient education, and thus, all clinicians have a vital role in preventing the high morbidity of the disorder. Fortified foods are those that have been modified to include essential nutrients. In randomized controlled trials, fortified vitamin D foods, including dairy products, bread, orange juice, and UVB enhanced mushrooms, have been shown to be effective at increasing circulating levels of 25(OH)D without adverse side effects. Most countries have individual national policies regarding food enhancement. However, current levels of fortification may not be adequate to satisfy physiologic requirements; this particularly applies to patients already at risk for vitamin D or calcium nutritional deficiencies. Successful enhancement of animal products has also been demonstrated in pigs, hens, and fish by utilizing vitamin D3 enriched feeding. Current results are promising, but further research is necessary on the impact of widespread introduction, particularly in developing countries. Patients need long term follow-up as the resolution can take months. The dietitian and nurses should continue to educate the patient about the importance of a healthy diet, reinforced with vitamin D supplements.

If the treating clinician decides to supplement with exogenous vitamin D, there should be a pharmacist consult to vet the precise agent and assist with appropriate dosing for the condition. Nurses can counsel the patient on administration, and assist in monitoring and evaluating results on followup visits, reporting their findings and concerns to the prescriber. Close communication between interprofessional healthcare team members is vital if one wants to improve outcomes. [Level 5]