The urethra, being open to the external environment, is susceptible to infection, disease, and damage. Although biopsy and histological observation of the male urethra are not always necessary during the workup of a urethral disease, it is crucial to understand the anatomy and histological characteristics of the urethra to best be able to understand, manage and treat disease.

One of the most common pathological processes that involve the male urethra is urinary tract infections. Urinary tract infections are usually the result of bacteria that enter the body through the distal opening to the urethra. The exact manifestation and colonization of the bacteria depend on the specific agent, some bacteria may adhere to the epithelial lining, penetrate through the lining, or continue traveling towards the bladder and upper portions of the urinary tract. Risk factors for urinary tract infections are poor hygiene, low urinary outflow and being immunocompromised.

A much less common pathological process involving the male urethra is cancer. Although male urethral cancers account for less than 1% of urologic malignancies, it is important to understand the pathophysiology, presentation, and impact of this rare but serious disease. Due to the limited amount of cases per year, there is little standardized data to guide physicians towards the best treatment choices. In the past, the primary surgical treatment option was a complete or near-complete penectomy. Though this may ensure the complete removal of cancerous cells, it has a severe impact on the patient's physical and mental wellbeing. Moreso today, where precision and efficiency matter more than ever, more conservative procedures like partial urethrectomies are being performed to remove less tissue and allow patients to maintain a better quality of life.