The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) is the most common psychometric test devised to assess personality traits and psychopathology. This data can be used to draw conclusions about the test taker’s psychopathy or to interpret psychological characteristics compared to the norm.

The MMPI was developed in the 1930s and published through the University of Minnesota in 1942 by Stuart Hathaway and Charley McKinley using visitors of patients at the University of Minnesota hospital as a base sample in both theorizing constructs of psychiatric illness and fielding the instrument. Testing is administered through 567 true or false items using a booklet with an accompanying answer sheet. The responses are then hand-scored and plotted on an X-Y graph; a separate version is used for male and female respondents.

The X-axis is comprised of 14 scales. The first four ‘content scales’ judge the validity of the test attempt and include:

- ? to represent the number of questions completed incorrectly, either with no attempt or both ‘true’ and ‘false’ selected

- L for ‘Lie’ to represent an attempt by the respondent to misrepresent themselves in a more positive light

- F or ‘frequency’ to gauge random response as well as the respondent’s exaggeration or downplaying of symptoms

- K to gauge ‘defensiveness,’ or evasion of stressful content

The 10 remaining scales known as ‘clinical scales’ are designed to measure for the presence of psychiatric syndromes, including:

- 1 or ‘Hs’ for hypochondriasis

- 2 or ‘D’ for depression

- 3 or ‘Hy’ for hysteria

- 4 or ‘Pd’ for psychopathic deviate

- 5 or ‘Mf’ for the continuum of masculinity-femininity

- 6 or ‘Pa’ for paranoia

- 7 or ‘Pt’ for psychasthenia or obsessive-compulsive tendency

- 8 or ‘Sc’ for schizophrenia

- 9 or ‘Ma’ for mania

- 0 or ‘Si’ for social introversion.

The Y-axis statistically standardizes the grading received on each scale in a range of T-scores from 0 to 120. A mean score is 50, and 82% of respondents are considered the normal population falling between 30 and 70. A T-score greater than 70 indicates psychopathy in that category.