Low serum TSH (less than 0.01 mU/L) has high sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of thyroid disorders. If TSH is low, elevated serum free thyroxine  (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3) levels can distinguish between overt and subclinical hyperthyroidism. Usually, the increase in T3 precedes the increase in T4. Pituitary-dependent causes of hyperthyroidism may have normal or increased TSH levels and increased T4 and T3 levels with an increase in free-alpha subunit concentrations. Serum levels of antibodies to the TSH receptor diagnose Graves' disease. Levels are 98% sensitive and 99% specific. Thyroid peroxidase antibodies are only present in about 75% of cases of Graves’ disease.

Radioactive iodine uptake studies or thyroid scans may be used to distinguish between causes of thyrotoxicosis besides Graves’ disease. It is recommended in all thyrotoxic patients without the clinical picture of Graves’ disease. In Graves’ disease, radioactive iodine uptake is diffuse, unless the patient also has nodules or fibrosis. In single toxic adenoma, there will be a focal uptake in the adenoma, with suppressed uptake in the surrounding thyroid tissue. Toxic multinodular goiter will show multiple areas of focal increased uptake and suppressed uptake in surrounding tissue. Radioactive iodine uptake will be near zero in patients with painless, postpartum, or subacute thyroiditis, as well as patients with ingestion of thyroid hormone or recent excess iodine exposure.

In subacute thyroiditis, inflammatory markers such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein are frequently increased. In pregnancy, either free T3 and T4, or the total T3 and T4 with adjusted reference range 1.5 times the nonpregnant range should be used for diagnosis in addition to serum TSH levels. During the first half of pregnancy, the serum TSH levels may be lower than the nonpregnant reference range, but free T4 values should be normal. In suspected factitious hyperthyroidism, thyroglobulin levels are decreased and radioactive uptake studies due to the suppression by exogenous thyroid hormone ingestion.