Idiopathic (genetic) generalized epilepsy requires an integrated approach by an interprofessional care team to provide optimal care to patients. Patients with absence seizures can pose a particular diagnostic challenge. They may present via a more convoluted route after initial concerns raised about reduced performance in school due to frequent absence seizures. A high index of suspicion is required by primary care providers in the communities, including primary care clinicians, school nurses, and social workers so that patients with this disorder are identified early. The hope is that the latest ILAE classification of epilepsies will help facilitate care delivery outlined above and improve research in the future. The classification was born from extensive peer-reviewed scientific evidence since the previous iteration in 1989. It was submitted for public scrutiny in 2013 and incorporated feedback from experts in epileptology internationally.

Once the diagnosis is made, the patient needs regular follow-up with the neurologist and primary care clinicians. Care coordination between medical providers can help decrease complications and ensure optimal treatment. Social workers can help identify barriers to optimal clinical care and communicate these findings to the clinical team. Specialty-trained nurses should provide education on safety precautions, medication compliance, and monitoring for adverse outcomes. The clinical pharmacists augment this role by educating the patient and family on possible adverse reactions of AEDs and communicating these findings to the clinical team if they occur. Simple dose adjustments can be made to ensure adverse outcomes are minimized, which will, in turn, increase compliance with therapy.

With ongoing treatment, the patient will need a reliable first port of call with future day-to-day questions relating to their epilepsy diagnosis and treatment. Nurses play this critical role and help establish a strong patient medical professional relationship to promote better patient care. They can also assess medication compliance and observe for any adverse reactions to medications at follow-up visits. Pharmacists can assist the clinical team during long-term care with drug level monitoring and checking for drug-drug interactions. Open communication in an interprofessional team will lead to optimal therapy and outcomes. [Level 5]