**Pelvic External Morphology and Pelvic Inlet**

The traditional external pelvimetry of Baudelocque rose from the hypothesis that the external shapes and dimensions of the pelvis corresponded to the internal ones. Current literature confirms the correlation.

One can trace and measure the oblique diameter, the transverse diameter, and the anterior-posterior or conjugated diameter for the pelvic inlet. The shape of the inlet is regulated by the relative proportions between the transverse diameter and the obstetric conjugate.

The sacral diamond area would externally correspond to the pelvic inlet: the transversal and longitudinal diameters of the Michaelis sacral area will have a specific reciprocal relationship for each type of pelvis, matching the shape of the pelvic inlet. The transverse diameter of the sacral rhombus-shaped area of Michaelis is the distance between the two posterior superior iliac spines (PSIS).

The two diameters of the sacral diamond area usually have the same dimensions. However, sometimes the longitudinal one is larger than the transverse (the opposite is uncommon), and they intersect at their middle point. Occasionally the transverse diameter, which intersects the longitudinal one at the level of the second sacral segment, will divide the latter into two unequal parts: the upper part of the longitudinal diameter is shorter than the lower portion.

The dynamics of the biomechanical movement will be different depending on the pelvic morphology for the same principle. The fascia anatomy of the sides of the sacral diamond area, which regulates its shape and movement, corresponds to the fascial thickenings that are part of the sacral complex of the thoracolumbar fascia, which surrounds the sacroiliac joints both posteriorly and, from the iliolumbar ligaments, anteriorly. The biomechanical properties of the bands would have repercussions from the inside to the outside and vice-versa.

The diameters of the sacral area were utilized in detecting cephalo-pelvic disproportion followed by complicated labor and dystocia, resulting in a correlation between the transverse diameter and the complications during childbirth.

**Diameters of the Pelvic Inlet**

The pelvic inlet is an irregular circumference; three diameters can be defined.

The anteroposterior (or "conjugate") diameter is the distance between the pubic symphysis and the sacral promontory. Three distances are:

- The anatomical conjugate or true: Measured between the sacral promontory and the upper edge of the pubic symphysis and measures an average of 11.0 cm

- The obstetric conjugate: Measured from the sacral promontory to the point bulging the most on the back of the symphysis pubis, located about 1 cm below its upper border. It measures 10.5 cm on average; it is the lesser anteroposterior diameter.

- The diagonal conjugate: Measured between the sacral promontory and the lower edge of the pubic symphysis, measuring an average of 12.5.

The anterior-posterior diameter can also be evaluated with external pelvimetry using the various types of pelvic tubes. According to the classical explanation of Baoudeloque, the external conjugate is measured from the upper edge of the pubic symphysis anteriorly to the first sacral segment posteriorly ("the depression one centimeter under the spinous process of the fifth lumbar vertebra"), its dimensions are about 20 cm.

The oblique diameter is the largest of the three; it is the distance between the arched line near the sacroiliac joint posteriorly and the pubopectineal line anteriorly. This is the diameter on which the fetal head presents; it measures about 12 cm. The transverse diameter is the distance between the two innominate lines at their widest point, measuring approximately 13 cm. The entrance of the fetal head into the pelvic excavation normally takes place through a rotation from the oblique diameter to the transversal diameter. External pelvimetry can also evaluate the transverse diameter by measuring the distance between the two upper posterior iliac spines (PSIS). The average distance between the two PSIS is about 11 cm.