- 
**Prematurity and Intrauterine growth restriction**

- 
              
- Inadequate insulin secretion and inability to suppress glucose production in the liver 
              
              
- Increased insulin resistance

- **Increased stress hormones**like epinephrine and norepinephrine inhibit both insulin secretion and action. They also increase glucagon, which promotes glycogenolysis. The following conditions are associated with increased stress hormones,

- 
              
- Catecholamine infusions 
              
              
- Seizures 
              
              
- Physiologic stress caused by surgery, pain, hypoxia, respiratory distress, or sepsis

- 
**Causes related to enteral feeding**

- 
              
- Delay in the initiation of enteral feeding causes decreased incretin secretion, which in turn causes hyperglycemia.
              
              
- The hyperosmolar formula may lead to transient glucose intolerance in the baby.

- 
**Causes related to Total parenteral nutrition (TPN)**

- 
              
- Delay in supplementing parenteral amino acids in TPN delays the release of insulin-like growth factor-1, which delays the development of beta cells in the pancreas and develops hyperglycemia.
              
              
- A high intravenous lipid infusion rate causes an increase in free fatty acids (FFA), which decrease glucose oxidation competitively by providing additional carbon substrates for oxidative metabolism. FFA and glycerol promote gluconeogenesis.

- **Sepsis:**Consider sepsis and Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) if hyperglycemia develops without glucose infusion rate change.

- **Iatrogenic:**One of the causes of hyperglycemia in the neonate is an error in the glucose infusion rate (GIR) calculation in the intravenous (IV) fluids.

- **Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus**usually occurs in small for gestational age (SGA) infants. This condition is self-limited.

- **Drugs**
- Maternal medications 

- Maternal diazoxide may cause hyperglycemia, hypotension, and tachycardia in neonates.
- Antenatal steroids 


- Neonatal medications 

- Dopamine, dobutamine, epinephrine infusions
- Caffeine, theophylline 
- Phenytoin 
- Corticosteroids