New lesions on chest imaging should be evaluated by a multidisciplinary team involving chest specialists, surgeons, and radiologists to decide the next best management.

Indications for PTLB according to the BTS guidelines (in near-verbatim language) are as follows:

- New or enlarging mass or solitary nodule on chest radiography that is not amenable to diagnosis by CT or bronchoscopy shows it is unlikely to be accessible by bronchoscopy.

- Multiple nodules in a patient with no previous history of malignancy, who have had a prolonged remission or more than one primary malignancy.

- Persistent focal infiltrates for which no diagnosis has been made by sputum, or bronchoscopy, blood culture, serology.

- Hilar mass.

Transthoracic needle biopsy (TTNB) is indicated for evaluating an undiagnosed pulmonary nodule or mass depending on the pretest probability of cancer and the presence or absence of metastasis. TTNB is also useful for the evaluation of mediastinal masses, hilar masses that are undiagnosed post bronchoscopy, and also for the diagnoses of infective diseases presenting as nodules or consolidation.

Transbronchial biopsy (TBLB) is useful for diffuse and localized pulmonary disorders and is often the primary diagnostic modality for centrilobular lesions like sarcoidosis, interstitial lung disease, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, eosinophilic pneumonia or infective etiology like tuberculosis, or lung disease of unclear etiology is suspected.

VATS has been preferred over traditional surgery due to lesser complications and early recovery. It is indicated for mediastinal lymph node biopsy, pleural biopsy, a biopsy of lung tissue/lymph node, and undetermined interstitial lung disease.

Traditionally, an open or surgical biopsy (OLB) has been considered as the gold standard for the diagnosis of lung parenchymal lesions. However, a trial of a less invasive method is usually preferred unless any major contraindications and OLB should be considered only when obtaining a diagnosis would change the line of management, and the underlying disease does not have high mortality.