There are several therapeutic options for the management of CNH. These can be broadly divided into conservative treatment and surgical excision.

**Conservative Treatment**

- Pressure-relieving prosthesis/padding is a cost-effective and inexpensive method. The primary goal of these prostheses is to relieve or eliminate pressure on the lesion. They are available in various forms, such as self-adherent foam sponges, foam bandages attached to the head, and doughnut pillows for sleeping. These methods are met with variable success, predominantly dependent upon patient compliance rates.

- Some clinicians have used topical and intralesional steroids; however, in the absence of interventions to alleviate physical pressure, steroids do not appear to be effective.

- Hyaluronic acid injection may provide relief by offering cushioning and insulation (as a supplement to the thin subcutaneous tissue that naturally exists in the area in question).

- Photodynamic therapy may be effective; however, a disadvantage of this modality is the requirement for multiple treatment sessions.

- Carbon dioxide/argon laser is another treatment option. The lesion is ablated with the laser, and later the wound is allowed to heal by secondary intention. In some ways, this represents an alternative to conventional surgical excision.

- Topical application of 2% nitroglycerine paste twice daily has been shown to relieve symptoms and appearance by improving perfusion to the affected area. Nitroglycerine patches may be used as a substitute.

- Diliazem topical cream has also been described as an effective alternative.

- Cryosurgery is another option to remove the lesion.

- Electrocauterization/curettage is yet another treatment modality, again essentially presenting an alternative to surgical excision with a blade.

**Surgery**

Many techniques have emerged over the years for surgical excision of CNH. These include wide local excision followed by auricular reconstruction using skin grafts or local flaps, removal of the lesion skin and cartilage, and skin-sparing, cartilage-only excision techniques. Most studies agree that the simplest approach, with primary excision and meticulous trimming of cartilage, is the method of choice and provides adequate results.