# Introduction

Bursae are sac-like structures, lined with synovial fluid, found throughout the musculoskeletal system in locations prone to friction, such as bony prominences and areas surrounding tendons and ligaments. They create a physiologic cushion between adjacent tissues and structures to facilitate dynamic function and movement.

- Deep layer

- Between the carpal bones and the flexor digitorum profundus tendons

- Intermediate layer

- Between the flexor digitorum profundus tendons and flexor digitorum superficialis tendons

- Superficial layer

- Volar to the flexor digitorum superficialis tendons

# Structure and Function

Like other bursae, the ulnar bursa is a sac of synovial fluid that typically remains collapsed with the walls being held apart by the thin layer of fluid. It provides a means for smooth movement by reducing friction for the tendons of both the flexor digitorum profundus as well as the flexor digitorum superficialis as they pass deep to both the flexor retinaculum and the median nerve in the carpal tunnel and into the metacarpals of the hand. There are three communicating invaginations of the ulnar bursa at the level of the carpal tunnel. The most superficial invagination is between the transverse carpal ligament and the flexor digitorum superficialis tendons. The middle and deep invaginations are situated superficial and deep to the flexor digitorum profundus tendons respectively. The ulnar bursa encases these tendons until they reach the midpalmar region overlying the second, third, and fourth metacarpals but continues distally over the flexor tendons of the fifth digit and often communicates with the flexor tendon sheath of the fifth digit.

# Embryology

Though the development of the wrist joint has been the subject of intensive study, there is not a complete consensus as to the precise origin, development, and organization of the various elements of the wrist joint, including the ulnar bursa. However, the synovial membranes of the wrist joint have been shown to develop from the intermediate layer interzonal mesenchyme around week 13 of development.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The proximal portion of the ulnar bursa in the carpal region receives its arterial supply from small branches of both the radial and ulnar arteries. The distal portion of the bursa overlying the metacarpals receives vascular by both the superficial and deep palmar arches.

# Nerves

The location of the ulnar bursa is on the anteromedial side of the wrist and hand which receives its innervation from the ulnar nerve.

# Muscles

The ulnar bursa encases the tendons of the flexor digitorum profundus and the flexor digitorum superficialis muscles in the carpal tunnel.

# Physiologic Variants

The ulnar bursa typically originates at the level of the pronator quadratus and continues distally to approximately 1 to 3 cm proximal to the flexor tendon sheaths of digits two, three, and four. However, studies have shown communication between the ulnar bursa and the flexor tendon sheaths of digits two, three, and four at rates of 5.1%, 4%, and 3.5% respectively.

# Surgical Considerations

With the ulnar bursa’s location deep to the flexor retinaculum of the wrist, surgeons frequently encounter it during hand and wrist surgeries, including carpal tunnel release operations. Carpal tunnel releases are the most common hand and wrist surgeries in the United States with more than 400000 procedures annually.

If the ulnar bursa becomes infected, which most commonly occurs through a spread from communicating flexor tendon sheaths in the hand, prompt irrigation and debridement are necessary, in addition to intravenous antibiotics.

# Clinical Significance

Carpal tunnel syndrome is a common disorder caused by inflammation of the median nerve

Bursitis, the painful swelling of a bursa as a result of noxious stimuli, can occur in the ulnar bursa but is more frequent in the bursa overlying bony protuberances such as the subacromial bursa or the trochanteric bursa.Staphylococcus aureus.

# Other Issues

Though rare, extrapulmonary tuberculosis can infect the musculoskeletal system and reports exist of cases of tuberculous tenosynovitis.