The differential diagnosis for WPW pattern and syndrome is broad and can be broken down by the symptoms, ECG pattern, or with the type of dysrhythmia that the patient presents. Since the WPW pattern is defined by its ECG findings of a short PR interval, widened QRS complex with a slurred delta wave, the differential diagnosis can include any condition that can cause similar ECG findings. The differential diagnosis includes myocardial infarction, bundle branch block, congenital or acquired structural heart abnormalities, hypertrophy, premature junctional or ventricular complexes, ventricular bigeminy, accelerated idioventricular rhythms, electrical alternans, pacemaker, or metabolic/electrolyte abnormalities.

For patients with a history of or symptoms concerning for an episode of a tachyarrhythmia who have WPW pattern on a resting ECG, the differential diagnosis includes other causes or manifestations of these arrhythmias. An accessory pathway that participates in initiating and maintaining an arrhythmia can cause a regular narrow complex tachycardia from orthodromic AVRT or a regular wide complex tachycardia from antidromic AVRT. The arrhythmia may be irregular if there is variable conduction, recurring episodes of initiation and termination of AVRT, or the accessory pathway is propagating an arrhythmia generated elsewhere. Therefore, the differential must include causes of both wide and narrow, regular, or irregular complex tachycardias. These categories are broken down into groups below.

Regular narrow complex tachycardia: Sinus tachycardia, atrial tachycardia, atrial flutter (with regular AV block), AVNRT, AVRT, junctional tachycardia.

Irregular narrow complex tachycardia: Atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter (with variable AV block), multifocal atrial tachycardia, sinus tachycardia with ectopic complexes, and any cause of a regular narrow complex tachycardia with variable conduction or ectopic complexes.

Regular wide complex tachycardia: Ventricular tachycardia, accelerated idioventricular rhythm, paced rhythm, artifact, and any SVT associated with aberrant ventricular conduction or accessory pathway or metabolic/electrolyte abnormalities.

Irregular wide complex tachycardia: Torsades de pointes, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, any cause of an irregular narrow complex tachycardia associated with abnormally aberrant conduction, metabolic/electrolyte abnormalities, any regular wide complex tachycardia associated with variable conduction or frequent ectopic complexes.