**Evaluation Options Include**

**Ultrasound**is the first non-invasive option for evaluating major salivary gland tumors, especially superficial parotid lesions. It can help localize tumors; distinguish solid masses from cystic collections, and help guide fine-needle aspiration biopsy. Heterogenous echogenicity, local invasion, poorly-defined margins, and lymphadenopathy are sonographic signs of malignancy.

**Computerized tomography (CT).**Conventional CT can evaluate tumor extent, bony infiltration, and lymphadenopathy. However, it is limited by the dental artifact and has a poor soft-tissue resolution, especially for MEC, AdCC, and acinic cell carcinoma, leading to underestimating the lesion.

**Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)**. For lesions in the deep parotid lobe, sublingual glands, and minor salivary glands, MRI is recommended to assess tumor extent, soft tissue invasion, and nerve involvement. MRI can be performed to detect the facial nerve branches and their interface with surrounding soft tissue for surgical planning. MRI has a higher sensitivity and specificity than CT in detecting perineural spread, especially for AdCC.

**Positron emission tomography (PET).**The role of PET is to detect locoregional and distant metastasis. Compared with conventional CT, PET is more accurate in demonstrating tumor extension, nodal involvement, local recurrence, and distant metastasis due to the tissues’ higher levels of standardized uptake values (SUV).

**Biopsy.**Imaging is unable to distinguish between benign and malignant lesions completely. Therefore, obtaining histological samples is key to determining the next steps in management. An incisional biopsy can be used for minor salivary glands in the oral cavity but is not recommended for parotid lesions due to the risk of damage to the facial nerve and the possibility of tumor-seeding. Hence, ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA) is preferred.

An ultrasound-guided core needle biopsy can obtain larger tissue specimens with histologic architecture, which improves recognition of tumor grade to allow further subtyping. The diagnosis and classification of the specific type of lymphoma of the salivary glands require histological cellular architecture.