Chapman’s points are easily defined clinically, but physiologically they are much more complex. Visceral inflammation, spasm, and distention are all postulates as causes of positive Chapman’s points. The leading theory is that Chapman’s points develop from lymphatic dysfunction, secondary to underlying visceral dysfunction. Accordingly, Chapman’s points are broadly referred to as examples of viscero-somatic reflexes.

Currently, the best hypothesis for the development of Chapman’s points lies in central sensitization and the facilitation of interneurons within the spinal cord gray matter. Visceral dysfunction, in the form of infection, inflammation, ischemia, etc. activate visceral afferent receptors, resulting in the transmission of abnormal or excessive input into the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. This abnormal input sensitizes the interneurons to subsequent stimuli. This facilitation maintains the interneurons at sub-threshold excitation, meaning that normal input to these interneurons is now amplified and results in excessive efferent responses.

While a variety of underlying visceral dysfunctions appear to cause Chapman’s points, they are most specifically representations of neuro-lymphatic reflexes.

Another possible physiologic mechanism of Chapman’s points lies in the axon reflex. Sustained visceral dysfunction repeatedly depolarizes the visceral afferent receptors, triggering the release of neuropeptides. These neuropeptides stimulate C-fibers, resulting in depolarization and an action potential along sympathetic afferents. This sensory input into the CNS can establish central sensitization and/or maintain facilitation resulting from mechanisms discussed above. Additionally, the neuropeptides stimulate antidromic activity within nerve branches in sites unrelated to the underlying visceral dysfunction. This mechanism may explain Chapman’s points in seemingly unrelated areas.