The tongue is a muscular organ in the mouth that plays a central role in aiding mastication (chewing), deglutition (swallowing), gustation (taste), speech, and articulation. It is a midline structure with mirrored muscle architecture, innervation, and blood supply. The tongue is split into mirrored halves by an avascular midline raphe. Histologically, the mucosa of the tongue is lined with keratinized and nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium. It also contains special sensory mucosa for taste perception.

The surface topography of the tongue includes the tip, lateral surface, ventral tongue, dorsal tongue, and tongue base. The tip of the tongue describes the most anterior part of the tongue. The lateral edge of the tongue separates the ventral surface from the dorsal surface of the tongue. The ventral tongue is the undersurface of the tongue, while the dorsal tongue is the superior surface. The base of the tongue is the posterior one-third of the tongue; it includes the tongue tissue posterior to the circumvallate papilla extending to the vallecula (the latter being the region between the base of the tongue and the epiglottis).

The tongue can also be described in thirds. The tip of the tongue is the anterior one-third of the tongue. The posterior one-third of the tongue is the tongue base. The middle third is between the tip and the tongue base. The anterior two-thirds of the tongue is considered part of the oral cavity, while the tongue base at the posterior one-third is considered to be part of the oropharynx.

There are eight paired muscles of the tongue. Muscles of the tongue are classified as intrinsic or extrinsic. The intrinsic muscles do not have insertions or origins external to the tongue; they are confined to the body of the tongue. Their actions shape the tongue but do not change tongue position. They are named for the directions in which they run: superior and inferior longitudinal muscles, transverse muscles, and vertical muscles. Four extrinsic muscles originate outside the tongue and insert into the body of the tongue. These muscles alter tongue position and include the genioglossus, styloglossus, hyoglossus, and palatoglossus muscles.

Motor innervation to the tongue is from the hypoglossal nerve (cranial nerve 12). The nerve originates from the hypoglossal nucleus and exits the skull base through the hypoglossal canal. Once in the neck, it crosses anterior to the internal and external carotid arteries and can be seen deep to the posterior belly of the digastric muscle. It can often be found inferior to the digastric muscle as it proceeds anteriorly, putting it at risk for injury during dissection of neck levels 1B and 2A. The nerve proceeds superomedially deep to the mylohyoid muscle to innervate the intrinsic and extrinsic tongue muscles.

Sensory and special sensory (taste) inputs from the tongue are based on the thirds of the tongue. The sensory function of the anterior two-thirds of the tongue is supplied by the lingual nerve, which comes off the mandibular branch of the trigeminal (V3) nerve. Sensation to the posterior one-third of the tongue is provided by the glossopharyngeal nerve (9). Taste from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue travels along the chorda tympani, which travels early in its course with the lingual nerve (V3) and later in its course with the facial nerve (7). Taste in the posterior one-third of the tongue is from the vagus nerve (10).

Arterial supply to the tongue comes from branches of the external carotid artery, primarily through the lingual artery and the tonsillar branch of the facial artery. Venous drainage is through tributaries to the lingual vein.

Lymphatic drainage from the oral tongue is primarily to levels 1 through 3 of the neck. This includes the submental (level 1a) and submandibular (level 1b) lymph node basins, as well as the upper jugular chain neck lymphatics (levels 2 and 3). Lymphatic drainage from the tongue base is primarily to levels 2 through 4.