Distal radius fractures can be managed either non-operatively or operatively, depending on the fracture pattern and the patient profile.

**Non-operative Management**

Closed reduction and immobilization with either splint or cast: This is indicated in extraarticular fracture with acceptable shortening (< 5 mm) and dorsal angulation ( < 5 degrees or within 20 degrees of the contralateral side). See **(Media 9)**showing successful closed reduction and casting of a Colle's fracture.

Closed manipulation/reduction requires adequate anesthesia: Usually performed in the emergency department in the form of a hematoma block or a Bier's block. The reduction is performed by inline traction and dorsal pressure of the distal fracture fragment. A three-pointed molded plaster is applied. Care should be taken to avoid plastering in excessive flexion or ulnar deviation (Cotton-Loder Position), which could precipitate carpal tunnel syndrome. The patient should be followed up in one week with radiographs of the involved wrist to check that the reduced position is maintained. Plaster is usually removed after a total of six weeks. Home exercises yield the same outcomes as physical therapy for simple distal radius fractures.

**LaFontaine**defined predictors of instability, where a fracture pattern with three or more of the following criteria would have a high chance for loss of reduction.

The most predictive criteria are radial shortening followed by dorsal comminution.

Initial fracture pattern (Pre-reduction) with the following criteria:

Radial shortening > 5 mm, dorsal comminution > 50%, volar or intraarticular comminution. Dorsal angulation > 20 degrees. Displaced intra-articular fractures > 2mm.

Other criteria include severe osteoporosis or associated ulnar fracture.

In the elderly population (> 65 years), there is no difference in functional outcomes between non-operative versus operative treatments.

**Operative Management**

**Closed Reduction and Percutaneous Pinning (CRPP):**

- Indicated for extraarticular distal radius fractures. It has up to 90% success results when performed satisfactorily for the correct fracture pattern.

- The K wires can be used as a reduction tool by inserting them dorsally into the fracture from distal to proximal (Kapandji intrafocal technique)

- Alternatively, an arthroscopically assisted reduction can be performed (Rayhack technique)

- Percutaneous pinning could be complicated by injury to the superficial sensory branch of the radial nerve or pin tract infection

**Open Reduction and Internal Fixation (ORIF)**

- Indicated for unstable fracture patterns ( Judged in the prereduction radiographs as per LaFontaine criteria)

- Progressive loss of reduction following closed attempt ( Loss of volar tilt and radial height)

Other unstable distal radius fractures where ORIF is indicated include:

- Articular margin fractures ( dorsal or volar Barton's fractures)

- Die Punch fracture

- Displaced comminuted extraarticular fractures (Smith's fractures)

NB. **The critical corner:**This is the volar ulnar corner that supports the lunate fossa ( through radiolunate ligament attachments). This must be addressed when operative management is indicated as missing, which can result in volar carpal subluxation with subsequent fixation failure.

**ORIF**with plating can be performed via volar or dorsal approaches. Volar plating is preferable to dorsal plating. Dorsal plating should be used when appropriately indicated, such as in cases of dorsal comminution, angulation, and associated carpal pathology.

**Volar Plating**

Advantages: New volar locking plates show improved support of the subchondral bone.

Disadvantages:

- Irritation of both flexor and extensor tendons.

- Plates positioned distal to the watershed area are associated with FPL rupture.

- Injury to the palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve with resultant hyperesthesia over the thenar eminence base. (a result of retraction of flexor tendons during plating)

Plating can be performed alone or in combination with external fixation or K-wire fixation. Bone grafts may be indicated in bone loss from significant comminution. The critical corner (lunate fossa fragment) should be assessed and addressed when indicated, and it might need fragment-specific fixation.

**Complications**(overall complication rate close to 15% with less than 5% requiring reoperation).

- Tendon rupture.

- Screw penetration into the wrist joint or distal radioulnar joint.

- The final screws' position should be assessed with 20 degrees elevated lateral views.

- The dorsal cortex should be assessed with a skyline view.

**Rehabilitation**with home exercises is not inferior to therapist-directed physiotherapy.

**External fixation (spanning or non-spanning):**indicated for open fractures, comminuted fractures not amenable to internal fixation, and patients unfit for long procedures.

- Spanning external fixation is for fractures with a small articular fragment, while non-spanning is for fractures with a large articular fragment.

- External fixation is usually used as an adjunct measure to other fixation methods, e.g., plate or wire fixation.

- It works through ligamentotaxis to restore radial length, but alone it can not reliably restore volar tilt.

- Carpal distraction should be less than 5 mm in the neutral position.

**Complications**

- Pin tract complications (infection, fracture through pin site)

- Malunion & non-union

- Stiffness and weak hand grip power

- Neurologic injury ( superficial sensory branch of the radial nerve, median neuropathy, or reflex sympathetic dystrophy)