Acne conglobata is a rare but severe form of nodulocystic acne. It usually presents with tender, disfiguring, double or triple interconnecting comedones, cysts, inflammatory nodules, and deep burrowing abscesses on the face, shoulders, back, chest, upper arms, buttocks, and thighs. The comedones often occur in groups of three, and the cysts often contain purulent, foul-smelling material that is discharged on the skin surface. It is a chronic inflammatory disease that inevitably leads to scar formation and disfigurement. Acne conglobata may occur following the sudden worsening of pustular acne, or the disorder may occur gradually following the recrudescence of acne that has been quiet for many years.

A physical exam will usually reveal a severe form of acne. The nodular lesions are tender and dome-shaped. When the nodules have broken down, there will be the presence of discharge that is foul-smelling pus. After the pus has drained, crusting of the lesion is common, followed by the formation of large irregular scars.

A classic feature of the disorder is the presence of paired or aggregates of blackheads on the trunk, neck, upper arms, and buttocks.

Acne conglobata may follow the use of androgenic anabolic steroids and is quite common in bodybuilders. Many young adult males will present to the dermatology clinic complaining of severe acne and facial scars. It is important to seek a thorough history of the use of anabolic steroids because discontinuation of these agents is vital for treatment.

Acne conglobata may also occur in patients with hidradenitis suppurativa and pyoderma gangrenosum. When the condition develops following puberty, the nodules will gradually coalesce and increase in severity over the ensuing years. Active nodule formation usually persists for the first three decades of life and then becomes quiescent.