Infective endocarditis is an established common cause of septic emboli from case studies as early as 1883.

The clinician should suspect endovascular infection and septic embolism in patients with endovascular devices/cannulations who present with recurrent or persistent bacteremia.

Septic emboli originate depending on the anatomical location of the infection and the vasculature surrounding that area. For example, orbital cellulitis with Streptococcus constellatus was complicated with cavernous sinus thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.

Paradoxical septic emboli to the brain could occur secondary to right-sided pacemaker endocarditis, and the septic emboli cross via potent foramen ovale, creating a right to left shunt.

Also, there are reports of septic pulmonary emboli from the right atrial thrombus related to tunneled hemodialysis catheters.

Septic superior vena cava thrombus has been reported from an infection at the peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line in a neutropenic patient with MRSA bloodstream infection.

Cardiac implantable electronic devices (CIED) infections occur in about 0.5% of de novo CIED implants and approximately 2% of CIED replacements.staphylococcus aureus after insertion of implantable cardiovertor defibrillator.

Microbiological organisms usually involved include Staphylococcus aureus, coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, streptococcal group, enterococcus group, polymicrobial infections, and less frequently, gram-negative organisms may be involved in the causation of septic emboli. In addition, fungi, mostly Candida and Aspergillus, may be found in septic emboli (E. Rubinstein et al., 1995).

A recent multinational study on infective endocarditis showed that (91.7%) endocarditis patients had any identified pathogen. Leading pathogens (Staphylococcus aureus ( 33.6%), Streptococcus viridans 18.7%), enterococci (16.1%), coagulase-negative staphylococci ( 11.6%)) displayed substantial resistance profiles. A total of (44.4%) patients had major embolic events, most frequently to the brain ( 26.3%).