Management choice is influenced by the size and location of nodules, as well as the severity of symptoms. Asymptomatic patients can be observed, mildly symptomatic cases typically respond to conservative management, but severe cases may require surgical intervention. The most common indication for surgery is a visual disturbance.

**Conservative Management**

In most cases, patients will respond to conservative medical therapy. The use of lubricants, warm compresses, lid massage, and lid hygiene often provides symptomatic relief, especially in the context of dry eye disease. One study found that conservative therapy was effective enough to avoid surgery in 77.3% of cases.

**Nodulectomy/Superficial Keratectomy**

The simplest method for surgical management is manual excision and superficial keratectomy.

If adhesions are present between the nodule and the limbus, typically due to a fibrovascular pannus, scissors may be used to amputate the nodule close to the limbus. After removal of the nodule, the underlying stroma is usually regular and smooth.

Some SND patients are left with significant defects in the Bowman layer. These irregularities, if present, may be treated with a diamond burr or PTK.

One study utilized superficial keratectomy followed by AMT; however, the nodule recurred, the operation repeated, but the nodule recurred once again. Published data of other cases are limited.

Mitomycin-C (MMC) is an alkylating agent that interrupts DNA synthesis inducing apoptosis in fibroblasts.

**Keratoplasty**

Rarely, lamellar keratoplasty (LK) is required for sufficient resolution of SND. A comparison of automated lamellar keratoplasty (ALK) to PTK for treatment of SND found that the overall change in VA was comparable between the two groups; however, PTK had a lower rate of complications.

**Additional Considerations**

For most accurate biometric data to be obtained, SND should be removed before cataract extraction. SND induced refractive sequelae may adversely affect biometry measurements, K values, and consequently IOL power calculations.