Catecholamines are implicated in the pharmacologic treatment of a multitude of diseases and disease processes. Epinephrine and norepinephrine are frequently used as vasopressor agents to treat acute hypotensive states, as well as in treatment algorithms for cardiac arrest. Their affinity to the alpha-1 receptor also is used to induce localized vasoconstriction to reduce bleeding during procedures such as wound closure. By the same mechanism, catecholamine-releasing agents in the form of sprays or ointments are used as nasal decongestants. The pharmacodynamic inhibition of catecholamine reuptake is commonly used in the psychiatric treatment of some depressive disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety disorders, attention deficit disorder, and panic disorders. Catecholamine reuptake inhibitors also may be used to treat neuropathic and chronic musculoskeletal pain. Epinephrine is the universal treatment for anaphylaxis and is also used to treat other causes of laryngeal edema (e.g., croup) or bronchospasm. The blockage of adrenergic receptors otherwise activated by catecholamines is an integral part of the treatment of hypertension, congestive heart failure, and other cardiovascular diseases.

Of the several types of neoplasms arising from the adrenal gland, pheochromocytomas are tumors of the adrenal medulla responsible for the unregulated secretion of catecholamines. Pheochromocytomas are particularly dangerous due to the overactivation of adrenergic receptors which cause episodes of hypertensive urgency. Patients with pheochromocytomas also may experience episodes of other uncomfortable sympathomimetic symptoms including palpitations, sweating, headaches, or anxiety. Pheochromocytomas are often amenable to surgery with or without pharmacotherapy targeting adrenergic blockade.