When opioid withdrawal signs are present, pharmacological management of opioid withdrawal is needed. Long-term opioid replacement is accomplished using methadone or buprenorphine.

Methadone is given in inpatient or outpatient treatment settings. The starting dose is 10 mg oral or intravenous (IV) methadone, which may be given every 4 to 6 hours if withdrawal persists. The total dose in 24 hours equals the dose for the next day. Rarely does a patient needs more than 40 mg in 24 hour period. On the second day, the determined dose can be given once or twice a day. Titration is begun on the third day to determine a maintenance dose.

Buprenorphine (sublingual) 4 to 12 mg initially can also be given instead of methadone. Buprenorphine can precipitate withdrawal symptoms in opiate dependent patients who do not have withdrawal signs. Thus, it must be started 12 to 18 hours after the last use of short-acting agonists like heroin or oxycodone and 24 to 48 hours after the last use of long-acting agonists such as methadone.

Symptomatic treatment in opioid withdrawal includes loperamide for diarrhea, promethazine for nausea/vomiting, and ibuprofen for myalgia. Clonidine can be given to reduce blood pressure.

**Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act**

The Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act provision updates federal guidelines to expand the availability of evidence-based treatment to address the opioid epidemic. The MAT Act empowers all health care providers with a standard controlled substance license to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder (OUD), just as they prescribe other essential medications. The MAT Act is intended to help destigmatize a standard of care for OUD and will integrate substance use disorder treatment across healthcare settings.

As of December 2022, the MAT Act has eliminated the DATA-Waiver (X-Waiver) program. All DEA-registered practitioners with Schedule III authority may now prescribe buprenorphine for OUD in their practice if permitted by applicable state law, and SAMHSA encourages them to do so. Prescribers who were registered as DATA-Waiver prescribers will receive a new DEA registration certificate reflecting this change; no action is needed on the part of registrants.

There are no longer any limits on the number of patients with OUD that a practitioner may treat with buprenorphine. Separate tracking of patients treated with buprenorphine or prescriptions written is no longer required.

Pharmacy staff can now fill buprenorphine prescriptions using the prescribing authority's DEA number and does not need a DATA 2000 waiver from the prescriber. However, depending on the pharmacy, the dispensing software may still require the X-Waiver information in order to proceed. Practitioners are still required to comply with any applicable state limits regarding the treatment of patients with OUD.  Contact information for State Opioid Treatment Authorities can be found here: https://www.samhsa.gov/medicationassisted-treatment/sota.