Active tuberculosis is diagnosed by isolating Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex bacilli from bodily secretions. Any patient suspected of active tuberculosis is a public health risk for transmission and should be isolated with airborne precautions. In pulmonary tuberculosis, initial testing includes a chest X-Ray, sputum evaluation. Sputum evaluation includes Acid-Fast Bacilli smear (AFB smear), mycobacterial culture, and nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT). The inability of sputum production can be an issue at times; in this instance, nebulized hypertonic saline can be used to induce sputum.

**AFB Smear**

CDC recommends the historical practice of obtaining three sputum samples with at least one early morning sample. Each specimen increases the sensitivity of testing.

**Genetic testing and NAAT**

Nuclear amplification and gene-based tests represent a new generation of tools used for the diagnosis of tuberculosis. These tests enable the identification of the bacteria or bacteria particles by making use of DNA-based molecular techniques. These techniques are faster and allow accelerated diagnosis with high precision. Confirmation of the tuberculosis infection could be made in a few hours compared to the days or weeks it usually takes to wait for a standard culture. These tests are especially important among immunocompromised patients for whom there is a high rate of false-negative results. A few of the molecular-based tests such as DR-MTB and GeneXpert also allow for the identification of multiple-drug-resistant tuberculosis infections. A positive NAAT testing on a single sputum sample is considered sufficient for the diagnosis of Active Tuberculosis irrespective of AFB smear results. On occasions of negative AFB smear with intermediate to high suspicion of active tuberculosis, NAAT positivity can be used as presumptive TB. That being said, NAAT cannot be used to rule out pulmonary tuberculosis.

**Sputum Mycobacterial Culture**

Mycobacterial culture is the gold standard for diagnosis. Mycobacterial culture should be performed on both the solid and liquid medium. Liquid media culture can detect very low bacterial load and is considered a gold standard. Culture essential for drug susceptibility testing.

**Drug susceptibility testing**

Two methods of determining drug susceptibility are phenotypic and genotypic testing.

**Bronchoscopy**

If all measures fail to obtain a sputum sample, a fibreoptic bronchoscopy with bronchioalveolar lavage can be performed with or without a transbronchial biopsy. Bronchoscopy can also be performed in high clinical suspicion with negative sputum studies and to rule out an alternative diagnosis.

**Tissue biopsy**

In the incidence of extrapulmonary tuberculosis, tissue biopsy of the affected organ is diagnostic.

**Other**

Apart from these, Tuberculin skin testing and/or interferon-gamma release assay should be performed depending on the situation. These tests should not be wholly relied upon in the diagnosis of active tuberculosis, but assist in diagnosis.

**The Mantoux Test/ Tuberculin skin testing**

The Mantoux test is a two-part test consisting of an intradermal injection of .1ml purified protein derivative and observing for induration 48-72 hours. The patient’s risk of exposure is taken into consideration when interpreting the result. Patients are then classified into three groups based on the size of the induration and the risk of exposure. These three groups include:

- Low risk: These patients have a minimal probability of exposure to tuberculosis. The Mantoux test is only considered positive if there is a significant induration of 15 mm or higher following the intradermal injection of purified protein derivative. People in this group include those with no history of travel to a tuberculosis-endemic region, no history of military service, no contact with a patient with a chronic cough, no history of steroid use, no known occupational exposure, are negative for HIV, and are not a resident of a tuberculosis-endemic country.

- Intermediate risk: These patients have an intermediate probability of exposure to tuberculosis. Their test results are considered positive if the measured induration is greater than 10 mm. People in this group include those who are residents of tuberculosis-endemic countries such as Asia, Latin America, and Africa, residents or workers of shelters, those who reside in overcrowded vicinities, and medical personnel.

- High risk: These patients have a significant probability of exposure to tuberculosis. Their test results are considered positive if the measured induration is greater than 5 mm. People in this group include those who are immunocompromised and cannot mount a sufficient immune response to the purified protein derivative test (HIV-positive patients, those on chronic steroids), patients with frequent exposure to those with a persistent cough, and patients with evidence of prior tuberculosis infection, such as a healed scar seen on X-ray.

A positive Mantoux test indicates exposure to tuberculosis or latent tuberculosis. However, this test lacks specificity, and patients require subsequent visits to interpret the result and a chest x-ray for confirmation of the disease. Although the test is considered relatively sensitive, false-positive results are seen with BCG vaccination. The Mantoux test should never be regarded as a confirmatory test.

**Interferon Gamma Release Assays**

This is a far more specific screening test that is just as sensitive as the Mantoux test. It qualitatively assesses the level of inflammatory cytokines such as interferon-gamma. The advantage of this test, especially in those inoculated with the BCG vaccine, is that the test requires only a single blood draw, which negates the need for repeat visits by the patient to interpret results. Some disadvantages of this method include its high cost, the need for technical expertise to perform the test, high rates of false-positive, and false negatives.

**Extrapulmonary tuberculosis**

Diagnosing active extrapulmonary tuberculosis is similar to pulmonary tuberculosis. The definitive diagnosis is made by isolating M.Tuberculosis organisms from involved organ systems (e.g., pleural effusion, pericardial, peritoneal fluid, lymph node, bone marrow, blood, etc.). Additionally, biopsies of an involved organ system can also be used to isolate the organism. In the case of pleural involvement, the pleural biopsy is the gold standard. Tuberculosis Pleural effusion is exudative and rarely is positive for AFB. ATS/IDSA guidelines recommend checking for adenosine deaminase and interferon-gamma levels on any fluid collected on a patient suspected from extrapulmonary tuberculosis.