Although ovarian cysts are mostly benign and resolve spontaneously, they can sometimes lead to complications such as rupture, hemorrhage, and torsion that require urgent medical or surgical treatment. The evaluation aims to determine the most likely etiology of the patient's symptoms whenever an ovarian cyst is present. Acute lower abdominal pain is a common presentation to the emergency room and can be associated with various generalized symptoms. The differential diagnosis is broad, and it can be challenging to determine the exact cause without proper imaging studies. Transvaginal ultrasound is the recommended first-line imaging modality for a suspected or incidentally identified pelvic mass. [Level 1]

Findings that raise the level of suspicion for malignancy include cyst size of more than 10 cm, presence of ascites, papillary excrescences or solid components, irregularity, and high color doppler flow. [level 1]. Surgical intervention for mature ovarian teratomas or endometriomas is warranted in the masses are large, symptomatic, and growing in size on serial imaging studies or if malignancy is suspected. If, however, expectant management is employed, follow-up surveillance is warranted.

As mentioned above, proper diagnosis and management of ovarian cysts require an interprofessional healthcare team that includes physicians (MDs and DOs), specialists, mid-level practitioners (NPs and PAs), and nurses, all sharing patient information and keeping the rest of them informed regarding status changes, new developments, and therapeutic improvement or failure. The interprofessional paradigm will result in better patient outcomes with fewer adverse events. [Level 5]