Complications of weight loss surgery can occur during surgery, in the immediate 1 to 2 days postoperatively, or even years after surgery. Intraoperative complications are rare and include anesthesia-related events, injury to bowels, spleen, liver, or damage to a major blood vessel such as the inferior vena cava (IVC) or portal vein. Bowel ischemia can also occur if the blood supply is disrupted inadvertently during stapling, suturing, or ligation. Injuries can happen during insertion of the trocars (which are sharp) into the abdomen, can be due to a technical error, or sometimes may be due to difficult or aberrant anatomy. The body habitus of this patient population, particularly the thickness of their abdominal walls, increases the level of difficulty of these surgeries. The risks of intraoperative complication seen are similar to that of any laparoscopic abdominal surgery. The comorbidities of these patients, however, predispose them to a slightly higher risk of complication when going under general anesthesia and having surgery. Nonetheless, these complications are rare and occur approximately 1% of the time. Myocardial infarction, deep vein thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolism, and hemorrhage are all extremely rare during weight loss surgery, but they do happen. LRYGB is associated with slightly higher occurrences of most of these complications. Conversion to an open procedure is also noted to carry an increased risk of complication.

The most common and dreaded postoperative complication is an anastomotic leak. This happens when there is leakage at the staple or suture line of the bowel or stomach, into the abdomen. When this occurs, it is usually within the first week after surgery. The classic presentation is unexplained tachycardia more than 120 bpm that does not resolve. Fever, respiratory difficulty, and abdominal pain may also be present. If not identified and treated promptly, the anastomotic leak can progress to sepsis and even death. Upper GI series can be used to diagnose the anastomotic leak, and in many bariatric centers, this is routinely performed on postoperative day 1 before initiating a bariatric diet. These leaks must be treated with surgery to revise the anastomosis and fix the leak. Initiation of intravenous (IV) antibiotics, percutaneous or laparoscopic drain placement, and making the patient nothing by mouth (NPO) are the standards of treatment for this complication.

Surgical site infection (SSI) is another complication with approximately 1% incidence in bariatric surgery. The use of perioperative antibiotics markedly decreases this risk as with other surgeries. Pulmonary embolism is the most common cause of death in the postoperative period following bariatric surgery. Again obesity is a factor that predisposes this population to this complication. Many surgeons routinely keep their bariatric patients on chemical thromboprophylaxis after surgery for as long as 1 month to mitigate this risk.

Internal hernias and marginal ulcers are complications that can present years after bariatric surgery. An internal hernia is when bowel extends into space within the abdominal cavity created inadvertently, in this case when reconstructing the GI tract during LRYGB. This is dangerous because bowel can become strangulated, ischemic, and/or obstructed. This is a surgical emergency, and if strongly suspected, warrants at minimum laparoscopic exploration with any necessary intervention to follow subsequently.

Marginal ulcers most often occur at the margin where small intestine is joined to the stomach pouch. These ulcers irritate the gastrointestinal mucosa and eventually can perforate which again is a surgical emergency, treated similarly to an anastomotic leak. Marginal ulcers have been attributed to the type of non-absorbable suture used, and many surgeons use absorbable sutures to prevent this.

The potential complications mentioned above are serious risks that both the surgeon and patient need to be aware of when planning weight-loss surgery. Bariatric centers for excellence have evolved and are required to have minimal complication rates after these surgeries, generally less than 5%. The surgeons that direct and operate within these centers have strict regimens, surgical techniques, and patient optimization that are designed to achieve success repeatedly.