At each visit to the pharmacy, the patient must undergo an assessment for buprenorphine toxicity. The vital signs should be obtained, and the patient's overall physical and mental health status evaluated. The clinician should not dispense buprenorphine if the patient appears lethargic or intoxicated. In some cases, the pharmacist may have to withhold the dose of buprenorphine may. The healthcare provider must be notified of these plans, as patient safety is paramount. Because buprenorphine has a long half-life, the drug can be withheld for one day without any adverse effects. The patient should then be released the next day. If the patient has signs of respiratory depression and/or hypotension, he or she should be evaluated in the emergency room and treated like any other opioid overdose patient.

One of the problems when trying to determine the adverse effects of buprenorphine is the difficulty in differentiating the withdrawal symptoms. The typical withdrawal symptoms after opioid withdrawal includes nausea, vomiting, headache, diarrhea, flu-like symptoms, and diaphoresis. These withdrawal symptoms may occur at any dose of buprenorphine. On the other hand, the adverse effects associated with buprenorphine treatment usually relate to the dose. The higher the dose, the more severe the symptoms are. Also, the side effects of buprenorphine can worsen with other CNS depressants and alcohol.

If a patient overdoses on buprenorphine, they may experience confusion, dizziness, pinpoint pupils, hallucinations, hypotension, respiratory depression, seizures, or coma. Respiratory depression is a possibility when using other central nervous depressants, especially benzodiazepines. For example, when using buprenorphine and diazepam together increased the risk of respiratory and cardiovascular collapse.

When a patient overdoses on buprenorphine, they must be given a naloxone bolus dose of 2 mg to 3 mg followed by continuous infusion of 4 mg per hour; this will cause a full reversal of the overdose within 40 to 60 minutes. A bolus dose is needed to overcome the high affinity that buprenorphine has to the mu-opioid receptor.

Reports exist of rare cases of liver damage with jaundice with the use of buprenorphine. For those who receive buprenorphine, liver functions require regular monitoring. The most severe and serious adverse reaction associated with buprenorphine use is respiratory depression, which can be fatal. This situation is particularly problematic with buprenorphine because, unlike morphine, there is no effective antidote. The respiratory depression associated with buprenorphine tends to occur at high doses and is much more prolonged and difficult to reverse with naloxone, as the binding of buprenorphine to the opioid receptors is very tight. In some cases, the patient may require mechanical ventilation to manage respiratory depression.

**Benefits of Buprenorphine Compared to Methadone**

The use of buprenorphine has been demonstrated to be more effective than detoxification in improving outcomes in patients with opioid dependence. When compared to methadone, buprenorphine has the following advantages:

- It is safer even at high doses.

- Optional therapeutic doses are achieved relatively quickly

- There is less risk of abuse and diversion

- The drug is easier to taper

- There is less stigma associated with buprenorphine than methadone.

- Patients can get the medication from any healthcare provider and do not have to go to specialized methadone clinics.

Buprenorphine, because of its partial opioid receptor agonist activity, is said to cause less euphoria compared to full agonists like methadone or morphine and, thus, is less likely to be abused or diverted.

The buprenorphine treatment typically lasts 3 to 6 months (or sometimes 1 to 2 years); conversely, methadone treatment is often lifelong.

**Patient Education**

The success of buprenorphine/naloxone is dependent on patient education. The patient should have counsel about the drug's addiction potential and avoidance of other CNS sedatives at each visit. Family members, or caregivers, should receive education about the signs and symptoms of buprenorphine toxicity. Patients should also understand what to do if the patient is lethargic and had depressed respiration.

To ensure that there is continuity in care, healthcare workers need to communicate all aspects of the treatment at a weekly meeting to ensure that there are no omissions or overlaps in the dosing of buprenorphine. These meetings are vital when a patient gets discharged from jail or a healthcare institution.

**Pearls of Wisdom**

- Buprenorphine acts as a partial agonist at the mu-opioid receptor and, overall, is safer than methadone. However, it should not be combined with other CNS depressants like alcohol or benzodiazepines; otherwise, this can lead to respiratory depression.

- If an overdose occurs with buprenorphine, much higher doses of naloxone plus other supportive measures are required.

- Because the drug is a partial opioid agonist, it has a much lower potential for dependence and misuse than pure agonists like heroin or morphine; however, misuse still occurs.

- The addition of naloxone to the formula is designed to lower the risk of abuse by injection further but does not always eliminate the risk.

- Unlike methadone, the therapeutic dose of buprenorphine is titratable to a stable dose within several days. In contrast, methadone often takes many weeks or even months to reach a therapeutic dose.

- There are some patients in whom, despite the maximal dose of buprenorphine, it may not be sufficient to treat the dependence; in such scenarios, one could consider switching the patient to methadone.

- Buprenorphine can induce withdrawal symptoms in patients dependent on opioids if it is administered quickly after the last dose of a pure agonist like fentanyl or oxycodone.