# Continuing Education Activity

Pyruvate kinase deficiency (PKD) is the most common enzyme-related glycolytic defect that results in red cell hemolysis. Invariably, PKD results in hereditary non-spherocytic anemia. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of pyruvate kinase deficiency and highlights the role of the healthcare team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the etiology of pyruvate kinase deficiency.
- Describe the appropriate evaluation of patients with pyruvate kinase deficiency.
- Outline the management options available for pyruvate kinase deficiency.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination amongst interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by pyruvate kinase deficiency.

# Introduction

Pyruvate kinase deficiency (PKD) is the most common enzyme-related glycolytic defect that results in red cell hemolysis.

# Etiology

Red blood cell (RBC) metabolism hinges on glycolysis. Pyruvate kinase (PK) enzyme is key to this process. PK converts phosphoenolpyruvate to pyruvate.****These metabolites enable RBCs to function effectively. In PKD, cellular energy efficiency and longevity decrease. Young RBCs are most affected in PKD.****Frameshift, deletion, and insertion type mutations can occur.

# Epidemiology

PKD was first discovered in 1961 by Valentine et al.****Since this discovery, worldwide reports have emerged. PKD is a rare disorder. The true prevalence of PKD is unknown.

Evidence of PKD-related gender differences appears scarce. Specific mutations have higher frequencies in certain communities, such as Pennsylvania Amish and Romani communities.

# Pathophysiology

Cellular integrity of RBCs is maintained by membrane-bound ATPases. ATPases exchange sodium for potassium. This maintains transcellular electrochemical neutrality, cellular fluid balance, and deformability.

Neonatal RBCs consume more ATP than in adults.

Dilutional anemia occurs in the second trimester of pregnancy in these patients. Plasma volume increases more than RBC mass.****Episodic hemolysis may require RBC transfusion replacement.

# History and Physical

**Neonates**

Manifestations include hyperbilirubinemia and anemia. Surviving neonates have recognizable pallor.

**Older Children and Adults**

Older children may present with poor growth, easy fatiguability, and jaundice. Some children may have poor appetite and dizziness.****Adults may present with complications. These include gall stones, hemosiderosis, and aplastic anemia.

# Evaluation

Laboratory evaluation is indicated for neonatal anemia or hyperbilirubinemia. Childhood chronic anemia with splenomegaly warrants investigation. Transfusion-dependent patients require evaluation.****Complete blood count characterizes anemia. Hemoglobin levels vary for different severities of PK deficiency. A blood smear shows normochromic cells. Polychromasia with echinocytes may be seen. Spherocytes are absent. Macrocytosis indicates folate deficiency.

PK activity level is key to the diagnosis. PKD suspicion is warranted with near-normal PK levels. In these cases, adjusted measures are necessary. RBC age-corrected PK enzyme levels are low. Pyruvate kinase/hexokinase activity ratio is also low.

Genetic analysis showing PKLR mutations is diagnostic. Mutation types are elucidated by this method.

Iron overload is a risk in PKD. Regular screening with iron studies may reveal its onset.

# Treatment / Management

Supportive therapy is important in chronic anemia. Folic acid supplementation is advocated for children. Pregnancy and hemolytic crises also warrant supplementation. These states are associated with increased folate demand. Blood transfusion ameliorates anemia. Decisions for transfusion must be justifiable. Good decisions are based on patient-specific presentations, which may prevent iron overload in patients.

Splenectomy is indicated for massive splenomegaly. This eliminates the risk of traumatic rupture. Severe anemia may also benefit from splenectomy. Total splenectomy is advocated in late childhood. Vaccination for encapsulated bacteria is required post-splenectomy.****Prophylactic antibiotics are also beneficial.

Hemosiderosis requires iron-chelation therapy with desferrioxamine. However, this should be stopped before pregnancy.

PKD patients can successfully navigate pregnancy. Pre-pregnancy surveillance for complications is essential. These include viral screening and maternal echocardiography. Appropriate counseling is required before screening tests.****Management by hematologists and obstetricians is essential. Fetal surveillance is advisable for suspected growth restriction.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnoses of PKD include other causes of hemolytic anemia. Immune hemolysis and enzyme deficiencies are considerations. Antibody-mediated hemolysis occurs with blood-group incompatibility. Coombs' positivity characterizes blood-group incompatibility.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency is an X-linked recessive condition. It is the most common inherited enzymopathic cause of hemolytic anemia. Males are commonly affected. Rarely, females with lyonization are affected. African-American and Mediterranean heritage is common.

# Prognosis

Prognostication in PKD is highly variable. Disease severity and early care modify outcomes. Severe anemia and hemosiderosis are unfavorable and portend risk, particularly in pregnancy.

# Complications

Complications may arise from hemolysis or therapy. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia may be the first manifestation.****Transfusions may also result in iron loading. Pre-transfusion screening reduces blood-borne viral transmission. Aplastic anemia from parvovirus B-19 infection is infrequent.****Extramedullary hemopoiesis may present with unusual masses. Paravertebral or intraabdominal masses require careful follow-up.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Continuous patient education on infections is essential. Infection prevention may limit hemolytic episodes. Vaccination, prophylactic folate, and antibiotics are pertinent. Premarital education is essential in PKD prevention. Educating prospective couples helps in psychological preparation. Screening partners for carrier status is advisable.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Liver failure is unusual in PKD. However, a report has been made. A careful review of other causes is required. Remarkably, PKD may protect against malaria. Studies from Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia are supportive in this regard.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

PKD frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma. Causes of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia are myriad. Detecting PKD requires careful evaluation. Recently, PKD-specific patient-reported outcome measures were designed. [Level 5]****Gene therapy is possible but not recommended.****Surgical management of massive splenomegaly may be required.