Treatment varies based on the patient's functional status, comorbidities, tumor stage, and molecular characteristics of the disease. Patients who have stage I, II, or III NSCLC are treated with the intent to cure. This can include surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy (RT), or a combined modality approach. Systemic therapy is indicated for those with distant metastases and stage IV disease, or if they recur after initial management. Lobectomy is generally accepted as an approach for surgical intervention on early-stage NSCLC. Patients with clinical stage I or II NSCLC who are surgical candidates are treated initially with resection and subsequent pathologic staging. Based on pathologic staging, surveillance may be indicated if the patient is pathologic stage IA. If found to be pathologic stage IB or stage II/III, the patient may then undergo adjuvant chemotherapy.

If the patient is found to have positive margins, they would then require postoperative radiation therapy or reresection followed by adjuvant chemotherapy. If the patient is a clinical-stage I or II and deemed not a surgical candidate, then treatment would focus on stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) or definitive RT. Clinical stage III would indicate a multidisciplinary approach to treatment that would include consultation with medical oncology, radiation oncology, and thoracic surgery to decide on the optimal combined approach to the disease process. It is important for tissue biopsy to be analyzed for targetable mutation, which can aid in the treatment of patients with stage IV NSCLC. For example, if epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) positive, tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as osimertinib, erlotinib, gefitinib, or afatinib can be utilized in treatment. If the tumor contains anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) fusion oncogene, treatment with an ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitor is preferred, which can include alectinib, ceritinib, or brigatinib.

A variety of other mutations, including ROS1, BRAF, RET, TRK, MET, KRAS, can also be found, and for these, their specific inhibitors should be integrated into the treatment plan. If a driver mutation is absent or unknown, the level of programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression should be quantified, and if greater than 50 percent, then pembrolizumab or atezolizumab may be utilized in the treatment plan. These can also be used as single-agent treatment without chemotherapy.