The evaluation of cardiac sarcoidosis is two-pronged: histological and clinical. According to the 2014 Heart Rhythm Society (HRS) expert consensus statement, histological diagnosis can be made by the presence of non-caseating granulomas in the myocardium following endomyocardial biopsy. However, it is important to note that endomyocardial biopsy has a low sensitivity (25 to 36%) due to patchy involvement of the myocardium. The diagnostic sensitivity can be increased to about 50% using electrophysiology study, FDG-PET, or CMR-guided endomyocardial biopsy.

As a result, the consensus statement developed criteria for the probable diagnosis of CS, which can be made with a combination of histological identification of sarcoid from an extracardiac organ, exclusion of other diagnoses, and presence of at least one of the following:

- Left ventricular systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction less than 40%), not explained by any other etiology.

- Sustained VT, not explained by any other etiology

- Mobitz Type II second-degree AV block or complete heart block

- Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) (dedicated sarcoid protocol) showing patchy uptake consistent with CS.

- CMR showing late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) consistent with CS.

- Gallium scintigraphy showing positive gallium uptake consistent with CS

Electrocardiograms can help identify rhythm abnormalities, and when patients present with palpitations as the only symptoms, ambulatory rhythm monitoring can help identify transient AV blocks and nonsustained VT.

Currently, CMR is recommended as the first-line imaging study to diagnose CS, given that it has a high negative predictive value; however, recent studies recommend the addition of FDG-PET to assist in the diagnosis of CS. The pattern that favors a diagnosis of CS on CMR is usually patchy LGE in a distribution not consistent with infarct from coronary distribution. There is also a tendency for LGE to preferentially affect the basal septal wall and cause thinning of the septum and spare the endocardial border, with transmural scar being very uncommon.

Another finding very suggestive of CS on CMR is the hook sign where LGE of the anterior and inferior septum can involve right ventricular insertion points.

FDG-PET can add valuable information in the diagnosis of CS, such as evidence of active inflammation and extracardiac involvement.

The sensitivity of FDG-PET is estimated at 89%, and the specificity is 78%. FDG-PET diagnosis of sarcoid requires suppressing myocardial glucose uptake to promote uptake of FDG by inflammatory cells.