**Visual Acuity**

Snellen's best corrected and uncorrected visual acuity must be recorded on each visit which is a good indicator of graft clarity or graft rejection. Visual acuity is a valuable tool to monitor the response to treatment.

**Intraocular Pressure**

Secondary glaucoma is a vital complication post corneal transplantation. On every visit, intraocular pressure must be recorded. The preferred method would be a non-contact tonometer to avoid contact with the transplanted tissue and prevent any incidence of graft rejection or dehiscence.

**Retinoscopy and Refraction**

This is important to know the best-corrected visual, the spherical and cylindrical add needed, the amount of astigmatism induced due to sutures, and the spherical equivalent.

**Scheimpflug Imaging**

This is important in cases with high astigmatism to know the steeper and flat axis of astigmatism. This also helps in planning suture removal to reduce astigmatism.

**Specular Microscopy**

Useful in all cases preoperatively to know the donor endothelial count and viability. This is also helpful to assess the endothelial status in postoperative endothelial keratoplasty patients.

**Anterior Segment Optical Coherence Tomography**

Useful to assess the depth of opacity, any areas of thinning, and graft attachment in DSEK and DMEK.

**Fluorescein Staining**

To rule out any epithelial defect, dry eyes, and ocular surface staining.

**B Scan**

This is helpful to assess the retinal status in cases with small pupils, graft rejection, and unexplained visual loss in a clear graft.

**Macular Optical Coherence Tomography**

This investigation will be helpful to rule out cystoid macular edema and epiretinal membrane.