Several intra- and postoperative complications are associated with SB surgery.

1. The various steps-wise intra-operative complications include:

i) **During****anesthesia**: Peribulbar anesthesia can cause inadvertent globe perforation in around 0.06 to 0.13% of cases.

ii) **During****muscle bridling**: The complications associated with this step include ocular cardiac reflex and resultant bradycardia, muscle rupture, lost muscle, damage to the vortex veins, and inadvertent scleral perforation. The prevention and management of these complications have been discussed in the technique section.

iii) **During****break localization**: The complications associated with this step include damage to the vortex vein and scleral perforation. A torn vortex vein has to be cauterized immediately.

iv) **Placement of****scleral sutures**can be complicated by scleral perforation and iatrogenic retinal breaks. An inadvertent scleral perforation can lead to SRF drainage, retinal break, vitreous loss, subretinal or sub-choroidal hemorrhage, and hypotony. An inadvertent perforation is suspected if SRF, blood, or pigments appear on the scleral surface while placing the sutures. It is crucial for the surgeon not to panic. The suture should be removed, and the intraocular pressure (IOP) should be checked. An intravitreal saline injection may be needed if the eyeball is becoming hypotonus. The retina is then examined with indirect ophthalmoscopy at the site of perforation. Any iatrogenic break warrants cryo-treatment and extension of the explant to support the break. Subretinal or sub-choroidal hemorrhage can be controlled by increasing the IOP by pulling the traction sutures. The eyeball is then placed in a position to prevent subfoveal migration of blood. Suture placement can be continued after managing the complications.

v) **SRF drainage**can be complicated by damage to vortex vein, choroidal hemorrhage, retinal incarceration, retinal perforation, vitreous gel incarceration, vitreous hemorrhage, hypotony, and serous and hemorrhagic choroidal detachment. The appearance of blood at the drainage site indicates choroidal hemorrhage and can be managed by increasing the IOP by pulling the traction sutures.

2. The various early postoperative complications include lid edema, conjunctival chemosis, corneal edema, impaired function of the recti, anterior segment ischemia, open- and closed-angle glaucoma, open retinal breaks, recurrent retinal detachment, serous and hemorrhagic choroidal detachment, and persistent SRF.

i) **Anterior segment ischemia**: The patient may present with extreme pain and decreased vision. The signs include corneal edema (epithelial and stromal), corneal endothelium precipitates, shallow anterior chamber, marked uveitis, lens opacification, and an excessive buckle height (vitreous cavity may appear like a dumb-bell shape). Mild cases may respond to topical steroids and cycloplegics. However, severe cases require immediate release of the encircling band. Untreated eyes may lead to phthisis bulbi. Patients with sickle cell disease are at increased risk of developing this complication. They may benefit from pre-operative exchange transfusion.

ii) **Angle-closure glaucoma**may occur secondary to ciliary body detachment. It can be treated with topical steroids and cycloplegics. However, choroidal drainage with anterior chamber reformation may be needed if the anterior chamber doesn’t form within seven days.

iii) **Ope****n-angle glaucoma**: The most common cause is steroid response.

iv) **Persistent SRF**: In a few cases, SRF may persist for up to 3 months despite the closure of all the breaks. Such eyes can be observed safely.

v) **Recurre****nt retinal detachment**: Persistent SRF with an open break and increasing SRF need further evaluation and appropriate treatment. The various causes of recurrent retinal detachment include:

- Inadequate buckle: An unchanged pattern of RD may be due to low buckle height. This may need revision surgery and the addition of extra sutures.

- Misplaced buckle: Sometimes recurrent RD may be caused by an untreated tear lying posterior to the buckle indent. This can be managed by adding a radial explant to support the break.

- Missed retinal break: A changed pattern of RD may indicate an undetected break. Such eyes may benefit from revision surgery to treat that break.

- Fishmouthing: Persistent SRF with retinal folds on the buckle is suggestive of fish mouthing of the retinal break. This warrants intravitreal injection of expansile gas.

3. The various late postoperative complications include diplopia, refractive change, buckle extrusion, buckle infection, transscleral erosion, cystoid macular edema (CME), epiretinal membrane (ERM), and PVR changes.

i) **Diplopia**may occur due to mechanical muscle restriction or ischemia. Such patients may initially be managed with prisms. However, muscle surgery with or without buckle removal may be required if symptoms persist.

ii) The **refractive changes**occur secondary to the surgery-induced changes in the shape of the eyeball. The main risk factor for postoperative astigmatism is the use of radial elements, while a myopic shift may occur secondary to an increase in the axial length due to circumferential elements or anterior displacement of the lens.

iii) Patients with **buckle extrusion**present with pain, redness, and discharge. Such patients need buckle explantation.

iv) **Buckle intrusion**was a common complication in the era of intrascleral implants. It can lead to recurrent RD, hypotony, vitreous hemorrhage, and endophthalmitis. While the asymptomatic patients can be safely observed, the presence of symptoms warrants buckle removal with or without vitrectomy. The scleral defect can be treated with cyanoacrylate glue, scleral imbrication, or other scleral patching techniques.

v) **ERM**is the most common cause of visual loss after a successful SB surgery. The reported incidence of CME and ERM is 5.6 to 43.0% and 7.7 to 18.0%, respectively.