While the exact pathophysiologic mechanism of STP is not fully understood, it is believed that STP initially begins by a disruption of the endovascular wall, which leads to a thrombus formation. This disruption of the vein wall can be due to an endovascular device, such as a peripheral line or central line. However, it can also be from a preexisting hypercoagulable state, such as those in patients with cancer. Once the thrombus is present, invasion of a microorganism may ensue from skin breakdown or an adjacent structure. Once an organism has entered the vein, it proliferates and can further add to the thrombus formation and inflammation.

The most common organism involved in STP is Staphylococcus aureus. However, others have been implicated, such as viral, parasitic, and fungal organisms, and even polymicrobial. Other common organisms are those of the streptococcal species, anaerobes as well as gram-negative organisms.

Other conditions, such as Lemierre syndrome, occur from bacterial invasion from a nearby structure. Lemierre syndrome refers to thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular vein. It occurs most commonly as a result of bacterial pharyngitis that may be associated with a peritonsillar abscess, which may then rupture and spreads to surrounding tissues and venous structures. There is characteristic bacterial involvement of the carotid sheath with associated bacteremia.Fusobacterium necrophorum.

Infection in any part of the middle third of the face, such as the nose, periorbital regions, tonsils, or soft palate, poses the greatest risk of dural venous sinus STP. These structures drain directly into the cavernous sinus, through the ophthalmic veins, facial veins, and the pterygoid plexus, and thus infection can spread via this route. Dental infections, meningitis, and sinusitis have also been reported to be associated with dural sinus STP through the direct spread of infection.

Pylephlebitis is a rare form of STP that can be associated with diverticulitis (most commonly), pancreatitis, appendicitis, inflammatory bowel disease, hemorrhoidal disease as well as any intra-abdominal infection that involves structures draining into the portal vein. It is believed to start as an infection of the neighboring areas drained by the portal system, that can progress and hematogenously spread to the liver and bacteremia.

Pelvic and ovarian vein STP occurs most commonly in the setting of childbirth and within the first three weeks post-partum due to local spread of uterine infection, such as endometritis or chorioamnionitis. The hypercoagulable state that occurs in the setting of pregnancy contributes to thrombus formation, and damage to the iliofemoral vessels during childbirth further promotes this process.