The historical evaluation of a brow ptosis patient is key to determining the underlying etiology.

- The history of the present illness should be focused on the onset and progression of symptoms. A slowly progressive onset in an older patient may indicate an age-related cause. In contrast, patients with more rapid onset may be suffering from Bell palsy, trauma, neoplasm, or other more unusual causes. A waxing and waning course with accompanying fatigability could represent myotonic dystrophy, myasthenia gravis, or oculopharyngeal dystrophy.

- The medical history should specifically evaluate for past instances of facial paralysis of any etiology, even cases long in the past.

- History of chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy should be determined, as these exposures can speed cutaneous and soft tissue aging.

- The surgical history should reveal all procedures performed in the area of the brow and along the course of the facial nerve, including any neuro-otologic or neurosurgical procedures. Patients should be asked if they have received chemodenervation with botulinum toxin injections as well.

- The social history should reveal sun exposure, smoking, and drug use, as they can all expedite involutional changes.

The physical examination should follow a formulaic, stepwise approach that is generalizable to all periorbital aging.

- Neutral brow position should be evaluated by having the patient close their eyes, relax the facial muscles, and open the eyes as gently as possible without raising the brows.

- Brow versus lid pathology should be differentiated via manual elevation of the brow to the neutral position. A lid that is still ptotic after brow elevation indicates true blepharoptosis rather than pseudoptosis caused by a drooping brow.

- Blepharoptosis should be thoroughly evaluated. The margin-reflex distance (MRD) is recorded. This is the distance measured from the corneal light reflex to the upper lid margin (MRD-1) or lower lid margin (MRD-2). MRD-1 less than 2-3 mm is indicative of blepharoptosis. The distance must also be measured between the upper eyelid margin and the superior palpebral crease. More than 8 to 10 mm often indicates blepharoptosis due to levator aponeurosis dehiscence. Brow asymmetry must also be noted if present. An asymmetric brow with symmetric eyelids may mask ptosis on the side of the elevated brow due to frontalis contraction compensating for a ptotic eyelid. The ice pack test may also be employed at the bedside if myasthenia gravis is suspected; placing an ice pack on the patient's eyelids (with a barrier to prevent frostbite) for 2 to 5 minutes will often improve blepharoptosis in patients with myasthenia gravis.

- While not directly applicable to the evaluation of brow ptosis, the points mentioned here are essential to a thorough periorbital examination: festoons and fat pseudoherniation should be evaluated with digital pressure on the globe while visualizing the upper and lower lids. The former will not enlarge, but the latter will. Festoons will also contract with effortful eye closure. Lower lid laxity should be evaluated via the snap test. This is performed by distracting the lid from the globe, then releasing and observing lid recoil, which should take no longer than 2 seconds and should occur without the patient needing to blink. The lower eyelid vector should be evaluated by observing the relationship between the cornea and the cheek with the patient's head in the Frankfort horizontal position. The vector is negative if the cornea is anterior to the cheek skin at the infraorbital rim. This is associated with aging and an increased risk of ectropion if lower lid blepharoplasty is performed. Finally, tear production should be evaluated via the Schirmer test. Filter paper is inserted into the fornix of the lower eyelid; if there is less than 10 mm of dampness after 5 minutes, tear production is not adequate, and the surgeon must adjust the operative plan accordingly.

- The hairline position and shape of the forehead must be visually evaluated to inform the surgeon's choice of operative approach.

- A thorough cranial nerve exam should be carried out, especially if damage to the facial nerve is suspected.