Superficial thrombophlebitis is a clinical diagnosis. The patient usually presents with pain and erythema at the involved site. On palpation, the vein is hard and tender. Brownish discoloration or hyperpigmentation from hemosiderin deposition can present through the course of previously affected veins. Extensive limb swelling can occur in the presence of deep venous thrombosis.

**Indications for Duplex Ultrasound (US)**

In patients with pain along the course of the superficial vein but who have no physical exam findings suggestive of thrombophlebitis, indicate the use of duplex ultrasound.

In obese patients, superficial veins are located several centimeters below the normal-appearing skin surface; these patients may have superficial venous thrombosis (SVT) or deep venous thrombosis (DVT). Duplex ultrasound is also indicated in these patients to rule out DVT.

Superficial venous thrombosis involving great saphenous vein and a small saphenous vein is at high risk of progression to deep vein thrombosis. If the patient has thrombophlebitis involving these veins, perform a duplex ultrasound to evaluate the extension of thrombus.

Patients with significant extremity swelling should have a duplex ultrasound to rule out DVT.

Diagnosis of migratory thrombophlebitis is essential, as it correlates with cancer and other systemic disorders, and it can be the initial presentation of underlying occult malignancy.

A comprehensive survey includes:

- A complete history to evaluate symptoms and signs of cancer

- A thorough physical examination, to include a digital rectal examination, testing for fetal occult blood, and pelvic examination in women

- Laboratory testing including complete blood count (CBC) with peripheral smear, basic metabolic panel, liver function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, urinalysis, tumor markers, autoimmune workup, and studies for hypercoagulability

- Chest radiograph

- A chest, abdominal, and pelvic CT scan

- Age-appropriate cancer screening including mammography and a Papanicolaou smear in women, upper and lower GI tract evaluation