Rotator cuff injuries and tendon degeneration result from multifactorial processes and pathological changes, both of which affect the quality of tendons.

Arthroscopic procedures can be used to access the shoulder joint and repair the rotator cuff muscles. Several port sites are used to access the joint, and they are made relative to bony landmarks and pass between or through the muscles of the shoulder. Posterior access is attained by making a port site that allows access to the joint by passing between the infraspinatus muscle and the teres minor muscle or directly through the infraspinatus muscle. Anterior access is obtained by passing a portal through the pectoralis major and the deltoid muscle. Lateral access is obtained by placing a portal directly through the deltoid muscle.

Surgical repair of individuals with partial-thickness rotator cuff tears refractory to conservative management as well as full-thickness cuff tears is typically done arthroscopically. The torn tendon(s) are repaired by anchoring them back to the humerus, their original insertion site.

Tendinopathies of the long head of the biceps tendon commonly co-occurs with rotator cuff pathologies and often contribute to shoulder pain. As the tendon attaches to the superior lip of the glenoid labrum, it is encountered during arthroscopic shoulder operations and is often included as a component of the operation. Biceps tendon tenotomy, or tendon release, is a common technique that clinicians can use to relieve pain caused by biceps tendinopathies. Tenodesis of the biceps tendon, or release and re-anchoring, is another technique used. There is some debate about which technique is superior.

The functionality of the shoulder muscles is important when considering total shoulder replacement options. For example, reverse total shoulder arthroplasties are frequently used in individuals with poor rotator cuff function, but successful operation necessitates a functional deltoid muscle to allow for shoulder abduction.