There is no single mechanism to explain the etiology of delirium. It is a complicated and multifactorial process. Several hypotheses describe different aspects of the pathophysiology of delirium, and multiple processes are likely to occur simultaneously to create the syndrome of delirium.

**Increased Age**

Changes associated with age lead to diminished physiologic reserve and increased vulnerability to physical stress and illness. Some of the changes associated with age include decreased brain blood perfusion, increased neuron loss, and changes in the proportion of stress-regulating neurotransmitters.

**Neuroinflammation**

Peripheral inflammatory insults damage endothelial cell-cell adhesions at the blood-brain barrier. The increased endothelial permeability promotes inflammation in the central nervous system, causing further damage, ischemia, and neuronal death.

**Reactive Oxidation Species**

Reactive oxygen species and reactive nitrogen species are a mediator of cellular damage. The central nervous system is particularly vulnerable to reactive oxygen species due to its high lipid content and low antioxidant capacity.

**Circadian Rhythm Dysregulation**

Disruption in sleep duration and architecture and melatonin secretion leads to dysfunction of many systems. Melatonin affects many functions in the central nervous system, including regulation of sleep-wake cycles, glucose regulation, core body temperature, antioxidant defenses, and immune system response.

**Neurotransmitter Imbalance**

Delirium is associated with decreased acetylcholine and increased dopamine activity. The dopaminergic and cholinergic pathways overlap in the brain, and their balance is vital to brain function.

**Neuroendocrine**

Increased glucocorticoid release in response to physiologic stress increases the vulnerability of neurons to subsequent damage and impacts the regulation of gene transcription, cellular signaling, and glial cell behavior.