The first step in interpreting PFTs is to review the test quality. Once the quality has been assured, comparisons can be made with healthy subjects and abnormal physiological patterns.

**Types of Ventilatory Defects (Table 3)**

**Obstructive Abnormalities**

An obstructive defect is a disproportional decrease in maximal airflow from the lung (FEV1) relative to the maximal volume (FVC) that can be displaced from the lung. In practical terms, an FEV1/FVC ratio of less than 0.70 defines an obstructive ventilatory defect. However, other variables such as age, race, and gender affect this cutoff to estimate expected lung function in health.

The earliest change associated with an obstruction in small airways is a slowing in the terminal portion of the spirogram (mid-flows). Qualitatively, it is reflected by a concave shape on the flow-volume curve. Quantitatively, proportionally increased the reduction in the instantaneous flow measured after 75% of the FVC has been exhaled (FEF) or FEF. Nevertheless, mid-flow abnormalities are not specific to airflow obstruction, and it is no longer a diagnostic criterion of airflow obstruction.

The FEV1 is used to classify the severity of obstructive lung diseases traditionally based on % predicted values into five levels.

- FEV1 >70% of predicted is mild

- FEV1 60-69% of predicted i is moderate

- FEV1 50-59% of predicted is moderately severe

- FEV1 35-49% of predicted is severe

- FEV1<35% of predicted is very severe

However, this method did not factor in age differences; therefore, it was recently changed to something new called z-score (express, which is defined as how far an observed lung function value is from the predicted value after accounting for sex, age, height, and ancestral factors). The utility of the new proposed cut values of −2, −2.5, −3, and −4  severity-scale systems in clinical practice is not clear yet, as most PFT systems continue to use the old method of reporting FEV1.

For many years the reversibility testing has been administered using a bronchodilator (short-acting beta 2-agonist or anticholinergic agent). An increase in either FEV1 or FVC of >12% and >200 mL is considered a positive bronchodilator response. However, the most recent ERS/ATS interpretation standards recommend that a significant bronchodilator response is defined by an increase in FEV1 or FVC by at least 10 percent of the respective predicted values.

The patient should hold their bronchodilators before the reversibility testing. The duration for holding the inhalers differs based on the type of short or long-acting inhaler. Short-acting inhaled beta-agonists (e.g., albuterol) should be held for at least 4 to 6 hours before spirometry. Long-acting inhalers such as tiotropium should be held for 36 to 48 hours before spirometry.

The spirometry procedure includes the measurement of flow volume loops. The maximal flow-volume curves are a great asset for detecting mild airflow obstruction (Figure 2). In each flow-volume loop, there is an inspiratory and expiratory segment.

**Restrictive Abnormalities**

Restrictive ventilatory defects are characterized by a normal FEV1/FVC ratio (>0.70) and a reduction in TLC below the fifth percentile or 80% of the predicted value. They can be suspected if the FVC is reduced (less than 80%), FEV1/FVC is increased (0.70), and the flow-volume curve shows a convex shape. Spirometry can only suggest a restrictive defect; lung volumes are necessary to confirm the defect. As mentioned previously, TLC is the gold standard for diagnosing a restrictive defect. The severity of the restrictive defects is based on the FEV1 percentage predicted value, using the same severity scale as obstructive defects.

In patients with kyphoscoliosis, a restrictive ventilatory defect is common on pulmonary function tests. The decline in vital capacity (VC) correlates with the degree of kyphosis. The ventilatory defect manifest by reduced VC and total lung capacity (TLC) with preserved residual volume.

**Mixed Abnormalities**

These are characterized by obstructive and restrictive defects, diagnosed when both FEV/FVC and TLC are below the five percentile of their predicted values (or FEV1/FVC ratio less than 0.70 and TLC less than 80% predicted value). If FEV1/FVC ratio is low and FVC is less than 80% of predicted, but TLC is normal, the patient has an obstructive pattern, and FVC is low due to hyperinflation. If the TLC is low, the patient has a mixed obstructive and restrictive pattern. For mixed defects, spirometry and lung volumes are needed for diagnosis. The severity of the restrictive defects is also based on the FEV percentage predicted value, using the same severity scale as obstructive defects.