Treatment aims include encouraging hair regrowth and preventing or halting the progression of the disease, but hairs will not regrow from permanently damaged hair follicles. Although there are no clear guidelines for the management of central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia, and most treatment options are only empiric, but it is imperative to start it early as it would reduce the chance of disease progression.

The response of CCCA to various treatment modalities is slow. Anti-inflammatory therapy is often considered as the first-line treatment and is achieved with the use of topical steroids or intralesional triamcinolone acetonide. Lower concentration of topical steroids decreases the risk of hypopigmentation in people with dark skin. Antibiotics, both topical and systemic like doxycycline, are effective and need to be continued till improvement is seen (at least 2 to 6 months). The dose may be decreased and then gradually discontinued after a quiescent state for at least one year. Systemic anti-inflammatory treatments like mycophenolate mofetil, hydroxychloroquine, and cyclosporine have also been used in a few cases. Short courses of oral corticosteroids are ideal for cases with active inflammation. Vitamin D also has some effective role in management.

Minimal hair grooming is recommended, even though the evidence is not sufficient. Haircare practices need to be modified, reduced or apply for a minimum time. However, excessive traction of hairs should be avoided. Symptomatic relief is achieved with the once-weekly use of mild shampooing.