Potassium is predominantly intracellular where it is the most abundant cation and involved in cell regulation and several cellular processes.  The fraction of potassium in the extracellular fluid is small. Therefore, plasma or serum levels are not a reliable indicator of total body potassium stores. Potassium homeostasis is maintained through a combination of adjustments in acute cellular shifts between the extracellular and intracellular fluid compartments, renal excretion and, to a lesser extent, gastrointestinal losses.

Hypokalemia can occur as a result of decreased potassium intake, transcellular shifts (increased intracellular uptake) or increased potassium loss (skin, gastrointestinal and renal losses). Decreased potassium intake, in isolation, rarely results in hypokalemia due to the ability of the kidneys to effectively minimize potassium excretion. However, reduced intake can be a contributor to hypokalemia in the presence of other causes, such as malnutrition or diuretic therapy. Cellular uptake of potassium is promoted by alkalemia, insulin, beta-adrenergic stimulation, aldosterone and xanthines, such as caffeine. Most cases of hypokalemia result from gastrointestinal (GI) or renal losses. Renal potassium losses are associated with increased mineralocorticoid-receptor stimulation such as occurs with primary hyperreninism and primary aldosteronism. Increased delivery of sodium and/or non-absorbable ions (diuretic therapy, magnesium deficiency, genetic syndromes) to the distal nephron can also result in renal potassium wasting. GI losses are a common cause of hypokalemia with severe or chronic diarrhea being the most common extrarenal cause of hypokalemia.