**History.**Obtaining a thorough history helps to identify the etiology of thrombocytopenia. Patients with platelets greater than 50000/mL, rarely have symptoms. Patients with platelets under 20000/mL most likely have spontaneous bleeding.

- Ask the patient about the prior blood count testing and baseline platelet count. The recent drop in platelet count is concerning.

- Ask for the history of bleeding (petechiae, hemorrhagic bleeding, gingival bleeding, epistaxis)

- Ask for any potential exposure and symptoms of infections (viral, bacterial, rickettsial). Assess risk factors for HIV infection. Ask about travel to an area endemic for malaria

- Obtain a diet history to detect any nutritional deficiencies.

- Ask about other conditions like SLE, RA, bariatric surgery, and blood transfusion.

- Review the medication list. Ask whether the patient is taking over the counter medications, quinine-containing beverages, and herbal teas.

- In the hospitalized patient, look for exposure to heparin products.

- Check for a family history of thrombocytopenia or bleeding disorders.

- In pregnant patients ask for headache, visual symptoms, abdominal pain, flu-like symptoms; these patients may have preeclampsia/HELLP syndrome.

**Physical Examination**includes examining the skin and other sites of bleeding and examination of liver, spleen, and lymph nodes. Bleeding caused by thrombocytopenia characteristically demonstrates petechiae, nonpalpable purpura, and ecchymosis. Dry purpura refers to purpura in the skin; wet purpura refers to purpura in the mucosa. Examine for hepatomegaly and splenomegaly which occur in lymphoma, chronic liver disease, and other hematologic conditions. Enlarged lymph nodes are present in infections, autoimmune disorders, lymphoma, and other malignancies.