**Blood Pressure**

Traditionally, the brachial artery is the primary vessel used when measuring blood pressure with a sphygmomanometer.

**Ankle-Brachial Index**

The ankle-brachial index is a numerical value given to the quotient of the systolic pressure at the ankle measured using the posterior tibial artery and the systolic pressure of the right arm measured using the brachial artery. This measure is used to determine the risk of peripheral artery disease in a patient and has been shown to be predictive of mortality and adverse cardiovascular events.

The USPSTF concludes that the current body of evidence determining the risk to benefit ratio of screening for peripheral vascular disease and cardiovascular disease in asymptomatic healthy adults using the ankle-brachial index is insufficient.

**Trauma**

The most frequently injured artery of the upper extremity is the brachial artery; it accounts for 28% of all vascular injuries. The collateral circulation associated with the brachial artery and its branches provides some vascular support in times of injury. The degree of limb ischemia associated with brachial artery trauma depends on the location of the injury relative to the profunda brachii artery.

**Volkmann's Ischaemic Contracture**

The definition of this condition is the permanent flexion contracture of the hand at the wrist, and its causes include multiple ischemia-producing pathologies. Notably, it can be directly caused by injury to or obstruction of the brachial artery, such as improper use of a tourniquet or plaster cast, compartment syndrome, or direct trauma.

**Aneurysm of the Brachial Artery**

Aneurysms of the brachial artery are rare, with an overall prevalence of 0.5%.