Treatment focuses on Candida species. It should be targeted to the extent of the patient's involvement and degree of immunosuppression. Topical antifungal therapy is the first-line therapy for uncomplicated cases of oral candidiasis and should continue simultaneously when systemic treatment is indicated.

Topical antifungal therapy and oral hygiene measures are usually sufficient to resolve mild oral candidiasis. Topical antifungal drugs available include nystatin, miconazole, clotrimazole, and ketoconazole.

Nystatin (oral rinse) and clotrimazole (troches) are high in sucrose. Therefore, triazoles - fluconazole or itraconazole – prescribed once daily can be an alternative

Topical treatment is recommended for patients with a mild presentation or first presentation of the disease. One option is clotrimazole troches 10 mg orally five times daily (dissolved over 20 minutes). Another is nystatin oral suspension (100000 units/mL) 5 mL orally four times daily (swished for several minutes then swallowed).

For moderate to severe disease, fluconazole 200 mg orally once, then 100 mg orally once daily for 7 to 14 days, is recommended. Data regarding the safety of fluconazole during breastfeeding is reassuring.

For refractory disease, options are itraconazole oral solution 200 mg once daily without food for 28 days, posaconazole suspension 400 mg orally twice daily for three days, then 400 mg orally daily for a total of 28 days, and voriconazole 200 mg orally two times daily for 28 days.

Additionally, single-dose oral fluconazole 150 mg has shown to be effective in patients with advanced cancer, thus helping reduce pill burden.

Oral azoles are teratogenic and should not be used to treat mucosal candidiasis during the first trimester. Clotrimazole troches, nystatin swish and swallow topical therapies, and miconazole buccal tablets are also treatment options.

Dosing for these regimens should be adjusted according to weight for pediatric patients.

In addition to treatment, patients should receive counseling on decreasing immunosuppressing conditions such as uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, smoking, and malnutrition.

**Management of Dentures**

Denture hygiene is particularly important in treating denture stomatitis; however, it must be indicated in managing all forms of oral candidiasis to eradicate the Candida colonization from dentures, which acts as a reservoir.

- Patients must clean and disinfect their dentures daily and remove them for at least six hours every night.

- Dentures should be soaked in chlorhexidine and allowed to dry, as air also kills Candida adhered to dentures.

- Dentures must be taken out every time an antifungal rinse is used and, in established cases of chronic atrophic candidiasis, soaked in chlorhexidine before placing them back in the mouth.

- In denture stomatitis cases, patients should be recommended to apply topical miconazole to the dentures' internal surface and place them back in the mouth.

- Mixing an antifungal agent with a denture liner is recommended for denture wearers that cannot hold antifungal rinse in their mouth for long enough.

- Nystatin and chlorhexidine digluconate combination inactivates both; hence, it is contraindicated.

**Specific Considerations**

**Acute Pseudomembranous Candidiasis in Infants**

The management of acute pseudomembranous candidiasis in breastfed infants includes topical antifungals for the infant and the mother's nipples, even if the mother does not show signs of involvement. A systemic antifungal, typically fluconazole, is prescribed to the mother in addition to topical treatment if the nipples show symptoms of thrush.

**Acute Erythematous Candidiasis**

Most cases of acute erythematous candidiasis are secondary to antibiotic therapy; stopping the antibiotic treatment usually resolves the candidiasis without intervention.

**Angular Cheilitis**

The treatment of angular cheilitis includes antifungal and steroid creams.

Staphylococci aureus reservoir is in the nostrils;

**Chronic Hyperplastic Candidiasis**

The treatment of chronic hyperplastic candidiasis includes fluconazole 50 mg daily for seven to fourteen days, depending on the extent of the lesion, and smoking cessation.

In suspected cases of chronic hyperplastic candidiasis, prescribing systemic antifungal treatment for seven days before taking a biopsy has been shown to help identify true dysplasia rather than dysplasia caused by the presence of Candida.

**Linear Gingival Erythema**

Debridement, chlorhexidine mouthwash, and ensuring patients receive appropriate antiretroviral treatment are included in the management of linear gingival erythema in addition to antifungal therapy.