Clinicians need to distinguish corneal degeneration from corneal dystrophies. Corneal degeneration is a broad term for afflictions that cause alterations to the corneal structure due to a multitude of factors, such as trauma, infection, increasing age, and other environmental factors. Corneal dystrophy is a disorder distinguished from general corneal degeneration by a genetic etiology, either inherited or through de novo mutation.

The IC3D categorized CD into four different categories, based on our genetic understanding of each disease variant: category 1 identifies a CD with the mutated gene(s) identified, category 2 identifies the locus of the mutation, category 3 is a CD without a gene or locus identified, and category 4 is reserved for new or suspicious CD.

Many corneal dystrophies are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.

While many genes could be affected and lead to corneal dystrophy, some genes have been  confirmed:

**Transforming Growth Factor, Beta Induced (TGFBI)**

This gene is altered in epithelial-based dystrophies such as type I LCD, GCD types I and II, EBMCD, Reis-Bücklers CD, and Thiel-Behnke CD.

**Gelsolin**: Type II LCD (Finnish type) is caused by a mutated form of gelsolin. This protein normally functions in removing excess actin filaments from plasma, but that can cause systemic amyloidosis when mutated.

**KRT**: Meesmann CD is an autosomal dominant disease caused by a mutation in the Keratin gene, specifically KRT3 and KRT12, which normally produce intermediate filaments inside cells to provide structure to keratocytes.

**UBIAD1:**Schnyder CD is caused by a mutation in the UbiA prenyltransferase domain-containing protein 1 gene, which is involved in vitamin K and coenzyme Q metabolism.

**TACSTD-2:**An autosomal recessive mutation of tumor-associated calcium signal transducer-2 is found in gelatinous drop-like dystrophy.

**CHST6**: Carbohydrate sulfotransferase 6 is found in MCD and inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion.

**SLC4A11:**Found in FECD, late-onset, as well as congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy, this gene produces a bicarbonate transporter protein.

**ZEB1**: Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1, formerly known as TCF8, leads to Posterior Polymorphous CD, as well as FECD, and is responsible for embryonic development and type I collagen expression.

**Phosphoinositide kinase FYVE mutations (formerly PIP5K3):**This mutated gene, which produces proteins that help regulate endosomal function, is found in Fleck CD.

**COL8A2**: Early-onset FECD, if inherited, is an autosomal dominant disease caused by a mutation in COL8A2.