The primary treatment for pituitary hyperplasia secondary to primary hypothyroidism is to treat the hypothyroidism with thyroid hormone replacement.

It is imperative to follow up with these patients closely for multiple reasons. Sometimes, after initiation of thyroxine therapy, there exists a rare phenomenon whereby patients develop pseudotumor cerebri, and they might complain about headaches and varied visual changes.

Follow up imaging is necessary and should include an MRI of the pituitary. To confirm the diagnosis of pituitary hyperplasia as a result of primary hypothyroidism, these should be a reduction in the pituitary size when thyroxine therapy has been initiated. Studies have shown that approximately 85% of those with pituitary hyperplasia due to primary hypothyroidism demonstrate decreased pituitary gland size after starting thyroxine replacement.

As for the role of surgery in pituitary hyperplasia in primary hypothyroidism, this is generally reserved for those who have visual field defects and necessitates decompression of the optic chasm to avoid permanent vision loss. In addition, if there is noted progression in the size of the pituitary despite initiation of thyroxine treatment, surgery may be required to establish a diagnosis by pathology.

Thus, close follow up should include evaluation of symptoms of hypothyroidism and any new symptoms such as headaches or new visual changes. A visual examination should be performed, including visual fields and fundoscopy, as well as neurologic examination and follow up thyroid biochemistry to assess treatment progress.