Latissimus flap transfer is indicated in reconstructing large defects of the head, neck, and chest, whenever a defect requires broad soft-tissue coverage. Latissimus free tissue transfer is particularly useful for defects of the entire scalp.

A pedicled latissimus flap, including muscle alone or muscle and skin, can be used anywhere on the chest or neck it can reach in a tension-free fashion. The pedicled configuration is particularly useful in women with neck defects who prefer to avoid pectoralis flap reconstruction that would deform the breast. The reach of a pedicled latissimus flap varies from person to person, depending on the torso's length and width. The flap itself remains pedicled at the thoracodorsal artery's takeoff, between the lateral scapula and the axilla. The pedicle can be dissected for free tissue transfer as far as the takeoff of the subscapular artery from the axillary artery, and often a substantial pedicle length can be achieved, sometimes as long as 15 cm.

The donor site is often closed primarily, but the ability to close the donor site's skin does not limit the size of the flap that can be harvested; the back can be partially or wholly covered in split-thickness skin grafts to achieve closure. Alternatively, a large myofascial flap transferred for reconstruction can, itself, be covered by split-thickness skin grafts. In rare cases, a "mega flap" involving the latissimus dorsi and the parascapular soft tissue can be harvested if the defect is huge; this flap requires the harvest of the subscapular artery, which includes both the circumflex scapular and thoracodorsal branches.