Based on the symptoms/examination findings, a few differential diagnoses of cervical cancer to be kept in mind are:

- Cervicitis (particularly granulomatous)

- Vaginitis

- Endometritis

- Pelvic inflammatory disorder

- Endometrial carcinoma

- Vaginal cancer

- Primary melanoma/Paget disease

**Approach To Post-Coital Bleeding**

The most common symptom of cervical dysplasia/cancer is post-coital bleeding. Benign conditions mostly cause it, but malignant diseases should be ruled out. Post-coital bleeding apart from cervical cancer can be seen in several other states as follows:

- Infectious causes like cervicitis, vaginitis, endometritis, and pelvic inflammatory disease

- Non-infectious reasons like other gynecologic malignancies (vulvar, vaginal, uterine cancers) and hormonal contraception can lead to change in the bleeding pattern, atrophic vaginitis, and lichen planes, lichen sclerosis, vulvar dermatitis, lacerations, and granulation tissue, etc

For any patient with post-coital bleeding, we need to take the following approach to come to a diagnosis:

1. History: A detailed history, we determine the volume and frequency of bleeding. Details about menstrual cycles, pregnancy, contraception, sexual activity, and previous pap smear testing results should be obtained.

2. Physical Examination: This will reveal the most likely etiology/source of the bleed. It involves inspection of the external genitalia and urethra. Examination of the vagina and cervix with a speculum, the testing of uterus and adnexa bilaterally, and a general physical assessment should be done.

3. Lab Testing: Appropriate lab testing can be carried out based on examination and history, which usually includes

- Exclusion of pregnancy

- Pap testing

- Biopsy of the visible lesion or endometrial biopsy if there is a risk of endometrial cancer (especially older women having a high BMI)

- NAAT testing for chlamydia and gonorrhea

- Vaginal pH and wet mount for candida, trichomoniasis, and bacterial vaginosis

4. Colposcopy: This will be performed in patients with a history of abnormal pap smear test results, a friable cervix on examination, or when no other cause of post-coital bleeding is identified.

5. Imaging: If the cause is not identified with the above approach, a pelvic ultrasound can be done to visualize the uterus. Hysteroscopy can be done if submucosal fibroids or endometrial polyps are identified on imaging.