The pulmonary arteries function to transport deoxygenated blood from the right side of the heart to the lungs for oxygenation. These vessels serve as the conduit between the right side of the heart and the lungs. The right and left pulmonary arteries specifically provide blood flow to their respective lungs and further subdivide into the lobar, segmental, and sub-segmental arteries of the lungs before eventually becoming capillaries surrounded by alveoli. Described as a high capacitance, low-pressure system, the pulmonary circulation is ideal for optimal gas exchange.

As it leaves the right ventricle, the main pulmonary artery is typically short and wide. The main pulmonary artery is usually approximately 5 centimeters in length and 2-3 centimeters in diameter. The main pulmonary artery generally travels along the left of the ascending aorta as the great vessels leave the heart. It bifurcates at the level of the carina (T4 vertebral level) and just below the aortic arch at approximately a right angle to form the right and left pulmonary arteries.

The right pulmonary artery supplies the right lung while the left pulmonary artery supplies the left lung. The right pulmonary artery courses posterior to the ascending aorta and anterior to the descending aorta. It lies anterior to the right mainstem bronchus. The left pulmonary artery passes anterior to the descending aorta and lies superior to the left mainstem bronchus.

A common mnemonic used to remember the relationship between the pulmonary arteries and their respective mainstem bronchi is RALS meaning, the right pulmonary artery lies anterior to the right mainstem bronchus, and the left pulmonary artery lies superior to the left mainstem bronchus.