Pulmonary edema can be a very life-threatening condition, and specialized consultation is a requirement for diagnosis and management. Considering a very high short term mortality rate, an Interprofessional team approach is recommended in the management of these patients to improve outcomes.

Starting from the diagnosis, etiological factor, and management of the patient, a well-coordinated team needs to work for better patient care involving all the related departments. All the available treatment options need to be discussed to avoid any complications and improving the outcome. The use of non-invasive positive pressure ventilation has a significant benefit in acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema.

While the physician is involved primarily in the management of the patient, consultation is also necessary from a team of specialists involving cardiologists, pulmonologists, and cardiothoracic surgeons. The nurses are also a vital member of the interprofessional group, as they will monitor the patient's vital signs, and communicate back to the team with results. The nurse practitioner, like the primary care provider, follows these patients in an outpatient setting and should try and reduce the risk factors for ischemic heart disease. Patients should be urged to quit smoking, enroll in cardiac rehabilitation, maintain healthy body weight, become physically active, and remain compliant with follow up appointments and medications. A dietary consult should be obtained to educate the patient on a healthy diet and what foods to avoid.

Since most patients with heart failure are no longer able to work, social work assistance is crucial so that the patient can get the much needed medical support.

The role of pharmacists will be to ensure that the patient is on the right medication and dosage. The radiologist can also play a vital role in determining the cause of dyspnea. A mental health nurse should consult with the patient because depression and anxiety are common morbidities, leading to poor quality of life.

As shown above, cardiogenic pulmonary edema requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, other ancillary therapists (respiratory, social worker), and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level V]

If the patient is deemed to be a candidate for a ventricular assist device or heart transplant, the transplant nurse should be involved early in the care. With a shortage of organs, one also has to be realistic with patients.

At the moment, the role of morphine and nesiritide remain questionable and requires further evaluation.

Outcomes

Unfortunately, despite optimal treatment, the outcomes for cardiogenic pulmonary edema/heart failure are abysmal. There is no cure for this disorder, and the key is to prevent the condition in the first place.