Because of the narrow therapeutic window of theophylline and its many side effects, physicians should monitor the following in the patient:

- The heart rate of the patient

- CNS effects (headache, insomnia, irritability)

- The respiratory rate

- Patient's arterial or capillary blood gases

- The patient's electrolyte concentrations, fluid balance, and acid-base balance require monitoring during prolonged IV therapy.

Serum theophylline concentrations should be checked after the initiation of therapy, before increasing dose, and if any signs or symptoms of toxicity appear. Worsening of the current illness, an occurrence of a new illness, or any change in the patient's treatment protocol that may alter theophylline clearance should also prompt the physician to check serum concentrations of theophylline. Attention should also is necessary for the infusion site.

**Oral Theophylline**

For patients taking oral treatment, monitor serum concentrations at 6-month intervals for rapidly developing children and at annual intervals for all other patients (if their symptoms are well controlled).

**IV Theophylline**

Loading dose: The serum concentration of theophylline should be checked 30 minutes after the completion of an intravenous loading dose in patients with no theophylline use in the last 24 hours to determine if additional loading may be required (if the serum concentration is less than 10 mcg/mL) or to delay initiating the constant IV infusion (if the serum concentration is greater than 20 mcg/mL).

Infusion: Serum concentration of theophylline should be measured to one expected half-life (approximately 4 hours in young children [ages 1 to 9 years], or around 8 hours in otherwise healthy adults, who do not smoke) after administering a continuous infusion, then checked every 12 to 24 hours to establish if any further adjustments are required, and then at 24-hour intervals for the remainder of the infusion.

**Therapeutic Concentrations for Theophylline**

- For children: 5 to 15 mcg/mL

- For adults: 10 to 20 mcg/mL

- Toxic serum concentration: greater than 20 mcg/mL.