The eye acts as a compound optical system and comprises a corneal and a lens portion. The total refracting power of the normal eye is approximately 64 D, with the cornea accounting for two-thirds (43 D). The anterior and posterior corneal surfaces and the crystalline lens focus the incident light rays onto the retina. In an emmetropic (normally sighted) eye, light rays from infinity are focused on the retina with the dioptric power equal to the axial length of the eye. Images are therefore in focus. In ametropic eyes, the eye is either too long or short or has astigmatism, and thus the light rays are unable to be brought to a focus on the retina.

The normal cornea is a transparent avascular structure, which is convex in shape. The average diameter measures 11.5 mm, and thickness increases from 550 to 565 μm centrally to 610 to 640 μm peripherally.

The corneal stroma provides mechanical strength and consists of collagen fibers, interconnected keratocytes, and glycosaminoglycans in regular and densely packed lamellae. In the central cornea, these lamellae have a higher density anteriorly compared with the posterior. Incisional surgery such as RK will disrupt this layer and decrease the mechanical strength of the cornea permanently.

Descemet's membrane is a basement membrane that measures 5 to 10 μm and is divided into an anterior and a posterior layer. The posterior layer is produced by the endothelial cells and increases in thickness with advancing age.

Radial keratotomy correction aims to change the refractive power of the anterior corneal surface to correct ametropia by the creation of individual linear incisions deep into the stroma (80 to 90% depth). The number of incisions ranges from 4 to 24, with 8 being the most commonly used.