Management of atrioventricular reentry tachycardia includes the termination of the acute arrhythmia and other treatments to prevent the recurrence of the arrhythmia.

In the case of a tachyarrhythmia patient who is hemodynamically unstable or symptomatic such as with altered mentation or ischemic chest pain, immediate electrical cardioversion is necessary.

**Acute Termination of Orthodromic AVRT**

In a case where the patient is hemodynamically stable, vagal maneuvers should be attempted first. A Valsalva maneuver involves asking the patient to bear down against a closed glottis for 10 to 30 seconds. Carotid massage also can be performed, but the absence of carotid bruit should be confirmed first, Carotid massage requires applying steady pressure over the left and right carotid sinuses, one at a time. In one study that examined at the effects of vagal maneuvers in terminating SVT in 148 individuals, the success rate was 27.7%.

IV adenosine should be the next intervention to terminate the tachycardia. The dosage of adenosine is 6 mg (0.1 mg/k for children with a maximum dose of 6 mg). Adenosine can be repeated in a dosage of 12 mg if the initial dosage is ineffective. Adenosine, in a dosage of up to 12 mg is 91% effective in terminating paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia with minimal and brief side effects.

IV verapamil is also effective in terminating atrioventricular reentry tachycardia when used at a dosage of 5 mg every two to three minutes and a maximum dosage of 15 mg.

If the above treatment fails to terminate orthodromic AVRT, either IV procainamide or IV beta blockers are the next attempts. IV procainamide should be used at a dosage of 20 to 50 mg per minute until the arrhythmia stops, hypotension occurs, or the QRS widen by more than 50 percent with a maximum dosage of 17mg/kg. IV metoprolol can be dosed at a dosage of 5 mg pushed IV over 2 minutes and can be repeated every 10 minutes for a total dosage of 15 mg.

**Acute Termination of Antidromic AVRT**

In case the diagnosis is certain, the same management used for the acute termination of orthodromic AVRT can be used. In practice,  since antidromic AVRT is a wide QRS complex tachycardia, confirmation of the diagnosis can be difficult in the acute setting. Thus, AV node blockade agents should be avoided, and IV procainamide should be tried, in the same dosage as mentioned above, to acutely terminate the arrhythmia.

**Treatment to Prevent Recurrence of the Arrhythmia**

In symptomatic individuals, and in select asymptomatic individuals particularly younger patients, radiofrequency ablation of the accessory pathway is the treatment of choice to prevent the recurrent arrhythmia. In a study that looked at 166 subjects who underwent radiofrequency ablation of the accessory pathway, AVRT recurred in 9% of patients after a mean follow up of 8 months; all of the subjects that had a recurrent arrhythmia underwent a second successful ablation.

In symptomatic individuals who are not candidates for ablation or refuse, initiate therapy with antiarrhythmic medication. Class 1C antiarrhythmics like flecainide are the drugs of choice to prevent the recurrence of the arrhythmia.