It is important to evaluate sleep quantity and quality during the evaluation of the pediatric patient. Studies have shown that sleep screening differs across practices. Although there is no standard screening tool that is widely used specifically for pediatric OSA, guidelines suggest that practitioners should be asking about sleep quantity and quality as well as screening for snoring at every well-child visit. Additionally, if there is concern about sleep quality, questions should also be posed to inquire about frequent night awakenings, unusual sleep positioning, and significant disruption of bed coverings as signs of increased nighttime movements.

Children can present in ways that often differ from the classic adult OSA presentation, most notably resulting in behavioral changes. Parents often endorse a history of snoring, mouth breathing, witnessed apneas, frequent nighttime awakenings, and secondary nocturnal enuresis. Children with OSA have disrupted sleep, which can lead to behavioral issues, including hyperactivity, irritability, or even aggression. These issues are often what prompts parents to bring children to the doctor for evaluation.

On physical exam, patients may appear tired or fatigued or may exhibit a hyperactive state. An exam may reveal “allergic shiners,” swollen nasal mucosa, micrognathia, macroglossia, high arched palate, adenoidal facies, or hypertrophied tonsils. Additionally, hyponasal speech and nasal congestion can often be appreciated. A growing risk factor for pediatric OSA is childhood obesity. All children should be screened with height, weight, and BMI evaluation at every visit. For every kg/m^2 increase in BMI above the 50th percentile, there is a 12% increase in the risk for OSA.

Craniofacial abnormalities, certain syndromes, and events in infancy can also carry an increased risk of OSA. Those with neuromuscular disorders, Down Syndrome, and craniofacial disorders should be screened repeatedly for OSA. Additionally, children with a history of prematurity are at increased risk for OSA even without the presence of other risk factors.