The scrotum may present with congenital malformations that are due to abnormal development of the labioscrotal swellings, which occur during intrauterine development. These malformations may include accessory scrotum, bifid scrotum, ectopic scrotum, and penoscrotal transposition.

**Accessory Scrotum:**

It is the rarest of congenital abnormalities of the scrotum. Although exact etiology is not clear, it is thought to occur due to the abnormal migration of labioscrotal swellings during the 4th to 12th weeks of development. The most common location of an accessory scrotum is mid perineum. The accessory scrotum does not contain testes. This additional tissue will have the same histologic features present in a typically developed scrotum and does not interfere with the development of the customarily positioned scrotum.

**Bifid Scrotum:**

A bifid scrotum is an abnormal cleft that presents in the midline of the scrotum. This cleft is caused by an incomplete fusion of the labioscrotal folds. The incomplete fusion can be attributed to an under-secretion of androgens during the first trimester. This androgenic under-secretion can also cause hypospadias and maybe the reason why most patients that are born with a bifid scrotum also present with hypospadias.

**Ectopic Scrotum:**

An ectopic scrotum occurs when the normal scrotum that is usually located under the penis is found in a different location. The main factor of this abnormality is a defect in the formation of the gubernaculum. The most common sites in which you can find an ectopic scrotum include a suprainguinal, inguinal, infra-inguinal, or perineal region.

**Penoscrotal Transposition:**

This condition is a genital malpositioning in which the penis is lying in an abnormal location in relation to the scrotum. This rare malformation is due to a defect of the scrotum during its caudal migration in the 9th to 11th week of gestation. This inversion can be classified as either partial or complete. A partial transposition occurs when the penis lies in the middle of the scrotum. A complete penoscrotal transposition, on the other hand, is seen when the penis emerges beneath the scrotum.  The literature has shown that this anomaly can present in conjunction with central nervous system, cardiovascular and gastrointestinal tract congenital malformations