The causes of the cherry-red spot include:

- Central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO)- The characteristic presentation of this disease is sudden onset unilateral visual loss in an elderly male or female. The usual cause is an embolism, which blocks the central retinal artery. The embolus may be composed of cholesterol, fibrin-platelet, or calcium. The embolus usually originates from the carotid plaque and, less commonly, from the heart or the aorta. Inflammatory conditions, like giant cell arteritis (GCA), may also cause CRAO, though branch retinal arterial occlusion (BRAO) is not a common feature in GCA. Branch retinal arterioles do not have a continuous muscular coat or internal elastic lamina.
- Intraorbital hemorrhage or mass may compromise the choroidal and retinal circulation and lead to a cherry-red spot at the macula
- Retrobulbar injections (usually anesthetics) with or without retrobulbar hemorrhage may cause CRAO and a cherry red spot at the macula
- Leukemic infiltrates of the optic nerve head may cause CRAO and cherry red spots
- Optic nerve avulsion may cause a cherry-red spot at the macula
- Macular infarction is another cause of cherry red spots at the macula. Causes of macular infarction include trauma,

- Tay-Sachs disease (GM2 gangliosidosis type 1, infantile amaurotic familial idiocy, B variant GM2 gangliosidosis)- This is the most common type of gangliosidosis due to deficiency of the alpha subunit of hexosaminidase A on chromosome 15q23. The disease has an onset of symptoms in infancy. There is an abnormal accumulation of gangliosides in the brain and ganglion cell layer of the retina. The disease is fatal, and most affected children die within the first 2 to 5 years of age. This neurodegenerative disorder is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. The child usually has a developmental delay. Other features include a cherry-red spot at the macula in both eyes, increased startle response, poor head control, seizures, dementia, apathy, hypotonia, deafness, blindness, and late hypertonia.

- GM2 gangliosidosis type 2 or Sandhoff disease is due to mutation of the beta subunit of hexosaminidase at chromosome 5q13. Reports describe infantile, juvenile, and adult forms. It is inherited autosomal recessively. The cherry-red spot is present in a majority of cases. Clinical features are similar to Tay-Sachs disease.

- Commotio retinae - After blunt trauma, acutely retinal opacification may occur.

- Niemann-Pick disease - Type A and B result from the deficiency of acid sphingomyelinase enzyme, a product of the SMPD1 gene (sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase-1) on chromosome 11p15.4. There is an accumulation of sphingomyelin in the tissues. The cause of Niemann-Pick disease type C1 and type D is a mutation in the NPC1 gene on chromosome 18q11. Niemann-Pick disease C2 is due to a mutation in the NPC2 gene at chromosome 14q24.3. Both NPC1 and NPC2 genes are involved in the transport of lipids (LDL cholesterol or low-density lipoprotein cholesterol) in endosomes and lysosomes.

- Type A disease (classic infantile) has an early onset and severe neurodegeneration. Hepatosplenomegaly may be present in early infancy, and there may be a failure to thrive and a suboptimal weight gain. The developmental milestones may be normal until the first birthday, after which there may be psychomotor regression or progressive loss of mental abilities and motor performance. Interstitial lung disease may be noted, and death usually occurs in early childhood. Most of the affected children have a cherry-red spot at the macula.
- Type B, usually (visceral), has a normal function of the central nervous system (CNS). Disease onset is usually in the mid-childhood, and presentation is similar to but less severe than type A. Features include short stature, hepatosplenomegaly, recurrent pulmonary infections, and thrombocytopenia. Some patients may have mixed features of type A and B. Cherry-red spot at the macula is noted in around 1/3rd of cases. 
- Type C (subacute/juvenile) has a slowly progressive disease and moderate CNS damage. Features include ataxia, speech and swallowing difficulty, vertical supranuclear gaze palsy, dystonia, interstitial lung disease, intellectual decline, and seizures.
- Type D (Nova Scotia form noted in individuals from Nova Scotia of Canada who have an Acadian ancestor) is associated with late-onset disease but may lead to severe CNS involvement with time. Currently, it classifies as the same condition as type C.

- GM1 gangliosidosis type 1 (Generalized gangliosidosis or Landing disease) results from the deficiency of beta-galactosidase at chromosome 3p22.3. A cherry-red spot in the macula occurs in around 50% of cases.
- Type I, or infantile form, is characterized by a severe disease with onset within the first year of life. Facial features are coarse with gingival hypertrophy. Other findings include developmental regression, increased startle response, skeletal anomalies, hepatosplenomegaly, intellectual disability, seizures, a cherry-red spot at the macula, corneal clouding, and death within early childhood.
- Type II or the late infantile or juvenile form presents within 18 months or five years, respectively. The severity is less than type I, and the cherry-red spot at the macula, visceromegaly, or facial features like type I are usually not seen.
- Type III or adult or chronic form is the mildest form. Features include dystonia and vertebral anomaly. The age of onset and life expectancy may be variable.

- Sialidosis or mucolipidosis type 1 or alpha-neuraminidase deficiency or sialidase deficiency, or lipomucopolysaccharidosis presents with ataxia, movement disorders, nystagmus, and myoclonic seizures. There is a deficiency of neuraminidase 1 (NEU1) or sialidase (SIAL1) at chromosome 6p21.33. Intellect is usually normal, and somatic features are generally not seen. Two types have been described according to the age of onset and severity of the disease:

- Sialidosis type I, or cherry-red spot myoclonus syndrome, is characterized by onset in the 2nd or 3rd decade, gait disturbances, myoclonus, ataxia, tremor, a cherry-red spot at the macula, and seizures. The intellect and life expectancy are usually not affected, though the patient eventually needs wheelchair assistance with time. Almost all the patients have a cherry-red spot at the macula.
- Sialidosis type II causes early and more severe disease. The variants include:

- Congenital - There is either stillbirth or death soon after birth. Features include ascites, hydrops fetalis, coarse facial characteristics, dysostosis multiplex, and hepatosplenomegaly.
- Infantile - Features are similar but milder than the congenital form. There may be short stature, gingival hyperplasia, widely spaced teeth, myoclonus, a cherry-red spot at the macula, deafness, and intellectual decline. The patients may survive into adolescence.
- Juvenile form - This is the mildest variety, and life expectancy varies among the patients. Along with other features, angiokeratoma of the skin is present.

- Farber lipogranulomatosis - Ceramidase or acid ceramidase (chromosome 8p22) is deficient in this autosomal recessive (AR) disorder. The typical triad consists of painful swollen joints, subcutaneous nodules (lipogranulomas), and a weak cry or hoarse voice due to laryngeal nodules. Other features are developmental delay, visceromegaly, respiratory involvement, and neurological features, including quadriplegia, seizures, and myoclonus.

- Metachromatic leukodystrophy - There is a deficiency of arylsulfatase A, cerebroside sulfatase, or sulfatide sulfatase on chromosome 22q13 in this AR disease. An abnormal collection of sulfatides in cells producing myelin results in the progressive destruction of white matter (leukodystrophy). There is a progressive decline in intellectual and motor functions, peripheral neuropathy resulting in diminished sensations, hearing loss, incontinence, loss of speech and mobility, blindness, unresponsiveness, and eventual death. The name comes from the color of the deposited sulfatide granules on histopathological examination. A cherry-red spot at the macula is occasionally a finding.

- Galactosialidosis (Goldberg Cotlier syndrome or neuraminidase deficiency with beta-galactosidase deficiency or cathepsin A deficiency) - This is an AR disorder due to a mutation in the CTSA gene (chromosome 20q13.12) coding for cathepsin A. The disease characteristically presents with seizures, mental retardation, growth retardation, dysostosis multiplex, coarse facies, short stature, skin hemangiomas, mitral and atrial valvular disease, and deafness. Ocular features include a cherry-red spot at the macula, corneal clouding, and conjunctival telangiectasia.

- Hyperalimentation causing hyperlipidemia

- Retinitis involving the central retina, including progressive outer retinal necrosis, subacute sclerosing panencephalitis

- The toxicity of various drugs may also cause a cherry-red spot. These drugs include:

- Quinine
- Carbon monoxide
- Dapsone poisoning associated with hemolytic anemia and peripheral neuropathy
- Methanol
- Intravitreal gentamicin and amikacin

The association between Gaucher disease and the presence of a cherry-red spot in the macula is questionable, and the cherry-red spot at the macula is not considered a feature of Gaucher disease.