The mylohyoid muscle is composed of two different subunits that come together to form the entire mylohyoid muscle. The mylohyoid muscle originates from the mylohyoid line located within the interior surface of the mandible near the molars of the lower jaw and continues along the entirety of the inner mandibular rim. The mylohyoid muscles on each side of the inner surface of the mandible meet medially at a median tendon called the mylohyoid raphe. The middle and anterior fibers of the mylohyoid muscle form the mylohyoid raphe which extends from the symphysis menti to the body of the hyoid bone. The posterior fibers of the mylohyoid muscle pass medial and downward to insert on the body of the hyoid bone. The oral diaphragm is a muscular floor of the oral cavity that bridges between the two rami of the mandible and forms from the mylohyoid muscle. The mylohyoid muscle is superior and deep to the anterior belly of the digastric muscle and deep to the stylohyoid muscle. The mylohyoid muscle separates the submandibular region and the sublingual region. Finally, the deep mylohyoid muscle forms the floor of the submental triangle, which is defined by the anterior belly of the digastric muscle laterally, hyoid bone inferiorly, and the platysma muscle superficially.

The mylohyoid muscle maintains a critical participant in day to day activities, including mastication and swallowing of food and production of speech in conversations. A key mechanism of action of the mylohyoid muscle is it works directly and indirectly with the infrahyoid muscle to guide the position of the hyoid bone. When the mylohyoid muscle contracts during swallowing, it functions to elevate the base of the tongue and the hyoid bone anterosuperior with the mandible fixed. Per these actions, the mylohyoid muscle also depresses the mandible and elevates the oral cavity if the hyoid bone is in a fixed position from the action of its depressors. The mylohyoid muscle acts as a support structure to reinforce the base of the oral cavity by forming the oral diaphragm.