SARS-CoV-2 is a single-stranded enveloped RNA virus. The outer surface comprises the envelope protein, membrane protein, and a large number of glycosylated S-protein. The virus binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE-2) receptor of the host cell via S-protein. The S-protein comprises two subunits S1 and S2. With the help of the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the S1 subunit, the virus binds to the ACE-2 receptor found on cells of the respiratory system, gastrointestinal system, and endothelium.

Bamlanivimab is a neutralizing immunoglobulin G1 variant mAb to the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2. It comprises two identical light and heavy chain polypeptides composed of 214 and 455 amino acids respectively. This antibody blocks the attachment of S-protein to human ACE-2 receptors, which prevents subsequent viral entry and replication [Figure]. The drug binds an epitope on RBD in both open and closed confrontation, which led this mAb to be potentially used as a monotherapy in phase 2 of the Blocking Viral Attachment and Cell Entry with SARS-CoV-2 Neutralizing Antibodies (BLAZE-1) trial.

This study also revealed enhanced viral clearance via an intrinsic immune response along with the mAb infusion. But with emerging variants and resistance, FDA revoked the EUA for monotherapy in April 2021. The EUA for combination therapy of bamlanivimab and etesevimab was reinstated in August 2021 with the caveat to unauthorize the use of the combination therapy where the frequency of resistance to the variants exceeds 5%.