Potassium is the predominant cation of intracellular fluid. As a component of extracellular fluid, potassium has a normal range of approximately 3.5 to 5.0 mEq/L. Potassium levels below this range, or hypokalemia, broadly result from increased excretion, decreased intake, and increased movement into cells. Regardless of the cause, hypokalemia is a significant clinical derangement to address due to the increased risk of life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias. Potassium chloride (KCl) is the preferred agent for correcting most presentations of hypokalemia.

Specific instances that may warrant KCl use include:

Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA): DKA usually presents with hyperkalemia due to the associated hyperosmolality and underlying insulin deficiency. This finding is deceptive; in DKA, total body potassium actually decreases. When administering insulin to move excess glucose from the bloodstream into the intracellular compartment, potassium moves intracellularly as well. As hypokalemia can result from insulin treatment, the clinician can administer KCl to maintain an adequate serum potassium level.

Kidney disease: Renal potassium handling plays a significant role in determining the serum potassium level. Most potassium reabsorption occurs at the proximal convoluted tubule and loop of Henle. Potassium secretion begins at the distal convoluted tubule. The collecting duct may secrete or reabsorb potassium based on input from chemical messengers (e.g., aldosterone), tubular delivery of water and sodium, and serum potassium status. Pathology at any of these segments can influence how much potassium is retained or excreted. Examples of tubular pathologies that result in hypokalemia include genetic channelopathies (e.g., Bartter syndrome) and type I renal tubular acidosis.

Hyperaldosteronism: Aldosterone is a mineralocorticoid that signals renal collecting duct cells to both retain sodium and water and secrete potassium and hydrogen ions. Conditions that promote excessive aldosterone activity can lead to excessive potassium secretion, leading to hypokalemia. Hyperaldosteronism can result from conditions that either produce excessive aldosterone (e.g., aldosterone-producing adrenal adenoma) or aberrantly stimulate the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (e.g., renal artery stenosis). Excessive mineralocorticoid activity can also occur in aldosterone-independent manners, as well. For example, consumption of glycyrrhizin in licorice can lead to apparent mineralocorticoid excess due to inhibition of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2. Inhibition of this enzyme prevents cortisol from being metabolized, allowing it to exert mineralocorticoid effects.

Medications: Medication-induced hypokalemia occurs primarily via renal potassium loss or intracellular shift. Diuretics (excluding potassium-sparing diuretics), corticosteroids, and certain antimicrobials promote urinary potassium excretion. Examples of medications that promote the intracellular movement of potassium include β2-receptor agonists and xanthines.

Gastrointestinal (GI) disease: GI-related potassium losses primarily occur due to vomiting and diarrhea. In vomiting, there is renal wasting of potassium induced primarily by metabolic alkalosis. Metabolic alkalosis results due to the loss of hydrogen and chloride ions. To replace the lost gastric acid, reactions involving carbonic anhydrase occur within parietal cells to yield hydrogen and hydroxyl ions. The hydrogen ions are secreted into the gastric lumen while the hydroxyl ions react with carbon dioxide to form bicarbonate. Bicarbonate then enters the bloodstream, resulting in hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis. In diarrhea, potassium is excreted with sodium, bicarbonate, and water, resulting in a hyperchloremic (i.e., normal anion gap) metabolic acidosis. In the setting of diarrhea, potassium bicarbonate is preferable to KCl.

Other: During cardiac surgery, KCl serves to induce cardioplegia by interfering with phase 0 of the cardiac action potential. Cardioplegia allows surgeons to operate directly on the heart while maintaining tissue perfusion with extracorporeal life support.