LPS, the major glycolipid of the outer membrane in gram-negative bacteria, is stabilized by divalent cations that increase the overall negative charge to the membrane. The LPS divides into three parts: Lipid A anchors the molecule to the outer membrane, the core oligosaccharide that is integral to imparting and maintaining membrane integrity, and the O-antigen polysaccharide that is connected to the core oligosaccharide as is in direct contact with the external environment.

Overall, LPS structurally provides an effective permeability barrier against molecules that could be harmful to the bacterial cell. The LPS molecules only including lipid A and core oligosaccharides, are generally referred to as ‘rough’ and often called lipooligosaccharides, while the complete LPS capped with O antigen is called ‘smooth.’ The only gram-positive bacteria to contain an authentic lipopolysaccharide is Listeria monocytogenes.

Most of the commensal and pathogenic gram-negative bacteria have been shown to form biofilms. These biofilms provide stability to the bacterial cell and resilience to these bacterial populations against various drugs and antibiotics. LPS modification through palmitoylation is one of the strategies that lead to stable biofilm formation. The bacterias such as E.coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa display increased incorporation of palmitate acyl chain in the lipid A moiety. Palmitic acid imparts increased hydrophobicity to LPS, which is inherent to biofilms forming over both biotic and abiotic surfaces. Biofilms are refractory to drug therapy, and thus bacteria can develop a resistant phenotype in vivo. Biofilms also accumulate various nutrients, such as amino acids and antiadhesion molecules.in vivo. Many hospital-acquired or resistant infections, such as catheter infections predominantly caused by Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, etc., show higher resistance to treatment due to their ability to form biofilms. Besides precluding host defense, the biofilm matrix also provides antimicrobial resistance by subduing antibiotic penetration and altering the host microenvironment.