A high degree of interprofessional coordination and teamwork is necessary for achieving optimal outcomes when performing a discectomy. Beginning with the preoperative diagnostic workup, primary care practitioners must be well versed in the signs and symptoms of a painful herniated disc so that they may start the appropriate workup process and initiate the proper referrals, all while effectively managing the patient's pain. Imaging technicians and radiologists contribute critical information to the diagnostic process through advanced imaging studies, most commonly MRI. Initial management employs pharmacists' expertise in determining the safest and most effective anti-inflammatory medication for each patient. Physical therapists administer the gold-standard first-line treatment; their understanding of human mechanics and therapeutic modalities allows for successful treatment of many disc herniations without surgery.

If conservative treatment fails, a discectomy is an option. Primary care practitioners again play an essential role in providing recommendations for pre-operative medical optimization and clearance. On the day of surgery, peri-operative and operating room nursing staff ensure the patient remains comfortable and safe. They also facilitate providing that necessary medications, equipment, and supplies allow for completion of the procedure. An anesthesiology team with an attending physician and assistant maintain safe and effective analgesia during the surgical procedure. Operating room techs assist in the positioning of the patient and placement of necessary equipment. An electrophysiologist carries out neurologic monitoring for the duration of the procedure. An orthopedic or neurosurgical spine surgeon carries out the procedure with an assistant. Postoperative care is agreed upon and executed by the interprofessional team as described. Effective analgesia in the immediate postoperative period is critical. The physical therapy staff carries out activity recommendations from the surgical team. Social workers ensure that the patient's hospital stay and discharge, once medically clear, are as seamless as possible. The surgeon's office staff coordinates follow-up care so that all steps towards a maximal recovery are in place.

Recurrence rates of lumbar disc herniation after discectomy are broadly reported and range from 1 to 25%.

Assessing the need for and performing a discectomy requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, therapists, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]

Proper surgical indication is the mainstay of surgical management of LDH. The nuisances in the pertinent surgical technique must be mastered.****