Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are among the most common presenting causes of sepsis in hospitals. Some are simple UTIs that can be managed with outpatient antibiotics and lead to almost universally good outcomes. However, complicated urinary tract infections may lead to florid urosepsis, which can be fatal. Several risk factors can complicate urinary tract infections and lead to treatment failure, repeat infections, or significant morbidity and mortality. It is vitally important to determine if the patient's infection may have resulted from one of these risk factors and whether the episode is likely to resolve with first-line antibiotics. Complicated urinary tract infections are those that present with greater morbidity, carry a higher risk of treatment failure, and typically require longer antibiotic courses, frequently requiring additional workup. Complicated urinary tract infections include those that occur: in males, in pregnant females (including asymptomatic bacteriuria), as a result of obstruction, hydronephrosis, renal tract calculi, or colovesical fistula, in immunocompromised patients or the elderly, due to atypical organisms, after instrumentation, involve urinary catheters, in renal transplant patients, in patients with impaired renal function, after prostatectomies or radiotherapy. Additionally, urinary tract infections that recur despite adequate treatment are considered complicated. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of complicated urinary tract infections and highlights the role of interprofessional team members in collaborating to provide well-coordinated care and enhance outcomes for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the criteria for complicated urinary tract infections. 
- Outline populations in whom all urinary tract infections are complicated. 
- Summarize management considerations for patients with complicated urinary tract infections. 
- Explain the importance of improving coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance care for patients affected by complicated urinary tract infections.