Risk factors for lung cancer include radon exposure, family history of lung cancer, history of cigarette smoking, and amount of cigarette smoke exposure. A good history is the essential first step in assessing radon risk and exposure. Important exposure history includes:

- Occupational history, especially if a person has ever worked in areas of confined air or worked where there is exposure to radon directly or indirectly (miners, builders, excavators, etc.)

- Year home was built/age of home

- Family history (to evaluate for risk of lung cancer)

- Smoke exposure (in the home or at work)

- Types of gas appliances

- Radon measurements in the home

- Time spent in confined spaces (such as basements)

- Ventilation systems in the home

Knowledge of the past medical history is important to make the diagnosis. A history of past lung disease is especially important since radon targets the lungs. Increased levels of radon exposure do not manifest with any specific signs and symptoms, which makes evaluation even more challenging. Since increased exposure to radon may lead to lung cancer, physical examination should focus on the respiratory system and signs of lung cancer. The physical examination may not be specific to radon exposure. However, it can aid in making the diagnosis. Some of these symptoms include:

- Shortness of breath

- Wheezing

- Hemoptysis

- Cough

- Chest pain

- Weight loss

Other changes related to lung cancer include lymphadenopathy in the upper chest and lower neck, clubbing of the nails, and multiple bouts of pneumonia. The history and physical exam, along with clinical judgment, will determine the next step in the assessment. This may include further testing and referrals.