**Anti-Inflammatory and Immunosuppressive Effects**

The anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects of glucocorticoids are dose-dependent, with immunosuppressive effects seen mostly at higher doses. The pharmacological anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects of glucocorticoids are extensive and can occur via genomic or non-genomic mechanisms. Most effects of glucocorticoids are via the genomic mechanisms, which takes time, while immediate effects via the non-genomic mechanisms can occur with high doses of glucocorticoids (such as pulse therapy). Clinically, it is not possible to separate these effects.

**Genomic Mechanisms**

Being small, lipophilic substances, glucocorticoids readily pass the cell membrane by diffusion and enter the cytoplasm of the target cells, where most of their action is mediated by binding to the intra-cytoplasmic glucocorticoid receptors. Glucocorticoid receptors have two isoforms, α, and β. Glucocorticoids bind to the α-isoform only. Glucocorticoid resistance in some patients has been partly attributed to higher levels of the β-isoform in these patients.

**Non-Genomic Mechanisms**

The immediate effects of high dose-glucocorticoids are mediated via non-genomic mechanisms. At high doses, glucocorticoids bind the membrane-associated glucocorticoid receptors on target cells such as T-lymphocytes, resulting in impairment of receptor signaling and immune response of the T lymphocytes. High-dose glucocorticoids also interact with the cycling of calcium and sodium across the cell membrane resulting in a rapid decrease in inflammation.

By altering the cytokine production via the genomic and non-genomic mechanisms, glucocorticoids lead to suppression of the immune system and decreased inflammation. They target a wide variety of cells, including T-lymphocytes, macrophages, fibroblasts, neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils. Notably, glucocorticoids have almost no effect on B-cell function and immunoglobulin production. The downstream effects of glucocorticoids are summarized below:

- Inhibition of neutrophil adhesion to endothelial cells and demargination of neutrophils from the marginal pool of blood vessels causing neutrophilic leukocytosis

- A decrease in the number of lymphocytes, macrophages, monocytes, eosinophils, and basophils (decreased myelopoiesis and release from bone marrow, and increased apoptosis)

- Decreased proliferation of fibroblasts

- Decreased MHC-Class II and Fc receptor expression on macrophages and monocytes

- Decreased phagocytosis and antigen presentation by macrophages

- Decreased cytokine production by macrophages and lymphocytes

- Decreased proliferation of fibroblasts.

- Reduction in the formation of arachidonic acid derivatives by the promotion of synthesis of lipocortin-A that inhibits phospholipase A2

- Inhibition of metalloproteinases collagenase and stromelysin, which are otherwise responsible for cartilage degradation

**Effects on the Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA) Axis**

Glucocorticoids exert negative feedback effects on the HPA axis. They directly suppress adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) secretion. Additionally, by suppressing the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines that stimulate ACTH and CRP secretion, glucocorticoids further suppress ACTH and CRH secretion indirectly in inflammatory diseases. Chronic HPA axis suppression by glucocorticoids leads to functional adrenal atrophy (sparing the mineralocorticoid producing outer adrenal cortex that is functionally independent of ACTH). The risk of this functional adrenal atrophy and insufficiency is challenging to predict and varies from patient to patient but is largely dependant on the dose and duration of glucocorticoid therapy. The adrenal function generally recovers by slow tapering of glucocorticoids.

**Mineralcorticoid Effects**

Glucocorticoids bind to mineralocorticoid receptors (MRs) and produce their mineralocorticoid effect (i.e., increasing sodium and decreasing potassium), but only when used at the high dose and for an extended period.