Before any spinal procedure, a thorough physical exam and neurological exam should be performed.

Imaging is essential in assessing spinal anatomy to determine the location of needle placement and catheter placement.  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the patient's spine should be obtained and reviewed before the procedure.  This will allow the surgeon performing the implant to determine if there is any anatomical obstruction to needle or catheter placement and if the patient's spinal anatomy will allow for placement of a spinal catheter.  The optimal needle and catheter entry point is typically below the level of the conus medullaris between the L2 to S1 lumbar interspaces. For this reason, an MRI of the lumbar spine is necessary, and depending on where the surgeon desires the tip of the catheter placement, a thoracic and/or cervical MRI should be acquired as well.

Laboratory studies that require assessment include a complete blood count with platelets, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, platelet function studies, and bleeding time.  If the patient is taking any anticoagulants, there should be a clearance from the medical team to stop these medications before the surgery. Most patients are placed under general anesthesia and positioned in the lateral decubitus position for optimal access to the abdominal and spinal areas. If the patient elects to forgo general anesthesia, then the standard recommendations for conscious sedation by the American Society of Anesthesiologists should be followed.

Antibiotic prophylaxis is achieved with the administration of weight-based intravenous cefazolin 1 hour prior to incision.  Typically vancomycin is administered if the patient is cefazolin allergic.

A detailed discussion of the risks and benefits of the procedure should undergo a review with the patient before pump placement.