In addition to the physician's identification, diagnosis, and treatment of onychomycosis, as well as monitoring for adverse drug effects, the interprofessional team should be involved in multiple ways. As terbinafine undergoes hepatic metabolism, conversations with the pharmacist about concomitant alcohol consumption would be prudent, although the relationship between alcohol and other hepatotoxic substances and the idiosyncratic nature of terbinafine-induced liver disease is not entirely clear. The pharmacist should also verify dosing and perform therapeutic medication management, especially in light of terbinafine's interaction profile, and report any concerns to the prescribing physician.

More importantly, the patient should be worked up to ensure that the diagnosis is correct when the patient presents with refractory symptoms. Both the nurse practitioner, primary care provider, and pharmacist should refrain from extending the duration of treatment until there is diagnostic confirmation. Finally, these clinicians should assess the liver function if the patient is on prolonged therapy, and the results require communication with the entire team. Both the pharmacist and nurse should regularly question the patient about the development of drug side effects and report back to the clinical team leader if untoward problems develop. Only with this type of interprofessional collaboration will terbinafine therapy be optimal, with minimal adverse drug reactions and drug interactions. [Level 5]

The level of evidence demonstrating terbinafine efficacy compared to placebo and alternative systemic anti-fungal agents is Level-I with confirmation from multiple randomized controlled trials.

Level of evidence for terbinafine and liver injury: Likelihood score: B (highly likely cause of clinically apparent liver injury).