Vernal keratoconjunctivitis is a recurrent, bilateral disorder. VKC is more commonly present in males and is most commonly seen after five years. Most cases show remission over the years and are usually resolved by puberty. Few may develop atopic keratoconjunctivitis over the years. VKC is more commonly seen in warm and dry climates. There is also a seasonal variation in these patients, with peak incidence occurring in the spring and summer. These symptoms might become perennial over the years. Thus more chronic the disease, the higher are the chances of symptoms becoming persistent.

There is often a history of atopy present in these patients. Family history of atopy might be positive in close to 49% of these cases. Thus, a genetic link has also been suggested. Apart from personal allergy history, other predisposing factors include male gender, close contact with animals, and increased exposure to dust and sunlight.

Both IgE-mediated and cell-mediated immune mechanisms are thought to be responsible for these exacerbations. Activated eosinophils have also been implicated in the pathophysiology of VKC. Gabrielides also showed the consistent presence of eosinophils in the conjunctival scrapings of VKC patients. Additionally, the role of type 4 hypersensitivity mediated by CD4 T helper cells has also been highlighted through a few studies. Immunomodulators like interleukins 4, 5, 13, and fibroblast growth factors have also been implicated. There is also reported over-expression of cytokines and chemokines in the conjunctiva of these patients.