Postoperative urinary retention is not an uncommon problem, and it should have management from an interprofessional healthcare team. Its diagnosis and treatment rely on an interprofessional approach through all perioperative stages. Surgeons should identify patients preoperatively who are at the highest risk of developing POUR, educate them on their increased potential of developing POUR, and consider prescribing a prophylactic alpha-blocker (tamsulosin). Intraoperatively, the anesthesia team should keep in mind that POUR correlates with the volume of intravenous fluids given, and the surgeon should keep in mind that the length of operation has a link to the development of POUR.

The choice of anesthetic should also be selected on a surgery-by-surgery basis as each anesthetic modality comes with differing risks of retention. Postoperatively, nurses in the PACU and on the floor should be aware of what their patient is voiding and should encourage early ambulation if possible. If a patient is unable to urinate after surgery, they should attempt to place a suprapubic hot pack. Surgeons and hospitalists managing postoperative patients should keep in mind that opioids can increase the risk of POUR. If POUR does develop, hopefully, the patient's nurse will identify this, and the surgeon/hospitalist will order either indwelling or intermittent catheterization and initiate selective alpha blockade (tamsulosin). If pharmaceutical care is an option, the pharmacist should weigh in, verifying the dosing, performing medication reconciliation, and advising the team on potential adverse effects.

A trial without a catheter can then follow in 1 to 3 days by the floor nurse at the order of the surgeon/hospitalist. It is essential after removal of a foley to closely monitor the patient's ability to void to avoid a second episode of extreme bladder retention and confirm a low (less than 200 mL) postvoid residual bladder scan before considering the trial without catheter a success. If a patient does fail a trial without a catheter, the patient should receive an outpatient urology consultation. These interprofessional measures can ensure the best possible patient outcomes with POUR. [Level 5]