Methods for detection of Bence Jone proteins include conventional high-resolution electrophoresis or capillary zone electrophoresis followed by confirmation through immunofixation electrophoresis (preferable) or immunoelectrophoresis.

The various electrophoretic methods are conducted on agarose and cellulose acetate medium. Differences between these methods arise regarding the volume of the sample loaded and the sensitivity of the protein stain utilized. Depending on these characteristics, the urine must be concentrated before analysis to ensure appropriate sensitivity. Coomassie Blue and Colloidal Gold are the stains used to detect Bence Jones proteinuria. Colloidal Gold is the most sensitive stain but has drawbacks such as demanding technique and lack of stoichiometry between uptake by BJP and by other proteins.

After gel electrophoresis, follow-up immunofixation electrophoresis serves to identify the type of BJP (kappa or lambda) and is the most sensitive measure of BJP. Immunofixation electrophoresis follows with antisera to IgG, IgA, IgM, total kappa, and total lambda. In monoclonal protein visualization without a corresponding heavy chain, additional immunofixation gel with antisera to delta and epsilon heavy chains can be performed, but it is not cost-effective. The issue of antigen excess with immunofixation electrophoresis can be minimized through decreased initial antigen loading. Immunoblotting is an alternative to immunofixation electrophoresis but is more cumbersome and uncommon in clinical laboratories.

An advancement in the field is the ability to accurately measure free light chains by immunoassay and express them as a ratio. This test, the free light chain assay, is now used routinely to diagnose and monitor patients with plasma cell dyscrasias.

The free light chain assay is a significant addition to the clinical management of plasma cell dyscrasias due to its increased sensitivity for determining serum free light chains compared to previous methods. It also is a better marker of early remission and early relapse of multiple myeloma and a prognostic marker for identifying the risk of progression of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance and smoldering myeloma. Its short physiologic half-life allows the free light chain assay to be a valuable tool for real-time monitoring for response to treatment and disease progression.

Overall, in light of the discussion of these various procedures, utilization of serum protein electrophoresis and free light chain assay will diagnose 100% of cases of multiple myeloma. This combination of testing poses a cost-effective and accurate modality for many laboratories worldwide.