Myopic traction maculopathy can only be managed surgically. However, there is no consensus on the plan of management. Owing to the rarity of the disease, there are very few studies in the literature quoting specific principles of treatment. Surgeons in different parts of the world have been developing protocols of management based on their clinical experience.

Pars plana vitrectomy along with internal limiting membrane (ILM) peeling has shown good results in eyes with myopic traction maculopathy. It has been hypothesized that peeling the ILM not only relieves traction on the macula but decreases recurrence by removing the scaffold for the proliferation of cells. However, due to the need for superior surgical skills and complications of an iatrogenic macular hole, it may not be a preferred entity for some surgeons. Scleral buckling is another modality that helps relieve traction on the macula by providing external compressive force. It has the advantage of being extraocular and hence decreases the risk of cataract formation and iatrogenic holes. Additionally, it might help in early resolution when compared to ILM peeling.

Before deciding on the treatment plan, the surgeon needs to identify the tractional forces operating on the retina of the patient. Both forces, tangential or perpendicular to the plane of the retina, need to be taken into account. Once the nature of force has been ascertained, then a surgical modality needs to be chosen that applies the force parallel to it, but in the opposite direction.

For eyes having a macular hole, due to tangential traction applied by the internal limiting membrane, the surgery of choice is pars plana vitrectomy with internal limiting membrane peeling.

Sometimes myopic eyes may have a combination of perpendicular and tangential tractional forces, as in the case of macular detachment with a macular hole. The surgery of choice in such cases is a pars plana vitrectomy with internal limiting membrane peeling and macular buckling.

If the force isn't correctly identified and countered, like providing counter perpendicular traction in an eye with tangential traction, or vice versa, the problem may not only persist, but it may also get aggravated, and the surgeon may end up doing more harm than providing benefit to the patient. Therefore, MTM retinal pattern (schisis and detachment) should be treated with a buckle while MTM foveal pattern (macular hole) should be treated with a vitrectomy and ILM peeling, and the MTM retinal with foveal pattern (schisis and detachment combined with macular hole) should be given a combined treatment of vitrectomy with macular buckle.