The way to diagnose dissociative identity disorder is via detailed history taken by both psychiatric practitioners and experienced psychologists. Often persons with DID are misdiagnosed with other personality disorders, most commonly borderline personality disorder, as elements of dissociation are prominently seen and even amnesia. Often longitudinal assessments over long periods and careful history taking are required to complete diagnostic evaluations. History is often gathered from multiple sources as well. Often neurological examinations are required as well to rule out autoimmune encephalitis, often requiring electroencephalograms, lumbar punctures, and brain imaging.

Dissociative Disorders are classically characterized as a disruption of normal consciousness/memory/identity and behavior. The disorders are classically broken down into "positive " and "negative " symptoms -positive symptoms are often associated with "new personalities, derealization," and negative symptoms are symptoms such as autism and paralysis.

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-5)criteria for DID include at least two or more distinct personalities. Each personality varies in behavior, sense of consciousness, memory, and perception of the outside world. Persons with DID experience amnesia, which essentially are distinct gaps in memory and recollections of daily and traumatic events. They cannot be directly related to substance use or part of cultural norms or practices. Importantly, these symptoms must cause a notable lack of functioning in day-to-day life.