The International Continence Society (ICS) guidelines advise for a standard urodynamics protocol where all patients undergo thorough clinical assessment as part of a urodynamic investigation.

Patients investigated for LUTS are expected to complete a relevant, validated symptom score which includes a bother to life indicator. Furthermore, patients should complete a 3-day bladder diary (frequency volume chart) to assist in arriving at a urodynamic diagnosis.

A multi-channel urodynamic test comprises of five components:

- Uroflowmetry

- Cystometry

- Pressure flow study

- Urethral pressure profile

- Electromyography

Uroflowmetry is the non-invasive assessment of the free flow of urine voided per unit time, measured in milliliters per second (ml/s)**.**

The 2 phases of standard invasive urodynamic testing include cystometry during the filling phase and a pressure-flow study during the voiding phase.

Cystometry is the dynamic measurement of detrusor pressure during the continuous filling of the bladder. It begins with the infusion of fluid into the bladder with a catheter. Catheters are most commonly inserted transurethrally. However, other routes, such as suprapubic, are also options where necessary. Cystometry provides information regarding bladder sensations that occur as the bladder fills as well as the reaction of the detrusor to this filling. Cystometry determines the compliance and the capacity of the bladder. The competence of the sphincter also needs an assessment during any abnormal detrusor contraction that occurs as well as on increasing the intraabdominal pressure by coughing, performing Valsalva maneuver and other activity that reportedly causes incontinence in the patient. Cystometry ends with a micturition command, or "permission to void". Some patients may experience severe incontinence, which also signifies the end cystometry, before this command.

A pressure-flow study is the measurement of the pressure generated by the detrusor muscle and the resulting flow. It begins following the micturition command given at the end of cystometry—poor flow results from either impaired detrusor contractility or outflow obstruction. Without synchronous measurement of detrusor pressure, uroflowmetry on its own is unable to differentiate between these two entities.**.**

Urethral Pressure Profile provides the measurement of the urethral length and its competence. It is typically performed in women to help determine the cause of stress urinary incontinence.

Electromyography records the electrical potentials generated by the pelvic floor muscle activity utilizing surface electrodes.

A standard urodynamic report that follows should include all of the pre-test mentioned above clinical assessments, along with a urodynamic diagnosis and a management recommendation. Additional details regarding the temperature and type of fluid used, the rate of filling, the size of the catheter, and patient position should also be in the report.