Pancreas transplantation offers a cure for type one diabetes mellitus and not only helps patients in maintaining glycemic control but also prevents secondary diabetic complications. It is a procedure associated with high morbidity and mortality, although in the past decade, the graft survival rates have increased due to advancements in surgical techniques and better regimens of immunosuppression. Although surgeons play a pivotal role in pancreas transplantation, multiple disciplinary approaches are needed in the care of such patients, which involves endocrinologists, nephrologists, specialized nurses, and other supporting staff.

Several studies have been done on long-term results after pancreas transplantation. Sutherland et al. in 2001 described it first with the help of a large series. Twenty-two years of follow-up of 1000 pancreas transplantations in Wisconsin was reported by Sollinger et al., followed by more recent reports describing risk factors and long-term experiences. The largest European series came from Innsbruck, Austria, which reported results of 509 consecutive pancreas transplantations with long-term follow-up. After comparing results from different transplant centers, it is found that no standard definition of pancreas graft survival is being used, making comparison difficult. The Pancreas Transplant Committee of the Organ Procurement Transplantation Network in 2008 emphasized having a unified definition of pancreas graft function and failure, for global use. Mandal showed in 2004 that low volume pancreas transplantation centers (<10 transplantation/year) as compared to medium (10 to 20 transplantations/year) or high (>21 transplantations/year) volume centers have a poorer outcome in graft survival.

Pancreas transplantation rates have dropped despite increase survival over the past decade.

Being better informed and trained about the benefits and risks of pancreas transplantation makes doctors advise, inform, and refer patients for transplant, and also, they can manage the challenges that patients have during the course of treatment in a better way.