A significant key finding in uremic pericarditis is the presence of chest pain in a patient with a history of chronic kidney disease or end-stage renal disease on dialysis. Most patients will present with pleuritic chest pain that improves when leaning forward. Acute non-uremic pericarditis usually presents with chest pain that is sudden in onset in the anterior chest, aggravates on inspiration and in the supine position, and could be accompanied by a pericardial friction rub. However, uremic pericarditis is gradual in onset, and aside from pericardial rub, there may not be any more findings. Other findings can include but are not limited to fever and shortness of breath. Many of these patients will present similarly to a myocardial infarction patient, so it is essential to rule out an ischemic event in the situation.

Cardiac tamponade is seen in 20% of patients with dialysis-associated pericarditis, and dialysis-associated hypotension happens in 60% of cases in pre-tamponade or tamponade, in comparison to 6% in those without.

Physical examination reveals a pericardial friction rub which is usually scratchy and squeaky and is best appreciated on the left sternal border with the patient leaning forward and holding their breath. It is almost always heard in uremic pericarditis cases, but sometimes it is transient in nature, heard at one point but not at others. The rub has three components in relation to the following:

- Atrial systole

- Ventricular systole

- Rapid ventricular filling during diastole