Avascular necrosis of the lunate, also known as Kienböck disease is a condition that occurs due to the disruption of the vasculature to the lunate. While there is no definitive underlying cause for this condition, it is well known what can result if the condition progresses. The collapse of the lunate will lead to proximal migration of the capitate. This altered alignment will result in abnormal scaphoid motion and ultimately arthrosis throughout the radiocarpal joint.

Buckle fractures are typically found in pediatric patients after a fall onto an outstretched hand. Radiographically it is represented by compression and bulging of the cortex at the distal radius.

Arthritis is an inflammatory disease of a joint that can be caused by a degenerative change (osteoarthritis) or autoimmune degeneration (rheumatoid arthritis). Degenerative changes in osteoarthritis are the result of repetitive impaction of the wrist leading to the destruction of articular cartilage. This process can be hastened by conditions that alter the dispersion of forces traveling across the wrist. Rheumatoid arthritis is a condition where the body produces an abundance of immune cells and cytokines that target the body's articular cartilage. Both forms of arthritis present with pain in the joints and impaired range of motion. However, osteoarthritis tends to worsen with the increased use of the joint, while rheumatoid arthritis loosens up with increased use.  Additionally, joints affected with rheumatoid arthritis will be warm and swollen. Just as the presentations of these conditions are different, so are their treatments. Osteoarthritis is managed primarily with NSAIDs, rest and if severe enough intra-articular corticosteroid injections. Rheumatoid arthritis has an underlying autoimmune cause. Therefore, treatment aims to reduce the immune response. Pharmacologic agents such as methotrexate are first-line treatment options for this condition. If methotrexate is unable to keep the diseases from progressing biologic agents are an alternative.