**Radiology**

Imaging is typically not pursued prior to excisional biopsy for small, benign-appearing nodules in the skin or oral cavity. However, tumors in the gastrointestinal tract, breast, extremity soft tissue, or other uncommon locations are often imaged because they cannot be distinguished clinically from other benign or malignant lesions.

Intramuscular

Although no radiologic findings are unique to granular cell tumors, MRI is the best imaging modality to differentiate benign from malignant lesions. In the muscle, benign granular cell tumors appear iso-intense or brighter than muscle on T1-weighted imaging. On T2-weighted sequences, the center of the lesion is also iso-intense to muscle or suppressed fat, but there is peripheral enhancement. They are round- or oval-shaped, less than 4 cm in diameter, and superficial. By comparison, the malignant counterparts often show high signal intensity on T2-weighted sequences, have the same iso-intensity to muscle on T1-weighted images, are larger than 4 cm in diameter, and may show the invasion of adjacent structures.

Breast

In the breast, imaging findings can be difficult to distinguish from carcinoma. They can be seen on mammography as small, round, well-circumscribed lesions that are less than 3 cm in diameter, but they have also been reported to be indistinct, stellate, heterogeneous with hypodense rims, poorly circumscribed, and spiculated without calcifications. Ultrasound findings are also non-specific in the breast. They are the most commonly heterogeneous, solid, and poorly defined masses featuring posterior shadowing and high depth to width ratio. Some series have described them as predominantly hyperechoic, while others have described them as hypoechoic. Rarely, however, they can be well-circumscribed with weak internal echoes and acoustic enhancement.

Esophagus

In the esophagus, granular cell tumors are more often hypoechoic, homogeneous, and smooth-edged by ultrasound, although hyperechoic, heterogeneous, and irregular lesions have been described.

**Pathology**

Given the similar clinical and radiologic findings between granular cell tumors and other benign and malignant entities, diagnosis via biopsy for microscopic analysis is required for all lesions.