Before the initiation of the procedure, the medical team reviews the critical medical information of the patient. The patient is informed in detail of the procedure, and with the agreement, the study begins. Food and liquid restrictions are not required, but the patient should be well hydrated with regular bowel movements. The 68Ga-DOTA-conjugates are eliminated by the kidneys, while the kidneys and bowel eliminate 67Ga-citrate.

The radiopharmaceutical agent is delivered intravenously to the patient with no interacting substances. Activity administered should be above 100MBq, but can range from 100-200MBq. For example, 67Ga should be 185MBq, 5mCi in adults, and 3.7-7.4MBq/kg, 0.1 to 0.2mCi/kg in children.

The patient should void their bladder before scanning to remove unbound radioactive compounds and reduce image noise, allowing better imaging of the area and decrease radiation exposure to the urinary tract. Metals on the body are also removed during the procedure due to their potential for imaging interference. The patient's whole body is imaged with typical imaging times of approximately 30 minutes to 60 minutes per view, but it depends on the size being imaged. The patient should remain still and quiet during imaging to reduce motion artifacts. The patient is discharged after the scan is completed when the radiation emission levels are safe and reviewed by the physician.

The patient should avoid contact with pregnant women and infants for as long as the physician advises. A waiting period of 7 half-lives allows for less than 1% of original radiation to persist. This guide can also be used as a general safety rule during breastfeeding. The image is reported in detail by the nuclear radiologist using all the patient's acquired relevant history.