Secukinumab is a novel biologic agent targeting interleukin-17 (IL-17) involved in a pathological process. It is a fully human monoclonal antibody. Recent literature refers to secukinumab as ‘a new kid on the block.’ Many clinical trials have demonstrated its efficacy in managing plaque psoriasis in 2015, psoriatic arthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis in 2016. Additionally, the drug has a commendable safety profile.

**FDA-approved Indications**

- Moderate to severe psoriasis

- Hypertrophic palmoplantar psoriasis

- Generalized pustular psoriasis

- Psoriatic arthritis

- Enthesitis-Related Arthritis

- Active non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis with objective clinical signs of inflammation

**Off-label Uses**

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Systemic lupus erythematosus

- Familial Mediterranean fever

- Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS)

Psoriasis: Clinical studies have labeled secukinumab appropriate as first-line therapy for moderate to severe cases of active, stable disease, hypertrophic palmoplantar psoriasis, and generalized pustular psoriasis in adult patients. In cases of prior failure to systemic therapies, contraindications, or intolerability to systemic agents, the drug is an acceptable choice for initiating biologic therapy.

Psoriatic arthritis: For active disease not responding to systemic agents in adult patients, secukinumab is prescribable as first-line therapy.

Ankylosing spondylitis: For active disease not responding to systemic agents or moderate-to-severe disease in adult patients are indications for secukinumab.

Following the evidence-based American College of Rheumatology (ACR) and the National Psoriasis Foundation (NPF) guidelines for psoriatic arthritis, secukinumab is highly recommended.