A careful history is crucial to any psychiatric interview, especially one for diagnostic purposes.  Eliciting symptomatology, severity, and the temporal course helps determine the appropriate DSM diagnosis.  Persistent depressive disorder as defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), American Psychiatric Association, Arlington 2013.) is as follows:

The patient must have a depressed mood for at least 2 years.  For children or adolescents, the mood can be irritable instead of depressed, and the time requirement is 1 year.  For both groups, symptoms cannot be absent for greater than 2 months. In addition to depressed/irritable mood, at least 2 of the following symptoms have to be present.

- Poor appetite or overeating

- Insomnia or hypersomnia

- Low energy/fatigue

- Low self-esteem

- Poor concentration/decision making

- Hopelessness

Note, the DSM-5 has consolidated chronic major depression and dysthymia from DSM-IV into persistent depressive disorder; this means that a patient may meet the criteria for persistent depressive disorder and major depressive disorder at the same time. The DSM-5 has identified specifiers to determine if the persistent depressive disorder is with a pure dysthymic syndrome or with a persistent major depressive episode and whether an episode is current or not.  As always, the above symptoms must cause significant distress and impairment in critical areas of functioning to meet the threshold for diagnosis.