Like the etiology, the pathophysiology of esophageal motility disorder is very hazy, except for achalasia. This applies to all primary esophageal disorders. For secondary esophageal motility disorders, esophageal pathology is better explained in the context of pre-existing underlying illness.

**Achalasia**

It is the only primary esophageal pathology with slightly well-known pathophysiology among all the other primary esophageal dysmotility disorders. It is characterized by impaired LES relaxation with swallowing and peristalsis in the smooth muscle esophagus. If there are premature, spastic contractions in the esophageal body, the disease is referred to as spastic (type III) achalasia. These physiologic alterations result from damage to the innervation of the smooth muscle segment of the esophagus (including the LES) with loss of ganglion cells within the myenteric (Auerbach) plexus. Several observers report fewer ganglion cells and ganglion cells surrounded by mononuclear inflammatory cells in the smooth muscle esophagus of achalasia patients. The degree of ganglion cell loss parallels disease duration, likely progressing from EGJ outflow obstruction to type II achalasia, to type I achalasia, to end-stage achalasia. Type III achalasia seems to have unique pathogenesis, characterized by myenteric plexus inflammation and altered function, but not destruction. Physiologic studies in achalasia patients suggest dysfunction consistent with postganglionic denervation of esophageal smooth muscle potentially affect excitatory ganglion neurons (cholinergic), inhibitory ganglion neurons, or both.

Regardless of excitatory ganglion neuron impairment, it is clear that inhibitory ganglion neuron dysfunction is an early manifestation of achalasia. These neurons mediate deglutitive inhibition (including LES relaxation) and the sequenced propagation of esophageal peristalsis. The ultimate cause of ganglion cell degeneration in idiopathic achalasia is gradually being unraveled, with increasing evidence pointing toward an autoimmune process in genetically susceptible individuals.59 HSV-1 has been proposed to be one of the causes of ganglion destruction

**Distal Esophageal Spasm (DES)**

Although the diagnosis of DES is often invoked as a cause of esophageal chest pain, the entity is actually exceedingly rare, with most cases of esophageal chest pain attributable to reflux disease or achalasia. The Chicago Classification has proposed reduced distal latency (DL) of peristalsis as the cardinal abnormality in DES. Although DES is clearly a disorder of peristalsis, the majority of afflicted patients exhibit normal peristaltic contractions most of the time. The neuromuscular pathology responsible for DES isunknown, and there are no known risk factors. The most striking reported pathologic change is diffuse muscular hypertrophy or hyperplasia in the distal esophagus with a thickening of up to 2 cm.

**Hypercontractile (Jackhammer) Esophagus**

Vigorous esophageal contractions with normal DL defined as esophageal hypercontractility or jackhammer esophagus in the Chicago Classification can be associated with both dysphagia and chest pain. From a clinical perspective, the summary metric for quantifying distal esophageal contractility in high-resolution manometry is the distal contractile integral (DCI). DCI values greater than 8000 mm Hg/cm/sec represent an extreme hypercontractility pattern, often associated with repetitive contractions, rarely seen in normal subjects, and almost always associated with chest pain and dysphagia. The current version of the Chicago Classification labels this condition “jackhammer esophagus” when two such contractions occur in a manometric study.

**Absent Peristalsis**

It is often idiopathic.

**Spastic Motility Disorder**

It is characterized by extensive degeneration of vagus nerve filaments, excessive deposition of collagenous material around nerve endings, and fragmentation of mitochondria. This leads to an imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory impulses in the postganglionic pathways. This is more marked in the distal two-thirds of the esophagus. It is also believed that anxiety also has a role in its pathogenesis.

**Scleroderma**

Owing to the propensity of patients with scleroderma to have excessive deposition of fibrous tissue in various organs, the esophagus also has atrophic and fibrous changes. The muscular layer of the esophagus is gradually replaced by the fibrous scar tissue, which gradually leads to loss of peristalsis and weakening of LES. However, this phenomenon is only limited to the distal esophagus, and the motility at the proximal end is preserved.