There are no typical clinical manifestations of gastritis. Sudden onset of epigastric pain, nausea, and vomiting have been described to accompany acute gastritis. Many people are asymptomatic or develop minimal dyspeptic symptoms. If not treated, the picture may evolve into chronic gastritis. History of smoking, consumption of alcohol, intake of NSAIDs or steroids, allergies, radiotherapy, or gall bladder disorders should all be considerations. A history of treatment for inflammatory bowel disease, vasculitic disorders, or eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders might require exploration if no cause of gastritis is apparent.

The most common initial findings for chronic and autoimmune gastritis are (1) hematological disorders such as anemia (iron deficiency) detected on routine check-ups, (2) positive histological examination of gastric biopsies, (3) clinical suspect based on the presence of other autoimmune disorders, neurological symptoms (related to vitamin B12 deficiency) or positive family history.

Iron-deficiency anemia (based on blood film showing microscopic hypochromic changes and iron studies) commonly presents in the early stages of autoimmune gastritis. Achlorhydria causing impairment of iron absorption in the duodenum and early jejunum is the leading cause.

Autoimmune gastritis is associated with other autoimmune disorders (mainly thyroid diseases), including Hashimoto thyroiditis, Addison disease, chronic spontaneous urticaria, myasthenia gravis, Diabetes type 1, vitiligo, and perioral cutaneous autoimmune disorders, especially erosive oral lichen planus.