Laboratory findings in ankylosing spondylitis (AS) are generally nonspecific but may help assist with diagnosis. About 50% to 70% of patients with active AS have elevated acute phase reactants, such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP). A normal ESR and CRP, however, should not exclude the disease.

A number of imaging abnormalities, especially those affecting the spine and sacroiliac joints, are characteristic of AS. In fact, according to the assessment of spondyloarthritis international society (ASAS) 2009 axial SpA criteria, evidence of sacroiliitis on imaging (radiographic or MRI) is a major inclusion criterion for AS. A standardized plain radiographic grading scale exists for sacroiliitis, which ranges from normal (0) to most severe (IV), as detailed below.

- 0: Normal SI joint width, sharp joint margins

- I: Suspicious

- II: Sclerosis, some erosions

- III: Severe erosions, pseudo dilation of the joint space, partial ankylosis

- IV: Complete ankylosis

In the first few years of AS, plain radiographic changes in the SI joints can be very subtle, but within the first decade will usually become more obvious. Subchondral erosions, sclerosis, and joint fusion are the most obvious abnormalities, and these radiographic changes are typically symmetric.

A series of plain radiographic changes characteristic of AS can progressively develop over the course of the disease. An early sign is "squaring" of the vertebral bodies, best seen on lateral x-ray. This is seen as a loss of normal concavity of the anterior and posterior borders of the vertebral body due to inflammation and bone deposition. Romanus lesions, or the "shiny corner sign," can also be seen on this radiographic view in the early stages. These lesions are characterized by small erosions and reactive sclerosis at the corners of the vertebral bodies. Late-stage findings include ankylosis (fusion) of the facet joints of the spine, syndesmophytes, and calcification of the anterior longitudinal ligament, supraspinous ligaments, and interspinous ligaments. This calcification may be seen on imaging as the "dagger sign," which is represented as a single radiodense line running vertically down the spine on frontal radiographs. The classic radiographic finding in late-stage AS is the "bamboo spine sign," which refers to the vertebral body fusion by syndesmophytes. A bamboo spine typically involves the thoracolumbar or lumbosacral junctions. It is this fusion of the spine that predisposes the patient to progressive back stiffness.

While plain radiography is the first-line imaging modality in AS, MRI may be needed to reveal more subtle abnormalities such as fatty changes or inflammatory changes. Active SI joint inflammatory lesions appear as bone marrow edema (BME) on short tau inversion recovery (STIR) and T2-weighted images with fat suppression. It should be noted that the presence of BME on MRI can also be seen in up to 23% of patients with mechanical back pain and 7% of healthy people.