Anything contributing to the breakdown of the neuromuscular pathways involved in speaking, swallowing, breathing, and maintaining a patent airway can lead to chronic aspiration and its sequelae. Several main risk factors include neurologic impairment, pulmonary diseases, supraglottic disease, and other conditions.

**Neurologic Impairment**

This can be cognitive or focal. In children, the most common risk factors are encephalopathy, cranial nerve dysfunction (CHARGE – CN VII, IX, X), neuromuscular disease such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy, congenital muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy, and spinal muscular atrophy as well as vocal fold immobility, and cerebral palsy. The mechanisms of aspiration differ in these. For instance, neuromuscular diseases may cause an overall weakness in swallowing solid foods, while cerebral palsy and other neurologically delaying syndromes cause difficulty with oral secretions and thin liquids.

In adults, examples include acute and chronic stroke, dementia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson disease (PD), and Guillain-Barre syndrome. Adults mostly develop overall swallowing muscle weakness that may become exacerbated by a neurologic decline, such as occurs in dementia or stroke involving certain aspects of the central nervous system (CNS). Dysphagia in these populations often contributes to increased overall morbidity. In PD, for example, the risk of being hospitalized for aspiration pneumonia is over three times higher than in healthy patients. This risk increases as patients advance into later stages of the disease and have a breakdown of their cough and swallowing function.

**Pulmonary Disease**

Patients with poor forced expiratory volume, inadequate cough, or those who require a ventilator are also at increased risk. Critically ill patients with extended stays in the ICU often develop neuromuscular weakness and flaccidity. This, in addition to deconditioning, weak airway muscles, prolonged intubation, and poor airway protection, contribute to an increased risk for significant oropharyngeal dysphagia and aspiration-related pneumonia.

**Supraglottic Disease**

Patients with poor dentition, oropharynx abnormalities, impaired swallowing, or esophageal dysmotility also suffer from an increased risk of aspiration. In children, tracheoesophageal fistula, laryngotracheoesphageal fistula, airway obstructive lesions (laryngomalacia), and other laryngeal or craniofacial abnormalities that prevent normal swallowing function can increase the risk.

The most common forms of supraglottic disease in adults include achalasia, Zenker diverticulum (ZD), and head and neck cancers. In achalasia and ZD, food products are not properly transferred to the stomach during the swallowing process by means of progressive ganglion degeneration, causing failed esophageal peristalsis and lower esophageal relaxation and outpouching of the esophageal mucosa and submucosa respectively. The lingering material can then easily be aspirated during normal respiration. Dysphagia also often occurs as a long-term side effect of radiation therapy in head and neck cancers. Esophageal cancer has the added risk of obstruction resulting in lingering foreign material and associated regurgitation and reflux.

**Other Conditions**

- Position changes

- High volume vomitus

- Analgesia of the pharynx and/or larynx

- Oral, esophageal, or airway procedures such as nasogastric (NG) tube, tracheostomy, upper endoscopy, bronchoscopy, gastrostomy feeding tube

- Trauma

- Medications: Prolonged intake of proton pump inhibitors can lead to gastric flora overgrowth. Antipsychotics have extrapyramidal motor side effects that can cause impaired function of striated muscles involved in swallowing. Antihistamines and antidepressants decrease oral lubrication. Anticonvulsants alter CNS functioning and can provoke drowsiness and incoordination. These all affect gastric motility, possibly increasing reflux.