The diagnosis, categorization, and management of ASPD is quite complex and multifaceted, often only presenting after harm has already taken place. Management of the disorder is best with an interprofessional team dedicated to the treatment of mental health disorders. People with antisocial personality disorder are at risk of incarceration due to the violent and deceitful nature of the behaviors elicited in ASPD. Hospitalization provides no benefit to a patient with ASPD and can actually create a disruptive hospital environment to others who truly need hospitalization for therapeutic purposes. The majority of these individuals are noncompliant with therapy and often fail to show up at clinics. Thus, management can be difficult.

The physician overseeing the case almost inevitably needs to be a psychological specialist; they can work collaboratively with the patient's family physician, but the complexity of this diagnosis requires specist-level care. Nursing staff should also have specialized psychological training, so they have received adequate training on ways to approach and cope with these individuals, as well as to be able to recognize therapeutically significant signs and behaviors that need to be brought to the treating physician's attention. They can also assess patient compliance as well as give their impressions of treatment effectiveness. A pharmacist should also provide consultation on the medications used, verifying dosing and checking carefully for drug interactions, and reporting to the nurse or physician if there are any concerns. Only with a collaborative interprofessional team approach patients with antisocial personality disorder receive optimal care leading to better outcomes. [Level 5]