In patients showing up to an emergency department with suspected rAAA, timeliness of evaluation and disposition are of utmost importance. Initial measures should include initiation of two large bore peripheral IV catheters, continuous hemodynamic monitoring, and lab tests to assess baseline hemoglobin, renal function, and current coagulation status. The patient should be cross-matched for infusion of packed red blood cells, as well as fresh frozen plasma and platelets in anticipation of the potential need for massive transfusion. Early consultation with a vascular surgeon in cases of suspected rAAA, while proceeding with the diagnostic workup, can help to facilitate eventual disposition to the operating room.

Experimental animal models and nonrandomized, retrospective studies suggest that preoperative fluid resuscitation strategies that include permissive hypotension with systolic blood pressures of 80-100 mmHg may improve outcomes. However, there are no randomized controlled trials in the literature to confirm these findings. Blood resuscitation of patients with rAAA is frequently required, often with the need for massive transfusion. Studies have demonstrated that patients with autologous blood transfusion and patients with higher concentrations of FFP transfusion (PRBC:FFP ˜ 1:1) have improved outcomes.

If left untreated, rAAA is almost uniformly fatal within several hours to a week. Decisions to perform open repair versus endovascular repair are complex and have to incorporate patient factors such as age, patient co-morbidities, and patient hemodynamic status; aneurysm factors such as location, size, and shape; surgeon experience; and available resources. Although non-randomized studies have demonstrated improved morbidity and mortality with endovascular repair, when these studies have been controlled for patients' hemodynamic status, these benefits have not been demonstrated.  Furthermore, a meta-analysis of RCTs comparing open versus endovascular repair have demonstrated lack of superiority of one method of repair over the other.