Initiating iron supplementation to address an iron-deficiency state is often managed by the primary care provider, however, sometimes it may be managed by specialists including the hematologist, gastroenterologist, or nephrologist, depending on the underlying cause of the anemia.

In the early stages, anemia may be present on routine bloodwork. Initial testing includes a complete blood count (CBC) with differential, which includes values such as WBC count, hemoglobin, hematocrit, RBC count, RBC indices. A reticulocyte count is helpful, as well.  If asymptomatic, the patient can be monitored with yearly CBC to check for any changes.  If symptomatic, more aggressive methods to identify the underlying cause are necessary. If iron deficiency is suspected, these patients should have iron studies assessed to check for serum iron, total iron-binding capacity (TIBC), transferrin saturation, and ferritin levels to determine if it is iron deficiency anemia, the most likely cause of microcytic anemia vs. other etiologies. Other tests that the clinician can order are hemosiderin and hepcidin, but are not necessary. Once the iron-deficiency is confirmed, then iron supplementation may be started. [Level 5]

It is the responsibility of the primary provider and other health professionals to ensure that the patient is not assumed to have iron deficiency anemia based on a CBC and receiving unnecessary iron supplementation without a complete workup. Anemia is a significant global health issue, and healthcare professionals must coordinate to ensure that if the patient is not improving with oral iron supplementation, to try another route of administration, or to check for another underlying cause of the anemia.

The need for care coordination of all healthcare professionals on the interprofessional team involved in the management of the patient is the recommended approach to provide symptomatic relief and improve outcomes.