The management of atrial fibrillation in the acute setting relies on patient hemodynamic stability and risk stratification. If the patient is hemodynamically unstable, immediate cardioversion with anticoagulant therapy is indicated. TEE is recommended prior to any cardioversion; however, if the patient is in hemodynamic stability due to atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response, cardioversion may be performed without prior TEE. If the patient has evidence of rapid ventricular response, rate control should be initiated using a beta-blocker or calcium-channel blocker. These medications can be used as intravenous (IV) pushes or drips. Typically, the patient is given a bolus then started on a drip if symptoms do not resolve. Digoxin can be considered as a rate control agent but is not recommended as a first-line agent due to its side-effects and tolerance. Amiodarone can also be considered for a rhythm controlling agent but is also not first-line therapy in the acute setting. Amiodarone is also considered as a rhythm control, but cardiology should be consulted prior to use.

In the chronic setting of atrial fibrillation, the patient should be risk stratified using the CHADs-2-Vasc score which is helpful in estimate risk of CVA per year. If the patient receives a 0 score, they will be considered "low-risk" and anticoagulation is not recommended. If the patient receives a score of 1, they are "low-moderate" risk; the physician should consider anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy. If the patient receives a score of greater than 2, they are in the "moderate-high" risk, and anticoagulation therapy is indicated.

Non-pharmacological therapy includes ablation therapy. Pacemaker placement is considered in severe causes resulting in heart failure in atrial fibrillation.