**Serum tumor markers**are indicated when specific tumors are suspected and include AFP, b-HCG, and placental alkaline phosphatase.

**CSF analysis**, which can be obtained by lumbar puncture if there is no hydrocephalus or during endoscopy, is useful for most tumors. (See figure)

**Imaging:**

**Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)**with and without gadolinium enhancement is the gold standard of evaluation for pineal region tumors. However, if not available, head computed tomographic (CT) scan, angiography, and ultrasound (in infants) play a role.

Normal findings on neuroimaging of the pineal gland:

- **CT scan:**

- **MRI:**

Brain MRI will show homogenous enhancing, except those presenting with heterogeneous cellularity. Dense tumors, like pineoblastoma and germinomas, will have restricted diffusion on the diffusion-weighted images. On the other hand, pineal cysts are non-enhancing and usually have a thin wall; therefore, a thick wall excludes a cyst.

Calcifications are often present and easier to be identified in a head CT scan, and can sometimes point in the right direction of diagnosis. Pineal parenchymal tumors (e.g., pineocytoma or pineoblastoma) tend to peripherally disperse calcification, whereas germ cell tumors tend to engulf the calcifications. An easy way to remember this is that pineoblastomas tend to blast the calcifications apart.

Many tumors of the pineal region may cause local or distant seeding. Thus, full spine MRI may be considered as part of the initial evaluation. Local invasion and remote seeding are significant for prognosis and may change initial management and adjuvant therapy drastically.

Findings that can point to worse prognosis include local invasion, CSF seeding, and extensive peritumor edema.

- Local invasion can be seen in pineoblastomas and most germ cell tumors.

- CSF seeding can be seen in pineoblastomas (distal seeding is most common) and in germinomas (proximal seeding is most common).