**Hantavirus and HFRS are Both Considered to be Immunopathologic**

- Inhalation of the infectious virus results in the deposition in the alveoli or terminal bronchioles. Viremia likely is generated after infection of alveolar macrophages or other primary targets, resulting in widespread infection of the pulmonary capillary endothelium. Critical adhesive receptors, beta-3 integrins, regulate platelet activation and vascular permeability but also mediate cellular entry of hantaviruses. Invasion of the endothelium is believed to induce IFN-alpha, which is possibly the cause of the prodromal manifestations. Once the infection has progressed, immunoblasts may be seen in the peripheral blood smear. T cell clones will be hantavirus-specific. Activated macrophages, in conjunction with these immunoblasts, will migrate to the interstitium of the lung. Capillary endothelial permeability greatly increases after the secretion of TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, and nitric oxide, which results in pulmonary edema. Soluble mediators such as TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, and nitric oxide are suggested as etiologies of myocardial depression in this infection resulting in cardiogenic shock.

- Replication within the vascular endothelium does not have direct cytopathic effects. Instead, tissue injury appears to be due to the immune response combined with the viral replication.

- In HFRS, the main site of increased cytokine expression and endothelial adhesion molecules is the distal nephron in the peritubular area. As a result, glomerular permeability is increased, resulting in massive proteinuria and evidence of tubular dysfunction.

- Immature dendritic cells likely serve as carriers for the virus through lymphatic tissue and allow further viral replication once at the regional lymph nodes. In addition, once exposed to the endothelial cells, immune activation is induced, especially by CD8+ T cells and macrophages.

- Hantaviruses induce maturation of infected dendritic cells and elicit and profound T-cell response in the acute infection phase, dissimilar to other hemorrhagic fever viruses that inhibit dendritic cell maturation.

**Viral Structure**

- Spherical particles, 90 to 120 nm in diameter

- Two glycoproteins and three unique negative-strand RNAs forming nucleocapsids

- Does not have matrix protein

**Replication**

- G1 glycoprotein interacts on the cell surface with beta integrins

- The virus is internalized via endocytosis

- Nucleocapsid released into the cytoplasm after fusion of the envelope with endosomal membranes

- mRNA and protein synthesis begins

- A 5'-capped portion of mRNA is stolen to prime synthesis of viral mRNA in the cytoplasm

- Medium length strand of viral RNA codes for the G1 and G2 proteins

- Large-length strand of viral RNA codes for the L protein (polymerase)

- Small-length strand of viral RNA codes for two non-structural proteins

- Glycoproteins are synthesized and glycosylated in the endoplasmic reticulum and then transferred to the Golgi apparatus

- Virions assembled by budding in the Golgi apparatus

- Virions released by exocytosis or cell lysis