In the cells, folic acid is reduced to THF, a biologically active form, in a two-step process that requires two molecules of NADPH and the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR). A single carbon group is transferred from serine to THF by the enzyme serine hydroxymethyltransferase and reduced to N5, N10-methylene THF. Vitamin B6 is also required in this process. Glycine is produced as a result of this reaction, which can be readily reconverted to serine using the carbon from the one-carbon pool.

The carbon carried by N5, N10-methylene THF can then be transferred to deoxyuridine monophosphate (dUMP) to form deoxythymidine monophosphate (dTMP) by the enzyme thymidylate synthase that can be used to synthesize thymidine, at the same time recycling THF to DHF.  The resulted DHF can be reduced once again to tetrahydrofolate and N5, N10-methylene THF again to continue this cycle. 5-fluorouracil is an anti-cancer drug that is used to inhibit the proliferation of cancer cells. It inhibits the synthesis of thymine and consequently DNA synthesis by inhibiting the enzyme thymidylate synthase.

Alternately, N5, N10-methylene THF can be reduced to N5-methyl-THF, a storage form of folate, with the help of riboflavin (vitamin B2) and the enzyme methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR).

The methyl group from N5-methyl-THF is transferred to cobalamine (B12) to help regenerate methylcobalamin (B12) and THF. Methylcobalamine can then donate the methyl group to homocysteine and form methionine with the help of methionine synthase. Hence B12 deficiency results in increased levels of homocysteine in the blood. Additionally, methylmalonic acid levels also increase in B12 deficiency as the conversion of methylmalonyl-CoA to Succinyl CoA is catalyzed by a vitamin B12 dependent enzyme, methylmalonyl-CoA mutase. Folate deficiency does not have any effect on methylmalonic acid levels, but homocysteine levels increase as homocysteine cannot be converted to methionine due to deficiency of N5-methyl THF. B12 plays an important role in the recycling of N5-methyl THF (the storage form of folate) to THF. Deficiency of Vitamin B12 can impair this process and prevent the use of storage form of folate when needed, resulting in functional folate deficiency.