**Management of Rosacea**

While rosacea responds well to treatment, this does not prevent or treat rhinophyma—rosacea treatment centers around antibiotics and oral isotretinoin, best utilized in mild to moderate severity. Isotretinoin aids symptom reduction by lowering sebum production and sebaceous gland size. Conversely, topical Retin-A can potentially worsen rosacea due to enhanced irritation and sensitivity of increasingly erythematous and heavy telangiectatic skin.

**Management of Rhinophyma**

Patients must be off oral isotretinoin before surgery as it can prevent re-epithelialization.

Advanced rhinophyma treatment requires surgical measures to remove tissue. The principal aim of surgery is to reduce the hypertrophied sebaceous glands and re-contour the nose. Secondarily, techniques are used to promote re-epithelialization of the nose. Surgery requires careful steps as rhinophyma occurs in a noticeable central region of the face.

- Reduction of hypertrophied tissue

- Re-contouring of the nasal region

- Controlling excessive bleeding

- Preventing postoperative complications.

Utilizing multiple modalities during surgery is common. Excisional methods carry an additional advantage of providing a specimen for pathologic evaluation, an option not available in ablative techniques due to complete tissue destruction.

**Excisional Treatment**

**Full-thickness resection with reconstruction via flap or graft:**this approach offers the benefits of immediate coverage of the open wound, avoids excessive heat damage, and eliminates recurrence risk by removing all pathologic tissue, including underlying cancer. However, this approach has fallen out of favor as flaps and grafts risk failure; grafts can have an incomplete skin color match and also require more operative wounds.

**Partial-thickness tissue removal:**this method preserves the pilosebaceous unit. By only excising superficial tissue and retaining the underlying adnexal structures, re-epithelialization occurs by secondary intention. It can be done with a standard scalpel and disposable razor blade, making this method cost-effective. Difficulties of this method include the risk of scarring with unintentional removal of the sebaceous unit and achieving hemostasis for a clear visual field. The use of electrocautery is often necessary to control bleeding and add additional nasal refinement.

**Cryosurgery excisions:**this is no longer widely performed. While its benefits entail relatively low intraoperative pain and lack of cartilage damage, this procedure often requires more than one visit with additional risks of scarring, dyschromia, and difficulty contouring the nose.

**Dermabrasion:**dermabrasion is used primarily as an adjuvant treatment post bulk removal to allow for precise nasal contouring.

**Ablative Treatment**

Many different ablative approaches are options in treating rhinophyma:

**Electrosurgery:**this approach can both coagulate and cut using a wire loop or epilating needle.

**Electrocautery:**heat is utilized from an outside source, while electrosurgery uses radiofrequency electricity to generate heat within the tissue. Both methods have proven beneficial in providing a nearly bloodless cost-effective procedure.

**Coblation:**"cold ablation" is an ablative method driven by radiofrequency to excite electrolytes within a conductive medium. Charged ions form a field used to de-epithelialize tissue at low generated temperature (less than 90 degrees C), decreasing thermal damage risk.

**Laser Treatment**

Early treatments were with the argon laser: although selective coagulation of capillaries is possible, the depth of destruction of tissue is not predictable.

CO2 laser treatment has the ability to both cut and vaporizes the skin. Utilizing a 10600 nm wavelength, the laser is primarily absorbed by water, allowing for a lower depth of penetration with the ability to reach up to .5mm beyond the visibly burned layer. As the laser is obliterating the sebaceous glands, sebum gets expressed, which serves as a surrogate depth marker as squeezing the skin during surgery without apparent sebum excretion indicates an appropriate stopping point to avoid scarring. It requires less thermal energy than electrocautery and electrosurgery, allows for a bloodless surgical field, necessitates simple postoperative care, and has an overall low scarring risk. The surgeon can utilize CO2 laser along with bulk scalpel removal for more precise contouring. Initial scalpel reduction before using the CO2 laser also allows tissue for histopathologic assessment. Common disadvantages include hypopigmentation, dilated pores due to the destruction of prior sites of follicular cysts and fibrosed sebaceous glands, expensive equipment cost, and lengthy procedure time. Complete reepithelization takes approximately three weeks.

The Er: YAG laser is an alternative laser option. Operating at the ideal wavelength for water absorption, 2940 nm, it has a smaller heat damage zone of fewer than 50 micrometers allowing for a reduced time to re-epithelialization of only 1 to 2 weeks. However, it can only provide minimal hemostasis.

Other lasers with a successful track record include the diode laser (808 nm), the Nd: YAG laser (1064 nm), and the KTP laser (532 micrometers).

**Plasma and Radiofrequency:**more recently, we have had success using Helium plasma in combination with radiofrequency: this is a unique energy-delivery mode that causes instantaneous heating but also instant cooling in tissues. Whereas bulk heating for more than 152 seconds is needed to a temperature of more than 65 degrees centigrade when using other devices like radiofrequency or ultrasound, helium plasma-RF energy raises tissue temperature to 85 degrees C within 0.044 seconds with the minimal transmission of heat to surrounding tissues; this allows us to ablate the nodules on the nose sequentially with little bleeding. The healing is similar to that seen after the CO2 laser.

**Non-surgical Treatments Undergoing Research**

Fibrotic cytokines TGFb1 and TGFb2 are proposed to play a role in the skin thickening in rhinophyma. Payne et al. have researched the in vitro outcomes of the anti-estrogen medication tamoxifen on fibroblasts with TGFb2 production and secretion in cultured rhinophymatous skin. Results included both decreased fibroblast function and TGFb2 down-regulation. Thus far, this medication has also demonstrated fibrosis inhibition in Dupuytren contracture.