**Diagnosis**

- The gold standard for detecting sleep disturbances in overlap syndrome is polysomnography. Current recommendations by the American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society state that individuals with mild COPD and clinical evidence of pulmonary hypertension should be evaluated with overnight testing for possible obstructive sleep apnea.

- In one study, the presence of expiratory snoring using integrated flow and snore signal predicted the presence of an obstructive ventilatory defect on a pulmonary function test defined by FEV1/FVC <0.7.

**Pulmonary Function Testing**

- Overlap syndrome patients may have a predilection for more severe lung hyperinflation, quantified by a reduced IC/TLC ratio. It has been suggested that the IC/TLC ratio may provide a better measure of lung disease severity than FEV1. This hyperinflation is suspected of worsening sleep quality in overlap syndrome, possibly due to increased work of breathing while in the recumbent position; this mechanism is not well understood and requires further evaluation.

- The gold standard for diagnosing COPD is spirometry and is defined as a post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC ratio of <0.7, which can be further classified based on spirometry grade (SG) as mild obstruction (SG 1, FEV1 ≥ 60%), moderate obstruction (SG 2, FEV1 between 30 and 60%) and severe obstruction (SG 3, FEV1 < 30%).

- The severity of obstruction measured by the FEV1/FVC ratio corresponds with the likelihood of persistent hypoxemia.

**Laboratory Evaluation**

- There are no well-documented laboratory evaluations that are consistent with overlap syndrome. However, a single-center study evaluated the association between microalbuminuria in patients with overlap syndrome versus OSA alone. Microalbuminuria was more prevalent in patients with overlap syndrome. However, when adjusting for confounding variables such as diabetes mellitus and increased BMI, which are independent risk factors for microalbuminuria, it was discovered that overlap syndrome was not an independent risk factor for microalbuminuria.

- Overlap syndrome patients exhibit higher NOD (i.e., decreased mean peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2) and longer sleep duration with SpO2 less than 90%).

- Laboratory testing is not routinely indicated for these patients and, if obtained, may demonstrate an increase in serum bicarbonate due to chronic hypercapnia, which can be associated which chronic stable COPD.

**Screening**

- In terms of screening tests, overnight oximetry can be useful in detecting nocturnal hypoxia during sleep. A cyclical (sawtooth) pattern may be seen on nocturnal oximetry and may suggest OSA in COPD patients; polysomnography investigations should confirm this.

- Overlap syndrome patients demonstrated higher COPD assessment test (CAT), Epworth sleepiness scale (ESS), Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI), and STOP-Bang questionnaire (SBQ) scores than COPD patients without OSA.

- The Berlin Questionnaire identifies patients who are at increased risk of suffering from sleep apnea.

- Screening tests such as home sleep apnea testing (HSAT) have shown significant sensitivity in diagnosing obstructive sleep apnea in COPD. However, current recommendations discourage the use of HSAT in patients with severe chronic respiratory illness due to the following limitations:

- The inability of HSAT to detect hypoventilation as a cause of hypoxemia can result in inadequate oxygen treatment or inappropriate PAP prescription.

- HSAT is often used with auto-PAP treatment. This may be followed by an unwarranted rise in expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP), which may aggravate hyperinflation and worsen lung function in COPD.

- The oxygen desaturation index (ODI) is a frequently used screening tool for determining the severity of nocturnal hypoxemia. The ODI is the number of episodes of oxygen desaturation per hour of sleep, where oxygen desaturation is defined as a reduction in blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) to less than 3% below baseline. Increased ODI is related to the production of inflammatory markers and is superior to AHI in predicting cardiovascular risk.

**Radiographic**

- Lung hyperinflation is commonly seen on radiographic imaging due to air trapping resulting from airway collapse while exhaling. This results in the retention of carbon dioxide (CO2). Additional findings of chest imaging may include diaphragmatic flattening, an increase in anterior-posterior diameter, and bronchial wall thickening, which may be found in the chronic bronchitis COPD subtype.