**Red Blood Cells (RBC)**

RBCs are released from the bone marrow as reticulocytes. The reticulocytes have a network of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and over a period of 24 hours mature into adult RBCs. The relative reticulocyte count can be used to gauge whether the bone marrow is responding appropriately to anemia by increasing production. The RBC contains 2 alpha and 2 beta chains and a single heme moiety that reversibly binds oxygen. Although there are multiple possible genetic variants leading to an alteration in the configuration of these chains, most do not lead to clinical consequences. However, sickle cell disease and thalassemia variants of alpha and beta chains are causes of anemia. Genetic variants in the cell membrane, cell metabolism, and cell morphology are additional causes of anemia.

**Bone Marrow
**

The bone marrow requires approximately 21 days transitioning a pluripotent stem cell to a reticulocyte released into circulation. The initial stimulus for reticulocyte production is the renal release of erythropoietin, and continued erythropoietin is required for the transformation of a pluripotent stem cell into a proerythroblast. This initial stage takes approximately 10 to 15 days. The next step is iron-dependent and takes 3-4 days, during which iron is added to the proerythroblast, forming a heme moiety and completing the formation of the reticulocyte.

Significant bone marrow related causes of anemia include:

- Lack of substrates such as iron, vitamin B12 or folate required for the production of healthy reticulocytes.

- Direct suppression of the bone marrow's function secondary to medications, toxins, infections or radiation exposure.

- Replacement of the bone marrow by neoplasm or fibrosis.

**Kidney
**

The kidneys have a dual role in the pathophysiology of anemia. Firstly, they are responsible for the production of 90% of the erythropoietin needed to stimulate bone marrow transformation of pluripotent stem cells to proerythroblasts. Interference with erythropoietin production and release will result in anemia. Secondly, acute anemia associated with acute blood loss results in hypotension, which causes the stimulation of stretch receptors, which in turn sends signals to parts of the brain via the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerve that lead to several downstream effects, including antidiuretic hormone (ADH), also known as arginine vasopressin (AVP) or vasopressin secretion. In response, the kidney reabsorbs water, in turn leading to decreased renal perfusion. In direct response to the decreased renal perfusion, the renin-angiotensin system becomes activated, leading to increased vascular tone and stimulation of aldosterone and resultant increased intravascular volume.

**Central Nervous System (CNS)
**

The medulla, cerebral cortex, and pituitary gland coordinate the response to acute blood-loss anemia and the resultant volume changes by increasing sympathetic tone and secreting ADH.

**The Acuity of Onset of the Anemia**

Acute onset anemia due to blood loss or rapid hemolysis is compensated by the CNS-directed, renal-mediated response to the loss of volume and perfusion. This compensatory mechanism has an upper threshold and is well defined by The American College of Surgeons' Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) protocols for management of volume loss:

- Class I Hemorrhage involves up to 15% loss of blood volume and produces no significant change in vital signs and requires no intervention.

- Class II Hemorrhage involves a 15% to 30% loss of blood volume and may cause tachycardia, reduced pulse pressure, and peripheral vasoconstriction. Volume repletion with crystalloids is generally the only necessary treatment and blood transfusion is generally not needed.

- Class III Hemorrhage involves a loss of 30% to 40% loss of blood volume and results in hypotension, tachycardia, and shock. Crystalloid resuscitation and blood transfusion are necessary.

- Class IV Hemorrhage involves loss of greater than 40% of blood volume, exceeding the compensatory mechanism thresholds, and is lethal unless rapid, aggressive resuscitation is instigated with blood products, crystalloids, and pressors.

On the other hand, very low hemoglobin may be tolerated in the setting of chronic, slowly progressing anemia wherein the RBC mass is greatly decreased but circulating blood volume is preserved. Management of blood products and anemia specific therapy, such as therapy with RBC substrates or erythropoietin, varies by case and by cause.