In addition to the initial history and physical exam, chest and pelvis radiographs, focused assessment of ultrasonography in trauma (FAST), diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL), computed tomography (CT) and diagnostic laparoscopy (DL) can be used to provide further information.

Radiographs- Typically a chest and pelvis radiograph are obtained to evaluate for the presence of an abnormal mediastinal profile, hemothorax or pneumothorax, air under or abnormality of the diaphragm, and fractures, particularly unstable pelvic fractures. Air under the diaphragm indicates intestinal perforation. Radiographs are also useful in penetrating injuries to evaluate for the type of foreign body and the trajectory of the foreign body.

Focused assessment of ultrasonography in trauma (FAST)- Fluid in the hepatorenal space, in the splenorenal space, and/or on the suprapubic view indicates there may be intraabdominal bleeding or intestinal injury. Although the FAST examination is a helpful adjunct, it has poor sensitivity for bowel injury.

Diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL)- DPL can be a useful tool in determining which patients would benefit from an exploratory laparotomy. If less than ten milliliters of blood are obtained upon initial aspiration, then one liter of warm saline is poured into the abdomen. If the return of fluids shows RBC > 100,000 per cubic millimeter, WBC > 100 per cubic millimeter, food, or bile, then the patient should undergo exploratory laparotomy.

Computed tomography (CT) scan- CT scanning is the most sensitive and specific imaging modality for intestinal trauma.

Diagnostic laparoscopy (DL) – DL may help avoid a laparotomy in hemodynamically stable patients with penetrating abdominal trauma.