Due to changing demographics, beta-thalassemia is present globally. However, it is most prevalent in the Mediterranean, Middle East, Southeast & South Asia, and southern China. The incidence of children born with beta-thalassemia major is about 68,000 worldwide. The prevalence rate is 1.5% (80-90 million carriers) across the globe. The exact prevalence rate in the United States (US) is not known, however, it is speculated that the number is increasing dramatically due to immigration. In 1960, the prevalence rate was 5.6%, and it reached 13% in 2010, which was highest in California due to 26% of immigrant residents. The highest prevalence (10%) is present in the southern and northern parts of Iran in close proximity to the Persian Gulf and the Caspian Sea, respectively. The total estimation for homozygotes is 20,000, and the carriers are approximately 3,750,000 there. In India, about 10,000-20,000 children are born with beta-thalassemia every year. The incidence of beta-thalassemia major (beta-TM) positive newborns was significantly reduced from 272/year in 2002 to 25/year in 2010 due to the introduction of a premarital screening test. In Bangladesh, the prevalence of thalassemia with different severity levels ranges from 60,000 to 70,000 with an estimated 2500 TM cases added per year. One of the proposed reasons for the high prevalence rate among the above-mentioned territories is that they are malaria-endemic regions that have a survival advantage due to a protective phenomenon. The other contributing factor is genetic drift.