SERCA and PMCA belong to a group of ion pumps called P-type ATPases. P-type ATPases exist in two conformational states: E1 and E2. In the E1 conformation, the pump exhibits a high affinity for calcium on the cytoplasmic side of the cell. In the E2 conformational state, the transporter’s affinity for calcium rapidly decreases and subsequently leads to the release of calcium to the other side of the membrane.

When calcium concentrations are low in the cytosol, the PMCA pump is in the resting position, elicited by the blocking of the phosphorylation site by the C-terminal auto-inhibitory domain. A calcium-sensing protein called cAM binds to calcium when concentrations of cytosolic calcium increase. This causes a conformational change driven by the interaction of Ca-cAM and the autoinhibitory site, which dissociates from the active site. Calcium is transported to the extracellular environment when it ATP-phosphorylates a conserved aspartate residue.

The voltage sensor for the voltage-gated calcium channels is located at the S4 segments of each a1 homologous domain. Under the influence of an electrical field, these segments undergo conformational changes that cause them to move outward and rotate, causing the pore to open. The lining of the pore within the channel is composed of segments S5 and S6. Required for calcium selectivity is a glutamate residue located inside the pore loop. At the S6 segments are the binding sites for the organic calcium channel antagonists.

Voltage-gated calcium channels are highly regulated, specifically through G-protein coupled receptors and second messengers.

The NCX does not use the energy from ATP directly. Instead, its energy derives from the sodium concentration gradient, which is used to move calcium against its concentration gradient. This process is called secondary active transport.

The formation of IP3 occurs in response to various stimuli, including neurotransmitters, hormones, and growth factors. These stimuli act to stimulate IP3 production via activation of either GPCRs and RTKs which are coupled to phospholipase C. Upon the binding of these ligands to their receptors; a downstream signaling pathway is activated via the hydrolysis of the G-alpha and G-beta/gamma subunits of G-protein coupled receptors causing the activation of phospholipase C. PLC converts a molecule called PIP2 into IP3 and DAG. Phospholipase C then produces IP3.

A variety of means perform the regulation of the IP3 receptor function. Central to its functions in cell signaling are inositol triphosphate (IP3) and calcium. Both of these are the primary controllers of IP3 receptors and are its two main ligands, of which calcium is its molecule of transport.

The expression of IP3 receptors is triggered by an increase in intracellular calcium levels via the activation of different receptors, including voltage-gated calcium channels, NMDA receptors, and D1 receptors.

Calcium oscillations are generated by the IP3/calcium signaling pathway when the receptor produces calcium transients/spikes repeatedly over an extended period.

The oscillations generated by both IP3 and ryanodine receptors enhance the activity of the sodium/calcium exchanger by releasing pulses of calcium, which depolarizes pacemaker cells by creating an inward calcium current. The SERCA pump refills calcium stores in the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which is relied upon for the periodic release of calcium from the SR by IP3 and RyR receptors. Ryanodine receptors are sensitized to release periodic calcium sparks upon the slow accumulation of calcium in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum by the SERCA pump. Toward the end of the pacemaker cell action potential, these calcium sparks begin to develop as a result of IP3 receptor calcium signaling. Immediately preceding and contributing to the pacemaker cell depolarization, the action potential is triggered when calcium is suddenly released by ryanodine receptors. The frequency and amplitude of these ryanodine-receptor mediated calcium sparks driving the pacemaker potential are increased by IP3 channel calcium release, which in turn are activated by beta-adrenergic receptor stimulation.

IP3 channels mediate the oscillatory calcium signals that drive smooth muscle contraction and are essential for the maintenance of smooth muscle tone. These IP3 channels become activated by various neurotransmitters, including serotonin and norepinephrine. Signals in the form of oscillatory frequency vary according to neurotransmitter concentration. Vascular tone is driven by oscillations generated from the release of calcium stores, which in turn is driven by the presence of these neurotransmitters whose concentration determines the extent of vascular smooth muscle contraction.

Ryanodine receptors are critical for both skeletal and cardiac muscle contraction. In these cells, it is involved in excitation-contraction coupling. This process is slightly different in skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle. In skeletal muscle, calcium currents through L-type voltage=gated calcium channels open ryanodine receptors via a mechanical coupling.

The mechanism by which SOCE channels operate is unique.

When calcium concentration in the endoplasmic reticulum is low, this is sensed by the EF-hand domain on STIM. The release of calcium from the EF-Hand domain promotes its oligomerization into dimers and more complex oligomers due to the exposure of hydrophobic surfaces. STIM then redistributes via diffusion into clusters to sites near the plasma membrane at junctional sites that form between the PM and ER membranes.