Light microscopy of bone marrow aspirates is generally done using H and E staining.

Erythropoiesis under light microscopy demonstrates the spectrum of red cell differentiation from proerythroblasts to reticulocytes. The full process of differentiation can take up to 5 days. Proerythroblasts will become erythroblasts/basophilic normoblasts, which then become late normoblasts. As the cell matures, it becomes progressively smaller and with an increasingly condensed nucleus. After the late normoblast stage, the nucleus is expelled, and the cell is called a reticulocyte.  In times of anemia, this process may quicken leading to various debris visual on microscopy residing in the RBC. Examples include Heinz bodies, Pappenheimer bodies, and Howell-Jolly bodies.

Granulocyte production progresses from myeloblast to promyelocyte where it then branches into 1 of 3 precursors: basophilic myelocyte, neutrophilic myelocyte, and eosinophilic myelocyte. The precursors go on to form mature basophils, neutrophils, and eosinophils respectively. Owing to the overall predominance of neutrophils compared to these other cell lines neutrophilic precursors are seen much more commonly on light microscopy.

Megakaryocyte precursors are difficult to distinguish microscopically from myeloblasts. Further along in differentiation, they gain their distinctive cytoplasmic granulation and numerous nuclear lobes.

Early stages of lymphopoiesis do occur in the bone marrow but then shift largely to the peripheral lymphoid tissues. Plasma cells can be present in bone marrow but can be difficult to differentiate from other blast cells with light microscopy.