It is essential to discuss the relevant anatomy to understand SB.

i) **Tenon’s capsule**is a layer of the fascia that envelops the globe. It extends from the limbus to the optic nerve. The extraocular muscles pierce the fascia and get covered by a glove-like sleeve of fascia that extends anteriorly untll the site of insertion. These sleeves connect to the intermuscular septum, which is another layer of fascia present between the recti insertions. The intermuscular septum has to be divided and stripped off to ensure easy passage of the exoplants and scleral suture placement. However, care is necessary to avoid damage to the recti and their ligaments. It must be remembered that these ligaments are functionally important for muscle action.

ii) **Ora serrata**inside the eye corresponds to the spiral of Tillaux outside, i.e., site of recti insertion.

iii) The **vitreous base**inside the eye lies around 2-3mm chord length posterior to the spiral of Tillaux outside.

iv) The **superior oblique (SO)**muscle travels under the superior rectus (SR) muscle and gets inserted 12-14mm posterior to the limbus. One vortex vein is usually present under the temporal edge of the SO insertion. The surgeon must be cautious while hooking the SR muscle to prevent engaging and/or damaging the SO tendon and the vortex vein.

v) The **inferior oblique (IO)**muscle passes under the lateral rectus (LR) muscle. The surgeon must be cautious while hooking the LR muscle to prevent engaging and/or damaging the IO tendon. The LR muscle can be hooked from the superior side to reduce the chances of inadvertently engaging and/or damaging the IO muscle.

vi) The **scleral thickness**varies according to the location. It is the thinnest, just behind the recti insertions. The thickness at the eyeball equator (5mm chord length posterior to the spiral of Tillaux) is approximately 1 mm.

vii) The **anterior ciliary arteries**exit the recti near their respective insertions. These vessels contribute to the formation of several vascular plexuses, which are responsible for the blood supply of the anterior segment of the eye. The scleral suture should be placed at least 1mm posterior to the spiral of Tillaux to prevent the exoplant from rubbing against the muscle at the site of their insertion, which can cause damage to these vessels and the anterior segment ischemia.

viii) There are seven **vortex veins**with at least one in each quadrant. They take a 2 to 4 mm intrascleral course in the posterior direction before exiting the sclera around 14 to 18 mm posterior to the limbus. Four of these vortex veins are present on either side of the vertical recti, i.e., 1,5,7 and 11 clock hours. Care must be exercised to prevent accidental damage to the vortex vein. These include hooking the muscles in a pre-equatorial plane, draining the SRF near the horizontal recti, and avoiding placement of scleral sutures in the region of the intrascleral portion of the vortex veins. The suture can be straddled if a vortex vein comes in the path of the suture.

Before understanding the principles of SB, let us first understand the pathophysiology of retinal break formation. Retinal breaks form due to the traction caused by vitreous on the retina. This traction results from a combination of forces, including the gravitational forces, inertial forces exerted by the vitreous during the ocular movements and blunt trauma, and contraction of the vitreous gel at sites of vitreoretinal adhesions secondary to posterior vitreous detachment (PVD). The sum of these forces acts either perpendicular or oblique to the retinal surface and leads to a retinal tear if this force exceeds the forces responsible for promoting retinal attachment. Once a break is created, the fluid currents guide fluid from the vitreous cavity into the subretinal space via the retinal tears.

The term “buckle” literally means “deformation of a structure under stress.” SB produces indentation of the eyeball, thus deforming the inner scleral surface from concave to convex. This modifies the direction of the tractional forces responsible for break formation as well as disrupts the flow of fluid through the retinal break. Hence, the equilibrium responsible for maintaining retinal attachment is re-established. In addition, the 360-degree circumferential band creates a new ora serrata with reduced vitreous base diameter, which results in reduced traction (Hook’s law) and lesser chances of new break formation.