It is generally understood that an increased BMI places an individual at significant risk of developing hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes, all risk factors for coronary heart disease.

In the respiratory system, an increased BMI is most commonly associated with obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS), caused by intra-abdominal pressure and increased body weight inhibiting the physiologic movements of the lungs. OHS causes individuals to feel short of breath, leading them to take short, quick breaths, increasing the risk of acquiring atelectasis. Increased BMI is also associated with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), which may lead to excessive fatigue, pulmonary hypertension, and abnormal heart rhythms.

In the gastrointestinal (GI) system, an increase in BMI has been associated with gallbladder disease and colon cancer. In addition, increased body fat leads to increased abdominal pressure pushing against the cardiac sphincter in the stomach, which allows gastric contents to be regurgitated into the esophagus, leading to gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).

An increase in BMI has also been linked to the development of liver disease. Fatty deposition within the liver, known as non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), is one of the leading causes of liver failure in the United States. Fat accumulation within the liver causes inflammation, injury, and scarring.

Obese individuals typically have an increase in adipose tissue hypertrophy, which leads to endocrine dysregulation and insulin resistance. Insulin resistance increases triglycerides, serum glucose, and blood pressure, increasing the risk of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Excess adipose tissue leads to insulin resistance by releasing excess free fatty acids.

An overweight or obese BMI may also affect the integumentary system. The increase in adipose tissue increases inflammation within the dermis, a risk factor for the development of immune-mediated hidradenitis suppurativa. This increased pro-inflammatory state seen in obesity has also been linked with the development of psoriasis. On the other end of the spectrum, a lower than normal BMI may cause dry, thickened dermis, less exfoliation, and fine hair growth, known as lanugo.

BMI also affects the genitourinary system. Multiple studies have found that acutely ill patients with an obese BMI are more likely to develop acute kidney injury (AKI), which is associated with increased short- and long-term mortality.

An increased BMI has been directly related to decreased reproductive function. The current literature has demonstrated that women with a BMI > 30 kg/m^2 have a higher incidence of anovulation/subfertility. Obesity has also been shown to strongly influence reproductive cancers, including neoplasms of the breast, prostate, endometrial lining, and ovaries.