**Troponin**

Troponin is a regulatory protein within muscle cells involved with the interaction of actin and myosin contractile proteins. Troponin I and troponin T assays are available. Cardiac troponin I is found only in cardiac tissue while cardiac troponin T is expressed to a very small degree in skeletal muscle. Contemporary or sensitive cardiac troponin assays have been available for years. Highly sensitive troponin assays are newer and were first approved for clinical use in 2017. With highly sensitive assays, there is a detectable range of troponin that is considered normal, while this is not the case with older sensitive troponin assays where any elevation is often considered significant. Troponin assays are immunoassays and can give false positives with antibody cross-reactivity, although this is rare.  Several troponin assays are available, and levels cannot be compared across assays. Older assays could detect troponin elevations within 3 to 4 hours of myocardial injury and peak at 24 hours. Newer highly sensitive assays detect troponin elevation sooner and vary by assay. Many recommendations based on older assays recommend repeat troponin measurement at 6 to 12 hours, but several strategies now exist with repeat measurement as soon as 2 hours.

In most clinical settings, cardiac troponin is the cardiac enzyme of choice, and other enzymes should not be routinely used. There are many reasons for this, but ultimately, troponin has been shown to be more specific and more sensitive to cardiac injury. Nearly all false-positive troponins are limited to situations where there is antibody cross-reactivity within the testing assay, as troponin is not released from damaged skeletal muscle. CK-MB is released from skeletal muscle, and this can lead to falsely positive elevation. Per gram of myocardial tissue, more troponin is present than CK-MB.

**Creatine Kinase/CK-MB**

Creatine kinase is a cytosolic protein involved with mitochondrial phosphate transport.   CK exists in three different dimer configurations (MM, MB, BB) of two CK isoenzymes, M and B. Prior to the ubiquitous use of troponin, CK-MB was the mainstay cardiac enzyme for the diagnosis of myocardial infarction.

Creatine kinase is found in all muscle tissues and is nonspecific for myocyte injury; however, CK-MB is relatively specific for myocardial tissue. CK-MB can be found in serum within 4 to 6 hours of the onset of myocardial ischemia; however, it can take up to 12 hours in some patients. CK-MB levels return to baseline within 36 to 48 hours and, therefore, are sometimes still used to assess for reinfarction after the intervention. Elevations in CK-MB must be interpreted with caution in situations where skeletal muscle injury or disease is also suspected, as CK-MB is released from damaged skeletal muscle. Some institutions will report a ratio of CK/MB to CK to ascertain whether elevations in CK-MB are increased to an extent greater than what would be expected with skeletal muscle injury alone; however, these ratios or indexes have not been demonstrated to improve sensitivity or specificity regarding the diagnosis of myocardial ischemia. CK-MB levels alone are most helpful in situations where myocardial ischemia is suspected and skeletal muscle injury or disease is not suspected. As discussed below, however, troponin is preferred in almost all situations where it is available for use.

**Myoglobin**

For many years, CK-MB was the cardiac enzyme of choice for the diagnosis of myocardial ischemia. One problem with this strategy was the length of time from injury to the elevation of CK-MB. Myoglobin was once used in conjunction with CK-MB in an attempt to speed the diagnosis of myocardial injury.  Myoglobin is a very small heme protein found in many tissues. It is rapidly released and has a short half-life. This was of some benefit when CK-MB was the primary assay available; however, as troponin assays have become more sensitive, they have replaced myoglobin for early detection of myocardial injury. High sensitivity cardiac troponin is released earlier from damaged myocardial tissue and to be detectable in serum earlier than myoglobin.

**Heart-Type Fatty Acid Binding Protein**

While not available in the United States, heart-type fatty acid-binding protein has been shown in one study to be more sensitive than troponin and myoglobin for early detection of myocardial injury. Troponin was more specific; however, heart-type fatty acid-binding protein has not been studied against high sensitivity troponin and has not been widely adopted for clinical use.

**Lactate Dehydrogenase**

Previously used in conjunction with CK-MB, lactate dehydrogenase is also no longer regularly used for diagnosis of myocardial injury. Lactate dehydrogenase is found in many tissues and is therefore not specific. It also takes several hours after onset of injury for levels to become elevated.

**Copeptin**

Copeptin is the C-terminal end of the arginine vasopressor precursor protein that is released from the pituitary gland during myocardial ischemia.  Early rule-out strategies using copeptin measurement with standard cardiac troponin assays have not clearly shown an advantage over troponin alone.