Transdermal drugs are a vast category of drugs defined as vessels for delivering drugs for a local or systemic mechanism of action via a specific dosing formulation. Transdermal drug delivery has become increasingly popular due to the significant advantages it carries. For example, transdermal drugs bypass the first-pass metabolism of the liver, protecting it from damage. Additionally, transdermal drugs decrease the risk of damage to the gastrointestinal system via the oral route, increase the likelihood of consistent patient use, and allow drug administration in a continuous stable-interval manner.

The fundamental principle of transdermal drug delivery relies on the ability of the drug to pass through the skin into the systemic circulation. Therefore, there are limited drugs that meet the criteria required to be able to bypass the skin. These criteria include having a low molecular weight (less than 600 g/mol), having the ability to pass through the epidermis, being absorbed by the blood vessels, and entering the circulation. Additionally, the active drug must be chemically and physically stable. The active substance must have a low daily dose for patient comfort and adhesive propensity. The skin should metabolize the drug. There have only been a limited number of successful transdermal drugs with such specific properties.

Some indications that transdermal medications have been addressed since the 1970s include:

- Hypertension

- Local anesthesia

- Angina pectoris

- Motion sickness

- Pain

- Smoking control

- Migraine

- Major depression

- Parkinson disease

- Alzheimer disease

- ADHD

Transdermal administration is historically safe and effective when used as directed.