An array of nine miniaturized electrodes are embedded within a catheter which is positioned in the lower esophagus at the level of the diaphragm. These electrodes continuously detect the electrical activity of the diaphragm and transmit this information to the ventilator.

There are three steps for the proper positioning of the Edi catheter.

- Anatomical placement: The most common practice to place a catheter is to measure a distance from the nose to the ear lobe to the xiphoid process (NEX method).

- Verification of the position of electrodes: ECG waveforms are visualized in the “Edi catheter positioning” window of the ventilator. P and QRS waves are present in the top electrodes (close to the right atrium). Loss of P wave and dampen QRS wave are present in the lower leads (close to the stomach)

- Verification of the Edi signal: A weak or absent signal may suggest neural disorder, sedation, or muscle relaxant use.

Secure the catheter once the second and third leads are highlighted in blue and record the insertion.

**Initial NAVA Settings**

- NAVA level

- Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP)

- Trigger Edi

- Backup ventilator settings

- fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO)

- Alarm settings

**NAVA Level**

NAVA level should be chosen to achieve a goal Edi range of (5-20µV). Lower NAVA level if Edi max < 5 µV and increase level if Edi max > 20 µV. NAVA level typically adjusted by 0.1-0.2 cmHO/ µV increments.

**PEEP**

Oxygenation and lung expansion are mainly determined by PEEP. Set the same PEEP according to earlier ventilator settings or according to the age of the patients.

**Trigger Edi**

Trigger Edi should be 0.5 µV.

**Backup Ventilator Settings**

An appropriate ventilator setting should be chosen in terms of respiratory rate, PEEP, tidal volume, inspiratory time, and peak inspiratory pressure. It could be similar to the earlier ventilator settings. These are set to kick in if there is a lack of Edi signal triggering a NAVA breath.

**FiO**

Oxygen requirements should be adjusted depending on targeted oxygen saturations depends on the condition of the disease.

**Alarm Settings**

The maximum pressure and apnea time should be chosen according to gestation age and maturity. Apnea time should be 2-4 s.

**Monitoring During NAVA Ventilation**

- Oxygen saturation

- Transcutaneous carbon dioxide pressure

- Edi signal (monitor trends on a ventilator)

- Arterial/capillary blood gas

- Trends

- The number of switches to back-up per minute: This indicates how often the patient goes into back-up mode. If the numbers are higher, then the current apnea time may be too short, and a patient can tolerate longer apnea time.
- Percentage of time on backup mode: if patients remain mostly in backup ventilation, then patients may not be ready to be weaned or may indicate malpositioning of the catheter.

**Weaning From NAVA Ventilator**

Unlike pressure-assist ventilation, weaning happens spontaneously in NAVA.

- Increasing apnea time

- Decreasing back-up settings

- Lowering NAVA level

**Troubleshooting During NAVA**

- The patient develops respiratory distress and oxygen requirement increasing

- Catheter malposition

- Upper airway obstruction

- Exceeding pressure limit

- High Edi (under-supported ventilation)

- Not enough Backup pressure

- Edi monitoring (Figure 2)