Because Chapman's points are somatic representations of viscero-somatic reflexes, they are typically used diagnostically, rather than therapeutically, and provide further clinical evidence of the presence or absence of visceral disease.

If a physician does decide to use a Chapman's point for treatment, rotatory movement over the point is believed to normalize the autonomic tone of the associated dysfunctional viscera by decreasing sympathetic input to the visceral structure.

These findings support the potential for the treatment of Chapman's points to alter the sympathetic tone to associated structures. There is also a belief that the treatment of Chapman's points improves lymphatic return and maximizes myofascial motion surrounding the dysfunctional viscera. Again, there is currently no evidence directly supporting this theory, but studies have found that manipulation of lymphatic channels via rhythmic compression of the abdomen or thorax has increased flow through the thoracic duct and increased the leukocyte count of the lymphatic fluids, even at distant sites.

Assuming that Chapman's points are, in fact, due to gangliform contractions within lymphatic tissues, these findings support that manipulation of lymphatic tissues, by rotary manipulation of Chapman's points in this case, mobilizes immune cells and may aid in disease recovery.

Taking up the theory of developing PVS, other authors relate Chapman's points to this system.

To conclude, one must remember that the lack of strong evidence does not mean that the phenomenon does not exist. EBM is a tripod in perfect balance: clinical experience, patient response to treatment, research. These three branches have equal value.