The initial treatment of aphasia is dependent on its cause. Immediate management follows the ABCs of critical care: airway, breathing, and circulation. In patients with acute CVA, patients may receive intravenous thrombolytic therapy with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), intra-arterial mechanical thrombectomy, or carotid endarterectomy.

While there is no standardized treatment, the primary goal is for patients to regain their greatest level of independence. To achieve this goal, the patient’s physical comorbidities, mental health, and deficits need to be addressed and properly managed. In addition, caregiver education and social support greatly impact a patient’s recovery outcome.

Patients suffering from aphasia have difficulties communicating their wants and needs. Some patients with aphasia are cognizant of their deficit and situation, which can be frustrating and may lead to severe depression and lack of participation in therapy. Therefore, early diagnosis of depression is instrumental in treating the aphasic patient. The patient will require emotional support from family, friends, and/or spiritual leaders. Referral to a psychiatrist, neuropsychologist, and/or psychologist for evaluation and management may be indicated. In addition, the treatment of depression includes pharmacological management.

Patients will be evaluated by speech-language pathologists to determine their strengths and weaknesses to individually customize a treatment plan. However, it has been shown that patients have better improvement with short, intense treatment sessions compared to longer but less intense treatment sessions.

Patients with non-fluent aphasias, such as Broca aphasia, have impaired fluency when it comes to sentence generation but tend to have intact singing abilities. Melodic intonation therapy (MIT) utilizes melody and rhythm to improve a patient’s fluency. The theory behind MIT is to utilize the undamaged non-dominant hemisphere that is responsible for intoning and reducing the use of the dominant hemisphere. MIT can only be used in patients with intact auditory comprehension.

Advances in neuroimaging technology now can appreciate the activation of the language areas of the brain, allowing for further advances in aphasia research and treatment.