# Continuing Education Activity

Giant cell tumor is one of the most common benign bone tumors, occurring in young adults ages 20–40 years with a high recurrence rate and a potential for aggressive behavior. It is most commonly located in the metaphysis or at the epiphysis of femur or tibia. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of giant cell tumors and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for the patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of giant cell tumors.
- Summarize the pathophysiology of giant cell tumors. 
- Outline the treatment options for giant cell tumors.
- Describe the interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the early detection of giant cell tumors and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Giant cell tumor (GCT) is one of the most common benign bone tumors, which occurs in young adults 20-40 years old with a high recurrence rate and a potential for aggressive behavior.

The biopsied tissue has multinucleated giant cells under the microscope. They consist of three different cell types:

- Giant cell tumor stromal cells of osteoblastic origin

- Mononuclear histiocytic cells

- The multinucleated giant cell of an osteoclast-monocyte lineage.

The tumor bone resorption is primarily done by the giant cells. The spindle-like stromal cells recruit monocytes and promote their fusion into giant cells. The stromal cells also improve the resorptive ability of the giant cells.

# Etiology

The exact etiology of GCT is not fully understood yet. It remains uncertain whether it is a true neoplasm or just a reactive condition. A 20q11 amplification is seen in 54% of GCTs, over-expression of p53 in 20% of them. Centrosome amplification, and boosted telomerase activity with the prevention of telomeres shortening support a neoplastic etiology.

# Epidemiology

Giant cell tumors represent 4-10% of all primary bone tumors and 15-20% of all benign bone tumors.

Although benign, these tumors exhibit locally aggressive behavior and own the potential to metastasize. Around 1 to 5% of cases show metastasis and there is a positive correlation between the occurrence of metastases and local aggressiveness and recurrence.

The tumor is sporadic before the age of 20, with less than 5% of the tumors occurring in skeletally immature patients.

# Pathophysiology

The receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B [NF-kB] ligand (RANKL) appears to be critical to the pathogenesis of GCT. Under normal physiologic conditions, osteoclast formation requires interaction with cells of the osteoblastic lineage, which may depend upon cell-cell contact, and the interaction of RANKL with its receptor RANK.

Several studies identified RANKL as highly expressed by the stromal cells within a GCT.

Mutations in the H3F3A gene, present in over 90% of GCT, may drive tumorigenesis. These mutations are restricted to the stromal cell population and are not detected in the osteoclasts or their precursors.

# Histopathology

On gross inspection, these lesions are characteristically chocolate brown, soft, spongy, and fragile.

Histologically, the lesions are cellular. Although the multinucleated giant cell is the characteristic cell type, these lesions have a background network of mononuclear stromal cells.

Three types of cells are found in benign bone GCT:

- Type I cells look like interstitial fibroblasts, make collagen, and can proliferate. This cell is probably the tumor component of GCT. Type I cells share features of mesenchymal stem cells. They have characteristics that suggest they could represent an early differentiation into osteoblasts.

- Type II cells are also interstitial but resemble the monocyte/macrophage family and could be recruited from the peripheral bloodstream.

- Type III cells are the multinucleated giant cells. They share many characteristics of osteoclasts and have similar morphologies.

Significant level activity for insulin-like growth factors I and II are found in type II and type III cells but absent in type I cells, which suggests that these factors are essential in the development and regulation of GCT.

Genetically, 80% of individuals with GCT of the bone exhibit the cytogenetic abnormality of telomeric associations (tas), whereas half of the cells in the tumor show the tas abnormality.

# History and Physical

**Common History and Physical Findings**

- **Pain**is the most common presenting symptom secondary to mechanical insufficiency resulting from bone destruction.

- **Swelling and deformity**are associated with more extensive lesions.

- **A soft tissue mass or bump**can occasionally be seen and results from cortical destruction and tumor progression outside the bone. It is often found close to the joint. Thus, a limited range of motion at the joint area is common.

- **Joint effusion and synovitis**are also possible. At the time of diagnosis, approximately 12% of patients present with pathological fractures.

- **The typical epiphyseal location**is found in 90% of the tumors. The tumor often extends to the articular subchondral bone or even abuts the cartilage. It rarely invades the joint and or its capsule. In those rare instances in which GCT occurs in a skeletally immature patient, the lesion is likely to be found in the metaphysis.

- **The most common locations**for the tumor in descending order are the distal femur, the proximal tibia, the distal radius, and the sacrum.

- **Multicentricity**or the simultaneous occurrence of GCT in different sites occurs but is exceedingly rare.

# Evaluation

**The workup includes:**

- **X-ray**reveals a characteristic radiolucent, geographic appearance with a narrow transition zone found at the lesion margin. This margin, as opposed to that of many other benign lesions, lacks a prominent sclerotic rim. Calcification of matrix, periosteal reaction, and new bone formation are typically absent.

- Imaging modalities such as computed tomographic (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be helpful to confirm the typical subchondral location of these lesions within the bone and the extent of a soft tissue mass, either beyond the bone cortex or through the adjacent joint.

- Modern imaging modalities to determine the extent of disease involvement include MRI, CT scan, functional positron emission tomography (PET), and bone scans.

- **CT scans**give a more accurate assessment of cortical thinning, penetration, and bone mineralization than the plain radiographs. The presence of a primary bone formation within the tumor suggests primary osteosarcoma. CT scan chest may be indicated to look for pulmonary metastasis. The metastatic spread is most common in the setting of a local recurrence; therefore, a chest CT is recommended in patients with locally recurrent disease.

- **MRI scan**helps assess the surrounding soft tissue integrity, such as the neurovascular structures or the extent of subchondral extension into adjacent joints. In the typical GCT, there is homogeneous signal intensity, and the lesion is well-circumscribed. They present with low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and intermediate signal intensity on T2-weighted images. Expansile hypervascular mass with cystic changes and heterogeneous low to intermediate signal intensity on T1-weighted images and intermediate to high intensity on T2-weighted images are its characteristic findings on MRI.

- **Bone scan**can help stage multicentric disease, but findings of the bone scan, typically a decrease in the uptake of radiotracer in the tumor's center, are not specific for GCT. Aneurysmal bone cysts have a similar appearance. There are limited data about the use of fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET for newly diagnosed GCT. GCT accumulates the FDG tracer, unlike many benign bone tumors, presumably because of the active metabolism of osteoclast-like giant cells.

# Treatment / Management

**Surgical Resection**

- It is the standard of care for the treatment of GCT. As most GCTs are benign and near a joint in young adults, several authors favor an intra-lesional approach that preserves the anatomy of bone instead of resection.

- Wide resection is correlated with a decreased local recurrence risk when compared with an intra-lesional curettage and could increase the recurrence-free survival rate from about 84% to 100%.

- Resection may be the preferred option even in benign tumors when the bone salvageability by intralesional methods would cause a severe compromise in mechanical characteristics. In the so-called "expendable bones," such as the lower ulnar end, upper fibular end, excision may be the treatment of choice.

- Either in primary or recurrent cases, as the tumor involves the end of a long bone and causes significant dysfunction of the joint surface, reconstruction of the joint surface is necessary. A mega prosthetic joint replacement, a biologic reconstruction with an autograft arthrodesis with internal/external fixation, a microvascular fibula reconstruction, an Ilizarov method of bone regeneration, and an osteoarticular allograft are the options for those cases.

- In the past, GCT was treated with amputations, wide resections, or reconstructions. But having in mind that GCT is a benign yet locally aggressive tumor, a local intralesional surgical approach is appropriate in most cases. Curettage, curettage and bone grafting, curettage and insertion of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), and primary resection are among the recommended treatment options. Radiation therapy and embolization of the feeding vessels are used for pelvic and sacral tumors, which are not amenable to surgery.

- Radiotherapy is also recommended for the spinal, sacral, or aggressive tumors when complete excision or curettage is impractical for any functional or medical reasons. Intralesional curettage and bone grafting are the limb-sparing treatment of choice, which is associated with acceptable functional and oncologic outcomes. However, a simple curettage with or without a bone graft has a recurrence rate between 27 to 55%. Many surgeons choose to replace bone graft packing of the lesion with PMMA packing due to the high recurrence rate.

- Wide en-bloc resection is another option that offers the lowest recurrence rate and can be used in an expendable bone. In the proximal fibula, a wide resection without reconstruction is often performed. GCT of the distal radius is usually resected and reconstructed with an allograft or an autograft.

**Adjuvant treatments**(liquid nitrogen, phenol, or HO and argon beam coagulation) offer an excellent recurrence-free survival, especially when paired with an intralesional curettage. A successful treatment for GCT heavily relies on the aggressiveness of the intralesional curettage than on the specific adjuvant used. The adequacy of tumor removal is influenced by the tumor location, associated fractures, extensions to the soft tissue, and an understanding of the functional consequences of the resection.

**Topical or systemic bisphosphonates**like zoledronate or pamidronate can be used as a novel adjuvant therapy for GCT. Bisphosphonates induce apoptosis and limit the tumor progression by targeting the osteoclast-like giant cells.

**Denosumab**, a monoclonal antibody, is widely used to treat unresectable GCTs of bone in adults and skeletally-matured adolescents, and acts by specifically binding to RANKL.

There is no recognized effective chemotherapeutic agent available for the management of these tumors yet.

# Differential Diagnosis

Based on the radiographic findings, the differential diagnoses include:

- Lytic metastatic lesion (particularly a vascular metastasis from thyroid or renal cell carcinoma)

- Primary bone tumor

- Brown tumor of hyperparathyroidism

- Non-ossifying fibroma

- Aneurysmal bone cyst

- Fibrous metaphyseal defects

- Osteoblastoma

- Chondroblastoma

- Malignant fibrous histiocytoma

- Telangiectatic osteosarcoma.

As noted earlier, mutations within the H3F3A gene can distinguish GCT from other entities, as they are identified in up to 96% of cases.

# Staging

Different classifications of GCT have been described based on histology and clinical/radiographic appearance, although they are clinically less useful. Campanacci grading system is as follows:

**Grade I**– Intraosseous lesions with well-marginated borders as well as an intact cortex.

**Grade II**– More extensive intraosseous lesions associated with a thin cortex without loss of cortical continuity.

- IIA – Without pathological fracture.

- IIB – With pathological fracture.

**Grade III**– Extraosseous lesions that extend into soft tissue.

# Prognosis

A recurrence occurring after three years has been considered exceptional in the literature.

Pulmonary metastases account for about 16-25% of the reported cases. Pulmonary metastases are treated with wide resection, combined with interferon alfa, chemotherapy, and radiation. When these metastases cannot be fully excised surgically, adjuvant treatments, like radiation or chemotherapy, are generally recommended. For unresectable metastases, both chemotherapy and radiation therapy are implemented. Lung metastases can have poor outcomes.

There is a probability of the presence of a primary bone sarcoma within prominent areas of giant cell reaction and hemorrhage of a newly discovered GCT that was missed at the initial evaluation instead of a malignant transformation explanation.

Overall, GCT has a good prognosis. Pulmonary metastases cause death in 16-25% of the patients presenting them. When a true malignant transformation occurs within a GCT, the prognosis is much worse than for a benign GCT, but it is still somewhat better than for other high-grade sarcomas.

# Complications

Giant cell tumor of the bone can be complicated with the following:

- Tumor recurrence

- Osteoarthritis of the knee joint

- Stress fracture

- Limited movement

- Pulmonary metastasis

- Local and deep infections

- Osteomyelitis

- Joint degeneration

- Hardware failure

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As the exact cause of GCT, like most of the other tumors, is still unclear, measures to deter them from occurring are unknown. It is crucial to educate the patients about the presentations of a local invasion or metastasis so that they can seek medical advice early in the process, which results in early detection and a better outcome. Education of the patient in regards to the surgical treatment is of utmost importance so they can make informed decisions that may impact the outcomes.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Bone GCT is a benign but locally aggressive primary bone tumor

- Local control is achieved by the removal of the tumor, but curettage therapies are often performed due to acceptable long-term outcomes and functional consequences of complete resection.

- After the treatment, the patient should be monitored with serial radiographs of the chest and site of involvement in addition to serial physical examinations.

- Relapses may be correlated with new swelling or pain.

- Tumor recurrence has been detected up to many years after the initial involvement and the subsequent treatment.

- At least a 5-year close follow-up is recommended.

- An intensified surveillance (preferably with CT) has been recommended for pulmonary metastasis in patients with a local recurrence of bone GCT, particularly for the first three years after the local recurrence diagnosis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The patients with GCT benefit notably from an inter-professional team providing their care. Primary care providers or emergency physicians are typically the first to visit the patients. Chiropractors may also be the first to encounter a GCT on their radiographs and must refer the patient to the appropriate specialist. After obtaining a plain X-ray showing the bone tumor, the patient should be referred to an orthopedic surgeon. The radiologists provide interpretations of the images, and an orthopedic oncologist provides the appropriate surgical care. Nursing assists in all phases from pre-op care to assisting in surgical and postoperative care.

Finally, the patient should receive rehabilitation from an occupational or physical therapist. Each of these disciplines is warranted to work together closely as a team to provide optimal care and achieve the best outcomes for the patients, which helps them get back to their ordinary daily activity as soon as possible.