**Background Physiology**: The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) is a major blood pressure regulating system in the human body.

- Angiotensinogen is produced mainly in the liver and released in the bloodstream as a pro-hormone.

- Renin is an enzyme produced by the juxtaglomerular cells located at the afferent arteriole of glomeruli in response to reduced renal perfusion. It is a direct effect of low blood pressure and signals juxtaglomerular cells to release renin.

- Renin acts on the angiotensinogen released by the liver and cleaves ten amino acids from its structure, which leads to the formation of angiotensin I.

- Angiotensin I increases blood pressure by vasoconstriction.

- When Angiotensin I passes through the lungs, it is further converted to angiotensin II by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), which is present in the vascular endothelial cells in the lungs.

**Angiotensin II**: Angiotensin II has various effects that help in blood pressure optimization.

- Acts in the brain and increase the release of vasopressin, which by reabsorbing fluids from the kidneys improves blood pressure.

- It causes arteriolar vasoconstriction, which increases blood pressure by increasing total peripheral resistance.

- It acts on the adrenal cortex and promotes the release of Aldosterone. Aldosterone further acts on the renal tubular cells and results in the reabsorption of sodium, which causes water reabsorption in collecting ducts.

- Increases adrenergic outflow from the central nervous system, which causes blood pressure to increase.

Ramipril inhibits angiotensin-converting enzyme and decreases angiotensin II formation**.**As a result, sympathetic activity goes down, sodium and water reabsorption from the kidneys reduces, smooth muscles in the arterioles also relax. As a result, blood pressure decreases.