LSD possession became illegal in the United States on October 24, 1968, in an amendment of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 1938. The final study of LSD approved by the FDA took place in 1980. LSD currently sits on a shortlist of schedule I drugs, along with other hallucinogens and stimulants such as dimethyltryptamine (DMT), gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), heroin, marijuana, methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA), mescaline, and psilocybin. Because of the controversy surrounding the substance, clinical trials have been difficult to organize. There are currently projects under development in Spain, Israel, and the USA looking at psilocybin and MDMA-assisted psychotherapy in the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder and as a treatment for anxiety and depression associated with cancer.

Alexander Shulgin, in his work, “Tryptamines I Have Known and Loved (TiHKAL),” detailed the synthesis of LSD from lysergic acid (interestingly classified itself as a schedule III controlled substance). He describes LSD as “a fragile molecule…free from air and light exposure; it is stable indefinitely.” Shulgin goes on to detail three groups of LSD analogs that have been synthesized; the first group kept the diethylamide group unchanged, with alterations made in the pyrrole ring, and included ALD-52, MLD-41, BOL-148, 1-hydroxymethyl-LSD, 1-dimethyl aminomethyl-LSD, 2-iodo-LSD. The other group of analogs had both 1-substituents and amide alkyl group variations and included LAE-32, ergonovine, methergine, DAM-57, LSM-775, and others. The third group included LSD analogs that had structural modifications at the 6-position in the “D-ring” and were labeled as constituents of the “LAD series.” According to Shulgin, ETH-LAD, AL-LAD, and PRO-LAD were considered significant and earned separate entries in his book.

A study published in 2016 by De Gregorio et al. analyzed the therapeutic potential of novel antipsychotics through the model of LSD-induced psychosis. Their paper includes a summary of experiments performed throughout the years that highlighted the interactions of LSD with serotonergic, dopaminergic, glutamatergic, and trace amine-associated receptor (TAAR) systems. The summary shows that LSD is not only active at the 5-HT1A, 5-HT2A, and 5-HT2C serotonergic receptors and serotonin transporter (SERT), but also active at the D1, D2, D4 dopaminergic receptors, the NMDA, mGlu2/mGlu3 glutamatergic receptors, and the TAAR1 receptor.

LSD is most commonly ingested orally in the form of blotter, perforated sheets of paper often decorated with abstract artwork that can subdivide into smaller pieces with the substance uniformly laid across the sheet. It is also distributed as small pills (microdot) and as a solution. LSD has a bioavailability of 71%, a threshold dose of 15 micrograms, and a duration of action of 8 to 12 hours, with residual effects sometimes lasting anywhere from 12 to 48 hours.