Vitamin K is a group of fat-soluble 2-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone. There is a variable alkyl substituent at the third position and exists in two principal forms: K1 (phylloquinone) and K2 (menaquinone). There is a third, synthetic form K3 (menadione), the use of which has been replaced by a synthetic form of vitamin K1 due to the potential for toxicity in infants with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.****Vitamin K1 is the major source in the human diet and is absorbed in the jejunum and ileum, transported by chylomicrons in circulation, and is dependent on bile, pancreatic enzymes, and dietary fat content.

These substances are necessary for adequate blood clotting because they are cofactors for gamma-glutamyl carboxylase and vitamin K2,3-epoxide reductase complex in modifying gamma-carboxyglutamic acid on clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X. This modification is required for cofactors to bind to phospholipids in the platelet membrane. Under-carboxylated clotting factors will lead to decreased protein activity and can lead to bleeding.

Vitamin K is also a requirement for various other proteins including anti-coagulant proteins (C, S, and Z), osteocalcin, and matrix GLA protein.

Vitamin K is not transported across the placenta efficiently, and infants are born with low to undetectable concentrations of Vitamin K and elevation of Protein Induced by Vitamin K Absence or Antagonism (PIVKA). PIVKA is a pre-carboxylated (incompletely carboxylated) form of prothrombin.

VKCFD is an autosomal recessive disorder with mutations in gamma-glutamyl carboxylase (type 1) or vitamin K2,3-epoxide reductase complex (type 2) which results in under-carboxylation and decreased activity of K-dependent proteins.