- Enterococci are Gram-positive facultative anaerobic cocci in short and medium chains commonly associated with nosocomial infections.

- VRE is seen in patients with prolonged hospitalization, ICU stays, residence in long term care (LTC) facilities, hemodialysis patients, diabetes, cancer, and transplant patients.

- E. faecium species are 80% vancomycin-resistant and 90% ampicillin-resistant compared to E. faecalis species, which are only 10% vancomycin-resistant and mostly ampicillin sensitive.

- Virulence factors include structural durability, bacteriocins, hemolysin/cytolysin, gelatinase, a serine protease, and biofilm production. Antibiotic resistance is intrinsic or acquired through the transfer of resistance-related mobile genetic elements (MGE) via various mechanisms like plasmids, conjugation, and transposons.

- Vancomycin resistance is attributed to the vanA gene, which replaces the D-Ala-D-Ala terminus of peptidoglycan with D-Ala-D-lactate, which binds to vancomycin with significantly lower affinity. VanA gene confers vancomycin resistance to MRSA via horizontal transmission.

- Enterococci can cause UTIs, bacteremia, IE, meningitis, intra-abdominal infections, and wound infections. Resistant strains require prolonged courses of antibiotics.

- Enterococcus should be routinely tested for sensitivity to penicillin, vancomycin, and high-level aminoglycoside resistance (HLAR). In the case of beta-lactam or vancomycin resistance, in vitro susceptibility to daptomycin and linezolid is warranted.

- Hand hygiene is paramount to prevent patient-to-patient transmission of VRE. Surveillance stool cultures may be required in high-risk patients in ICUs, transplant patients, and LTC patients to prevent the colonization of the GI tract and subsequent infections.