Due to the structure and function of the AV junction, it is susceptible to re-entry. Atrioventricular nodal re-entry tachycardia is the most common. AV block is also a common pathology due to AV nodal dysfunction.

****Atrioventricular nodal re-entry tachycardia**:**

The reentrant circuit directly involves the AV node. The AV node has two pathways, the fast which has a longer refractory period and the slow, which has a shorter refractory period. It forms from the re-entry circuits between the AVN, fast pathway, slow pathway, and the atrial myocardium. Most common being slow-fast AVNRT with slow AV nodal pathway for anterograde conduction and Fast av nodal conduction for retrograde conduction. If there is a premature atrial beat, then the slow pathway can travel up the fast pathway and restimulate itself, creating a loop, which increases the heart rate much higher than a normal with supraventricular tachycardia found on electrocardiogram (ECG).

**Atrioventricular block**:

Mobitz type 1 is the prolongation of the PR interval until finally complete block of the atrial impulse and a drop of the QRS. While Mobtiz type 2 is a constant PR interval until one atrial impulse is blocked, resulting in no QRS following. It is most likely from damage to the infranodal conduction system so a widened QRS may present on EKG. Mutations in sodium channels are highly suggested to result in AVN block; this may be congenital or due to exogenous factors including ischemia and Lyme disease, which cause damage to the AV conduction pathway.

**Atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia**:

This condition is due to an accessory pathway outside the AV node that allows for re-entry stimulation of the AV node, which can lead to a tachyarrhythmia. It classifies as supraventricular tachycardia. It can get triggered by a premature atrial or ventricular contraction, which can stimulate a reentrant impulse**Wolff-Parkinson White**:

Wolff-Parkinson White is an electrical cardiac disorder resulting from an accessory pathway that communicates between the atria and the ventricles. The accessory pathway has the name of the bundle of Kent. It does not have rate slowing properties and conducts electrical activity at a higher rate, leading to stunning of the heart resulting in cardiogenic shock.