Normal heart valves are formed by two main types of cells: valvular endothelial cells (VECs) mainly covering the valve surfaces and valvular interstitial cells (VICs) that are located deeper than the VECs. It has been demonstrated that VICs have serotonin receptors and tumor growth factor-beta receptor (TGFBR) on their plasma membrane.

Anorexigens (fenfluramine, dexfenfluramine, and their active metabolite norfenfluramine), dopamine agonists (pergolide and cabergoline), MDMA, ergot alkaloids (ergotamine, methysergide, and its active metabolite methylergonovine) are partial to full agonists of 5-hydroxytryptamine 2B receptors (5-HT2BR).

Activation of 5-HT2BR has a different mechanism from which increases the activation of transcription factors in the nucleus of the VICs, therefore, producing proliferation, resulting in valvulopathy.

One of the mechanisms by which 5-HT2BR activation produces VICs proliferation is by dissociation of guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins (G-proteins). The release of G-proteins leads to the activation of phospholipase-c beta with a subsequent calcium mobilization and diacylglycerol (DAG) release. Increased release of DAG will activate protein kinase C, which can by itself increase nuclear transcription factors (i.e., produce proliferation) or activate nuclear transcription factors by triggering cytoplasmic extracellular-regulated kinases 1 and 2.

SRC (proto-oncogene c-Src**)**can also be phosphorylated by G- proteins, activating the nuclear transcription factor or TGFB-1. The activation of TGFB-1 subsequently produces a complex formed by SMAD2, SMAD 3, and SMAD4 (which are intracellular proteins). This complex will enter into the nucleus and upregulate transcription factors and then will produce the proliferation of VICs.

This mechanism is described to be very similar to the valvulopathies produced by carcinoid disease.