The nerve can be divided into four distinct portions: the nucleus, the cisternal portion, the cavernous sinus portion, and the orbital portion. The abducens nucleus resides in the dorsal pons, ventral to the floor of the fourth ventricle, and just lateral to the medial longitudinal fasciculus. About forty percent of the axons project through the ipsilateral medial longitudinal fasciculus to cross over to the contralateral medial rectus subnucleus to eventually innervate the contralateral medial rectus muscle. The abducens nucleus is supplied by the pontine branches of the basilar artery.

Of all the cranial nerves, the abducens nerve has the second longest intracranial course. It is located in the pons at the floor of the fourth ventricle, at the same level as the facial colliculus. In fact, the axons of the facial nerve loop around the posterior aspect of the abducens nucleus. This will be of clinical significance later. The nerve originates from the caudal, dorsal pontine below the fourth ventricle. After the fibers emerge from the nucleus, they course superiorly and then anteriorly before most axons leave the brainstem at the junction of the pontine and the medulla (i.e., the pontomedullary groove) caudal and medial to both the facial nerve and the vestibulocochlear nerve in most cases.

The nerve then travels through the subarachnoid space and crosses the upper edge of the tip of the petrous part of the temporal bone towards the clivus within a fibrous sheath called Dorello's canal and enters the dura inferior to the posterior clinoid process. Because it is anchored in Dorello's canal, the nerve is prone to stretching when intracranial pressure is increased due to multiple causes discussed later. It then enters the cavernous sinus (along with the oculomotor nerve, the trochlear nerve, and the first branch of the trigeminal nerve (V1), following lateral to the internal carotid artery and medial to a lateral wall of the sinus before following the sphenoidal fissure and entering the orbit through the superior orbital fissure within the tendinous ring to reach its destination at the lateral rectus muscle.