**Chest X-ray:**

On chest x-ray, mucoepidermoid carcinomas are well-circumscribed, oval, round, or lobulated masses. Frequently, there are signs of bronchial stenosis or obstruction such as mucoid impaction, post-obstructive pneumonia, distal bronchial dilatation, atelectasis, air trapping, and peripheral lucency.

**Computed tomography scan:**

The value of CT study in pulmonary mucoepidermoid carcinomas diagnosis is limited since the CT image findings are non-specific.

On CT, low-grade tumors are intraluminal homogeneous nodules or masses with or without obstructive change; some large lobular heterogeneous masses containing multilobular cystic structures filled with low-attenuation fluid and in some cases multiple punctate or coarse calcifications are noted.

In high-grade tumors, mucus secretion decreases because of weak differentiation, cystic lesions are less common, and necrosis occurs more frequently than in low-grade tumors. On CT, certain high-grade tumors also present signs of common lung cancer, such as spiculation, pleural infiltration, lymphadenopathy, or even distant metastasis.

**PET imaging:**

By PET imaging, pulmonary mucoepidermoid carcinoma is usually FDG-avid.

**Bronchoscopy:**

At bronchoscopy, pulmonary mucoepidermoid carcinomas appear as polypoid pink masses that can be confused with carcinoid tumor.

**Histopathology:**

The diagnosis of pulmonary mucoepidermoid carcinoma relies on histopathological examination of the biopsy and surgical specimen since the clinical and radiological manifestations are not specific.