The causes of hirsutism are variable. The condition may be of ovarian or adrenal origin, tumoral or not. The following are some examples.

**Hyperandrogenic Hirsutism**

Hirsutism is most often due to hyperproduction of androgens, of ovarian or adrenal origin. Hyperandrogenism of tumor origin, which is very severe, must be distinguished from non-tumor hyperandrogenism, which is often minimal or moderate.

Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS)

It represents the most common cause of hirsutism and causes about 75% of all cases. It affects 5% to 10% of women during their period of genital activity and 20% to 25% of adolescent girls. It is a heterogeneous and complex syndrome of unknown etiology characterized by the end of follicular maturation with an accumulation of small follicles under the cortex and hyperplasia of the ovarian stroma.

Hirsutism appears at puberty, accompanied by disturbances of the menstrual cycle, weight gain, dyslipidemia, insulin resistance, acne, and acanthosis nigricans. The patient reports spaniomenorrhea (prolongation of the cycle beyond 35 days), oligomenorrhea (less abundant menstruation), and infertility. The ovaries can be enlarged. Hypothyroidism or liver disease may be present.

Androgen-Secreting Tumors

Hyperandrogenism due to ovarian or adrenal tumors is rare. It is responsible for only 0.2% of all cases of hirsutism. These androgen-secreting tumors are autonomous, and therefore, do not depend on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. Approximatively 50% of them are malignant, and in these cases, the plasma androgen levels are very high. They are also responsible for rapid-onset of virilization, hirsutism, and a pelvic or abdominal mass.

Non-classical Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (NCAH)

This is a common autosomal recessive disorder, caused by a partial 21-hydroxylase deficiency, and represents the most common adrenal etiology of hyperandrogenism. Its prevalence varies greatly according to the ethnicity of the patients. So it is more common in the Ashkenazi Jewish population (3.7%) and the Central European population (2%) and rare in Caucasians (0.1%). Like PCOS, NCAH can be expressed after the puberty by hirsutism, oligomenorrhea, acne, infertility, alopecia, and primary amenorrhoea.

**Non-Hyperandrogenic Hirsutism**

Medications

Many drugs can cause hirsutism: androgens, glucocorticosteroids, progestins, estrogen antagonists (clomiphene, tamoxifen), minoxidil, cyclosporine, danazol, diazoxide, phenytoin, D-penicillamine, and interferon.

It is important to know that hypertrichosis could also be caused by certain medications such as acetazolamide, phenytoin, latanoprost, streptomycin, psoralen, minoxidil, cyclosporine, and diazoxide.

Endocrinopathies

The responsibility of the endocrinopathies in the occurrence of hirsutism is rare, and other more specific symptoms and signs dominate the clinical picture:

- Cushing syndrome depends on adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH). It can cause hirsutism, because of the stimulating nature of ACTH on the reticulated area that can cause excessive androgen secretion. The features of hypercorticism are often in the foreground.

- Hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism is uncommonly a cause of isolated hirsutism.

- Hyperprolactinemia is manifested by amenorrhea, galactorrhea, infertility, and rarely hirsutism.

- Acromegaly is also a rare cause of isolated hirsutism.

Others Causes

Moderate hirsutism can be observed in pregnant women (physiological prolactin secretion) and postmenopausal women (relative hyperandrogenism due to the cessation of ovarian estrogen production).

Idiopathic Hirsutism

Idiopathic hirsutism defines the hirsutism that occurs in association with regular menses, normal ovarian morphology, and normal plasmatic androgen levels. It is a diagnosis of exclusion after elimination of other etiologies. It represents about 10% of all cases of hirsutism and 50% of cases of mild hirsutism. It may be due to hypersensitivity of the pilosebaceous follicle receptors to androgens and peripheral conversation induced by the 5-reductase of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone ten-fold more active on the follicle-sebaceous unit. This has genetic determinism and is frequently reported in women of East Indian and Mediterranean origin.