The femoral triangle in the anterior superior third of the thigh is a subfascial space that appears as a triangular depression inferior to the inguinal ligament; the depression is visible when the thigh is abducted, flexed, and laterally rotated. The borders of the femoral triangle are the inguinal ligament superiorly, the adductor longus muscle medially, and the sartorius muscle laterally. The apex of the triangle is located distally and is formed by the intersection of the lateral border of the femoral triangle, the sartorius, crossing over the medial border of the triangle, the adductor longus.

The floor of the femoral triangle is composed of several muscles; medially, the floor is formed by the pectineus and adductor longus and laterally by the iliopsoas. The roof of the femoral triangle, from superficial to deep, is composed of skin, subcutaneous tissue, superficial fascia, and deep fascia (fascia lata).

From lateral to medial, the contents of the femoral triangle include the femoral nerve, femoral artery, femoral vein, and lymphatics. A convenient mnemonic is NAVEL:  femoral Nerve, femoral Artery, femoral Vein, and Empty space with Lymphatics (femoral canal). The femoral artery, femoral vein, and deep inguinal lymph nodes with associated lymphatics are within a conical fascial sheath, the femoral sheath. The femoral sheath is continuous with the transversalis fascia of the abdomen and the inguinal ligament; it encases the vessels as they pass through the femoral triangle.

The femoral sheath merges inferiorly with connective tissue associated with the vessels. Each vessel has a separate sub-compartment of the femoral sheath as it passes through the femoral triangle. The femoral nerve is not contained within the sheath.