Evidence shows that tracheostomy-related complications are minimized, and outcomes are improved when there is a multidisciplinary, ward-based approach to tracheostomy care.

Weekly tracheostomy ward rounds should be the ideal practice, with the team comprising of a physician (commonly an intensivist, respiratory physician or otolaryngologist), chest physiotherapist, speech and language therapist, and specialist nurse. The team ensures standards of routine tracheostomy care are achieved, provides a weaning or decannulation plan, and troubleshoots potential issues surrounding tracheostomy care, such as competencies, logistics, and shortfalls.

The care of tracheostomy requires both competencies and experience. The latter is especially true when ‘troubleshooting’ issues or potential problems that may arise. The most important aim of caring for patients with a tracheostomy is to prevent tube blockage. As the native upper airway is bypassed, numerous physiological changes occur, therefore care that mimics the normal functions of the upper airway should be undertaken e.g., humidification, secretion clearance, stoma or wound care, native speech, airway protection, and safe swallowing.

The commonest measures or elements of care that are carried out and monitored regularly are: (I) going through daily tracheostomy care checklist, (II) humidification, (III) suction clearance, (IV) stoma care, (V) inner cannula care, (VI) oral care and swallowing, and (VII) cuff management.

Monitoring of these elements by the various team members is paramount in ensuring the safety and quality of tracheostomy care. Especially after tracheostomy tube change, monitoring of respiratory function (such as respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, work of breathing, waveform capnography) and secretions management are critical as this is when any complications, such as tube dislodgement or false passage creation, may be detected promptly.