There is no specific test for diagnosis and predicting disease activity in JIA.

**Laboratory**

Initial laboratory tests should include CBC, ESR, CRP, ANA, RF, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies (anti-CCP), and HLA-B27. The typical inflammatory markers are common, especially in oligoarthritis. A positive RF or anti-CCP provides little value for the diagnosis but may indicate a poorer disease course and outcome. Ferritin, fibrinogen, AST, triglyceride are recommended when there is a concern of macrophage activation syndrome (MAS). Other tests for excluding other diseases may be considerations depending on the differential diagnosis.

**Imaging**

Imaging serves to improve the certainty of a diagnosis of JIA, narrow the differential diagnosis, and evaluate joint damage. The heterogeneity of clinical manifestations usually requires a multimodal imaging approach.

Radiography remains initial imaging used for symptomatic joints; however, the radiographic changes are undetectable in an early stage of JIA. The indirect signs of arthritis in radiography are soft tissue swelling, increased density of soft tissue as well as dislocation of fat folds. Other features are periarticular osteoporosis, joint space narrowing, bone erosion and deformity, and joint subluxation or ankyloses in an advanced stage.

Ultrasound (US) is an imaging modality easily accessible and non-irradiating that plays a significant role in the imaging of JIA. Also, the US allows the comparison with the contralateral side and the dynamic evaluation of joints. The US is capable of assessing synovial thickening, joint effusion, tenosynovitis, enthesitis, and bone erosions. US evaluation of the synovial thickening and the synovitis is particularly important for the diagnosis. They appear as abnormally hypoechoic tissue associated with joint lines or surrounding tendons. In addition to detecting synovitis, the US accurately guides for intra-articular corticosteroid injections. Ultrasound allows evaluation without sedating the patient.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the modality gold standard for the study of JIA. All joints affected by pathological inflammatory phenomena can be easily examined in all possible plans and with an excellent contrast resolution of bone and soft tissues.  It is the most sensitive imaging technique detecting synovitis. The standard MR imaging protocol needs to include: T1 spin-echo (SE) sequence, fat-suppressed sequence (classic T2 fat-sat; short tau inversion recovery - STIR; DIXON fat-suppression sequence); T1 fat-suppressed sequence precontrast and postcontrast. MRI is the only modality able to objective bone marrow edema and the most sensitive to detect bone erosions.

**Clinical-Laboratory Classification**

The clinical manifestations and the test results of RF and HLA-B27 will be used to categorized JIA subtypes based upon the ILAR classification

Oligoarthritis is defined as chronic arthritis affecting four joints or less during the first six months of disease. Persistent oligoarthritis is defined as the affected joints being four or less after the first six months, and extended oligoarthritis is defined as more than four affected joints after the first six months.

RF negative polyarthritis is defined as arthritis affecting five joints or more during the first six months of disease with a negative IgM RF.

RF positive polyarthritis is arthritis affecting five joints or more during the first six months of disease with a positive IgM RF on at least two tests three months apart.Systemic arthritis is arthritis with or preceded by a fever of at least a 2-week duration and accompanied by at least 1 of the following: evanescent erythematous rash, generalized lymph node enlargement, hepatomegaly, and/or splenomegaly, or serositis (pericarditis and/or pleuritis and/or peritonitis).Psoriatic arthritis is defined as chronic arthritis with psoriasis or chronic arthritis with at least 2 of the following: dactylitis, nail pitting, onycholysis, or psoriasis in a first-degree relative.Enthesitis related arthritis (ERA) is defined as arthritis with enthesitis, or arthritis or enthesitis with at least 2 of SI joint tenderness and/or inflammatory lumbosacral pain, a positive HLA-B27, the onset of arthritis in a male over six years of age, acute anterior uveitis, history of ankylosing spondylitis, ERA, sacroiliitis with inflammatory bowel disease, reactive arthritis or acute anterior uveitis in a first-degree relativeUndifferentiated arthritis is defined as chronic arthritis, which does not fulfill criteria in any subtype or fulfills two or more subtypes.