History and presenting symptoms depend on the etiology, as well as the level of obstruction.

Obstruction due to underlying colorectal malignancy tends to occur on the left side (descending, sigmoid and rectum), as these are the more common locations for colorectal cancer. Also, the diameter of the bowel is smaller, and the feces tend to be solid. Patients may have experienced a change in bowel habit leading up to the obstruction, usually an alternating pattern of diarrhea and constipation, as only liquefied feces can pass through the narrowed lumen. Questioning patients carefully about changes in their bowel patterns often reveals that symptoms have been present for weeks or months before the acute presentation. They may report bleeding per rectum in addition to the change in bowel habits. Patients presenting with obstruction will experience abdominal distension, abdominal discomfort and are unable to pass feces and ultimately flatus. Patients may or may not have a positive family history of colorectal malignancy.

Large bowel obstruction due to a sigmoid volvulus usually presents more acutely with abdominal distension rather than a change in bowel habit, and in patients who are less mobile and have a tendency for constipation, for example, nursing home residents and bedbound patients.

Pain is not as prominent a feature as it is in small bowel obstruction, due to the less frequent contractions in the large bowel compared to the small bowel.

Patients with an incompetent ileocecal valve will decompress their large bowel into the small bowel and eventually present with vomiting, but a patient with a competent ileocecal valve will have ongoing distension of the obstructed colon, and will eventually present with significant right iliac fossa pain and impending caecal perforation.

Examination of the abdomen reveals significant distension, a tympanitic percussion note and potentially guarding and rebound over areas of impending perforation.

If the perforation has occurred already, the patient will be grossly peritonitic.

The digital rectal examination reveals an empty rectum.