The treatment of patients with bronchogenic cysts depends on symptoms at presentation and the patient’s age. Surgical resection alleviates symptoms, prevents complications and establishes the diagnosis of bronchogenic cysts.

Symptomatic cysts should be resected either by thoracotomy or via video-assisted thoracoscopy regardless of patient age unless surgical risks are unacceptably high.

There has been a recent rise in the use of thoracoscopic techniques for resection of bronchogenic cysts in adults. The benefits of thoracoscopy include decreased scarring, reduced pain, and shorter hospitalization. Complicated bronchogenic cysts usually require thoracotomy for more extensive resection.

The resection must be complete because of the risk of recurrence after incomplete surgical removal. The treatment of asymptomatic bronchogenic cysts remains controversial. Most authors seem to advocate a surgical approach to prevent complications.

Intrapulmonary bronchogenic cysts:

Lobectomy is the procedure of choice. However, in peripheral bronchogenic cysts or patients with limited lung function, a conservative procedure as a total pericystectomy, a wedge resection, or segmentectomy are recommended.

Mediastinal bronchogenic cysts:

The presence of adhesions especially in complicated forms of mediastinal bronchogenic cysts can lead to incomplete resection. Thus, resection or destruction of the mucosa is a requirement to prevent accumulation of fluid and late recurrence.

An alternative option for bronchogenic cysts is close imaging surveillance to ensure temporal stability.