A detailed clinical history and physical examination are crucial for the diagnosis of LS plexopathy. Patients typically present with low back pain radiating to one side. Pain may be positional, worse in a supine position. Patients with diabetic LS plexopathy (diabetic amyotrophy) typically complain of unilateral pain in the proximal thigh. Pain may be associated with numbness, paresthesias, or dysesthesias of the lower limbs. These symptoms are usually unilateral. LS plexopathy secondary to radiotherapy is usually painless. The duration of symptoms may vary from very acute (after road traffic accident) to chronic (after radiotherapy). In severe cases, muscle weakness and atrophy may occur. Sphincter disturbances are rare and their presence should suspect cauda equine syndrome.

Physical examination may be normal in mild cases. Bruises may be seen in cases of trauma. A straight leg raise test is positive in more than half of the patients. Asymmetric lower limb muscle weakness may be seen with asymmetrically absent or reduced deep tendon reflexes. Knee jerk reflex is affected in lumbar plexopathy and ankle jerk is affected in sacral plexopathy. Muscle weakness in hip flexion, knee extension, or adduction suggests a possible injury to the lumbar plexus. Sensory loss may be present in a dermatomal pattern in cases of proximal LS plexopathy involving the roots, or in the nerve distribution. Sensory changes to the medial thigh, anterior thigh, and medial leg can suggest lumbar plexus involvement; posterior thigh, dorsum of the foot, and perineum are likely related to sacral plexus involvement. Spinal point tenderness may be present, especially in cases of sacral fracture or infection. A rectal exam should be performed to assess rectal tone. Saddle anesthesia and bowel or bladder incontinence are rare and may be present, making it difficult to differentiate from cauda equina and conus medullaris syndromes. The inguinal region should also be palpated for suspected hematomas.