According to enhanced recovery protocols, prenatal care should include educating patients and their partners about the possibility of cesarean delivery. The patient should receive information about what to expect before, during, and after the procedure. If a cesarean delivery is anticipated, perhaps due to maternal or fetal complications, any maternal comorbidities (anemia, diabetes, hypertension, obesity) should be optimized preoperatively if possible.

There is an aspiration risk with subsequent pneumonitis with cesarean delivery. Preoperative antacids (sodium citrate) and a histamine H2 antagonist can be administered to prevent low gastric pH. Concerning fasting, it is traditional to ask a patient to be “NPO after midnight.” In a stable patient with an unscheduled cesarean, it is common to ask the patient to fast for 6 hours. Most recently, enhanced recovery protocols have recommended the patients be encouraged to drink clear liquids until 2 hours before the scheduled surgery, and solid food is prohibited for 6 hours prior. Additionally, carbohydrate fluid supplementation may be offered to nondiabetic patients up to 2 hours before surgery, which may also improve patient outcomes. Oral or mechanical bowel preparation is not recommended. In the case of emergencies, NPO status may be superseded by urgent fetal or maternal indications.

Preoperative gabapentin has been found to improve pain control after cesarean delivery. Preoperative sedation, however, should not be administered due to the risk of impaired psychomotor function after delivery, as well as fetal risks (problems with thermogenesis, low Apgar scores, and “floppy baby syndrome”).

As with any surgery, the cesarean section carries a risk of infection. It is considered a clean-contaminated surgical wound due to the contiguous nature of the uterus, cervix, and vagina. Cesarean section is the most important risk factor for a woman developing an infection in the postpartum period. Women who have a cesarean are at 20 times greater risk of infection than women who have a vaginal delivery.

Antibiotic prophylaxis can help decrease the risk of infection from the cesarean section by 60% to 70%.

A single intravenous dose of 1 g of cephazolin is routine for women weighing less than 80kg, and the dose increases to 2 g for patients weighing 80 kg or more. For women weighing 120 kg or more, there is a consideration for increasing the dose of cephazolin to 3 g to achieve adequate tissue concentrations of the antibiotic.Staphylococcus aureus.

Because of the nature of the cesarean section, infection risk is conferred by vaginal flora in addition to skin flora. Women undergoing cesarean after labor or rupture of membranes have increased exposure to vaginal bacteria. More recent research has found that, for these women, the addition of 500mg of azithromycin intravenously to traditional antibiotic prophylaxis is beneficial for reducing infectious morbidity.

Topical preparations have also been utilized to decrease infection after cesarean. Topical povidone-iodine and chlorhexidine have both been found to be effective for abdominal skin preparation. Research is mixed and of generally low quality; however, there may be some evidence that chlorhexidine is superior to povidone-iodine in reducing infection.

In addition to abdominal skin preparation, vaginal preparation should also be a consideration. A Cochrane Review recently examined this topic and concluded that vaginal preparation probably does reduce the risk of endometritis after cesarean.