Histologically, major salivary glands are made up of salivary acini and ducts, which produce two types of fluids, serous and mucinous. All major and minor salivary glands have nerve supplies, and upon stimulation, salivatory nuclei in the medulla generate an efferent response. The efferent nerve impulses release acetylcholine (ACh), which works on muscarinic receptors (specifically M3 receptors), stimulating salivary glands to produce saliva. The stimuli that cause salivary production ranges from smelling to chewing. Pathology arises when there is a dysfunction in gland innervation or in the gland itself.

**Medication-Induced Xerostomia**

Xerostomia-inducing medications may exert their effect on the central nervous system (CNS) or at the neuroglandular junction.

**Radiation-Induced Xerostomia**

Radiation causes xerostomia because the oral cavity, lymph nodes, and salivary glands are in the radiation field of head and neck radiation therapy. Radiation causes quantitative and qualitative changes in the salivary glands

Although the tissues of salivary glands have a low mitotic index which should make them quite stable and typically radiation-resistant, studies have shown a decline in salivary gland function proportional to the radiation dose. This dose-dependent radiation causes a secretory dysfunction of the gland. Acinar atrophy and chronic inflammation are considered hallmarks of radiation-induced xerostomia. Fibrosis mainly presents as periductal and intralobular, but the structure of the ducts remains intact.

**Sjögren Syndrome**

In Sjögren syndrome, chronic lymphocytic infiltration and inflammation of acinar cells lead to exocrine fibrosis resulting in gland damage.