Colostomy creation and care is a major abdominal procedure, routinely performed in general surgery departments around the world, but have multiple possible complications as well as a severe psychosocial impact on patients. Thus it is imperative to have adequate preoperative guidance as well as intraoperative decision making and postoperative care so as to minimize morbidity and the psychosocial burden. A team approach is an ideal way to go about this, and the following should be done:

- The patient should be evaluated by a general or gastro surgeon to assess the necessity of stoma creation.

- He should be evaluated by a pulmonologist and cardiologist to assess and optimize lung and heart status and also tested for fitness by the anesthesiologist.

- An enterostomal therapist should then explain the procedure, address any concerns the patient might have, and mark the site for stoma creation.

- The nurse should teach the patient how to use an incentive spirometer.

- The stoma should be made by the general or gastro surgeon based on his best clinical judgment.

- In the postoperative period, the nurses or enterostomal therapist should perform colostomy care with the view to teach the patient how to go about it himself at home and also how to assess for complications.

- A physical therapist and a dietician should be contacted for early ambulation and parenteral or early enteral nutrition to reduce postoperative ileus.

- The patient himself performs colostomy care and must look out for complications once he is discharged from the hospital.

- A psychologist may be required to assess and address any psychosocial complications the patient might have regarding the colostomy or the appliance.

An integrated team approach is seen to be vital in colostomy preparation and management and has also been seen to reduce complications related to stoma creation as well as for psychosocial support. [Level 5]