Complications affecting patients undergoing mechanical ventilation include ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), barotrauma, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), pneumothorax, atelectasis, and post-extubation stridor. VAP is generally defined as a new persistent infiltrate on chest radiograph after a patient has been on mechanical ventilation for at least 48 hours, with at least three of the following associated symptoms: fever, leukopenia/leukocytosis, increased sputum production, rales, cough, or worsening gas exchange. ARDS is generally defined using the Berlin definition. The definition requires the measurement of the partial pressure of oxygen on a blood gas compared to the fraction of inspired oxygen the patient is currently receiving. There are three stages of ARDS: mild with a PaO2/FiO2 ratio less than or equal to 300 mm Hg, moderate with PaO2/FiO2 less than or equal to 200 mm Hg, and severe with PaO2/FiO2 less than or equal to 100 mm Hg.

A study of pediatric patients in Egypt showed 39.9% of patients experienced complications, which equates to 29.5 complications per 1000 ventilation days. The complications were broken down into VAPs (27.3% or 20.19/1000 ventilator days), pneumothorax (10.6% or 7.82/1000 ventilator days), atelectasis (4.4% or 3.28/1000 ventilator days), and post-extubation stridor (2.4% or 1.76/1000 ventilator days).

Asynchrony is another complication, defined as a mismatch between the patient's demand and the ventilator supply of measures such as ventilation rate, flow, volume, or pressure.