Practitioners performing OAPS should possess foundational knowledge of the anatomy and physiology of all body systems. Along with this foundational knowledge, intimate knowledge of normal airway anatomy and potential variations is of utmost importance as the majority of severe complications that occur during OAPS, however rare, involve the respiratory system. In a systematic review and meta-analysis examining the incidence of adverse events occurring during the procedural sedation of adults in the emergency department, aspiration and laryngospasm were the two most common severe adverse events that required emergent medical intervention.

As such, all practitioners performing OAPs should be well-versed in the pre-sedation airway assessment to identify patients who may be difficult to ventilate and/or intubate. Although there is no single best predictor of difficulty in bag-mask ventilation and intubation, one should be familiar with the commonly assessed variables during the pre-sedation airway evaluation, which has proven useful predictors. These variables include the presence of a beard, age >55, history of snoring, obesity, and edentulism.

For many reasons, patients with restricted mouth openings of less than 2.5 cm are poor candidates for OAPS. These include the potential inability to visualize and suction the oral cavity and oropharynx, the potential inability to insert certain airway adjuncts, and the potential inability to perform direct laryngoscopy for intubation. A thorough history of any prior airway procedures and/or congenital malformations should be obtained. The most commonly utilized scale for pre-anesthetic upper airway anatomy assessment is the Mallampati score, a visual grading scale ranging from I-IV, which looks at the distance/space between the base of the tongue to the soft palate, with scores greater than III/IV being more predictive of a potentially difficult airway and intubation.