Cardiopulmonary syndrome is the primary form of Hantavirus syndrome in the United States. Europe and Asia more commonly have a hemorrhagic fever with renal insufficiency syndrome.

In the United States, sporadic cases of hantavirus have been seen as far east as Maine, but the vast majority of the 697 cases as of January 2017 were west of the Mississippi River. Seven states account for approximately 70% of all cases reported in the United States: with the most cases in New Mexico (109 cases), Colorado (104 cases), Arizona (77 cases), California (63 cases), Washington (47 cases), Texas (42 cases), and Montana (41 cases).

The following list of HFRS presentations contains the virus serotype, specific rodent vector, and geographic distribution.

- Hantaan virus: Apodemus agrarius, the major cause of disease in Asia

- Dobrava virus: Apodemus flavicollis, the Balkans, Slovenia, the Baltic states, and other parts of Europe

- Seoul virus: Rattus norvegicus, East Asia

- Puumala virus: Clethrionomys glareolus, Europe

The following list of Hantavirus presentations contains the virus serotype, specific rodent vector, and geographic distribution.

- Sin Nombre Virus: Peromyscus maniculatus; Canada, United States - a major cause of hantavirus in Canada and the United States

- New York Virus; Peromyscus leucopus, eastern United States

- Monongahela Virus: Peromyscus maniculatus nubiterrae, eastern United States

- Bayou Virus: Oryzomys palustris, southeastern United States

- Black Creek Canal Virus: Sigmodon hispidus, Florida, United States

- Laguna Negra: Calomys laucha, Paraguay, Bolivia - first South American hantavirus isolated

- Andes: Oligoryzomys longicaudatus, Argentina, Chile, Uruguay - only hantavirus with a person-to-person transmission reported

- Oran: O. longicaudatus; northern Argentina - regularly causes disease in cane-growing areas

- Choclo: Oligoryzomys fulvescens, Panama

- Rio Mamore: Neacomys spinosus, Peru

- Lechiguanas: Oligoryzomys flavescens, Argentina

It is suggested that around 50% of infections are due to exposure in or around the home, 10% from the workplace, and 5% during recreation.  The rest of the exposures are from mixed or unknown causes.