Besides routine baseline investigations like serum electrolyte levels, renal function tests, complete metabolic profile, and brain natriuretic peptide, some specific investigations like an autoantibody profile including anti-Ro and anti-La are advised since management includes steroids if positive.

A chest X-ray is a quick way to assess for cardiac and pulmonary findings like cardiomegaly, pulmonary edema, pleural effusion, and pneumonia.

Electrocardiograms reveal a variety of disturbances, including tachyarrhythmias and neonatal atrial fibrillation, arrhythmias, infarct pattern, and LV hypertrophy.

Echocardiographic features of the dilated type of primary endocardial fibroelastosis include the globular shape of the LV with global hypokinesia. Increased septal and free wall thicknesses can be seen. Increased dimensions of the left atrium, left ventricle, right ventricle, and a varying degree of mitral regurgitation along with abnormal mitral inflow velocities may also be seen. An experienced eye can pick up increased brightness of the endocardium as well, which is a hallmark of endocardial involvement.

Computed tomography (CT) scan is an excellent non-invasive tool for the detection of cardiovascular calcification and ruling out pericarditis.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be useful in the detection of EFE since biopsy is invasive. A hypointense rim in the perfusion sequence of the myocardium and a hyperintense rim in the delayed-enhancement sequence is indicative of EFE.

Biopsy of endocardial tissue is the gold standard test for diagnosis but may not be the first choice due to its invasive nature and related complications.