**Approach to Interpretation of CBC**

To understand complete blood count, it is important to understand the process of hemopoiesis. Hemopoiesis involves forming mature blood cells from immature cells and consists of a series of distinctively recognizable cells. The production of RBCs, WBCs, platelets, and lymphocytes are named erythropoiesis, granulopoiesis, thrombopoiesis, and lymphopoiesis, respectively. There is a balance between the production and destruction of cells, and each cell has a normal range of count in normal human blood.

If all cell lines are decreased, it is called pancytopenia. Pancytopenia occurs in viral infections, malignancies, bone marrow disorders, autoimmune diseases, a side effect of drugs, and after chemotherapy or radiotherapy.

If RBCs and platelets are decreased, the cause is MAHA/TPA

If a single line is affected, then the approach is different, e.g., low RBCs is called anemia, and a specific approach is followed. Similarly, raised WBCs and/or the presence of different immature cells of white blood cell lineage in the blood are referred to as leukemia.

**Anemias**

A decrease in hemoglobin level or total circulating red cell mass for a specified age and sex of a person is called anemia. Clinical features include fatigue, weakness, shortness of breath, palpitations, dizziness, headache, and decreased exercise tolerance.

Diagnostic tests for anemias:

The following initial investigations are performed if anemia is suspected:

- CBC with differential

- Retic count

- Peripheral blood smear

Morphologically, anemias are classified into three major types

- Microcytic hypochromic anemia: RBCs are smaller and in size and contain less hemoglobin than normal cells. Examples: Fe deficiency anemia, thalassemia, sideroblastic anemia, and anemia of chronic disease.

- Macrocytic anemia: RBCs are larger than normal, and the amount of hemoglobin may be normal or below normal. Examples: B12 deficiency anemia, folate deficiency anemia, drugs, alcoholism, liver disease, and hypothyroidism.

- Normocytic normochromic anemia: RBCs are normal in size, although the hemoglobin concentration in blood is reduced. Examples: acute blood loss, leukemias, bone marrow infiltration, chronic renal failure, and chronic infections.

**Leukemias**

Leukemia is defined as the uncontrolled proliferation, abnormal maturation, and accumulation of various intermediate cells. These are divided into acute and chronic leukemia based on disease and the maturation of malignant cells in blood and bone marrow.

**Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML)**

It is a rapidly progressive hematological malignancy characterized by the failure of myeloid cells to differentiate beyond the blast stage. The classic finding is circulating blast with Auer rods (azurophilic granules) on peripheral blood film.

**Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML)**

It is an increased proliferation of the granulocytic cell line without loss of their differentiation ability. There is a leukoerythroblastic picture on peripheral blood film with a predominance of immature red cells and granulocytes. Diagnostic test for CML is the presence of bcr-abl fusion gene in more than 90% of patients.

**Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL)**

In ALL, the early lymphoid precursor cells proliferate and replace normal progenitor cells in the bone marrow. Leukemic lymphoblasts lack specific morphological features; therefore, diagnosis requires immunophenotyping. Cytogenetics shows Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) in approximately 25% of adult cases.

**Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)**

It is a clonal malignancy of mature B-cells. CBC detects population of B lymphocytes >5 x 10/L. On the peripheral blood picture, there are small mature lymphocytes and numerous smudge cells.

**Approach to Disorders of Hemostasis**

In a patient suspected of coagulation disorder, the investigations should be pre-planned. History and physical examination findings are significant and help decide whether the patient has a vascular defect, platelet defect, or a defect in one of the coagulation factors. It also gives clues of the hereditary or acquired nature of the disorder and narrows down the tests performed. The preliminary tests ordered include platelet count, PT, and aPTT. Further course of action is decided based on the results of these tests.

**Approach to Suspected Diabetes Mellitus**

Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a metabolic disorder characterized by hyperglycemia with disturbances in carbohydrate, protein, and fat metabolism resulting from defects in insulin secretion, its action, or both. Typical DM symptoms are polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss, polyphagia, blurred vision, and increased susceptibility to infections. There are two major types of DM.

- Type 1 diabetes mellitus (immune-mediated, idiopathic)

- Type 2 diabetes mellitus

Any one of the following is diagnostic

- FBG ≥ 126 gm/dL OR

- 2 hr OGTT ≥ 200 mg/dL OR

- RBG ≥ 200mg/dL along with classic symptoms of DM OR

- HbA1c ≥ 6.5 %

Impaired fasting glucose:

Patients who have FBG between 109 to 126 mg/dL are labeled to have impaired fasting glucose and are then subjected to 2 hr 75 gm OGTT to confirm DM.

**Approach to Liver Function Tests**

An increase in PT/INR, serum albumin, serum direct bilirubin, and disproportionately high ALT or AST implies hepatocellular dysfunction. ALT is more specific to the liver; AST comes from multiple sources (especially muscles). AST>ALT is suggestive of alcoholic liver disease.

Serum transaminases >1000 signify direct hepatocyte injury, and the differentials include viral hepatitis, drugs/toxins, autoimmune hepatitis, and hepatic ischemia.

When ALP is elevated alone, rule out the bone disease by fractionating ALP. A disproportionately high ALP and GGT are evident of cholestatic liver diseases (e.g., cholelithiasis, cholangiocarcinoma, sclerosing cholangitis).