In the Losartan Intervention for Endpoint Reduction in Hypertension (LIFE) study, LVH regression (diagnosed by ECG utilizing the Sokolow-Lyon index or the Cornell product criteria) in response to losartan improved clinical cardiovascular outcomes independent of blood pressure response. LVH is a consequence of the complex interaction of genomic factors, environment as well as lifestyle. LVH is reflective of end-organ dysfunction in HTN and other diseases such as valvular heart disease. A number of studies have demonstrated that LVH in and of itself is a significant independent risk factor for increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality and, therefore, a major public health burden, especially in light of an aging population. There is also accumulating evidence that targeting LVH regression is not only feasible but necessary in order to achieve improved clinical outcomes. Therefore, in treating hypertension as well as valvular disease, LVH regression should be considered an important surrogate endpoint. Among the various drugs used in the treatment of hypertension, those that target the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), particularly angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-Is), appear to have unique class actions that decrease left ventricular hypertrophy by reducing LV mass independent of blood pressure control. Also, besides treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors/or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB’s), calcium channel blockers and beta-blockers have also been shown to reduce LV mass. This is associated with reduced arrhythmias, mortality, and risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD). It is yet to be definitively proven whether this decrease in LV mass produces significant improvement in clinical outcomes. This would indicate that in the future, the new target in treating left ventricular hypertrophy will require an understanding of an individual’s genomic makeup through new study designs in personalized medicine as well as advances in genetic technologies in order to identify the overall impact on the regression of LVH.