Liver function tests (LFTs) are a commonly ordered panel among clinicians to help assess a patient’s liver. While its components, aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT) help portray a portrait of what is occurring in the liver, the panel merely identifies the degree of cell damage if any, occurring in the liver. The reason these levels better reflect the presence of injury is that these enzymes are components of hepatocytes that get released into the circulation upon hepatocyte damage. ALT and AST are important enzymes in gluconeogenesis, with ALT being more specific for the liver as AST is found in a variety of tissues. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) can be found in the bone as well as the biliary tree, so it is not as specific, but when used in combination with the rest of the panel, it supplies evidence of hepatocellular injury. In particular, elevated ALP signals damage to the lining of the biliary tract.

A true test to assess the liver’s function is its ability to synthesize protein. While albumin is an important protein the liver produces, albumin levels do not only provide an idea of how the liver is functioning, but its levels are also influenced by other factors, such as nutrition status and nephrotic syndromes. In addition, albumin has a half-life of 15 to 20 days and therefore may not identify acute liver dysfunction. As such, albumin levels are combined with coagulation studies to provide insight into the liver’s functional capacity. All clotting factors except for factor VIII are produced by the liver. The coagulation proteins used in the extrinsic pathway are tested with the PT test. These factors must be carboxylated in the liver, with a pathway that uses vitamin K, meaning an elevated PT could signal liver damage, vitamin K deficiency or current warfarin therapy.

Ultrasound is an inexpensive and noninvasive imaging modality commonly used in the assessment of the liver. Most commonly, right upper quadrant ultrasounds are used to assess the biliary tree for obstruction and/or inflammation, such as in cholecystitis or choledocholithiasis. Ultrasound has the ability to reveal various liver pathologies and show various characteristics, such as border regularity, solid or cystic, and location.

Triple phase imaging such as computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies is used to characterize and diagnose liver lesions. These studies use contrast and scan images at specific time points to gather a portal venous phase, arterial phase, and venous phase. Depending on how the lesion takes up the contrast, clinicians can better diagnose the lesion, sometimes without needing to perform invasive procedures, such as needle biopsy. For example, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) as discussed below, demonstrates arterial hyperenhancement in most cases as they gather their blood supply from the hepatic artery. While CT is generally cheaper, MRI may be more beneficial due to its ability to show soft tissue better, potentially detailing the lesion better.