**Current and Future Trends in Allergen Immunotherapy**

Recent advances in understanding the mechanism and the long-term effects of immunotherapy are encouraging for future therapies. There are also new approaches being used to improve safety and overcoming the risk of severe adverse allergic reactions during immunotherapy. Newer allergen preparations available include allergoids, recombinant allergens (recA), and modified-recombinant allergens (recA). Studies on virus-like particles and CpG-motifs, adjuvants like MPL, and aluminum hydroxide have been shown to increase immunological response and can improve safety and efficacy.

**Safety, Doses, Delivery, and Application of Immunotherapy**

- Comparison of pediatric and adult systemic reactions to subcutaneous immunotherapy shows significant Grade 1 and Grade 2 systemic reactions that are higher in a pediatric population than adults. However, further studies are needed to evaluate the dosing strategy in children.

- Subcutaneous allergen immunotherapy has shown that SCIT rarely causes any major clinical problems; there is a risk of less than 1.5% in patients who are HIV positive without AIDS, cancer (in remission), severe asthma, transplantation,  and during pregnancy, based on web-based survey.

- Food immunotherapy has exploded due to numerous studies suggestive of its benefit.  One such study was the LEAP (Learning Early About Peanut Allergy) that showed that high-risk infants with atopic dermatitis and egg allergy were able to build a tolerance to the ingestion of peanut if given early.

Future trends in allergy immunotherapy support the concept of precision medicine. It should always be individualized and specific for a particular patient. Although it has been shown to prevent the development of asthma and new sensitization, this has only been shown in children. On the other hand, adults should be evaluated differently, and it should be used for the primary objective of bringing relief to their allergic symptoms. Further research is needed to address research gaps in allergy immunotherapy.  Such gaps include which sensitivities should be targeted to prevent disease, timing of immunotherapy, length of treatment, monoallergen vs polyallergen treatment, etc. However, the future is exciting, and with the increasing understanding of the immune system, the age of precision medicine has arrived.