The International Germ Cell Consensus Classification studied more than 5000 cases of non-seminomatous GCTs with metastatic spread, treated with cisplatin chemotherapy and followed for 5 years. This provided important clinical data on metastatic cases, and in this consensus, a three-tier risk factor evaluation was created. Independent prognostic variables were identified: histotype, site of the primary tumor, tumor marker elevation (α-fetoprotein, human chorionic gonadotrophin, lactate dehydrogenase), and nonpulmonary visceral metastases. Based on this classification, the prognosis depends on the risk class of each patient, with a mortality risk of 10%, 20% to 30%, and 50% to 60% of good-, intermediate-, and poor-risk patients, respectively.

Radical orchiectomy is the gold standard for a patient presenting with a testicular mass with clinical features concerning malignancy. Placement of a testicular prosthesis is an aesthetic option that can be considered before surgery. Testis-sparing surgery is only applicable for lesions that do not infiltrate the testis and are not suspicious for germ cell origin. In those cases, in fact, germ cell neoplasia in situ is often present in the surrounding parenchyma suggesting a potential to develop invasive germ cell neoplasia if left untreated.

Stage I tumors are treated depending on the lymphovascular invasion (LVI) of the spermatic cord, infiltration of the scrotum, and serum markers. Orchiectomy is the treatment of choice, and the patient is then sent to surveillance or retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND). The latter is the choice in cases with transformed teratoma and cases where radiology cannot exclude a lymph node involvement. Viable GCT may be found in as much as 20% of primary RPLND done for pure testicular teratoma and usually implies either a small volume NSGCT which was missed in the pathological report of the orchiectomy specimen) or regressed viable GCT elements in the testis. Patients who choose surveillance should adhere to a strict follow-up aimed to detect early metastases. In patients choosing preventive chemotherapy, accurate staging with a CT-scan and a single cycle of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (BEP) is recommended.

Stage I patients with positive nodes after RPLND are candidates for surveillance or adjuvant chemotherapy (suggested in pN2 cases, mandatory for pN3) with two cycles of etoposide+cisplatin (EP). Teratoma is not highly sensitive to chemotherapy, so it is not always recommended.

Patients in stage II present with regional lymphatic metastasis (retroperitoneum) without other metastasis (any T, N1–3, M0, SX). Stage IIA is a clinical or pathological stage N1, less than 2 cm; serum tumor markers are at normal levels or only slightly high (S1). In stage IIB, the largest lymph node mass is between 2 and 5 cm in size (N2), serum tumor markers are at normal levels or only slightly high (S1). In stage IIC, there is at least one lymph node metastasis larger than 5 cm (N3). Stage II disease should be treated with chemotherapy if serum markers are elevated [indicates mixed histology]or if lymph nodes are enlarged (>3 cm).

Patients with incomplete resection (residual masses) should undergo RPLND in lesions containing mainly teratoma. In cases of infiltration of the inferior vena cava wall or thrombi, these should be completely resected. The resection needs to be as complete as possible because teratomas tend to have a local growth raising their risk of malignant transformation and relapse. Residual masses are usually chemoresistant, and they progress despite chemotherapy.