Death is the end state of every disease process; however, each disease has a different progression and course. It is important to assess the patient for findings related to their underlying disease process as well as their needs related to the death and dying process.

The self-determination of the patient with capacity must be respected. When the patient can make their own choices, their autonomy must be upheld. It is not the role of the provider to impart their values and beliefs onto patients. Patients' families may experience anticipatory grief and have a hard time fully handling the current situation, and they may want to push their personal choices for the situation instead of respecting their loved one's wishes and choices. As healthcare providers leading family discussions related to these difficult topics, remember to keep the patient's goals in the forefront at all times.

This type of discussion may arise because of the following reasons (but is not limited to):

- Patients who, according to clinical assessment, have entered the dying process

- Patients no longer wish to receive life-sustaining treatment in the event of a cardiac arrest; also known as implementing a Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) order

- Patients diagnosed with a progressive disease process that will ultimately cause their death; examples include cardiac disease, kidney disease, cancers

- Patients who have been previously diagnosed with progressive diseases that have a new decline in their status

- Patients who wish to stop curative treatments

- Patients who request to discuss these matters

When gathering information about a patient and about a situation it is important to create a calm environment and allow for the patient and their family to feel comfortable. Give them enough time to answer questions. Ensure that each party's goals have been discussed; the patient's, the family's, and the medical team's.