The mfERG is a more recent electrophysiologic test that detects and localizes distinct areas of outer retinal damage in the macula and paramacular as well as discrete peripheral areas. This precision enables electrophysiologic findings to be correlated with visual field testing. The mfERG is valuable in evaluating patients with ambiguous retinal diseases and in monitoring the progression of the disease. An abnormal mfERG generally reflects foveal cone and/or bipolar cell dysfunction along with the source of vision loss.

**Retinitis Pigmentosa**

Retinitis pigmentosa (RP), a generalized retinal degenerative disease, is the most commonly inherited disease of the outer retinal rod-cone photoreceptors. The mfERG will show strong central responses with weak or flat signals in the peripheral rings. The mfERG is especially useful in the late stages of retinitis RP, when standard ERG tests may not be recordable given the severity of the disease. In these cases, the mfERG exhibits a generalized diminished response. Intriguingly, the mfERG is also affected in asymptomatic RP carriers, demonstrating patchy areas of retinal dysfunction.

**Hydroxychloroquine Retinopathy and****Bull’s Eye Maculopathy**

Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil) is a commonly prescribed anti-inflammatory medication for treating rheumatologic and dermatologic conditions. More recently, hydroxychloroquine has been suggested as a potential off-label therapy for coronavirus, COVID-19. Among its side effects, this medication has been associated with macular retinal toxicity. Specifically, the macular rod and cone cells are damaged, while the foveal cones are spared. In advanced disease stages, this pattern of retinal loss results in a bullseye appearance, also known as bull’s eye maculopathy. A pericentral loss in the mfERG response is the most characteristic of hydroxychloroquine toxicity. The mfERG has prognostic value by identifying patients who are more prone to retinal toxicity. Early cessation of medication is necessary to avoid irreversible vision loss. Hydroxychloroquine is generally continued in patients with a normal mfERG with the test repeated annually, whereas individuals with significant mfERG loss are advised to stop the medication.

**Stargardt’s Macular Dystrophy**

Stargardt's macular dystrophy is a recessive retinal disease caused by a mutation in the ABCA gene. The clinical exam typically reveals an apparently normal fovea with mid-peripheral flecks along with poor central vision. However, patients may also present atypically without visibly appreciable flecks or diminished central vision. In affected patients, the central and paracentral responses in the mfERG will be significantly diminished in affected patients. Conversely, a normal mfERG excludes Stargardt's disease.

**Occult Macular Dystrophy**

Occult macular dystrophy (OMD) is a rare, inherited retinal degenerative disease. Patients may clinically present with unexplained, progressive central vision loss, despite a normal-appearing fundus, decreased color vision, and normal fluorescein angiogram. Affected patients will exhibit a decreased central response density on mfERG.

**Branch Retinal Artery Occlusion**

Branch Retinal Artery Occlusion (BRAO) is retinal ischemic damage caused by a blockage in a branch of the central retinal artery. The mfERG response is characteristically decreased in a “cookie-cutter” fashion corresponding to the pattern of the affected retinal arterial blood supply. This diminished mfERG response is notably observed despite a normal-appearing retina in chronic disease.

**Multiple Evanescent White Dot Syndrome**

Multiple Evanescent White Dot Syndrome (MEWDS) is an atypical retinal inflammatory disease that commonly affects otherwise healthy young to middle-aged women. Patients are clinically present with photopsia and an enlarged blind spot on visual field testing. The mfERG response is characteristically depressed in the retinal region corresponding to the blind spot. Since these ocular findings are self-limiting and frequently accompanied by flu-like symptoms, MEWDS is often referred to as the “common cold” of the retina. Similarly, these mfERG abnormalities are generally reversible, and retinal responses return to normal after a few months.

**Neurodegenerative Disease**

Alzheimer’s Disease (AD): the leading form of dementia pathologically hallmarked by fibrillar beta-amyloid and hyper-phosphorylated tau deposition in the central nervous system (McKhann G, Drachman D, et al., Neurology, 1984). Notably, abnormal protein deposition and degenerative changes have also been reported in the retina.

Parkinson’s Disease (PD): a neurodegenerative disease involving abnormal accumulation of α-synuclein (α-syn) protein resulting in dopaminergic neuronal atrophy.