Possible identifiable organic causes include structural disorders such as spermatoceles, varicoceles, infection, trauma, fibrosis, tumors, intermittent torsion, torsion of a testicular appendage, chronic epididymitis, low back strain, vasculitis (such as Henoch-Schonlein purpura), post-vasectomy pain syndrome, nerve entrapment from hernia surgery or perineural fibrosis, pelvic floor dysfunction, or referred pain from another site such as a ureteral stone. Less common causes include diabetic neuropathy, retroperitoneal tumors, interstitial cystitis, abdominal aortic aneurysms, peritonitis, amiodarone-induced epididymal inflammation, pelvic musculoskeletal disorders, osteitis pubis, and polyarteritis nodosa. Chronic orchialgia may also be associated with chronic pelvic pain syndrome (CPPS), possibly through intraprostatic reflux, or the 2 may sometimes be describing the same entity.  Up to 50% of men with chronic pelvic pain syndrome or chronic prostatitis will also claim to have chronic orchialgia.

- Primary somatic sensory innervation of the testicle is from the ilioinguinal nerve and the genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve.  However, any organ or tissue that shares a neural pathway with the scrotum or testicles (L1-L2 and S2-S4) can refer pain to the genital area. Low back pain or radiculitis that affects the nerve roots from T10 to L1 can refer pain to the testicles and any infectious, traumatic or inflammatory stimulus to the nerves of the scrotum can be perceived by the patient as orchialgia.

- Sensory fibers from both the testis and the upper ureter use spinal cord segments T11 and T12 which explains why ureteral stones can cause testicular pain.

- Pelvic floor muscle dysfunction or spasms can play a role in CPPS but may also be involved in some cases of chronic orchialgia.

Henoch-Schonlein purpura is an uncommon cause of chronic testicular pain but should be considered as part of the differential diagnosis, particularly in younger patients (younger than 20 years). It is a systemic vasculitis with a peak incidence around age 4 to 5 years. It involves the scrotum between 2% and 38% of the time and can sometimes be misdiagnosed as an acute testicular problem requiring urgent surgery. It is characterized by marked edema of the scrotum with intact testicular vascular flow, an enlarged epididymis, and a hydrocele.

Amiodarone has been associated with a sterile epididymal inflammatory syndrome in up to 11% of adult patients on the drug. This condition is thought to be due to the very high concentrations of the drug sometimes found in testicular and epididymal tissue.

There is often a psychological component in chronic orchialgia including such problems as somatization disorder, major depression, chronic pain other than in the genitals and chemical dependency. When no specific etiology can be identified, which happens in about 25% to 50% of all cases, it is called idiopathic chronic orchialgia and is thought to be due to neurogenic inflammation or nerve sensitization possibly from prolonged overstimulation.