The exact etiology of various aspects of migraine is not completely understood. It is believed that a primary neuronal dysfunction leads to a sequence of changes intracranially and extracranially, which causes migraines. The aura of migraine is thought to be due to neuronal and glial depolarization that spreads across the cerebral cortex.

**Genetics and Inheritance**

Migraine has a strong genetic component. The risk of migraines in ill relatives is three times greater than that of relatives of non-ill subjects, but no inheritance pattern was identified. The genetic basis of migraine is complex, and it is uncertain which loci and genes are the ones implicated in the pathogenesis; it may be based on more than one genetic source at different genomic locations acting in tandem with environmental factors to bring susceptibility and the characteristics of the disease in such individuals.

**Triggers**

Withdrawn or exposure to several factors contribute to the development of migraine headaches. A retrospective study found that 76% of the patients reported triggers.

- Certain food items like aged cheese, food additives like nitrates (as used in hot dogs), and monosodium glutamate (MSG) can be responsible in a few patients.

- High-stress levels and anxiety

- Caffeine: High intake of coffee or withdrawal from coffee can precipitate migraines.

- Weather changes: Storm fronts, strong winds, or changes in altitude can sometimes trigger a migraine.

- Sleep disturbances: Lack of adequate sleep or too much sleep can trigger a migraine.

- Menstrual period: Many women can have migraine episodes during their menstrual periods and be symptom-free otherwise.

- Exposure to bright lights, loud noise, or strong odors