Mass spectrometry is applicable across diverse fields, including forensic toxicology, metabolomics, proteomics, pharma/biopharma, and clinical research. Specific applications of mass spectrometry include drug testing and discovery, food contamination detection, pesticide residue analysis, isotope ratio determination, protein identification, and carbon dating.

**Applications of Mass Spectrometry in the Diagnosis of Disease**

Mass spectrometers are primarily used in clinical settings to diagnose diseases due to biomarkers. Biomarkers are utilized in diagnoses, prognoses, and treatment.

Mass spectrometers can measure biomarkers, ranging in size from small molecules to large macromolecules.

To diagnose disease, mass spectrometers focus on analyzing a sample and its biomarker profile. Of note, two critical biomarkers are proteins and lipids.

If the biomarker is a protein, we can use the principles of proteomics and apply them to mass spectrometry.

If the biomarker is a lipid, we can use the principles of lipidomics to generate a clinical profile for the patient using mass spectrometry, as well.

**Applications of Mass Spectrometry in COVID-19**

During the peak of the coronavirus pandemic, many countries were hindered by inadequate testing due to supply chain shortages and inconsistencies in mass-produced testing kits. Clinical laboratories thus created a method to use mass spectrometry. Nasal swab samples of patients were applied to mass spectrometers, and the pattern generated by the spectrum was used to categorize patients if they were COVID-19 positive or COVID-19 negative.

**Applications of Mass Spectrometry in Pharmaceuticals**

Mass spectrometry is relevant in analyzing pharmaceutical drugs. The ionization that is performed in the apparatus helps differentiate the molecules that create the drugs. This is essential because it enables faster and more accurate screenings in the clinical analysis of patient samples.

**Applications of Mass Spectrometry in the Analysis of Glycans**

Oligosaccharides are molecules formed by the association of several monosaccharides linked through glycosidic bonds. Determining the complete structure of oligosaccharides is more complex than that of proteins or oligonucleotides. It involves the determination of additional components as a consequence of the isomeric nature of monosaccharides and their capacity to form linear or branched oligosaccharides.

**Applications of Mass Spectrometry in the Analysis of Oligonucleotides**

Oligonucleotides (DNA or RNA) are linear polymers of nucleotides. These are composed of a nitrogenous base, a ribose sugar, and a phosphate group.

**Applications of Mass spectrometry in Environmental Analysis**

Drinking water testing, pesticide screening and quantitation, soil contamination assessment, carbon dioxide, and pollution monitoring, and trace elemental analysis of heavy metals leaching.

**Applications of Mass Spectrometry in Forensic Analysis**

Analysis of trace evidence (e.g., fibers in carpet, polymers in paint), arson investigation (e.g., fire accelerant), confirmation of drug abuse, and identification of explosive residues (bombing investigation).