Taxonomically POW virus is an arbovirus classified into the family Flaviviridae and subclassified into the genus Flavivirus. The flaviviruses are transmitted by tick or mosquito vectors and include several clinically significant viruses that cause human infection. Other notable viruses among this family are those known to cause Yellow fever, Japanese encephalitis, West Nile, Dengue, and Zika.

POW virus is a single-stranded RNA virus, and genomic sequencing has identified two distinct lineages or genotypes.

Transmission to humans occurs primarily through the bite of an infected tick. Three main species of ticks have been identified as vectors for the transmission of the POW virus, but Ixodes scapularis (deer tick) is the primary vector.Ixodes scapularis also serves as a vector for other common pathogens that cause human infection, including Borrelia burgdorferi, Babesia microti, and Anaplasma phagocytophilum. Ixodes cookei (groundhog tick) and Ixodes marxi (squirrel tick) can also transmit the POW virus but rarely bite humans.

The primary ecologic reservoir for the POW virus is rodents and small mammals. It has been most commonly isolated in mice, groundhogs, voles, and squirrels. However, larger animals such as skunks, foxes, deer, and horses likely play a role in transmission as well.

Once infected, animals develop high viremia and onward transmission to ticks that feed on these infected hosts. Ticks then become vectors for the POW virus, enabling subsequent transmission of the virus to humans or other animals. Infection in humans is not thought to result in high enough viremia levels to result in onward transmission, and thus humans are considered dead-end hosts.