Replantation is the treatment of choice

**Pre-replantation Procedures**

**Storage Media**

Storing the avulsed tooth in an isotonic solution, such as milk, saline, or saliva, slows down cell death in the periodontal ligament of the root.****However, PDL cell death is unavoidable, and the storage in a solution is only a temporary but effective way of managing the tooth before replantation. Short-time storage in an isotonic solution has proven to provide the same or even higher healing results than replanting the tooth immediately.

**Anti-resorption Therapy**

It involves soaking the avulsed tooth in a storage solution containing antibiotics. Anti-resorption therapy is believed to prevent inflammation caused by necrotic cells and microbial contamination.

**Tooth Replantation**

The tooth should be aligned anatomically and replanted, applying firm pressure to the socket. Most teeth can be successfully replanted if the extraoral dry time is less than 30 minutes; after this period, the survival probability of the tooth diminishes - the periodontal ligament cells are irreversibly damaged after 30 to 60 minutes.

**Post-replantation Procedures**

**Splinting**

Once the tooth has been replanted, it should be immobilized with a semi-rigid splint (e.g., titanium trauma splint). Splinting immobilizes the replanted tooth and allows the damaged periodontal ligament fibers to reestablish connection from the alveolus to the cementum. The International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) guidelines indicate flexible splinting for all dental injuries. The splinting time is two weeks for avulsed teeth and four weeks if the avulsed tooth exceeded 60 minutes of dry time.

**Systemic Antibiotics**

It is advisable to prescribe the patient doxycycline for five days or amoxicillin in case of intolerance. In children under 50 kg, the regime includes an initial dose of 100 mg doxycycline on the first day and 50 mg on the four consecutive days.

**Follow up Appointment**

The splint must be removed after two weeks, where the tooth will be clinically and radiographically examined. After removing the splint, the tooth’s mobility is checked, and a pulp vitality test should be performed, preferably pulse oximetry or electric testing.

If the tooth is non-vital, a root canal treatment is indicated since there is no probability of revascularisation.

When the dry time is more than 60 minutes, the remaining PDL should be removed as it will become a stimulus for continued inflammation that accelerates infection-related resorption and ankylosis. The remaining PDL can be removed by gentle scaling and root planning, soft pumice prophylaxis, gauze, or soaking the tooth in 3% citric acid for 3 minutes. Fluoride treatment must follow this procedure as it slows down ankylosis and reduces the risk of resorption.

Severe damage to the neurovascular bundle and the periodontal ligament can lead to replacement root resorption or inflammatory resorption. These complications can be anticipated and possibly prevented with disinfectants at the time of reimplantation and systemic antibiotics. Resorption complications may need a root canal.

Immature teeth where the root has not yet wholly formed have a greater chance of revascularization after soaking in doxycycline. Primary teeth should not undergo replantation as this can damage the underlying permanent tooth germ.