Treatment strategy involves antithrombotic therapy and selection between rate or rhythm control. Previous randomized studies such as Atrial Fibrillation Follow-up Investigation of Rhythm Management (AFFIRM) and Rate Control versus Electrical Cardioversion for Persistent Atrial Fibrillation (RACE) have shown no superiority with one compared to other.

**Antithrombotic Therapy**

AF is associated with a 5-fold increased risk of stroke. Whether all patients with AF need anticoagulation regardless of risk factor status is debatable. The embolic risk in patients with AF is estimated using the CHA2DS2-VASc risk model (congestive heart failure, hypertension, age, diabetes mellitus, prior stroke, vascular disease, sex).

The benefits of anticoagulation should be balanced against the risk of bleeding. HAS-BLED scoring system (hypertension, abnormal renal/liver function, stroke, bleeding history, labile international normalized ratio, elderly, drugs/alcohol) is widely used to estimate the risk of bleeding from anticoagulation. The HAS-BLED score equal to 3 is associated with an increased risk of bleeding. Once the patient’s individualized stroke risk is determined, the selection of antithrombotic therapy varies from one patient to another. Compared to warfarin-aspirin, monotherapy is not recommended for primary stroke prevention in patients with AF.

**Rate Control**

Rate control is the preferred strategy for all asymptomatic AF patients. Guidelines on target heart rate in patients selected for rate control are lacking. A previously conducted randomized trial (RACE II) to assess heart rate goal in patients with AF showed no outcome difference between lenient and strict heart rate control; however, sufficient evidence to assess the impact on all-cause mortality was lacking. Physicians usually attempt to control heart rate control with agents such as beta-blockers (metoprolol, esmolol, propranolol), nondihydropyridine calcium-channel blockers (verapamil, diltiazem), or digoxin. All 3 classes of drugs are given intravenously (IV) for acute rate control and can be switched to oral therapy for chronic management. In patients with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, carvedilol therapy has shown significant improvement in left ventricular ejection fraction. Due to the negative inotropic properties of calcium channel blockers, physicians do not use these not preferred in such patients. Digoxin is usually reserved for patients who do not achieve rate control with beta-blockers or calcium channel blockers alone. Amiodarone can be used as second-line therapy when treatment with other agents has failed.

**Rhythm Control**

The decision to achieve rhythm control either with pharmacological or non-pharmacological (electric) methods is based on the presence or absence of symptoms, age, and other comorbidities. Rhythm control with pharmacological therapy alone is associated with increased side effects and a lower success rate.