Nonpharmacological followed by pharmacologic interventions should be employed early in the course of delirium to mitigate the risk of long-term adverse sequelae. Nonpharmacological interventions have been tried and have proven to be effective. Notable examples are the Hospital Elder Life Program (HELP) and modified HELP. These programs use multidisciplinary teams that work on reorienting the patient, socialization, daily visits from the family, feeding and nutrition balance, managing sleep-wake cycles, noise reduction, providing sensory aids and early mobilization. Using 3 protocols administered daily; i.e., orienting communication, oral and nutritional assistance, and early mobilization, Chen et al. demonstrated a significant reduction in the incidence of delirium in the intervention group.

The ABCDEF bundle used in the ICU has also been associated with improved brain function outcomes.

- A: Assess and manage pain

- B: Daily awakening and breathing trials

- C: Choice of sedation, light sedation, and avoidance of benzodiazepines

- D: Routine delirium assessment, non-pharmacologic intervention, and judicious use of medications to treat delirium

- E: Early mobility

- F: Family involvement

Hayhurst et al. showed that patients receiving a daily goal-directed mobility program had more days alive and free of delirium, had shorter lengths of hospital stay, were more functionally independent at discharge and were more likely to discharge to home.

To institute prevention strategies, early intervention, and treatment, patients should be evaluated for their risk of POD. In the PACU, reorientation should be started immediately, for example, saying the patient name, current location, type of surgery and surgeon's name. Physical factors such as a distended bladder, hypoventilation, uncomfortable patient positioning, and pain should be addressed promptly.

Several pharmacologic agents have been used to prevent and treat delirium in a high-risk population. Continued delirium should be dealt with aggressively by reversing continued effects of anesthetic agents. Flumazenil (0.2-mg increments), naloxone (0.04-mg increments), and physostigmine because it crosses the blood-brain barrier (1- to 2-mg increments), can reverse the effects of benzodiazepines, opioids, and muscle relaxants. Haldol, which is often used for acute management of delirium, shortens the severity of delirium episodes but does not change the incidence and is also not effective for prophylaxis in high-risk elderly populations.

Drugs that increase acetylcholinesterase availability, antipsychotic drugs such as haloperidol have shown no benefit over placebo for the treatment of delirium. Since benzodiazepine sedation has been strongly tied to delirium, propofol and dexmedetomidine have become the mainstay of ICU sedation. Djaiani et al. demonstrated that patients receiving dexmedetomidine had less incidence of and shorter duration of delirium compared to those receiving propofol.