Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine belongs to a class of drugs known as central nervous system stimulants. The Drug Enforcement Administration/Food and Drug Administration (DEA/FDA) classifies these medications as schedule II drugs with high potential for abuse in the United States. Based on the published data by the American Psychiatric Association, 3% to 7% of school-aged children and 4% of adults in the United States have a diagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Immediate-release amphetamine medication and sustained-release amphetamine medication are used to treat ADHD and narcolepsy in both the adult and pediatric populations.

**Non-FDA-approved**clinical uses for dextroamphetamine/amphetamine:

**Cerebrovascular Accident
**

- FDA approval: Adult, no; Pediatric, no

- Recommendation: Adult, Class III (et al.)

- Strength of evidence: Adult, Category B

Research by Walker-Batson et al. in 1995 and Crisostomo et al. in 1988 shows that amphetamine use in patients with ischemic stroke improved motor function compared with patients undergoing physical therapy alone. However, another study showed conflicting results, as the mean scores on the Fugl-Meyer motor scale were not significant for the amphetamine group compared with the placebo group.

Amphetamine/dextroamphetamine is used off-label by college students for memory enhancement, test-taking ability, and study marathons.

**FDA-approved**clinical uses for dextroamphetamine/amphetamine:

**Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity**

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine is FDA-approved for adult and pediatric (ages 3 to 16 years) populations. Amphetamines, along with other remedial measures such as psychological, educational, and social, are prescribed to manage patients with symptoms like distractibility, short attention span, hyperactivity, and impulsivity.

In the pediatric population, the immediate-release tablet is recommended for patients three years of age or older, and the extended-release capsule can be prescribed to patients six years or older.

- Adult, Category B Class IIb (Class ll; have a high potential for abuse and dependence, an accepted medical use, and the potential for severe addiction)

- Pediatric, Category B, Class IIb

**Narcolepsy
**

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine is FDA-approval for adult and pediatric patients who are six years of age or older.

- Adult, Category B, Class IIb

- Pediatric, Category B, Class IIb

Amphetamines are Pregnancy Category C (prior to 2015) (Category C; Animal reproduction studies have shown an adverse effect on the fetus, but no adequate and well-controlled studies in humans. Potential benefits may warrant use in women who are pregnant.)

The American Academy of Pediatrics rates amphetamines as drugs of abuse for which there are reports of adverse effects on the infant during breastfeeding.

Consider potential risks and benefits before prescribing amphetamines during pregnancy and breastfeeding. Use during pregnancy only if the potential maternal benefit outweighs the potential fetal risk.

Reports exist of increased risk of premature delivery and low birth weight in infants born to mothers with amphetamine dependence as amphetamine crosses the placenta. Reported cases show biliary atresia in infants who were exposed to amphetamine in utero during the second and third trimesters.

Amphetamine should not be prescribed to nursing women as it is excreted in human breast milk. Physicians should consider an alternative medication or advise the patient to discontinue breastfeeding. The result of a study on a nursing mother with the diagnosis of narcolepsy who was receiving a daily dose of 20 mg amphetamine was significant for an elevated level of amphetamine in breast milk compared to maternal plasma. Studies showed amphetamines were 3 and 7 times higher in breast milk than maternal plasma on the 10th and 42nd days after delivery, respectively. Measurable amounts of amphetamine were also present in the urine of the infant.