Schamberg disease is still considered idiopathic. Without an established therapy, treatment is sometimes ineffective, and recurrences are not uncommon. It is not life-threatening or causes any major health concern. Reassurance about the chronic and benign nature of the disease is required, and residual pigmentation could last for years.

First-line interventions are nonpharmacologic interventions and topical steroids. Various non-drug strategies are aimed at eliminating or reducing potential contributing factors such as discontinuing or changing the offending medication, avoiding food preservatives and artificial coloring agents, and wearing support stockings to counteract abnormal vein function.

The itching will improve with moisturizing, oral antihistamines, and topical steroids, such as cortisone or betamethasone, may be used. Topical steroids decrease inflammation by suppressing the migration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes and reversing capillary permeability.

Second-line intervention: Pentoxifylline, a methylxanthine derivative, acts by various mechanisms.

- Potent rheological and anti-inflammatories properties.

- Immunomodulatory action by modifying cytokine profile and anti-fibroblastic action.

- A decrease in expression of ICAM-I on endothelial cells of blood vessels that leads to decreased exudation of inflammatory cells from capillaries into the surrounding perivascular tissue.

- Inhibits synthesis and release of TNF-a, which also reduces the extravasation of blood from the capillaries.

Different clinical trials reported a clinical improvement from the 2-3 weeks until six months, with doses ranging from 100-400 mg three times a day.

Phototherapy had shown to be effective in a few case reports. Most of these were resistant to other therapies. Narrowband ultraviolet B therapy-induced immunomodulation by suppression of the interleukin-2 production and altering the T cells activity. It was used in two children and one adult two-three times a week for 10-20 treatments with improvement and without recurrence during the follow-up.

PUVA phototherapy diminished the CD4+ and CD1a+ cells and the adhesion molecule receptor and had proved to be effective in eight patients.

Multiple other therapies have been utilized for SD, although only a few of them have been effective.

Ascorbic acid and bioflavonoids have additive antioxidative properties that wield an angio-protective and anti-inflammatory effect. It also decreases the permeability of endothelial cells and reduces capillary permeability and fragility by increasing their resistance. Three patients were treated with 500 mg bid and 50 mg bid, respectively, with clinical improvement at four weeks.

Colchicine 0.5 g bid has been used with the improvement from the first week to complete clearance by the four months.