# Definition/Introduction

Virchow's node, a left supraclavicular lymph node, was first described by German pathologist Rudolf Ludwig Karl Virchow (1821-1901) in 1848 as a sign of metastatic malignancy mainly from gastric cancer.

Several studies have established its clinical significance by demonstrating its association with various malignancies, including gastrointestinal, pulmonary adenocarcinoma, prostate cancer, lymphoma, among others.

Considering its role in lymphatic drainage, researchers have theorized that its involvement in malignancies could be due to tumor embolization along the thoracic duct.

Although there have been just a few studies on its anatomic description, they have helped understand the possible complications that the mass effect of Virchow's node can cause, which includes thoracic outlet syndrome, horner's syndrome, and unilateral phrenic neuropathy.

# Issues of Concern

Virchow's node, a left supraclavicular lymph node, was first described by German pathologist Rudolf Ludwig Karl Virchow  (1821-1901) in 1848 as a sign of metastatic malignancy mainly from gastric cancer.

Following Virchow's and Troisier's work, researchers have conducted few studies on the anatomic description of Virchow's node. One of those studies by MitZutani et al.

Virchow's node is a lymph node and is a part of the lymphatic system. It is the thoracic duct end node. It receives afferent lymphatic drainage from the left head, neck, chest, abdomen, pelvis, and bilateral lower extremities, which eventually drains into the jugulo-subclavian venous junction via the thoracic duct.

# Clinical Significance

Numerous studies have shown Virchow's node to be of clinical significance, especially concerning malignancies. Due to its lymphatic function, the Virchow's node is a potential seeding site for not only gastrointestinal malignancies, but also pulmonary adenocarcinoma, prostate cancer, lymphoma, and ovarian cancer, among others.

Considering its anatomy, researchers have theorized that Virchow's node results in certain complications secondary to mass effect.

Virchow's node is an important clinical finding in association with metastatic malignancy, certain infections, and even a potential cause of neurovascular pathologies and hence should merit consideration in clinical practice.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Due to the clinical significance of Virchow's node, all members of the healthcare team with clinical responsibilities should familiarize themselves with identifying it in patients so they can report it to the appropriate clinicians for further evaluation. [Level 5]