A variety of information is required to evaluate sleep problems. After a detailed medical history, medication history, and physical examination, some clinical and investigative tools could help narrow the differential diagnosis and help identify the type of sleep disorders. Here is a list of some of these questionnaires and tests

**Epworth sleepiness scale (ESS):**ESS is an eight-item self-administered questionnaire that measures the presence and severity of sleepiness.

**Fatigue severity scale (FSS):**FSS is a nine-item instrument that can help distinguish sleepiness from fatigue and estimate fatigue severity.****

**Insomnia Severity Index (ISI):**ISI is the most widely accepted clinical assessment tool that helps identify and monitor insomnia severity

**Sleep diary:**The sleep diary, or sleep log, is a personal paper record of sleep and wakefulness over weeks to months. Patients should record a detailed description of sleep, such as bedtime, duration until sleep onset, the number of awakenings, duration of awakenings, and nap times.

**Sleep studies:**Objective measures of sleep may be obtained by sleep studies such as home sleep apnea testing (HSAT) or polysomnography (PSG).not recommended in asymptomatic patients as a routine test.

**Laboratory studies:**Some of the lab studies appropriate for those with sleep disorders include:

- Arterial blood gases (ABG)

- Thyroid function tests

- Drug and alcohol toxicity screening

- Iron studies and ferritin level

- Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) hypocretin-1 deficiency (<110 pg/ml).

**Actigraphy:**In this test, an actigraph device is worn on the wrist like a watch. The signals are detected when there is movement, and very few to no signs are recorded during sleep/inactivity. This device can assess sleep-wake cycles or circadian rhythm over an extended period and thus diagnose advanced or delayed sleep phase syndrome.

**Multiple sleep latency testing (MSLT):**This objective test determines the degree of sleepiness.