There are more than 20 types of lissencephaly, most of them are listed under 2 main categories: Classic lissencephaly (Type 1) and Cobblestone lissencephaly (Type 2). Each category shares similar clinical presentations but different genetic mutations.

Examination of the brain in type I lissencephaly shows a cerebral cortex with four layers instead of six layers as in normal patients, while in type 2 lissencephaly the cerebral cortex is disorganized, and appears pebbled or nodular due to complete displacement of the cerebral cortex with clusters of cortical neurons separated by glio-mesenchymal tissue. The patients also had abnormalities of muscle and eyes.

- Classic lissencephaly (type 1):

- LIS1: Isolated lissencephaly and Miller-Dieker syndrome (lissencephaly associated with facial dysmorphism).

- LISX1: DCX gene mutation. Compared to lissencephaly caused by LIS1 mutations, DCX shows a six-layered cortex instead of four.

- Isolated lissencephaly without other known genetic defects

- Cobblestone lissencephaly (type 2):

- Walker-Warburg syndrome

- Fukuyama syndrome

- Muscle-eye-brain disease

- Other types cannot be placed in one of the two aforementioned groups:

- LIS2: Norman-Roberts syndrome, similar to type I lissencephaly or Miller-Dieker syndrome, but without deletion of the chromosome 17.

- LIS3

- LISX2

- Microlissencephaly: It is a combination of the absence of normal cerebral cortex folding and an abnormally small head. Children with usual lissencephaly have a normal head size at birth. In children with reduced head size at birth, microlissencephaly is typically diagnosed.

It is also important to differentiate between lissencephaly and polymicrogyria, which is a different developmental malformation of the brain.