Treatment will usually require procedural sedation to get adequate muscle relaxation and facilitate a closed reduction via traction-counter-traction. In some cases, a "buttonhole" deformity exists (humeral head is trapped in a tear of the inferior capsule), in which case open reduction is required. To reduce an inferior shoulder dislocation, extend the arm at the elbow and then apply overhead traction in the longitudinal direction of the humerus, an assistant may also apply cephalad pressure over the humeral head to help guide it into the joint. If needed, counter-traction can be applied toward the patient's feet by wrapping a sheet over the shoulder allowing the force to be applied in the opposite direction.

After reduction, bring the abducted arm into adduction against the body while supinating the forearm. Alternatively, a two-step closed reduction technique can be utilized. Here, the inferior dislocation is first converted into an anterior dislocation before being reduced. One hand is on the shaft of the dislocated humerus and the other hand on the medial condyle. An anteriorly directed force on the shaft rotates the humeral head from an inferior to an anterior position. The humerus is then adducted and any of the common anterior reduction techniques can be used (e.g. traction-counter-traction, Stimson, Cunningham, etc.) to reduce the head of the humerus into the glenoid fossa. The advantages of the two-step maneuver are that it requires a single operator, fewer attempts, minimal force, and only local analgesia or minimal procedural sedation. Often a "clunk" is felt or heard as the humeral head returns to its normal anatomic position and the range-of-motion will once again be free allowing the arm to be adducted and the forearm supinated.

Once back into anatomical position the arm should be placed in a shoulder immobilizer to avoid recurring dislocation as the soft tissue and muscle stabilizers are injured and will be lax. After reduction is achieved another thorough neurovascular exam should be performed, most neuropraxia will resolve after reduction. Post-reduction x-rays are also usually done to confirm reduction and check for any procedural injuries. In rare cases, closed reduction is not possible (i.e. the "buttonhole deformity" discussed earlier) and an operative reduction must be performed. Indications for surgery include irreducible dislocation by closed techniques, open dislocation, and vascular injury.