Clomiphene, also called clomiphene citrate, a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM), is an FDA-approved medication indicated to treat anovulatory or oligo-ovulatory infertility to induce ovulation for patients desiring to conceive.

It is also often used in an off-label setting by men to treat both male infertility and secondary hypogonadism because of its ability to increase serum testosterone levels.

Studies have found clomiphene citrate effective in treating and preventing short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks (SUNCT), a subform of trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias (TACs). It has not been FDA-approved for the treatment of SUNCT. However, a case study of a 65-year-old patient who suffered frequent headaches for years and was refractory to treatment was finally diagnosed with SUNCT syndrome. The patient’s physician started him on 50 mg of clomiphene per day for two weeks. Four days after initiation of therapy, his frequency of headaches reduced, but the pain did not subside entirely. The dose was increased to 75 mg per day, and after day 5, the patient became pain-free. After 1.5 months of being on that dose and doing well, the patient experienced a slight recurrence of the attack. His physician increased his clomiphene dose to 100 mg per day, and he was void of attacks for three months, at which point, the clomiphene was tapered off, and four months after being free from clomiphene, the patient continued to be pain-free.

**FDA -Labeled Indication**

- Anovulatory or oligo-ovulatory infertility (Ovulation induction)

- Male infertility (Spermatogenesis induction)

**Non-FDA- labeled Indication**

- Secondary hypogonadism

- Performance enhancement for healthy athletes

- Primary short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks (SUNCT)