Laboratory and imaging evaluation to diagnose and stage the disease are serological tests, abdominal and retroperitoneal ultrasound, chest X-ray, CT-scan (abdominopelvic and thoracic), and in some cases MRI or PET.

Serum tumor markers can help in the differential diagnosis of a germ cell tumor and can be used as a baseline for follow-up. In serum evaluation, hCG and AFP levels can be elevated. In those cases, the increased serum markers can be due to mixed histology of yolk sac tumor and hCG-secreting syncytiotrophoblast cells.

Ultrasound (US) is the preferred imaging study for evaluating testicular pathology. It is an easy and non-invasive procedure and is highly sensitive for identifying scrotal masses. The technique can differentiate between intratesticular and extra-testicular lesions with a sensitivity that reaches 99%. The affected testis can be compared with the contralateral one. A normal testis has a homogeneously granular texture and is located below the epididymis that appears iso/hyperechoic. A hydrocele would appear as extra testicular fluid in tunica vaginalis that can be easily differentiated from cystic testicular masses.

A solid intratesticular lesion should be considered malignant unless proved otherwise. The US appearance is closely related to the gross morphology of the lesion and therefore is extremely important to carefully evaluate and describe the US images. Testicular neoplasms are usually hypoechoic (compared to the normal parenchyma), and heterogeneity can appear if there are calcifications and cysts. Testicular teratoma can appear as an irregularly solid or predominately cystic mass. The presence of calcifications in the tumor is another helpful finding associated with teratomas. The vascularisation of the tumor can be evaluated with a Doppler scan, although this additional exam is not of particular use in the differential diagnosis. In contrast, epididymal masses are usually benign, but careful examination should exclude the involvement of the spermatic cord and intratesticular abnormalities.

Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is not widely used in clinical practice, and its role is mainly in difficult cases and for the characterization of extra-testicular neoplasms.

PET scan can rarely help in the differential diagnosis as teratoma lacks the usually increased glucose uptake of tumoral tissues, i.e., it is 2-deoxy-2-fluoro-D-glucose (FDG)-negative. PET scan is not useful for differentiating teratoma and necrosis.