The evaluation of patients with suspected SCFE should begin with bilateral hip radiographs with anteroposterior (AP) and frog-leg lateral views.

Other plain radiography methods of detecting SCFE include the Southwick Slip Angle and the "S" sign. The Southwick Slip Angle measures the degrees of epiphyseal displacement in relation to the diaphysis; this method is considered more sensitive in detecting SCFE. The "S" sign consists of a line drawn along the inferior cortical outline of the femur in the frog-leg lateral view that extends from the proximal femoral head-neck junction to the proximal femoral physis; normally, the cortical outlines are symmetrical, without sharp turns, or broken continuity. SCFE is likely to present if the cortical outlines are asymmetrical, have a sharp turn, or have broken continuity. The use of the "S" sign in conjunction with Klein's line was found to increase both sensitivity and specificity in the detection of SCFE.

Ephyisiolysis, which is the widening or lucency of the growth plate, could be an early radiographic sign. In addition, another sign can be detected on the anteroposterior radiographs, the metaphyseal blanch sign of steel which is the blurring of the proximal femoral metaphysis due to its overlapping on the displaced epiphysis.

If radiographs do not demonstrate findings consistent with SCFE, but clinical suspicion is high, the clinician can consider obtaining magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to evaluate further.

The clinician should consider laboratory testing to evaluate for possible underlying medical conditions such as endocrine or renal disorders if the patient is less than ten years of age or pre-pubertal, has short stature (more than two standard deviations below mean for age), or weight below the 50th percentile for age. Initial laboratory testing can include thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level, thyroxine level (free T4), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and serum creatinine.