No specific signs and symptoms exist for lung cancer. Most patients already have advanced disease at the time of presentation. Lung cancer symptoms occur due to local effects of the tumor, such as cough due to bronchial compression by the tumor due to distant metastasis, stroke-like symptoms secondary to brain metastasis, paraneoplastic syndrome, and kidney stones due to persistent hypercalcemia.

Cough is present in 50 to 75% of patients with lung cancer.

Pleural involvement in lung cancer can manifest as pleural thickening/nodules or a malignant pleural effusion. During the course of their illness, approximately 10 to 15% of patients with lung cancer will have a malignant pleural effusion, with some showing a unilateral pleural effusion as the only presenting feature.

Superior vena cava syndrome with dilated neck veins, edema of the face, neck, and upper extremities, and a plethoric appearance is a common feature of small cell lung cancer. It might be the primary presentation of the disease. The chest radiograph will show widening of the mediastinum or a right hilar mass.

Metastasis from lung cancer to bone is frequently symptomatic, and patients may present with bone pain at the site of metastasis in the setting of elevated serum alkaline phosphatase and hypercalcemia. Up to 20% of the patients with non-small cell lung cancer may have bone pain secondary to metastasis on initial presentation;

**Paraneoplastic Syndromes Associated with Lung Cancer**

Symptomatic hypercalcemia secondary to lung cancer may be due to secretion of the parathyroid hormone-related protein or due to extensive bony metastases. They present with anorexia, nausea, constipation, and lethargy as typical symptoms of hypercalcemia and have an overall poor prognosis as they tend to be associated with advanced disease.

Neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes are immune-mediated syndromes associated with SCLC and include Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), encephalomyelitis, limbic encephalitis, cerebellar ataxia, sensory neuropathy, and autonomic neuropathy.