# Continuing Education Activity

Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) is a rare autoimmune disease diagnosed when a specific antibody known as anti-U1-ribonucleoprotein is present, and there are features of at least two connective tissue diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus, systemic sclerosis, polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and rheumatoid arthritis. Diagnosis can be challenging due to variable and diverse symptoms upon presentation and the changes in symptoms over time. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, steroids, and immunosuppressive agents are mainstays of treatment. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of MCTD and highlights the interprofessional team's role in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of mixed connective tissue disease.
- Review the typical presentation of a patient with mixed connective tissue disease.
- Outline the treatment options for mixed connective tissue disease.
- Describe the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to optimize outcomes for patients with mixed connective tissue disease patients.

# Introduction

Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) is a rare systemic autoimmune disease with an overlapping feature of at least two connective tissue diseases (CTD), including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), systemic sclerosis (SSc), polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) along with the presence of a distinctive antibody, anti-U1-ribonucleoprotein (RNP) previously known as an antibody to extractable nuclear antigen (ENA).

A revised set of diagnostic criteria for MCTD, which divides the features of the disease into the following four categories, was proposed by a consensus panel in Japan in 2019.

- Raynaud phenomenon

- Immunologic manifestation such as anti–U1-RNP antibody

- Organ involvement includes pulmonary arterial hypertension, aseptic meningitis, trigeminal neuropathy

Overlapping manifestations of SLE-like, systemic sclerosis, polymyositis, and dermatomyositis may present.

# Etiology

The etiology of mixed connective tissue disease is unclear. No clear risk factor has been identified so far. Immune activation due to environmental factors in people with genetic predisposition is thought to play a role. Certain viruses and chemicals have been found to correlate with the disease.

# Epidemiology

Mixed connective tissue disease is a rare disease, and the exact incidence is unknown. In a population-based study done in Olmsted County, Minnesota, the incidence of MCTD was 1.9 per 100,000 adults per year. The mean age of diagnosis was 48 years, and 84% of affected populations were females.

# Pathophysiology

Since the anti-U1-RNP antibody is the hallmark of mixed connective tissue disease, the assumption is that anti-U1-RNP and its antigen play a role in the pathogenesis of MCTD.

Apoptotic modification and molecular mimicry are the two mechanisms by which these intracellular molecules are believed to become autoantigens.

Amino acid sequence from these non-self proteins can mimic host epitope and induce autoantibody response, a phenomenon known as molecular mimicry. For example, almost 91% of DNA from the serum of patients with MCTD had a human immunodeficiency virus type-1 conserved pol sequence.

# History and Physical

Initial symptoms of mixed connective tissue disease are usually non-specific and include arthralgia, malaise, myalgia, and low-grade fever. Almost any organ system can be affected by MCTD.

Skin: The most common skin change is the Raynaud phenomenon, which is also the most common presenting feature of MCTD. Hand edema, acrosclerosis, calcinosis cutis, telangiectasia, erythema nodosum, hair loss, and vasculitis of digits are other manifestations. Discoid plaques and a malar rash similar to SLE can also occur. Nailfold changes are visible by capillary microscopy. Case reports describe panniculitis involving the abdomen, legs, and breasts.

Joint: Joint involvement is usually more severe than in SLE. Arthritis with deformities similar to RA can also occur. Arthritis mutilans resembling psoriatic arthritis is rarely present.

Muscle: Inflammatory myopathy clinically and histologically similar to polymyositis often manifests as myalgia and is a common symptom of MCTD. Rarely myositis can also be the initial presentation.

Lung: Pulmonary involvement occurs in almost 73% of patients, and dyspnea is the most common symptom. Patients can also be asymptomatic until fatal consequences arise.

Heart: Pericarditis is the most common variant of cardiac disease involving up to 40% of patients.

Kidney: Renal involvement occurs in 15 to 25% of MCTD patients. Most patients are usually asymptomatic.

The central nervous system(CNS): Though the lack of CNS involvement is characteristic of MCTD, mild involvement has been described in about 25% of patients.

Gastrointestinal tract: Esophageal hypomotility, dilatation, and GERD are frequent features. Less common manifestations are pancreatitis, megacolon, duodenal bleeding, portal hypertension, and autoimmune hepatitis. Rarely patients can present with protein-losing enteropathy. They often have anasarca due to hypoproteinemia.

Hematological involvement: Anemia and leukopenia are common, while there are also reports of thrombocytopenia.

# Evaluation

**Laboratory Studies**

A complete blood count will demonstrate anemia and leukopenia in almost 75% of patients. Hypergammaglobulinemia is also present in 75% of patients with MCTD. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate presents as elevated in nearly all patients.

**Imaging Studies**

Chest X-ray: Chest X-ray helps in evaluation for pulmonary infiltrates, pleural effusion, and cardiomegaly. Dilatation of the pulmonary artery can present in patients with pulmonary hypertension.

X-ray joints: X-ray of affected joints might reveal small, asymmetrical periarticular erosions. Soft tissue swelling, deformities, and destructive arthritis resembling psoriatic arthritis can present. Rarely periarticular osteopenia and aseptic necrosis may be found.

Echocardiogram: Echocardiogram shows Pericardial effusion, mitral valve prolapse, left ventricular hypertrophy, and changes secondary to pulmonary hypertension.

EKG: Abnormal EKG findings include hemiblock, bundle branch block, atrioventricular block, changes secondary to pericarditis, and pericardial effusion.

Pulmonary function testing: Reduction in diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide, forced vital capacity, forced expiratory volume, and six-minute walk tests occur in ILD.

Computed tomogram: High-resolution computed tomogram is very sensitive in diagnosing ILD. Common findings include ground-glass opacities, linear opacities, subpleural micronodules, septal thickening, traction bronchiectasis, usually with peripheral and lower lobe predominance. Honeycombing, airspace consolidation, emphysema, and centrilobular nodules are less common findings.

Angiogram: Medium-sized arterial occlusions can occur in patients with Raynaud phenomenon.

Right heart catheterization: Definitive diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension in MCTD requires right heart catheterization demonstrating mean pulmonary arterial pressure at rest greater than 20 mmHg.

# Treatment / Management

No randomized controlled trials to guide the treatment of mixed connective tissue disease have yet taken place. The goal of therapy is to control symptoms and is directed by clinical manifestations and organ involvement.

Raynaud phenomenon: Symptomatic management includes avoiding caffeine, smoking, cold temperature, and injuries. Oral calcium channel blockers (CCB), e.g., nifedipine that decreases peripheral resistance, are an option. Intravenous prostaglandins and topical nitroglycerins are effective. Case reports exist of the Raynaud phenomenon responding to rituximab.

Arthritis and arthralgia usually respond to NSAIDs and hydroxychloroquine. For refractory synovitis, corticosteroids and methotrexate can be used.

Pleuritis, pericarditis, myositis, myocarditis, and aseptic meningitis usually respond to steroids. Steroid-sparing agents, e.g., methotrexate, cyclosporine, azathioprine, and mycophenolate mofetil, are commonly used as second-line agents. Steroid-resistant myositis may respond to intravenous immunoglobulin.

Pulmonary hypertension is usually less responsive to steroids. Patients who respond to a vasodilator challenge during right heart catheterization receive treatment with CCB. The efficacy of anticoagulation with warfarin is unknown. Prostaglandins (epoprostenol), endothelin receptor antagonists (ambrisentan), phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors (sildenafil), immunosuppression with corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide are all therapeutic considerations.

Esophageal disorders also respond to steroids. Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) treatment is with proton pump inhibitors (PPI), lifestyle, and dietary modification, e.g., elevating the head of the bed and avoiding dietary triggers. Prokinetics and gastric fundoplication are possible options for those who fail twice-daily PPI therapy. Esophageal motility disorder requires prokinetics. Patients with malabsorption should be on a lactose-free diet, and medium-chain triglycerides should substitute for long-chain fatty acids.

Autoimmune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia receive initial treatment with steroids. Clinicians can consider rituximab in resistant cases.

# Differential Diagnosis

Due to the presence of nonspecific symptoms and different organ involvement, MCTD mimics several other conditions, especially CTD. Few differential diagnoses are listed below.

- Systemic lupus erythematosus

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Polymyositis

- Dermatomyositis

- Scleroderma

- Bacterial infections

- Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension

- Primary Raynaud disease

# Prognosis

Mixed connective tissue disease, previously considered a mild and curable condition, can often be life-threatening. Almost one-third of patients with MCTD undergo complete resolution, while another third can develop life-threatening complications. Prognosis depends on which organ is affected, the degree of inflammation, and the rate of progression of the disease. The mortality rate varies between 8 and 36%.

Epitope spreading can occur during disease leading to change in clinical features. For example, a lower rate of skin sclerosis and a higher percentage of interstitial lung disease appeared in patients who had epitope spreading compared to those who did not during a follow-up of patients with MCTD.

# Complications

Life-threatening complications, e.g., thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, renal crisis, malignant hypertension, and respiratory failure secondary to pulmonary hypertension, can occur rarely. Cardiovascular complications include dilated cardiomyopathy, cardiac tamponade, coronary sclerosis with ischemic cardiomyopathy, and arrhythmias. Infections accelerate atherosclerosis, and malignancies can occur as side effects of immunosuppressives. Transverse myelitis is a rare central nervous system complication.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education about the disease course and management is vital to improve the quality of life. Active involvement of patients in the decision-making process should be encouraged. Patients with esophageal reflux and malabsorption should receive education about lifestyle and dietary modification. Encouraging an active lifestyle and exercise program can help symptom management in patients with arthritis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Mixed connective tissue disease resembles several other connective tissue diseases and is easy to misdiagnose. Diagnosis can be challenging to nurse practitioners and primary care physicians due to variable and mixed presentation and changes in symptoms over time. Early diagnosis and targeted treatment are associated with a better outcome. It is crucial to recognize early signs and symptoms and make an early referral to a rheumatologist. Definitive diagnosis often requires close follow-up and identification of the characteristic evolution of clinical, laboratory, and radiologic findings.

An interprofessional team approach is key to improving the quality of life. Pulmonologists, cardiologists, and other specialist referrals should be made based on organ involvement. Nurses and physicians should provide coordinated patient education to ensure patient understanding of signs and symptoms and when to seek medical attention. Pharmacists should help educate patients about the medications used and their potential adverse effects. Pain should be addressed with pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic approaches, e.g., physical therapy, psychological, social, and emotional support.