**Labeling**

If the incorrect name is placed on a radiograph, one might diagnose disease in a non-diseased patient or not be able to tell whether the pathology seen on a radiograph is acute or chronic. An example of this is observing Kerley B lines on a chest radiograph. Kerley B lines are 1-2cm lines perpendicular to the pleural surface and extending out towards it, caused by thickening of the subpleural interlobular septa. These lines are not specific to any one disease (e.g., may be seen in a patient in acute heart failure exacerbation or a patient with chronic interstitial lung disease.) Having correct dating on exams can help ascertain this finding's chronicity and help determine how to manage the patient clinically.

**Artifact**

An artifact is important to identify, as it can cause misinterpretation of imaging. The most important way to avoid errors involving artifacts is to identify artifacts when they occur and correct for them. Concerning the example artifacts listed earlier in the definition/introduction section, the ways to remedy them are as follows

- Detector drop: recalibration or replacement of the detector

- Liquid contamination: proper sealing of plastic bag holding the detector

- Backscatter radiation detection: tighter collimation and/or additional shielding behind detector (e.g., lead apron or plate)

- Oversaturation: ensure proper size-based techniques have been followed

**Five Anatomic Technical Assessments of Chest Radiographs**

**1. Penetration**

If there is over-penetration of a chest radiograph, more X-ray beams are hitting the photosensitive detector, and the radiograph will look darker than it normally would, especially in the lung fields, making them appear more radiolucent than they should. This decreases lung markings and can raise suspicion for pathologies such as emphysema or even pneumothorax in a patient that may be completely healthy.

**2. Inspiration**

Patients who demonstrate a poor inspiratory effort in chest radiography cause the image vessels to look more prominent than they should, which might lead one to believe that a patient might have some underlying pathology, such as heart failure. It may also lead to compressed lung marking at the lung bases that can mislead the individual reading the radiograph to believe that there may be underlying atelectasis or pneumonia. A good way to help rule out underlying pathology in these situations is to look at the lateral view if available to confirm the presence or absence of pathology.

**3. Rotation**

When a patient is rotated, this results in one side of the patients’ body is closer to the X-ray beam than that of the other, causing several problems with the chest radiograph interpretation. Rotation causes one side of the radiograph to appear darker than that of the other, a phenomenon termed “increased transradiancy.” This can lead to interpreting chest radiographs that may very well be normal as abnormal. Increased lucency in lung fields may lead the interpreter to think there is a pneumothorax, emphysema, or pulmonary embolism. Additionally, the opposite luing field appearing lighter may lead the interpreter to believe there is a pleural fluid collection or air space consolidation.

**4. Magnification**

Assessment of heart magnification is important for evaluating cardiac-related pathology (e.g., dilated cardiomyopathy, pericardial effusion, etc.) To properly assess whether or not a heart is truly enlarged, one must consider what type of radiograph the chest radiograph is (e.g., PA or AP), as on AP views, the heart may appear larger than it is. One may also look at past chest radiographs to determine if there has been a significant change in the heart's transverse diameter over time (1 to 2 cm increase in diameter over a year). Another way to help determine if there is cardiomegaly present is to look at a lateral view chest radiograph if one is available to reduce the size of the retrocardiac space.

**5. Angulation**

The main artifacts seen in apical lordotic views/lordotic projections are elevation of the diaphragm, poor visualization of the lung bases, loss of definition of the aortic knob, and widening of mediastinal structures.