**PTSD**

Prevalence of combat-induced PTSD ranges from 2 to 17% in U.S. veterans but is lower and with a narrower range in other Western countries throughout the same conflicts. This variability is multifactorial, including the uniqueness of each theater and changes in diagnostic criteria. Each war exposes participants to varying intensities of combat and occurs in different sociopolitical contexts from which troops are pulled and returned. There are also noteworthy differences between studies, including sampling methods, measurement strategies, such as self-report versus structured interviews, and delays in assessment after combat exposure, oftentimes years or decades later, possibly increasing recall bias. The multifactorial, inherently subjective, and evolving nature of PTSD poses significant challenges to accurately defining its epidemiology.

**Depression**

Major depression is the most prevalent mood disorder in the general population, with an estimated lifetime prevalence of up to 21%. Lifetime incidence for females ranges as high as 25%, and in males as high as 12%.

**Suicide**

Before 2000, suicide rates within the military and veteran populations were lower than in civilians. However, rates have increased during the last twenty years and currently exceed the civilian rate. There are approximately 19.74 deaths per 100,000 members within the military service, and age-adjusted suicide rates (amongst 17 to 59 year-olds) in the U.S. population is 16.8 per 100,000.

**Substance Use Disorders**

Changes to DSM criteria and the fact that not all veterans receive care through the VA make it challenging to know the true prevalence of SUDs in veterans. As with the general population, SUDs are more common in male veterans (10.5% alcohol and 4.8% other drugs, compared to 4.8% and 2.4%, respectively, amongst female veterans). Unmarried and veterans younger than 25 are at the most risk.

In military and veteran populations, alcohol use disorders (AUDs) are the most prevalent form of SUD. According to the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, compared to non-veterans, veterans were more likely to use alcohol (56.6% versus 50.8% over one month) and use heavily (7.5% versus 6.5% over one month). Problematic drinking was higher in those with more combat exposure: heavy and binge drinking were found at 26.8% and 54.8%, respectively, in those with high combat exposure, compared to other military personnel at 17% and 45%. Smoking is more common in veterans compared to age-matched civilians (27% versus 21%). Opioids are being given to veterans at increasing rates. From 2001 to 2009, the number of VA opioid prescriptions increased from 17% to 24%. A diagnosis of PTSD (17.8%) or other mental health disorders (11.7%) increased the likelihood of getting an opioid prescription compared to those without (6.5%). Illicit drug use among veterans occurs at similar rates to civilians, at around 4% over one month. Marijuana is the most common among veterans at 3.5% compared to 1.7% for other illicit drugs over one month. Cannabis use disorders increased by 50% between 2002 to 2009 among VA patients.