There are many things to consider when treating cystitis. The choice between agents should be individualized and depends on the duration of treatment as well as the possible organism involved. According to guidelines, there is no single, best agent to treat acute uncomplicated cystitis. Choosing an antibiotic depends on its effectiveness, the risk of adverse effects, resistance rates, and propensity to cause collateral damage. Physicians should also consider cost, local antibiotic resistance patterns, antibiotic availability, and patient factors, such as allergy history. On average, patients will experience symptom relief within 36 hours of beginning treatment. Increasing antimicrobial resistance, particularly to fluoroquinolones and carbapenems, as well as the emergence of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) producing organisms, have all contributed to making treatment more difficult and complex.

Excellent cure rates can be achieved with only three days of therapy, but longer treatment durations are sometimes recommended. Local resistance patterns will vary, but any drug with a resistance rate of over 50% should generally not be used unless no alternatives are available and culture/sensitivity results indicate efficacy.

**Uncomplicated Cystitis**

- Nitrofurantoin 100 mg by mouth twice a day for 5 to 7 days as it is bacteriostatic and not bacteriocidal

- Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 160 mg/800 mg twice a day for 3 days (if local resistance is <20%)

- Fosfomycin 3 grams oral once (phenazopyridine can be useful as adjunctive therapy for dysuria)

- Ciprofloxacin 250 mg twice a day or levofloxacin 250 mg twice daily for 3 days (fluoroquinolones are not preferred for first-line therapy in uncomplicated cystitis due to increasing bacterial resistance unless nothing else is appropriate.)

- Alternatives are B-lactams such as amoxicillin-clavulanate 500/125 mg twice a day for seven days or Cephalexin 250 mg four times daily for 3 to 7 days.

- Prophylactic antibiotics may be recommended for patients with complicated or recurrent cystitis but are not routinely recommended for acute, simple cystitis.

**Complicated Cystitis**

There is no absolute guideline for treatment, but therapy typically requires a longer duration (typically about seven to fourteen days). Please see our companion article on Complicated Urinary Tract Infections.

Some recommended treatments are listed below.

**Foley Catheters**

- If treating a patient with a catheter for a UTI, the catheter should always be changed to eliminate the biofilm and avoid contaminating the urine culture.

- Catheters develop biofilms after only a few days, so urine cultures should ideally be taken only from newly placed Foleys.

- Treatment is the same as in patients without catheters.

- Gentamicin solution can be used as an additional treatment option in patients with catheters.

- Prophylactic antibiotics are not recommended for patients with catheters but may be used in selected patients at times of catheter changes if appropriate.

**Nonpregnant Women**

- Nitrofurantoin monohydrate/microcrystals 100 mg mouth twice a day for 5 to 7 days

- Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole DS by mouth twice a day for 7 to 10 days

- Ciprofloxacin 500 mg by mouth twice a day for 7 to 10 days if other antibiotics are not acceptable

**Pregnant Women**

In pregnancy, it is recommended that asymptomatic bacteriuria be treated as well as overt cystitis.

- Amoxicillin-clavulanate 500 mg/12 mg by mouth twice a day for 7 days

- Keflex 500 mg by mouth four times a day for 3 to 5 days

- Cefpodoxime 100 mg twice a day for 5 to 7 days.

**Men**

Acute cystitis is usually recognized as complicated in men. Men with cystitis who do not have signs or symptoms of prostatitis can be treated with the following regimens:

- Ciprofloxacin 500 mg by mouth twice a day for 7 days

- Levofloxacin 750 mg by mouth once a day for 7 days

- Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole DS by mouth twice a day for 7 to 10 days

- Nitrofurantoin 100 mg by mouth twice a day for 7 days. (Not recommended for suspected prostatitis due to lack of tissue penetration.)