There is no evidence-based, preferred treatment of choice for a jumper's knee. Refractory response to treatment is also typical for the condition, often leaving the health professional and patients searching for alternative therapies.

Most patients with jumper's knee are managed through medical and rehabilitative treatment in the initial stages of the disease.

**Non-surgical treatment**focusing on the following: Relative rest rather than immobilization to avoid tendon and muscle atrophy.

**Eccentric training**has been suggested to play a key role in rehabilitating a jumper's knee.

Athletes must avoid activities such as excessive jumping or impact loading of the knee, which only aggravates the situation. As the pain begins to subside, the intensity of rehabilitation therapy and sport-specific training can be slowly increased.

**Surgical treatment**is usually indicated in cases of partial tendon tears and Blazina stage III, where pain continues during rest and activities. Also, it remains the last resort for chronic refractory cases unresponsive to conservative treatment. Traditionally, the gold standard for surgical treatment of patellar tendinopathy involved open debridement of the inferior pole of the patella, as well as debridement of the patellar tendon by excising the angiofibroblastic and degenerative areas. This is followed by reattachment of the tendon using sutures or anchors as indicated. Recently, knee arthroscopy has gained popularity for tissue debridement and release. The arthroscopic procedure has been described as being performed through a direct inferior patellar portal.