Patient classification is as one of three types of silent ischemia:

- Type I: This is the least common form and occurs in completely asymptomatic patients with CAD (which may be severe) in the absence of anginal symptoms.

- Type II: This type occurs in patients with documented previous myocardial infarction.

- Type III: This is the most common form and occurs in patients with the usual forms of chronic stable angina, unstable angina, and vasospastic angina.

**Diabetes mellitus (DM):**Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a significant risk factor for coronary artery disease and correlates with a higher incidence of SMI. Cardiac autonomic dysfunction is the main culprit in diabetic patients which involves pain receptors, afferent neurons or higher areas of the brain.

Studies have shown that atherogenic dyslipidemia strongly correlates with an increased risk of SMI and silent CAD in patients with DM and the management of atherogenic dyslipidemia might help to reduce the high residual burden of cardiovascular disease.

**In surgery****:**There is a relatively high incidence of perioperative MI in the geriatric population. Studies have shown that patients who underwent coronary artery bypass graft surgery had episodes of SMI detected by Holter monitoring.**In the intensive care unit:**Critically ill patients in the intensive care unit (ICU) admitted for noncardiac causes are also at risk of acute myocardial ischemia. Transient myocardial ischemia and advanced age are significant predictors of cardiac events.**Sleep apnea:**Obstructive sleep apnea carries correlations with myocardial ischemia (silent or symptomatic), cardiac arrhythmias, pulmonary hypertension, heart failure, transient ischemic attack, and stroke.