Although some of the pathways involved in the development of absence seizures have been described, their pathophysiological mechanisms are yet to be fully understood. The cortico-thalamic-cortical circuit is considered to play a significant role in the pathophysiology of absence seizures.

Some of the neurons involved in the cortico-thalamic-cortical system include:

- Cortical glutamatergic neurons originating on cortical layer VI and projecting to the nucleus reticularis of the thalamus

- Thalamic relay neurons with excitatory projections to cortical pyramidal neurons

- Neurons from the thalamic nucleus reticularis containing inhibitory GABA-ergic projections that connect with other neurons from the same nucleus and with thalamic relay neurons; these neurons do not connect directly with the cortex

Neurons from the thalamic nucleus reticularis can fire in an oscillatory pattern (for example, rhythmic bursts involved in the generation of sleep spindles) or continuously in single spikes (tonic firing during wakefulness). Shifts between these two firing patterns in the thalamic nucleus reticularis are modulated by spikes in thalamocortical networks and neurons from the thalamic nucleus reticularis. These are mediated through low-threshold transient calcium channels known as T-type channels. After depolarization, T-type channels briefly allow calcium inflow before becoming inactivated. Reactivation requires a relatively long hyperpolarization facilitated by GABA-B receptors. Therefore, abnormal oscillatory rhythms can originate from T-type channel abnormalities or from increased GABA-B activity.

As explained by the genetics of absence epilepsy, genes coding for T-type calcium channels and for GABA receptors have been associated with the etiopathogenesis of this type of epilepsy. Medications that suppress T-type calcium channels, such as ethosuximide and valproate, are effective anti-absence drugs. Conversely, medications that increase GABA-B activity (e.g., vigabatrin) exacerbate the frequency of absence seizures. In contrast, GABA-A agonists (e.g., benzodiazepines) that preferentially enhance GABA-ergic activity in neurons from the thalamic nucleus reticularis can suppress absence seizures.

More recent research on penicillin-induced models of epilepsy in cats favors the cerebellum's role in long-term electrical stimulation in the absence epilepsy.