A 12 lead EKG should be obtained within 10 minutes of patient presentation, in those with clinical suspicion for the acute coronary syndrome. Changes in ECG in patients may include ST depression, transient ST-elevation, new T-wave inversions, or even Q-waves.

Anteroseptal MI on ECG usually is characterized by the presence of ST-elevations in V1-V3 leads acutely followed by the development of Q waves in V1-V3 precordial leads. The presence of Q-waves in these leads is classically referred to as an age-indeterminate anteroseptal infarct. Q-waves are considered significant if the Q wave duration (onset to its nadir) is more than 0.03 sec or the height of the Q wave is more than 25% of the height of the succeeding R wave. ST changes qualify as new ST-segment elevation at the J-point in two contiguous leads with the cut-points: greater than or equal to 1 mm in all leads other than leads V2-V3. For leads V2-V3: greater than or equal to 2 mm in men 40 years and older, greater than or equal to 2.5 mm in men under 40 years, or greater than or equal to 1.5 mm in women regardless of the age. These values assume the usual calibration of 1mV/10mm.

Abnormal cardiac troponin above the 99th percentile of the upper reference limit is usually indicative of infarction. Cardiac troponins are the primary modality for the diagnosis of MI or acute coronary syndrome. They are the most sensitive and specific biomarkers for the acute coronary syndrome. They usually rise within a few hours of the symptom onset and may remain elevated for several days. In a large area of myocardial involvement, they may remain elevated for up to 2 weeks. A negative troponin value on admission offers greater than 95% negative predictive value for MI. They are also useful for risk stratification in patients with MI. The main diagnostic biomarkers indicating myocardial damage and necrosis are cardiac troponin I and cardiac troponin T.

Other tests: A chest X-ray is useful to identify other potential causes of chest pain. There may be a widened mediastinum in patients with aortic dissection. Computed tomography of the chest with contrast can exclude causes such as pulmonary embolism and aortic dissection. Point of care ultrasound (POCUS) of the heart can be used to evaluate for any new wall motion abnormalities of the left ventricle. One of the advantages of using POCUS is that the wall motion abnormality appears earlier in the ischemic cascade compared to the EKG changes or serum troponin elevation.