Following diagnosis, the initial workup should consist of chest radiography, electrocardiography, an echocardiogram to evaluate cardiac status in the early onset type.

The reduction of vital capacity can be assessed in late-onset, which is a difficult approach with infants since the procedure requires instruction compliance. For all onsets, a prompt response should be provided to patients who develop a cough, wheezing, or shortness of breath

For feeding difficulties consider an orogastric or nasogastric tube, as well as video swallow studies (late-onset) to prevent aspiration and/or gastroesophageal reflux.

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) is currently the most reliable treatment. By providing an analogous enzyme, lysosomal glycogen accumulation in cardiac and skeletal muscle is actively reduced, though diagnosis timing is the main determinant factor for treatment response. CRIM (cross-reactive immunologic material) status is to be determined either prior to or during the first administrations of ERT. CRIM testing is important since patients who develop antibodies against the provided enzyme can have a reduced effect. Different protocols have been created to reduce this response, which can consist of antihistamines, steroids, and other immunomodulators. Dosing for ERT in its commercial forms, ranging from 20 to 40 mg/kg/dose every two weeks

Treatment of the different complications should be tailored particularly to each case. Cardiac affected patients should avoid digoxin or inotropes initially since they can worsen left ventricular outflow status. Muscle weakness is greatly benefited from physical therapy, mainly to avoid contractures of the pelvic girdle, which can require surgical management. Speech and swallow therapy, CPAP, and BiPAP are often required in patients with the late-onset phenotype.