Macrocephaly refers to a large head size and does not specify the cause. Prior to the closure of the fontanelles and sutures in children and an increase in the volume of any of the intracranial contents will cause the size of the head to increase. Etiology of the condition can be due to increased brain parenchyma, also known as megalencephaly, or increased cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). There are also instances when macrocephaly can be caused by increased blood, thickened bone, or increased intracranial pressure (ICP) from other causes.

Megalencephaly may be anatomic, which refers to an increase in the size or number of cells in the brain without metabolic disease process, or maybe metabolic. Anatomic megalencephaly is most often familial and benign. In these cases, the patient is often born with a large head and a normal-sized body with a further rapid increase in head size over the first six months of life (head circumference increases by 0.6 to 1 cm rather than average 0.4 cm/week). Familial megalencephaly usually produces mild macrocephaly, typically 2 to 4 cms above the 90th percentile, and the growth curve follows above but parallel to 98th percentile. Family members may also have large heads.

The other causes of anatomic megalencephaly are varied and often genetic.

Sotos syndrome, also known as cerebral gigantism, is another cause of megalencephaly. Other features include frontal bossing, a high forehead, high arched palate, intellectual disability or developmental delay, hypertelorism, and a prominent jaw or pointed chin. Most cases of Sotos syndrome result through sporadic mutations in the NSD1 gene.

Fragile X syndrome's features are macrocephaly, intellectual disability, prominent ears and jaw, and macroorchidism. These features may not be as noticeable prior to puberty. Fragile X syndrome is caused most frequently by a CGG trinucleotide repeat in the FMR1 gene, which is located on the X chromosome.

Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome, also known as Gorlin syndrome, relays a predisposition for basal cell carcinomas to the patient. These patients have macrocephaly and coarse facial features. Gorlin syndrome is caused by mutations in the PTCH1 gene. The inheritance pattern is autosomal dominant.

Cowden syndrome is another syndrome that gives the patient susceptibility to certain cancers. Patients with Cowden syndrome can have macrocephaly and can develop thyroid or breast cancers. Cowden syndrome is caused by mutations in the PTEN gene and is also autosomal dominant.

In cases of metabolic megalencephaly, the brain parenchyma is increased in size due to the deposition of metabolic products within the brain tissue. This can include the leukodystrophies such as Alexander disease, lysosomal storage diseases such as Tay-Sach disease, and organic acid disorders. Patients with these conditions often have a normal head circumference that is normal at birth but increases at a rate that exceeds their expected curve.

Macrocephaly may also be caused by an increase in cerebrospinal fluid. In hydrocephalus, the ventricular system contains an abnormally high amount of CSF, leading to increased pressure and dilatation of the ventricles. Hydrocephalus can be due to increased production, decreased absorption, or a CSF flow obstruction. The clinical presentation of elevated intracranial pressure from hydrocephalus includes lethargy, irritability, developmental problems, nausea or vomiting, and restricted upgaze. The head may enlarge while cranial sutures and fontanelles are still open, but when there is no longer a compensatory mechanism such as this, then surgical management may need to be pursued. This could include a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. Elevated intracranial pressure can also result from a space-occupying lesion located within the cranial vault. Benign enlargement of subarachnoid space is another relatively common cause of macrocephaly secondary to an increase in CSF that manifests in the first six months of life, seen more in boys than girls.

Neuroimaging reveals enlargement of anterior subarachnoid space and distinguishes it from anterior to posterior symmetric fluid collection associated with cerebral atrophy. Infants with this condition, especially if born at term, are developmentally normal with a normal neurological examination. However, they have a higher risk of subdural hemorrhage in the setting of minimal or no trauma. Similar neuroimaging features in infants with a history of complicated neonatal intensive care unit stay or requirement of early extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may represent a different subset and may be associated with worse developmental and neurologic outcomes.

Increased blood within the cranium can also result in increased head size. This can be related to hemorrhage or an arteriovenous malformation. In the case of hemorrhage, this may be related to non-accidental trauma, and further workup of the social components of the history would be required. On physical exam, the patient may have other injuries or retinal hemorrhages. Either way, the presentation with intracranial hemorrhage following non-accidental trauma would likely accompany other features, such as seizures, nausea/vomiting, lethargy, or irritability.

One more consideration for increased head size is an increase in the volume of the skull. Bone thickening can result from an expansion of the bone marrow, which can be seen in thalassemia major, or from skeletal/cranial dysplasias.