Granuloma annulare is often located on the lateral and dorsal hands and feet in a ring-like or circinate con­figuration. There is usually no pruritus or other symptoms associated with the lesions. The localized variant is the most common subtype of granuloma annulare and represents approximately 75% of the reported cases of granuloma annulare.

In addition to the localized variant, other clinical variants of granuloma annulare include generalized, perforating, patch, and subcutaneous. Generalized granuloma annulare presents with numerous flesh-colored papules in an annular configuration on the trunk and extremities. Unlike the classic presentation, these lesions are often pruritic. Up to 15% of granuloma annulare cases are of the generalized type. This subtype rarely resolves on its own and has a poor response to therapy.

Subcutaneous granuloma annulare presents with large nodules on the extremities. These nodules are sometimes called pseudorheumatoid nodules. Subcutaneous granuloma annulare is seen almost exclusively in children; the age range for developing the disease is about 1 to 14 years of age.

The patch variant of granuloma annulare presents with erythematous patches that may involve large areas of skin. There is some overlap between this subtype and reactive granulomatous eruptions; differentiating between the two is sometimes difficult. Perforating granuloma annulare presents with umbilicated papules. The lesions may be confined to the extremities or involve the trunk and the extremities. It is estimated that approximately half of the patients with the localized form of granuloma annulare will experience spontaneous remission within a 2-year period. A patient may have more than one of the subtypes of granuloma annulare.