The precentral gyrus is the anatomical location of the primary motor cortex and is responsible for the control of voluntary movement. Lesions occurring within the precentral gyrus affect upper motor neurons, and therefore present with upper motor neuron signs. Since the precentral gyrus is above the pyramidal decussation, upper motor signs will present on the contralateral side of the body. Symptoms of upper motor neuron dysfunction include muscle weakness, distal muscles are usually affected more than proximal, increased muscle tone with spasticity, increased muscle stretch reflexes, and the presence of pathologic reflexes, for example, the Babinski sign. Upper motor neuron signs will also present with little to no muscle atrophy.

The precentral gyrus can also be affected by strokes, and symptoms can aid in localizing the site of the stroke. A stroke in the superior division of the middle cerebral artery will affect the more lateral aspects of the precentral gyrus; this would present with contralateral face and arm weakness with upper motor neuron signs. A stroke in the middle cerebral artery affects other areas besides the precentral gyrus, so it is likely to also present with contralateral hemisensory loss of the arm and face, and if in the dominant hemisphere, Broca aphasia may also be present. A stroke involving the anterior cerebral artery will affect the more medial aspects of the precentral gyrus, presenting with contralateral leg weakness with upper motor signs. A stroke involving the anterior cerebral artery will also be likely to demonstrate hemisensory loss of the contralateral leg.