The basic design of LVADs since their inception has stayed similar. The inlet cannula is placed in the apex of the left ventricle (LV). The blood subsequently enters the pump, the structure of which has undergone significant changes over time. The outflow graft then leads to the ascending (most common) or descending aorta

The first-generation LVADs were approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for clinical use in 1994. These were pulsatile-flow LVADs used for circulatory support as a bridge to transplantation (BTT) for patients awaiting donor's hearts. However, the second and third-generation continuous-flow devices have had modifications in structure and function, with improved durability, which has expanded their use as destination therapy (DT) in patients who are not eligible for cardiac transplantation

**First-Generation Devices**

These were pulsatile volume-displacement pumps. The Heartmate I (HM I) was used in the REMATCH trial and underwent many modifications but is no longer manufactured. Another of its generation, the Novacor also, is now obsolete due to a high risk of stroke. The Thoratec paracorporeal ventricular assist device (PVAD) is still manufactured but rarely used. The first-generation devices required significant surgical dissection for placement and were suited to those with a large body habitus. They also had a high rate of infection at the external lead. Also, the pump was audible and caused discomfort. These limitations resulted in the discontinuation of their use.

**Second-Generation Devices**

These are continuous flow devices that use axial flow pumps. The Heartmate II (HM II) and Jarvik 2000 are the two most commonly used devices, with the latter characterized by outflow graft anastomosis to the descending aorta. The rotor is the only moving part of these devices, making them more durable. These devices are smaller and easier to implant. They are quieter and also associated with lower rates of driveline infection than first-generation devices. The sixth INTERMACS annual report showed that, since 2010, all patients receiving DT had continuous flow devices

**Third Generation Devices**

These are continuous flow centrifugal pumps, of which the HeartWare and Heartmate 3 are the most popular. They are designed for long durability (5 to 10 years), easy surgical placement, and low risk of hemolysis or thrombosis. Smaller devices are currently in the testing phase.

**Biventricular Assist Device (BiVAD)**

This device is used for patients with either biventricular failure or right ventricular failure associated with left ventricular disease. The total artificial heart (TAH) has been a revolution. The SynCardia TAH is the most widely used TAH, with over 1600 patients benefiting.