Bronchiectasis is treatable but rarely curable.

**Treatment Goals:**

- Identifying and treating the underlying cause

- Improve tracheobronchial clearance

- Control infection

- Reverse airflow obstruction

**General Management**

**1. Identifying and treating the underlying cause:**Immunoglobulin replacement, steroids, antifungals for ABPA, treatment for NTM, and CF all represent opportunities to treat the underlying cause specifically, and systematic testing of all patients is recommended in consensus guidelines.

**2. Improve tracheobronchial clearance:**Most physicians recommend mucus clearance as the mainstay of therapy in bronchiectasis, Postural drainage consists of adopting a position in which the uppermost lobe is drained, and should be performed for a minimum of 5 to 10 minutes twice a day. Efficiently performed, this is of great value both in reducing the amount of cough and sputum and in preventing recurrent episodes of bronchopulmonary infection.

Deep breathing followed by forced expiratory maneuvers (the "active cycle of breathing" technique) is of help in allowing secretions in the dilated bronchi to gravitate towards the trachea, from which vigorous coughing can clear them. "Percussion" of the chest wall with cupped hands may help to dislodge sputum, and a number of mechanical devices are available, which cause the chest wall to oscillate, thus achieving the same effect.

**3. Control infection**: The choice of antibiotic should primarily be based on the results of culture and sensitivity. When no specific pathogen is identified, and the patient is not seriously ill, an oral agent like amoxicillin, co-amoxiclav, or macrolides for 2 weeks is sufficient.

Use a higher dose of oral amoxicillin 1 gm twice per day for 2 weeks, especially if colonized with H. influenza. If pseudomonas-colonized, then a 2-week course of ciprofloxacin 750 mg twice per day (with cautious use in the elderly) is reasonable.

For patients with moderate-to-severe symptoms, parenteral antibiotics, such as an aminoglycoside (gentamicin, tobramycin), antipseudomonal synthetic penicillin, a third-generation cephalosporin, or a fluoroquinolone, may be indicated.

Treatment for Pseudomonas isolates 2 weeks of intravenous (IV) antipseudomonal antibiotics, nebulized colistin for 3 months, or nebulized colistin for 3 months with an additional 4 weeks of oral ciprofloxacin.

Maintenance therapy with intermittent antibiotics is not used routinely in patients with non-CF bronchiectasis, and the decision to use long-term antibiotics should be individualized.

Inhaled aminoglycosides can be of benefit in chronic non-CF bronchiectasis; however, the treatment needs to be of sustained duration.

**4. Control reverse airflow obstruction**: In patients with airflow obstruction, inhaled bronchodilators and corticosteroids should be used to enhance airway patency.

**5. Lifestyle modifications**: As with other respiratory diseases, patients with bronchiectasis should be encouraged to stop smoking. Vaccination against influenza and pneumococcal disease is also recommended.

**Adjunctive Surgical Treatment:**

- Surgery is only indicated in a small proportion of cases. These are usually young patients in whom the bronchiectasis is unilateral and confined to a single lobe or segment, as demonstrated by CT.

- Surgery is an important adjunct to therapy in some patients with advanced or complicated disease.

- Single- or double-lung transplantation has been used as a treatment of severe bronchiectasis, predominantly when related to CF. In general, consider patients with CF and bronchiectasis for lung transplantation when FEV falls below 30% of the predicted value. Female patients and younger patients may need to be considered sooner.

- Massive hemoptysis: Bronchial artery embolization and/or surgery is first-line therapy for the management of massive hemoptysis.