Patients with PPC usually present with defective near and distant vision, glare, halos, difficulty reading small words, problems driving a vehicle during the night, photophobia, and reduced contrast sensitivity. The problem increases with age due to senile miosis and increased density of the PPC. The symptoms probably result from vacuole-like changes in the surrounding area of discoid opacity. If present during childhood, it can result in defective vision, amblyopia, and deviation of the eyeball manifesting as exotropia. As the age increases, the anatomical (in the bag placement of IOL without posterior capsular breach) and the patients' functional (visual) expectation also increases.

The diagnosis of PPC is clinical and can be easily made with a meticulous slit-lamp examination. Retro illumination reveals a thick white circular discoid plaque-like central opacity in the form of onion rings densely adherent to the posterior capsule. This typical appearance has also been described as a bull's eye appearance. The thickness and the breath of the opacity are a fair indicator of visual acuity also. Larger and thicker opacities affect the visual acuity more compared to the smaller ones. They are rarely picked up in infancy compared to anterior polar cataracts, which are quite evident during birth. While examining the anterior vitreous phase, it may appear like oil droplets suggesting a pre-existing posterior capsular defect. In a study, the mean PPC lens thickness was comparatively lower than that of senile sclerotic cataracts. Another study demonstrated that the mean age of patients in PPC was lesser than that of senile cataracts.

PPC can also present with posterior subcapsular cataracts, cortical cataracts, and nuclear sclerotic cataracts. Sometimes dense white spots are noticed adjacent to the PPC, suggestive of the thin or absent posterior capsule. This is known as the Daljit Singh sign. When the PPC plaque is examined by a 60-degree slit, if there is a bend of rays at the center, this also signifies posterior capsule dehiscence.

**Classification Systems for Posterior Polar Cataract**

**Duke-Elder Classification System**

**Stationary PPC**- This is the more common type seen in 65% of cases; it is a round, well-defined, localized opacity located on the posterior capsule. The onion ring appearance of PPC gives it the shape of a bull's eye. Very rarely, the opacity is masked by nuclear sclerotic cataracts. Occasionally satellite lesions are observed surrounding the opacity. The progression may be noted at any time.

**Progressive PPC**- The lenticular changes are present in the form of whitish opacity at the posterior cortex in the shape riders. The edges are feathery and don't involve the nucleus. It may also become symptomatic. The opacity affects the visual acuity, usually by the age of 30 to 50 years.

**Daljit Singh's Classification**

Type

Description

1

Presence of posterior polar cataract along with posterior subcapsular cataract

2

Onion ring-shaped posterior polar cataract with presence or absence of white spot at the edge

3

Discrete round or oval opacity at the center with surrounding white spots at the edge. This is usually associated with thin or absent posterior capsule

4

Combination of any of the above three along with nuclear sclerosis

Singh, in his analysis, proposed that type 2 can convert to type 3, and it is not a wise option to delay surgery in PPC cases.

**Schroeder's Classification**

He classified PPC in pediatric patients based on the obstruction in the red reflex through the pupil

**Grade**

**Description**

**Management**

1

Very small PPC without any effect on the visual acuity through the clear part of the lens

Patching

2

PPC obstructing two-third part of the pupil

Patching with mydriasis and bifocal glasses

3

PPC with the surrounding area of optical distortion. A clear red reflex is appreciated only through a dilated pupil

Patching and early surgery

4

Large PPC, no red reflex is observed even through a dilated pupil

Patching and early surgery

Schroeder advised patching before surgery in PPC patients as it will be helpful to diagnose and treat amblyopia and post-surgical management. He proposed that if patching works well, surgery can be delayed in these cases. The above classification will also be helpful for planning surgery in these patients. The larger and denser the opacity, and earlier the area of pupillary obstruction surgery should be done.

**Vasavada's Classification of Posterior Polar Cataract**

Vasavada divided PPC into three distinct varieties

- PPC with impending posterior capsular dehiscence

- Pre-existing capsular dehiscence with PPC

- Spontaneous dislocation of PPC