Cannabinoids, broadly speaking, are a class of biological compounds that bind to cannabinoid receptors. They are most frequently sourced from and associated with the plants of the Cannabis genus, including Cannabis sativa, Cannabis indica, and Cannabis ruderalis. The earliest known use of cannabinoids dates back 5,000 years ago in modern Romania, while the documentation of the earliest medical dates back to around 400 AD.

- Phytocannabinoids - derived naturally from flora

- Endocannabinoids - produced endogenously

- Synthetic Cannabinoids – created artificially

Of all known cannabinoids (hundreds of which have been isolated and identified), arguably the most commonly notable are the phytocannabinoids tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) - the former being responsible for Cannabis’s psychoactive effects. Throughout their storied history, cannabinoids have been renowned for their psychotropic and physiological effects. In tandem, the effects, as mentioned above, have made them the target of medical, cultural, and recreational uses, of which the former will be the focus of this article. Cannabinoids are frequently the targets of pharmaceutical innovation, with most being either structurally related to or mimicking the ligand-receptor activity of THC and CBD. These biochemical innovations have found extensive application in clinical studies for a variety of diseases, where cannabinoids have shown mild to strong efficacy:

- Chronic pain, opioid dependence

- Epilepsy (e.g., Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome)

- Appetite stimulation in HIV/AIDS and cancer patients

- Tourette syndrome

- Multiple sclerosis

- Chemotherapy-related nausea/vomiting

Clinical studies notwithstanding, in the United States (US), only a small number of cannabinoids have been approved for medical use by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Those are:

- Dronabinol

- Nabilone

- Cannabidiol

Finally, as a point of clarification for this review, Cannabis refers to the plants mentioned above of the Cannabis genus, marijuana refers to parts of Cannabis containing notable concentrations of THC, and hemp refers to cannabis plants often designated for industrial use containing less than legal threshold of THC in the US. These distinctions are important, inasmuch as many people, both laypersons, and even medical personnel, blur the lines between them.

This article focuses on systemically ingested cannabinoid formulations and does not address topical cannabinoid products, which are available over the counter.