Relapse prevention is an essential part of addiction recovery. Frequent relapses may prevent individuals from progressing in overcoming their addiction. Although relatively little is known about brain functioning in addiction recovery, sustained abstinence likely allows time for the brain to resume normal functioning that can lay the foundations for long-term success.

Providers have long recognized that relapse is a process rather than an event. Some relapse prevention programs have delineated stages of relapse, starting with an “emotional relapse” followed by a “mental relapse” and culminating in a “physical relapse.” The dissection of the relapse process in this way allows for the early recognition of initial signs and symptoms and the establishment of preventative interventions for each stage.

**Emotional Relapse**

An emotional relapse may occur when a person remembers their last relapse, does not want to repeat it, and is not thinking about using. However, their emotions and resulting behaviors are laying the foundations for their next relapse. Individuals in this stage are often not planning to relapse so that they may be in denial of their risk of relapse. This denial can prevent the use of effective techniques to prevent the progression of the relapse.

Signs of emotional relapse include isolation, not attending meetings (or not sharing in meetings), focusing on other people's problems, and poor sleeping or eating habits.

There are two main goals during this stage. The first goal is to help the patient understand the importance of self-care. The second goal is to help patients recognize their denial so they can further understand the need to take steps to avoid progressing through the stages of a relapse.

**Mental Relapse**

During a mental relapse, the patient has an internal struggle between the desire to resume using and the desire to remain abstinent.

Signs of a mental relapse including craving a substance, thinking about people/places/things associated with their use in the past, exaggerating the positive aspects of past use and/or minimizing the consequences of past use, lying, bargaining, trying to plan ways to use while still maintaining control, seeking opportunities to relapse, and planning a relapse.

Providers help patients in this stage to recognize and avoid situations that increase the risk of physical relapse. Participants in this stage may be at a significantly increased risk of a physical relapse during special times, such as a social event, holiday, or a trip when they may use mental bargaining to justify their use.

Some patients early in recovery may set up unreasonable expectations in that they believe they will never again think about using or having a relapse. Providers need to emphasize that occasional thoughts of using or cravings are a common part of recovery so they can help the patient equip themselves with the skills needed to work through these challenges.

**Physical Relapse**

The final stage of relapse occurs when an individual resumes the use of the substance. Some researchers have differentiated a "lapse" (an initial use of the substance) from a "relapse" (uncontrolled use of the substance). However, this distinction may be detrimental to some individuals by helping them to minimize the impact of a lapse. As the DSM criteria make clear, most individuals with a substance use disorder have difficulty controlling how much they use, resulting in the likelihood that one drink, for example, will lead to many more if not corrected. Also, an initial lapse can lead to an increased obsession with further use.

Many physical relapses occur during times when the individual believes their use will go undetected. In working with patients in early recovery, providers need to ensure they have the skills necessary to recognize these high-risk situations and avoid using.

**Stages of Recovery**

Researchers and practitioners have identified multiple steps which help to explain the progression of many individuals through the process of recovery.

Abstinence stage

Experts in the field commonly hold that the abstinence stage starts as soon as the individual ceases their use and may continue for one or two years. During this stage, the primary concerns of the patient are often coping with their cravings and avoiding relapses.

Repair stage

The repair stage is commonly thought to last two to three years. During this stage, the individual works to repair the damage caused by the addiction. Participants usually start to feel progressively better, but as they begin to address past trauma or adverse life events associated with their use, they may feel worse at times.

Growth stage

The growth stage starts after the individual has largely repaired the damage caused by the addiction. This stage is commonly thought to start three to five years after the individual has quit using and is expected to last for the rest of their lives. The individual's growth often includes experiences and developing skills they missed due to the addiction, particularly if the addiction started at a young age.