Tooth fractures are often associated with soft tissue injuries, such as swelling, hematoma, and laceration. The application of cold packs to the injured site is useful in reducing pain and swelling before initiating specific dental treatment.

**Enamel Infraction**

Most cases do not require treatment, but if the crack is more severe, etching and sealing with bonding resin is advised to prevent bacterial contamination and discoloration.

**Enamel Fracture**(uncomplicated crown fracture)****

Reattach the tooth fragment, restore with resin composite, or smooth the tooth edges depending on the fragment availability and extension of the lesion. Follow-up clinical and radiographic examinations are advised after two months and then a year to check the state of the restoration, pulp necrosis, apical periodontitis, and lack of root development (immature teeth).

**Enamel-dentin Fracture****(uncomplicated crown fracture)**

Protect the exposed dentin using a bonding agent and composite resin or glass ionomer. Calcium hydroxide can function as lining material when the exposed dentin is in the proximity of the pulp, in which case the dentin will be slightly pink but with absent bleeding. After that, cover with a material, like glass-ionomer.

If available, consider fragment reattachment, which must be soaked in water or saline solution 20 minutes before the procedure to recuperate the tissue hydration. Other options are resin direct composite restoration, wax-up and resin composite restoration, or ceramic restoration.

**Enamel-dentin Fracture with Pulp Exposure (complicated crown fracture)**

When treating a complicated crown fracture, one must consider the most appropriate way to manage the pulp exposure and restore the tooth structure. A conservative approach should always prevail since teeth can form a dentinal bridge after pulp exposure when using a pulp-capping material.

Pulp capping or partial pulpotomy?

It depends on the time and diameter of exposure, state of the pulp before the injury, age of the tooth, stage of root development, and simultaneous luxation injuries.

Pulp capping is indicated when the pulp was only exposed for a short period because the longer the exposure, the higher the chances for bacterial invasion and irreversible inflammatory reactions.

Partial pulpotomy is the treatment of choice for young teeth with open apices when pulp capping is contraindicated: too much time has elapsed since the trauma, or the diameter of the exposure is too great. Cvek suggests amputating the pulp 2 mm below the exposure site, where the tissue is believed to be healthy.

Dentists must use their clinical judgment to choose a restorative option, such as freehand or indirect composite resin restoration, fragment reattachment if available, or ceramic restoration.

Pulp testing and radiographs are advised on follow-up visits after six to eight weeks, three months, six months, and a year.

**Crown-root Fractures**

The objective of the treatment is to expose the fracture margins to allow bleeding and moist control during clinical procedures and improve plaque control by the patient. The first step in management is to remove the tooth fragment to reveal the extent of the fracture and pulp involvement (the fragment may later be reattached).

When the pulp is not exposed, the remaining dentin can be covered with glass ionomer or composite resin after retrieving the fragment. This is the most conservative approach but remains an alternative as long as the fracture extends just apical to the cementoenamel junction.

Other treatment options include: gingivectomy (and osteotomy if needed), orthodontic extrusion with or without gingivoplasty, forced surgical extrusion, vital root submergence, intentional replantation with or without root rotation, autotransplantation, and extraction.

Clinical and radiographic examinations must be performed on follow-up appointments after one week, six to eight weeks, three months, six months, and a year, from this point, once a year for a minimum of five years.

**Root Fractures**

The treatment of root fractures first involves repositioning the crown fragment if displaced and checking that the reposition is correct with an x-ray. No endodontic treatment should be performed during the emergency appointment, and since fractures at the cervical level can heal, the crown fragment should not be removed. The mobile segment needs to be stabilized with a flexible and passive splint for up to four months in cervical fractures and four weeks in mid and apical third fractures.It is essential to monitor the fracture healing after four weeks (where the splint will be removed in mid and apical third fractures), six to eight weeks, four months (where the splint will be removed in cervical fractures), six months, one year, and yearly from then for at least five years.