Clinical presentation of these infections is variable based on the primary site of infection, the fascial plane involved, the extent of inflammation and infection, and the presence of abscess and local pressure effects and other systemic conditions. Most patients present with fever and neck pain. Associated symptoms such as dental pain, dysphagia, stridor, dysphonia, trismus, pain on neck movements, and respiratory distress can provide clues regarding the potentially affected facial plane. Predisposing factors such as immunocompromised state, recent oral/dental procedures, recent neck or oral trauma, recent neck surgery or radiation, IV drug use, or diabetes mellitus should be sought.

Patients may be febrile and may appear ill and toxic. Inspection of the neck may reveal asymmetry, redness, swelling, induration, and regional lymphadenitis. Torticollis may be present. Abscesses in this area are harder to diagnose clinically due to frequent absence of fluctuance due to the taut fascia, overlying muscles, and the deep location, but are easily demonstrated on computed tomography. Physicians should have a low threshold to obtain such imaging so long as the patient is able to lie supine and protect their airway.

Proximal deep neck infections (peritonsillar, parapharyngeal, parotid, and submandibular) infections and abscesses tend to present with a sore throat and sometimes with trismus. Trismus occurs due to the local inflammation of the muscles of mastication or the direct involvement of these muscles by the infection. A physical exam may reveal neck or lower facial swelling, local erythema, tenderness, and regional lymphadenitis. Medial displacement of the uvula in conjunction with tonsillar asymmetry suggests peritonsillar abscess, whereas medial displacement of the pharyngeal wall is suggestive of parapharyngeal space infection. Local pressure may result in dysphagia or odynophagia and may have associated inflammation in the cricoarytenoid joints. If the vagus nerve is affected, dysphonia and hoarseness can occur, the so-called "hot potato" voice. Infections in the submandibular space may occur after spreading from dental abscesses, sublingual or submaxillary salivary glands, or oral infections following trauma. Cellulitis in this space is also known as Ludwig’s angina if it originates from the 3rd molars, which can lead to life-threatening airway obstruction if untreated. Ludwig’s angina presents with drooling, inability to swallow, trismus, and induration and elevation of the floor of the mouth.

Parapharyngeal and retropharyngeal space infections are more common in children and usually are preceded by an upper respiratory infection. They often present with dysphagia, drooling, and stridor and can lead to airway compromise or spread into the chest to cause mediastinitis. Infections in the danger space (located posterior to the retropharyngeal space and anterior to prevertebral space) that has loose areolar tissue facilitates the rapid spread of infection to surrounding regions and often presents with complications such as mediastinitis, empyema, and sepsis.