Although taste is regarded as less important than its sensory counterparts of vision and hearing, it plays an important role in happiness. Gustatory pathology can impact mental health and compromise some peoples' occupations. Taste evolved to allow us to detect the nutritional quality and hazards of potential foods, and as such, a loss of taste may even be considered life-threatening. Identifying and treating the cause of gustatory disorders is therefore of great importance to the individual patient, however as mentioned before, it is difficult to examine a single pathway. In fact, isolated pathologies of the gustatory pathway are rare

A full history identifying previous surgical procedures of the head and neck, upper aerodigestive tract pathologies, and a list of medications is paramount. A thorough history will highlight the most prevalent causes of gustatory dysfunction: iatrogenic, drug-induced, post-infectious, or neuropsychiatric. This indicates the need for an interprofessional healthcare team approach to these disorders, utilizing clinicians, specialists, PAs and NPs, nurses, and pharmacists, all working collaboratively to achieve optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Combined expertise from otorhinolaryngologists, neurologists, and maxillofacial surgeons is recommended to diagnose and manage gustatory pathology. Clinical examination should include close inspection of the tongue and oropharynx and otoscopy (the ear canal is a common site for lesions affecting the chorda tympani). Cranial nerve examination is crucial. For example, abnormalities in the trigemino-facial pathways can be detected by testing the blink and masseter reflexes.

The history should reveal a temporal relationship between gustatory dysfunction and, say, a new medication, recent surgical procedure, or infection. Other causes of taste disorders affect either the peripheral or central nervous system. Peripheral lesions comprise syndromes of the glossopharyngeal or facial nerve, the most common being idiopathic Bell palsy. Other lesions of the facial nerve include infectious neuritis or space-occupying masses of the cerebellopontine angle. A frequent cause of glossopharyngeal dysfunction is the dissection of the cervical arteries.

The management of gustatory disorders should be targeted at an accurate diagnosis of the underlying cause. A thorough patient workup is warranted, followed by smoking cessation advice, good oral hygiene measures, and a trial of zinc therapy. Zinc, corticosteroids, and vitamin A have all been attempted despite a lack of convincing clinical data, and there is currently no specific treatment for idiopathic dysgeusia.