After fertilization, the single-celled zygote undergoes multiple mitotic cleavages of the blastomeres to change from a two-celled to a 16-celled ball or morula. The morula begins as a solid mass of totipotent blastomeres that undergoes compaction and cavitation to transform into the blastula (non-mammalian term) or blastocyst (human development). Within the blastocyst, two tissue layers differentiate: an outer shell, known as the trophoblast, and an inner collection of cells termed the inner cell mass (ICM). Cells within the outer shell bind together via gap junctions and desmosomes to undergo compaction, ultimately forming a water-tight shell called the trophoblast.

The outer trophoblast will develop into structures that provide nutrients, help the growing embryo implant in the uterine lining, and contribute to the formation of the placenta. Additionally, the trophoblast cells are essential in the cavitation of the solid morula into a hollowed ball of cells with an internal cavity. Trophoblast cells utilize the active transport of sodium ions and osmosis of water to form a fluid-filled cavity known as a blastocoel.

The cells remaining after blastocoel formation are pluripotent ICM progenitor cells, which give rise to the distinctive formation of the fetus. Rather than being arranged as a solid sphere of cells, the ICM is pushed off to one side of the sphere formed by the trophoblast. Together the trophoblastic layer, blastocoel, and inner cell mass are the characteristic features of the human blastocyst.

From zygote to blastocyst formation, the organism is surrounded by the zona pellucida, a layer of the extracellular matrix that plays a role in the protection and prevention of implantation into the uterine tubes. During blastocyst formation, the zona pellucida begins to disappear, allowing the ball of cells to proliferate, differentiate, change shape, and eventually implant into the uterine wall.

During implantation, the trophoblastic layer surrounding the blastocyst further differentiates into two functionally distinct layers. The outer trophoblast, known as the syncytiotrophoblast, releases proteolytic enzymes to assist with endometrial implantation. This layer also releases human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG, necessary in regulating progesterone secretion), the protein used in many pregnancy tests. (cuboidal epithelial cells), which are together known as the bilaminar embryonic disc.

The formation of the bilaminar embryonic disc sets the dorsal/ventral axis as the epiblast cell layer is positioned dorsal to the hypoblast. The anatomical location of the bilaminar disc is found between the amniotic cavity and the primitive yolk sac. The cells of the epiblast stretch to form a semi-sphere known as the amniotic cavity, while the cells of the hypoblast extend to surround the yolk sac. On the hypoblast is a raised area of columnar cells known as the prechordal plate; this is the earliest delineation of cranial from caudal. Development of the bilaminar embryonic disc directly precedes gastrulation, the stage in week 3 of development that involves the transformation of the human blastocyst into a multilayered gastrula with endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm.