# Continuing Education Activity

Rib dysfunctions can lead to chest wall pain, musculoskeletal pain, thoracic outlet syndrome, and intercostal neuralgia. Decreased rib motion can lead to excess lymphatic fluid in the subcutaneous tissues as well as the worsening of respiratory pathology. This activity reviews inhalation rib dysfunctions and how they can be treated to improve rib pain. It will cover the clinical presentation, treatment options, contraindications, and benefits of osteopathic manipulative treatment for rib inhalation dysfunctions.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the indications for the treatment of inhalation rib dysfunctions. 
- Review the contraindications to performing certain osteopathic manipulative techniques for inhalation rib dysfunctions. 
- Identify clinical relevance in diagnosing and treating inhalation rib dysfunctions. 
- Summarize how to perform four of the common treatment modalities for inhalation rib dysfunctions.

# Introduction

Rib dysfunctions occur in many forms. This article aims to identify, diagnose, and discuss the treatment of inhaled rib dysfunctions with direct and indirect osteopathic treatments. Rib dysfunctions can lead to chest wall pain, musculoskeletal pain, thoracic outlet syndrome, and intercostal neuralgia. Decreased rib motion can lead to excess lymphatic fluid in the subcutaneous tissues as well as the worsening of respiratory pathology.cephalad (toward the patient's head) with associated physiologic motion dysfunction. The physiologic manifestation of an inhaled rib dysfunction presents when ribs are elevated in inspiration and do not move freely into a neutral position on expiration.

When treating inhaled rib dysfunctions, the provider must identify the key rib to release the dysfunctional segment into normal physiologic motion.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The thoracic cavity encloses and protects the body’s vital organs. There are twelve sets of rib pairs that make up the thoracic cavity. Anteriorly, ribs attach to the sternum, costal cartilage of an adjacent rib, or have no attachment and are known as floating ribs.

Bony rib anatomy consists of the anterior portion for attachment to the hyaline cartilage or sternum and the posterior portion for articulation with the spinal column.

Muscular attachments to the ribs include the scalenes, internal intercostals, external intercostals, and the diaphragm.(nuchal) or cephalad and down (caudal) or caudad. Ribs 1 to 4 on their anterior articulations move up and down. Ribs 5 to 10 are called bucket handle ribs because the shaft of the rib body on the lateral aspect of the chest wall moves up and down.

Each rib has muscular attachments to facilitate inhalation and exhalation.

The diaphragm moves in inspiration and expiration by expanding and re-doming as the diaphragm contracts and relaxes.

# Indications

**Myofascial Release**

- Elderly

- Acutely Ill

- Degenerative diseases

- Down syndrome

- Pregnancy

- Can not tolerate a direct technique

- Bleeding disorders

- Lymphedema or need for improved lymphatic flow

- Asymptomatic patients

**High-Velocity Low Amplitude**

- No underlying medical pathology

- Unsuccessful manipulation with other indirect techniques

- Stubborn dysfunctions

**Muscle Energy**

- Post-surgical patients

- ICU patients

- Anyone who can not participate in active muscle contraction

- Asymptomatic patients for stretching

# Contraindications

**Myofascial Release or Re-doming the Thoracic Diaphragm**

- Rib fractures

- New surgical skin incisions near the area of treatment

- Metastatic cancer where increasing lymphatic flow and spread could worsen the patient's health

**High-Velocity Low Amplitude Techniques**

- Anyone suffering from degenerative bone disease

- Rib fractures

- Acute muscle sprains

- Vertebrobasilar disease

- Ligament laxity, such as in Down syndrome

- Concerns for possible contraindications noted by the physician provider when obtaining a patient's medical history

- Pregnancy

- Bleeding disorders

- Do not place thrusting pressure on costovertebral articulations with acute fractures or bone metastasis from cancer

**Rib Raising**

- Acute rib fractures

- Recent spinal surgery

- Overlying areas of skin infection

- Erythema

- Swelling overlying the skin

# Equipment

Manual manipulative techniques involve a patient sitting upright or lying supine while they are passively manipulated or actively engage in the manipulative technique with their provider. A patient, the physician provider, and preferably a cushioned manipulation table are best for successful osteopathic manipulative treatments. If an appropriate treatment table is unavailable, it is possible to perform osteopathic techniques from a supine floor or seated position.

# Personnel

- Patient

- Clinician provider

# Preparation

Obtain verbal and/or written consent from all patients receiving osteopathic manipulative treatments. Explain the procedures in full and where your hand placement will be before beginning any hands-on patient care. Cover the risks and benefits of different kinds of treatment and how that pertains to the patient’s specific needs. Make sure to perform a thorough medical history and physical exam for new patients along with necessary radiologic imaging before performing high-velocity low amplitude treatments.

# Technique or Treatment

Diagnosing inhaled rib dysfunctions can be started by assessing the patient's chest wall motion. With the patient lying supine or seated, the physician provider can place their palms flat on the patient's right and left anterior chest wall, careful not to touch delicate breast tissues. With hands stable on the chest wall, ask the patient to breathe in and out. Assess for symmetry in the rise and fall of the chest wall.

**Rib Raising**: Rib raising is an articular technique that places pressure on a restrictive barrier of the rib angle against the spine. It is a non-invasive, passive technique that can be useful with acutely ill, hospitalized patients.

- To perform rib raising, the physician provider places their finger pads under the posterior rib angle and pushes upward, applying gentle pressure and traction on the rib angle, which the clinician does until there is release. Reassess for an increased articular range of motion; this inhibits sympathetics from the thoracic chain ganglia to the ribs and increases chest wall expansion and negative intrathoracic pressure.

**Myofascial release:**increases lymphatic flow, releases muscle tension, and can be performed on acutely ill patients. Re-doming the diaphragm is an indirect myofascial technique that increases lymphatic flow and increases the mechanics of inspiration and expiration.

- To perform myofascial release to the thoracic diaphragm with the patient seated, the physician provider can stand behind the patient and wrap hands around their infra-costal margin until anteriorly palpating the fascia of the thoracic tissues.

- To perform myofascial release to the thoracic diaphragm with the patient supine, the physician provider can place their thumbs under the costal margins, beneath the xiphoid process, on the right and left. To assess the restricted side, the physician provider should press with the thumbs on the right and left of the diaphragm, gently pressing with infra-lateral traction. For an indirect approach to treatment, hold the thumb into the side of the tissue to ease where the tissues move more freely and allow the fascia to release, gently unwinding. Always reassess after treatment for bilateral tissue softness and increased diaphragmatic range of motion.

**HVLA:**High-Velocity Low Amplitude (HVLA) techniques are direct manipulative techniques bringing the dysfunctional segment into the restricted plane of motion. When performing HVLA, the physician provider is thrusting a short distance through the inhibited plane of motion of the dysfunctional segment.

- To perform HVLA on the first rib inhalation dysfunction (exhalation restriction): The physician provider is at the head of the bed. The patient lays supine. Assess for right or left first rib inhalation dysfunction (exhalation inhibited). The dysfunctional side will palpate as firmer and cephalad. Side bend the patient's head toward the side of dysfunction and rotate away from the dysfunctional rib. The physician provider places their thenar eminence on the side of dysfunction. The patient participates by inhaling, then exhaling. On the patient's exhalation, the physician provider administers a thrust caudad. Then reassess the patient's first rib.

- HVLA to the thoracic ribs 2 through 10 can be performed by using the Kirksville Krunch.

**Muscle Energy:**Muscle Energy is a direct and active technique where a patient is placed into their restrictive barrier by a physician provider then participates in the treatment.

- To perform muscle energy to a group of ribs with an inhalation dysfunction, place the patient supine on a waist-high cushioned treatment table if available. Identify the key rib; it will be the rib on the bottom of a group of dysfunctional ribs.

- To perform muscle energy on bucket handle ribs (6-10), follow the steps above. However, when asking the patient to breathe out and hold their exhaled breath for 3 to 5 seconds, have them reach for their knee on the side of the dysfunction. Follow the steps above to repeated rounds of treatment.

# Clinical Significance

Chest pain is a common presentation to any clinic or acute care facility. To determine cardiac vs. pulmonary vs. musculoskeletal origin is essential in ruling out deadly pathology. Assessing the chest wall and managing musculoskeletal complaints is beneficial to the medical community in reducing hospital admissions, cost of diagnostic testing, and length of inpatient stay.

Lymphatic pump techniques have been shown to decrease hospital stays, antibiotic use for pneumonia, and increase immunity.

Thoracic outlet syndrome is one common pathology seen in a clinical setting. It is a syndrome in which a person experiences numbness or tingling and loss of motor function or sensation in one of their upper extremities.

The brachial plexus is a set of nerves and vasculature that gives motor and sensory function to the upper extremity.

According to a recent study, the most common OMM inpatient consultations were for chest pain, rib pain, spinal pain, and adjunctive treatment for lower respiratory infections.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Coordinated patient care is key to the treatment of any disease. For patients with persistent chest pain, multiple emergency room visits, and numerous cardiology workups, osteopathic manipulative techniques need to be at the forefront of a provider's next treatment plan. Patients can be evaluated and assessed for underlying pathology while also being evaluated for musculoskeletal dysfunctions.

Clinicians should take responsibility for patient referrals to osteopathic providers when deadly underlying pathologies have safely been ruled out. Patients benefit from a well-rounded treatment approach that includes pharmacology, diagnostic testing, physical medicine, and manipulative treatments. This was shown in a clinical trial using rats where the lungs of rats diagnosed with Streptococcus pneumoniae had reduced levels of bacteria after receiving lymphatic pump techniques along with antibiotics compared to controls.

It is essential for all patient providers, including nurses, urgent care workers, primary care physicians, emergency medicine physicians, and pharmacists, to communicate openly to formulate a healthy treatment plan. This approach will help to better monitor patients with chronic pain to reduce opioid and other substance abuse. All of these methods of providing patient care will deliver a well-rounded systemic approach to healing patients with musculoskeletal discomfort from inhaled ribs and ruling out underlying deadly disease processes.