Patients with urinary retention usually present with difficulty voiding, a sensation of incomplete emptying, urinary retention, frequent voiding, and overflow incontinence. Diabetes mellitus and other neurologic conditions such as a stroke are the leading causes of detrusor nerve control degeneration.

Detrusor areflexia is the inability of the bladder to contract, which is typically neurologic in origin. Some causes of detrusor areflexia include spinal cord injury, fractures, herniated disc, and infections.

Damage to the detrusor muscle from chronic overdistention can lead to the fibrosis of the muscle with weakness in the contraction of the muscle. This condition is often referred to as a myogenic bladder.

A common cause of chronic bladder distension is benign prostatic hypertrophy in males and less commonly severe pelvic organ prolapse in females. Whether the issue is of nerve or muscle origin, poor emptying ability is the result.

A subset of women may have detrusor overactivity with poor contractility, which can lead to overflow incontinence. This condition is common in the aging female population. Detrusor overactivity is often associated with urgency incontinence. Urgency incontinence is the sudden urge to urinate, which may lead to leakage. Urgency incontinence is common in older women with other comorbid diseases. Treatment of the underlying disease is the most effective treatment. Usually, the first steps in treatment involve conservative options with lifestyle modifications, pelvic floor exercises, and bladder training. However, if these initial conservative therapies do not improve symptoms, there are other pharmacologic and surgical therapies. The two medication classes commonly used are antimuscarinic drugs such as oxybutynin and tolterodine or beta 3-adrenergic drugs such as mirabegron. Antimuscarinics have side effects such as dry mouth, constipation, blurry vision, drowsiness, and cognitive issues. Sacral nerve stimulation and Botox are other options. More invasive therapies include surgery with augmentation cystoplasty or detrusor myectomy, which improves compliance of the bladder. This limits or prevents upper tract damage resulting from high bladder pressures.