**Hyperparathyroidism**

Hyperparathyroidism can lead to dangerously elevated levels of calcium in the blood. The expression “moans, stones, bones, and psychic overtones” is used to describe the symptoms that are commonly seen with hypercalcemia including nausea, vomiting, constipation, kidney stones, bone pain, and psychosis or altered mental status.

It is important to consider the etiology of hyperparathyroidism when forming your differential diagnosis. Primary hyperparathyroidism is a result of overproduction and release of PTH. This can be a result of a parathyroid adenoma, hyperplasia, or carcinoma. In these instances, a single gland or multiples parathyroid glands are functioning above physiological set point due to a primary disease. PTH and serum calcium will be elevated, while serum phosphate will be reduced.

Secondary hyperparathyroidism is a physiologic response to a chronic hypocalcemic state. This can be caused by chronic kidney disease (CKD) or vitamin D deficiency. In CKD, the damaged kidneys fail to produce enough 1-alpha-hydroxylase, so they are unable to convert vitamin D into its active form. Additionally, the kidneys are unable to excrete phosphate resulting in higher blood phosphate levels properly. Phosphate acts as a positive stimulus at the parathyroid glands, increasing PTH release.  PTH and phosphate levels will be high when tested, while calcium and 1,25(OH)-vitamin D levels will be low.

Tertiary hyperparathyroidism results from uncorrected, long-term hyperparathyroidism, usually seen in end-stage renal disease. The chronic low calcium state in these patient leads to hyperplasia of the parathyroid glands. The parathyroid glands cannot respond to serum calcium levels and instead act autonomously producing and secreting PTH. PTH levels will be extremely high while calcium and phosphate will also be elevated.

In patients presenting with acute hypercalcemia, it is important first to correct the electrolyte disturbance as it can be life-threatening. Fluid administration is first-line treatment, and the addition of calcium-lowering medications such as diuretics, bisphosphonates or calcitonin can be discussed. Once the patient is stabilized, physicians should begin to look for the etiology and treat the underlying disease.

**Hypoparathyroidism**

Decreased function of the parathyroid glands, called hypoparathyroidism, can lead to low serum calcium levels. As calcium is necessary for muscle and nerve functions, the main symptoms of hypocalcemia deal with these 2 systems.

Perioral numbness or tingling is commonly reported by patients, but can also be felt in the hands and feet. Weakness, paresthesias, muscle cramps or tetany, and seizures can all result from severe hypocalcemia. On physical exam of the hypocalcemic patient, physicians can elicit tetany in 2 ways. Tapping on the facial nerve (the area anterior to the tragus) will elicit spasms of the facial muscles on the ipsilateral side, what is known as Chvostek’s sign. Trousseau’s sign is the induction of carpopedal spasms after inflating the blood pressure cuff above systolic blood pressure.

The most common etiology of hypoparathyroidism is iatrogenic, with damage to one or multiple parathyroid glands occurring during surgery. Thyroid, parathyroid, laryngeal, and pharyngeal surgeries commonly risk damage to the parathyroid glands that can be temporary or permanent. Other causes of hypothyroidism include congenital parathyroid aplasia as in DiGeorge syndrome, autoimmune destruction, infiltrative processes like hemochromatosis, magnesium deficiency, or genetic mutations in PTH receptors.