PRCA is an extremely heterogeneous disease both clinically and pathologically. The pathophysiology is discussed here based on the classification.

**Congenital PRCA or Diamond Blackfan anemia (DBA)**

- The congenital PRCA (also known as inherited PRCA) or DBA, is now recognized as a disease of ribosomal biogenesisRPS19), which is responsible for encoding a protein that assists in ribosome assembly.RPS19 behaving like a dominant gene. Subsequently, 19 other mutations were identified in RP genes using whole exome/genome sequencing and comparative genomic hybridization/single nucleotide polymorphism array. Out of 80 RP genes, mutations in 20 genes have been identified, which can lead to congenital PRCA.RPS19, RPL5, RPS26, RPL11, RPL35a, and RPS 24 account for 70% of the mutations.

**Transient Aplastic Crisis and Parvovirus B19 infection**

- The transient aplastic crisis occurs when the concentration of parvovirus B19 is very high in the blood. The virus has an affinity for the progenitor erythroid cells because of their P antigen, which acts as a receptor for the entry of the virus into the cell.

- Typically, in a patient with acute infection, neutralizing antibodies (IgG) develop quickly. Although a phase of reticulocytopenia may occur, anemia does not manifest unless RBC survival becomes reduced. In patients with inherited hematological disorders (like thalassemia, sickle cell disease, hereditary spherocytosis, etc.), an infection with parvovirus B19 can induce a transient aplastic crisis. Thrombocytopenia and neutropenia are also well documented in such patients. However, due to the development of humoral immunity, the aplastic crisis occurs only once in life.

- In children with sickle cell disease, transient aplastic crisis increases the frequency of fever, acute chest syndrome, pain, and acute sequestration crises.

- It is worth noting that this transient presentation is separate from the fifth disease, which is characterized by IgM antibodies against the parvovirus. The viral levels are low to undetectable, and the symptoms of arthritis, arthralgia, and ‘slapped cheek appearance’ occur due to the antibody-virus immune complex.

**Transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (TEC)**

- TEC is a poorly understood entity. Parvovirus B19 is the most commonly implicated virus in TEC.

- The drugs which carry implications in PRCA can also cause TEC via a hapten-based mechanism. The serum antibody can act against the erythroid precursors only in the presence of the offending medication.

**Secondary acquired PRCA**

- **PRCA with autoimmune disorders.**
- Immune-mediated erythropoietic failure is central to PRCA seen in patients with autoimmune diseases like RA, SLE, myasthenia gravis, auto-immune hemolytic anemia, acquired hypogammaglobulinemia, autoimmune polyglandular syndrome, and thymoma. Laboratory evidence has clearly shown the existence of both ‘antibody-mediated and cell-mediated mechanisms of inhibition of red cell erythropoiesis.in vitro.

- **Erythropoietin (EPO) associated antibodies causing PRCA.**
- Around the turn of the 21st century, new reports of EPO-associated PRCA were published in the literature.

- **ABO-incompatible transplant-associated PRCA**.
- Using donors mismatched at the major ABO locus leads to the development of ‘target-specific antibodies and leads to delayed engraftment of the erythroid precursors or even PRCA later in life. Specific targets are still not recognized in such patients.

- **PRCA associated with lymphoproliferative disorders**.
- CLL is the most common lymphoproliferative disease associated with PRCA. A T-cell-mediated mechanism is more commonly associated with the suppression of erythropoiesis rather than an antibody-mediated mechanism. Mutation in the signal transducer and activator of transcription three-gene (STAT3), which leads to activation of clonal cytotoxic CD8+ cells and suppression of erythropoiesis, have been identified in patients with PRCA.

- **Persistent Parvovirus B19 infection:**
- The intrinsic humoral immunity clears the parvovirus B19 infection within 1 to 2 weeks. Patients with immunodeficiency secondary to viruses (HIV), drugs (chemotherapy, immunosuppressive drugs), or congenital immunodeficiency cannot mount an antibody response against the parvovirus. This immunodeficiency leads to a persistent infection that is toxic to the erythroid progenitor cells and leads to chronic red cell aplasia. In pregnant mothers, the parvovirus can be transmitted to the fetus in the mid-trimester and is toxic to the erythroid progenitors in the fetal liver leading to severe red cell aplasia and hydrops fetalis. In the rare instance, when such an infant was rescued with timely red cell infusions, they still had persistent congenital PRCA or dyserythropoietic anemia.

- **PRCA as a manifestation of myelodysplasia**
- Activating point mutations in N-RAS and loss of the RPS-14 gene (in patients with 5q deletion) leads to PRCA in patients with MDS.

- **Drugs causing PRCA:**
- Many drugs have implications for involvement in PRCA; however, there is limited evidence from case reports. Drugs like diphenylhydantoin, sulfa and sulfonamide drugs, azathioprine, allopurinol, isoniazid, procainamide, ticlopidine, ribavirin, and penicillamine are implicated in the etiology of drug-induced PRCA. An IgG-mediated mechanism appears to be the cause in patients receiving diphenylhydantoin and rifampin.