The history and physical exam are vital when assessing a patient with failure to thrive. Often, the patient may have no specific presenting symptoms but is then found to have inadequate growth when they present for a routine well visit. Other patients may have more obvious signs and symptoms associated with their underlying condition which have led to the failure to thrive. In the history, it is important to note a detailed feeding history including types of food, amount, and frequency. Feeding refusal, texture preferences, difficulty swallowing, or frequent emesis should be noted. If the infant is formula fed, identifying the formula mixing technique used can be helpful. Tachypnea, fatigue, or diuresis with feeds may also be important if present. In addition, documenting urine output, any unusual urine smells, and stool frequency and consistency are also helpful. Developmental milestones should be assessed and any delays documented. Past medical history may provide clues to an underlying organic etiology. Specifically, congenital abnormalities such as known congenital heart disease, esophageal abnormalities, intestinal abnormalities, endocrine disorders, and genetic disorders are often associated with failure to thrive. Family medical history including prenatal history can be pertinent, especially when considering potential underlying organic etiologies. The physical exam should note the rate of weight gain or loss from last visit as well as the current weight and height percentiles. Carefully assessing for any hints to an organic etiology such as an oral motor dysfunction, heart murmur, tachypnea, abnormal abdominal or genitourinary (GU) exam, or prominent skin lesions is essential. Often, the exam will be notable only for the poor weight gain and a thin appearing infant without providing any specific clues to the underlying cause.