It is recommended to minimize gastric volume and stimulation in the immediate preoperative period to lower the risk of aspiration with general anesthesia. Different food items are digested and emptied from the stomach at different rates and stimulate gastric secretions and acid production depending upon their constituent makeup. To mitigate this risk, most providers recommend not to eat solid foods eight hours prior to the procedure and may allow clear liquids up to two hours before procedures.

A clear liquid diet is typically ordered before gastrointestinal procedures, such as endoscopies or colonoscopies, in addition to the bowel preparation regimen prescribed. It is critical to adhere to this process before the procedure so the provider can clearly visualize the gastrointestinal tract. Some physicians also recommend avoiding red and orange-colored items in such pre-procedural settings, as the color residue may appear blood-like during the procedure and potentially cause confusion.

After a procedure that utilizes sedation or general anesthesia, a clear liquid diet may be ordered as part of the recovery process. Using a relatively non-stimulating clear liquid diet can decrease the risk of nausea before progressing to more substantial foods. Beginning with a few ice chips, a postoperative patient's ability to control their swallow reflex can be assessed. If they do not cough or clear their throat after the ice chips, they are likely ready to try a sip of water. Assessing the patient’s swallowing ability with the first sip. If they do not demonstrate any difficulty, they are likely ready to advance to other clear liquids as ordered. If the patient is drowsy, coughs, clears their throat, or cannot swallow, they may need additional time to recover from the anesthesia to try again, or they may need further follow-up with speech therapy for a formal swallow study if this is prolonged. If the patient cannot keep their airway clear or handle their own oral secretions, do not continue diet without notifying the physician. Wait for 1 to 2 hours after the throat has been numbed for any otolaryngic or bronchoscopic procedure.

A clear liquid diet is used in treating uncomplicated diverticulitis, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or other gastrointestinal maladies. Utilizing a clear liquid diet for these instances allows for bowel rest and healing, avoiding potentially aggravating foods but still allowing clear liquids helps maintain hydration, electrolytes, and satiety while limiting the strain of digestion.