# Continuing Education Activity

Kasabach-Merritt phenomenon (KMP), first described in 1940, is a rare but life-threatening coagulopathy of infancy which presents with thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, and consumptive coagulopathy in the setting of a rapidly enlarging vascular tumor. It is exclusively associated with the vascular tumors kaposiform hemangioendothelioma (KHE) and tufted angioma (TA), which exist along the same neoplastic spectrum. Treatment includes supportive therapy and management of the underlying tumor. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of Kasabach Merritt syndrome and addresses the role of the interprofessional team in managing this rare condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the frequency of Kasabach Merritt syndrome.
- Review the presentation of Kasabach Merritt syndrome. 
- Outline the treatment for Kasabach Merritt syndrome.
- Summarize the evaluation and treatment of Kasabach Merritt syndrome and address the role of the interprofessional team in managing this rare condition.

# Introduction

Kasabach-Merritt phenomenon (KMP), first described in 1940, is a rare but life-threatening coagulopathy of infancy which presents with thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, and consumptive coagulopathy in the setting of a rapidly enlarging vascular tumor. It is exclusively associated with the vascular tumors kaposiform hemangioendothelioma (KHE) and tufted angioma (TA), which exist along the same neoplastic spectrum. Treatment includes supportive therapy and management of the underlying tumor.

# Etiology

KMP occurs exclusively as a complication of KHE and TA, which are rare, benign vascular tumors that typically present in infancy.

# Epidemiology

While the precise incidence of KHE and TA are not known, they are noted to be rare and estimated to be 0.07/100,000 in one article based on observed cases at a large center.

# Pathophysiology

Both KHE and TA have a convoluted vascular architecture that likely contributes to the pathophysiologic mechanisms of KMP. It is theorized platelets become trapped in the lesion, leading to platelet activation and fibrinogen consumption.

The morbidity and mortality of KMP are high with reported mortality up to 30%.

# Histopathology

KHE and TA have similar histopathologic features but differ in their clinical behavior. KHE is locally aggressive and may involve multiple tissue planes; whereas, TA is benign and typically confined to a single tissue plane.

# History and Physical

KHE typically presents as an enlarging, firm, purpuric cutaneous or soft tissue lesion. It may be indurated, with a pebbly texture and poorly defined margins. KHE may involve the trunk, extremities, or retroperitoneum. Up to 10% of all KHE cases are not cutaneous.

Infants affected by KMP who have cutaneous involvement of KHE or TA will present with a rapidly enlarging pre-existing lesion that becomes tense, purpuric, or ecchymotic, is markedly painful. The swelling may be dramatic. Of note, if the lesion involves the retroperitoneum, the enlarging lesion may not be readily apparent on physical exam.

# Evaluation

Diagnosis of KMP requires laboratory evaluation and identification of an underlying vascular tumor. Laboratory evaluation should include a complete blood count, coagulation panel, and PTT and PTT. Thrombocytopenia may be severe. Coagulation studies will reveal a prolonged PT and PTT, hypofibrinogenemia, and increased D-dimer.

When identifying the underlying, cutaneous lesion, physical examination may be sufficient. If a visceral tumor is suspected, further imaging such as MRI may be useful in establishing both the presence of the tumor and its local extent. MRI may show significant gadolinium enhancement with dermal and subcutaneous thickening.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of KMP is largely supportive and aimed at preventing life-threatening complications while addressing the underlying tumor. While the thrombocytopenia of KMP may be profound, life-threatening hemorrhage is, in fact, rare, and platelet transfusion is not recommended except in the cases of active bleeding. Transfused platelets may become trapped in the tumor and lead to further abnormal coagulation, worsening KMP.

Treatment of the underlying tumor is critical in KMP. Surgery is the definitive management for both KHE and TA. However, it is often not possible given ill-defined tumoral borders and the invasion of multiple tissue planes and local structures. Furthermore, once KMP develops, surgery is inadvisable given the hemodynamic risks. Embolization may be possible if a single feeding vessel is present. However, tumors usually have multiple feeding vessels. Embolization also carries the risk of necrosis of local structures. Radiation therapy can induce regression, however, carries the risk of developmental delay, growth delay, and secondary malignancy.

Multiple medical therapies have demonstrated promise in the treatment of KHE and TA. Historically steroids are typically first-line treatment. For patients who respond, clinical response is usually seen within 2 weeks, after which steroids should be tapered slowly.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Angiosarcoma

- Arteriovascular malformations

- Consumption coagulopathy

- Hemangioblastoma

- Hepatic hemangiomas

- Immune thrombocytopenic purpura

- Infantile hemangioma

- Teratoma

- Neuroblastoma

- Subcutaneous fat necrosis

# Pearls and Other Issues

Congenital hemangiomas (CH) may also present with thrombocytopenia and a disturbed coagulation profile; however, this phenomenon is transient and distinct from KMP which is progressive and not expected to resolve spontaneously.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis and management of KMP is with an interprofessional team that includes a hematologist, radiologist, intensivist, pediatrician, nurse practitioner, and the primary care provider. Once the diagnosis is made, the treatment is largely supportive and includes prevention of life threatening complications like hemorrhage. The underlying tumor must be treated. Both surgery and embolization have been used but both carry high risk of injury to adjacent structures. In some children, radiation may induce regression of the mass, but the therapy can also lead to growth retardation and induction of secondary malignancies.

Many potent chemotherapeutic agents have been used but the response is variable and not always predictable. The outlook for most children with KMP is guarded.