Medical practitioners should take a careful history when evaluating for a central retinal vein occlusion. Any mention of the risk factors noted earlier should raise suspicion for a vein occlusion. As with any sudden loss of vision, ophthalmology should be consulted as soon as possible. CRVO is an ocular emergency and primary care clinicians should make the consult with the ophthalmologist immediately. The medical practitioner should assess visual acuity, pupil constriction, and intraocular pressure of both eyes. Treatment should be directed by ophthalmology.

After a diagnosis of a CRVO, a multitude of medical disciplines may need to be involved in the care of the patient. If the decreased vision disables the patient, physical and occupational therapy may need to get involved. Depending on the underlying cause of the CRVO, specialists including but not limited to hematology/oncology, endocrinology, obstetrics, cardiology, neurology, rheumatology, or infectious disease may need to evaluate the patient. Regardless of the etiology, the patient should regularly follow up with their ophthalmologist and primary care provider to help control risk factors and prevent future complications.

The interprofessional team is composed of physicians, nurse practitioners, specialty care nurses, and pharmacists. Nurses monitor patients, provide education to patients and their families, and provide status updates to the team. Effective communication between members of the team can lower the morbidity of CRVO. [Level V]