The outcomes depend on several factors, including age, stage, the extent of residual disease after surgery, and response to treatment. Children with WNT subtype have a good outcome, whereas those with MYCN or MYC amplification have poor outcomes. Even after successful treatment, many patients are left with permanent residual neurological and cognitive deficits. Children have difficulties with learning, and there is growth impairment. In addition, deficiency of gonadotrophin and thyroid hormones are common. The key reason for these complications is craniospinal radiation.

The five-year survivor rate for those with average risk disease is 85% as long as there is no significant residual disease and no evidence of spread.

In the high-risk group, the 5-year survival is less than 40%.

In children less than three years, survival varies from 30%-70%. Children with metastatic disease do poor, whereas those with SHH or WNT activated lesions have better survival.

Transcriptional and methylation profiling date coupled with cytogenetic aberrations and copy number variations and patient outcomes has helped subclassify medulloblastoma in as many as 12 subtypes, two WNT, four SHH, three group 3 and three group 4. The highest survival rates have consistently been seen for the WNT subgroup at 97-100% at 5 years. The SHH subgroup remains intermediate, with 5-year overall survival between 70%-88%. The non-SHH/WNT subgroups have been thought to have the worst prognosis though group 4 patients tend to do better. Group 4 MB has a 65%-85% 5-year overall survival, while group 3 MB has dismal rates between 40%-65% 5-year overall survival, with myc amplification portending the poorest outcomes.