Trastuzumab is a biologic agent primarily used in the treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer. It may be used as adjuvant therapy for localized disease or as first-line therapy for metastatic disease. The development of trastuzumab has significantly increased survival associated with HER2-positive breast cancer; notably, trastuzumab also carries considerable historical importance as one of the first “targeted” chemotherapeutic agents developed. It is typically given in combination with one or more cytotoxic agents, most commonly anthracyclines (e.g., doxorubicin) and taxanes (e.g., paclitaxel). Trastuzumab has also demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of HER2-positive metastatic gastric cancer. The most significant adverse event associated with trastuzumab is cardiotoxicity; this is usually mild and reversible with discontinuation, but it may progress to irreversible, clinically significant cardiac failure.

The risk of cardiotoxicity is highest in patients receiving concomitant anthracycline therapy. All patients should receive a baseline echocardiogram before initiating therapy and must be monitored closely for the development of palpitations, dyspnea, chest pain, and/or peripheral edema. Certain patients may benefit from a more frequent echocardiographic assessment. Immediate discontinuation of trastuzumab is warranted if a decreased LVEF is discovered. The interprofessional healthcare team, e.g., clinicians (particularly oncology specialists), nurses, pharmacists, etc., must also be aware of the potential for serious infusion reactions, especially following the initial dose. Trastuzumab is likely a human teratogen; it should be avoided in patients who are pregnant, and patients of childbearing potential must use contraception during treatment.