Thymomas are slow-growing neoplasms. The most accurate adverse prognostic marker is the invasiveness of the tumor. On the other hand, thymic carcinomas are more aggressive and have a poorer prognosis compared with thymoma. Prognosis is dependent on the stage of the disease and the complete resectability of the tumor.

A German series studied the prognosis of various stages of thymic tumors. Their findings are summarized below:

- The prognosis was found to be excellent for Masaoka stage I and II thymomas.

- The prognosis was worse following resection in Masaoka stage III thymomas.

- There was a 27% recurrence rate and an 83% 10-year survival in Masaoka stage III thymomas.

- Masaoka stage IV thymomas have a 10-year survival rate of 47%.

- There was no tumor-related death seen in type A, AB, or B1 disease (Masaoka stage I and II)

- There was a rate of tumor-related death of 9, 19, and 17% in B2, B3, or thymic carcinoma and a rate of death of 50% to 60% in Masaoka stage III and IV thymomas.

After treatment, annual imaging is recommended even though no clinical trials have shown benefit to such imaging. It is recommended that a CT chest is ordered every six months for two years and annually for five years in cases of thymic carcinoma and ten years in cases of thymomas.

Thymic tumors tend to recur as pleural nodules, most commonly with a mean length of 8 to 68 months after treatment.

Thymic tumors carry a risk of development of a second malignancy (approximately 17% to 28% risk after thymectomy). According to the SEER database, there is an increased risk for B cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma, gastrointestinal cancers, and soft tissue sarcomas.