Polyclonal B cell activation in various disease processes results in hypergammaglobulinemia (polyclonal gammopathy). However, the exact immunological cascade triggering polyclonal B-cell activation is not fully understood. Chronic antigenic stimulation, T cell-mediated B cell activation, cytokines (e.g., interleukin 6, 10), and defects in reticuloendothelial cells all play an essential role in immune responses. Also, genetic predisposition plays a vital role in immune response in various populations.

The inflammatory cytokine IL-6 (Interleukin 6) plays an essential role in the pathogenesis of polyclonal gammopathy.

For example, in multicentric Castleman disease, a large amount of IL-6 is expressed in the lymph node. Successful treatment of a patient with ‘Multicentric Castleman disease’ with IL-6 inhibitors such as siltuximab or tocilizumab proves the role of IL-6 in the disease process.

IL-6 also plays an integral role in stimulating hepatocytes to produce various acute phase reactants (e.g., CRP, serum amyloid A, fibrinogen, hepcidin, and haptoglobin).

IL-6 also activates naive CD4+ T cells to become helper T cells. Later, helper T-cell plays the leading role in B cell proliferation, B cell class switching, and maturation of B cells into immunoglobulin-secreting plasma cells. Furthermore, IL-6 supports chronic inflammation and autoimmunity by increasing Th17 (T helper 17) cells and decreasing regulatory T cells.

Although IL-6 is pivotal in the pathophysiology of polyclonal gammopathy in inflammatory conditions, polyclonal gammopathy can also occur without a significant inflammatory process.

In hepatic cirrhosis, damage to the Kupffer cell leads to inadequate immune surveillance of the liver.

In pulmonary sarcoidosis, local immunoglobulin production is related to activated T lymphocytes.

Direct activation of B cells by various bacterial and viral proteins (e.g., HIV viral protein, HIV accessory protein Tat) is also noted in the pathophysiology of polyclonal gammopathy.