Acute afferent loop syndrome in the setting of complete obstruction represents a surgical emergency. Meanwhile, patients with chronic afferent loop syndrome may convert to complete obstruction, presenting with acute exacerbation of symptoms. For early diagnosis and management, clinicians must maintain a high index of suspicion when evaluating a patient with the appropriate surgical history presenting with acute abdominal pain.

While laboratory studies such as complete blood count (CBC), lactate, liver function tests (LFTs), pancreatic enzymes, and serum electrolytes are important adjuncts in evaluating the patient, abdominal imaging with computed tomography (CT) is the mainstay of diagnosis for afferent loop syndrome. An abdominal CT scan secures the diagnosis by demonstrating the obstructed loop while also providing information about the severity of bowel ischemia and the presence of complications such as perforation, pancreatitis, and inflammatory changes to the biliary tree. CT is also helpful in evaluating the underlying etiology for the obstruction, which may impact management.

Radiologists should be aware of the pathophysiology of the disease to interpret imaging findings better. Multiple signs have been described for the CT appearance of afferent loop syndrome, including the C-loop sign in the right upper quadrant, which represents the dilated afferent limb, and the keyboard sign, which describes the projection of valvulae conniventes projecting into the lumen to help differentiate the dilated bowel from pancreatic pseudocysts.

When interpreting abdominal imaging on these patients, presence of pancreaticobiliary tract dilation, focal non-enhancement of the pancreas or peripancreatic edema, mass or wall thickening involving the anastomosis, and evidence of metastatic disease (lymphadenopathy, peritoneal nodules, ascites, distant metastatic lesions) should be noted. Adhesions are implicated when a discrete transition point is seen without another underlying cause. The presence of intraperitoneal air in the immediate post-operative patient is expected; however, if persistent or increasing air is noted or if it is seen more than 10 days following surgery in the setting of afferent loop syndrome, perforation of the afferent limb should be suspected.

Abdominal radiographs are often normal, except in the setting of gross pneumoperitoneum or with a long segment, dilated afferent loop. Ultrasound and fluoroscopic upper GI barium studies have largely been replaced with CT imaging in acutely ill patients with concern for afferent loop syndrome. In the early postoperative period, the leading differential consideration is an anastomotic leak, and these patients often undergo fluoroscopic upper GI before cross-sectional imaging. Findings associated with afferent loop syndrome on fluoroscopic upper GI include failure of contrast to enter the afferent limb, though this is a nonspecific finding. Alternately, preferential filling of the afferent limb of a gastrojejunostomy (Billroth II reconstruction and Whipple) with retention of contrast may also suggest the diagnosis.