Carotid endarterectomy can be performed under regional anesthesia, general anesthesia with routine shunting, or general anesthesia with selective shunting based on adjuncts such as intraoperative EEG monitoring or stump pressures.

- Most surgeons prefer an oblique incision along the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle. A transverse incision is cosmetically superior and technically feasible for all patients except those with the highest lesions.

- Electrocautery is used to divide the platysma and dissect along the medial border of the SCM muscle from its tendon superiorly to the level of the omohyoid muscle inferiorly. The medial edge of the internal jugular vein (IJV) is identified by sharp dissection.

- Ligation and division of the common facial and the middle thyroid vein inferiorly and any hypoglossal veins superiorly allows for lateral retraction of the SCM and IJV. Great care must be taken to identify the cranial nerves of interest. The vagus nerve usually lies posterolateral to the carotid arteries but can be located anteriorly, placing it at risk of injury early in the dissection.

- The ansa cervicalis can be divided near its origin and followed in a cephalad direction to the hypoglossal nerve. Dissection of the superior thyroid artery should be kept to its origin to avoid injury to the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve.

- The common carotid arteries (CCA), external carotid arteries (ECA), and internal carotid arteries (ICA) are circumferentially dissected and encircled with vascular loops. The superior thyroid artery can be looped with a 2-0 silk ligature. The distal ICA can be controlled with a Schwartz clip.

- A long plaque or high carotid bifurcation necessitates additional distal exposure of the ICA; this requires division of the digastric muscle and any underlying crossing veins.

- Cephalad mobilization of the hypoglossal nerve is achieved through ligation and division of the occipital artery and the sternocleidomastoid artery.

- A longitudinal arteriotomy is made, and a shunt of the surgeon's choice is used if indicated. The atheroma is bluntly dissected and elevated in a medial plane. The proximal plaque in a relatively healthy portion of the CCA is sharply cut and the plaque dissected in a cephalad direction toward a finely feathered endpoint.

- Eversion endarterectomy of the ECA is required.

- The bed should be irrigated vigorously with heparinized saline and any remaining loose bits of media removed with fine forceps. If a satisfactory endpoint is not found, the remaining distal plaque can be secured to the vessel with interrupted, full-thickness 7-0 sutures tied on the adventitial surface.

- Once the endarterectomy is complete, a patch of the desired material (Dacron or bovine pericardium) is cut to fit the length and shape of the arteriotomy.

- Prior to completion of the patch angioplasty the shunt is removed, the ICA is allowed to back-bleed, and the atheroma bed is irrigated with heparinized saline.

- Upon completion of the circumferential and continuous suture line, flow is established into the ECA prior to establishing antegrade flow into the ICA.

- The transection plane for eversion carotid endarterectomy is determined by the location of the bulk of the plaque.(a) A type I transection (severe oblique, ICA only) is performed when the bulk of the lesion is located in the ICA.(b) A type II transection (gentle oblique, across the CCA 3 mm below the flow divider) is performed when the bulk of the disease lies within the distal CCA and most proximal portion of the ICA. Lesions extending beyond the proximal 2–3 cm of the ICA are best treated with patch angioplasty rather than eversion.

- Eversion endarterectomy is performed by bluntly developing a circumferential medial plane and continuing it in a cephalad direction while gently pulling back the adventitia with atraumatic forceps.

- The arteriotomy is extended in a caudad direction on the lateral CCA and in a cephalad direction on the medial ICA to allow for an even wider, circumferential anastomosis. Once the ICA portion of the eversion endarterectomy is complete, a shunt may be placed as indicated.

- If the ICA is redundant in length, it may be cut shorter or implanted more proximally on the CCA, making eversion endarterectomy ideal for patients with ICA stenosis in the setting of concurrent ICA elongation.

**Postoperative Care**

- Closed suction drain overnight, depending on surgeon preference.

- Strict postoperative management of blood pressure, avoiding hypertension to reduce the risk of hyperperfusion syndrome.

- Discharge following overnight observation and monitoring (possibly 8 hours postoperatively if uncomplicated and with satisfactory blood pressure).