# Introduction

Plasminogen activation results in increased conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, the latter an enzyme that breakdowns the fibrinogen in blood clots. There is a wide usage of tissue plasminogen activators in clinical practice during the treatment of ischemic cerebral vascular events. Since ischemic cerebral vascular events are a leading cause of morbidity in the United States, a general understanding of the physiology of plasminogen activation is critical, both as a base for the utilization of these therapies and an understanding of coagulation homeostasis in the body. This article will serve as a review of plasminogen activation with a discussion on inhibitors of plasminogen activation and will conclude with a short discussion on medical thrombolytic therapy.

# Function

The fibrinolytic system functions to dissolve fibrin, one of the main products of thrombin activity. Within this system, plasmin, serves as the major protease, utilizing fibrin contained within clots as a substrate for proteolysis and producing soluble products and thus maintaining the patency within the vascular system.

Before continuing it is important to briefly mention that while plasmin’s role is largely thought to be contained to the fibrinolytic system, the activators of plasminogen seem to play roles beyond regulation of fibrinolysis. Interestingly deficiencies of plasminogen are not associated with increased thrombotic events, but rather is associated with thickening of mucous membranes from an accumulation of fibrin; the hypothesis is that the lack of tendency towards thrombosis is from subsequent increases in other serine proteases activity.

# Mechanism

Plasminogen serves as a zymogen which initiates the fibrinolytic cascade by binding to intact fibrin via structural domains within plasminogen called ‘kringle’ domains. Structurally, kringle domains are large loops of amino acids stabilized by disulfide bonds. These kringle domains, present in several enzymes within the fibrinolytic system, allow for plasminogen binding to carboxy-terminal lysine residues and has been considered to be the first stage of fibrinolysis.

Studies indicate that plasminogen exists in three distinct conformational forms, alpha, beta, and gamma. The alpha-conformation is a closed conformation and is the confirmation adapted predominantly while plasminogen is circulating. The beta-conformation or a semi-open conformation occurs when plasminogen is bound to intact fibrin via one carboxy-terminal lysine residue, and lastly, the gamma-conformation is described as a fully open conformation and occurs when plasminogen is bound to two carboxy-terminal lysine residues.

The most physiologically active plasminogen activator is tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), its production and secretion are predominantly from endothelial cells.

Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) is the second major plasminogen activator and is known to have numerous functions beyond its involvement in plasminogen activation.

Once activated, mechanisms exist within the plasma to degradant the plasmin response. Inhibition of plasmin occurs by alpha-antiplasmin which is a member of the serpin protein family, alpha-antiplasmin circulates within the plasma at a relatively high concentration to inhibit the activity of plasmin.

Numerous cell types including endothelial cells and platelets release PAI-1 and PAI-2 in response to cytokines involved in inflammatory cascades. PAI-1 is produced in endothelial cells. Synthesis is highly regulated, and PAI-1 produced is in an active form which rapidly decays in solution.

More recent evidence has come to suggest the endocrine role adipose tissue plays, and in plasminogen activation, an adipose-derived plasminogen activator inhibitor has been identified. Production of adipose-derived plasminogen activator inhibitor increases as total visceral body fat increases, thus resulting in an increasing inhibiting effect on plasminogen activation and leading to dysregulation of fibrinolysis.

In summary, plasminogen exists in three distinct conformational forms, which confer different accessibility to plasminogen’s activating site.  Activation can occur via several different catalytic enzymes, tPA and uPA being the most physiologically important. The activity of these plasminogen activators is regulated primarily by PAI-1 and PAI-2, while the active form of plasminogen, plasmin, is inhibited by alpha-antiplasmin, a serpin protein in the same class as PAI-1 and PAI-2.

# Clinical Significance

Acute ischemic stroke is one of the most significant causes of mortality and morbidity in the United States. An acute ischemic stroke occurs when there is a sudden onset occlusion of blood supply to an area of the brain. Primary mechanisms of acute ischemic stroke include embolic events and atherothrombosis (a clot forming over an atherosclerotic plaque). Treatment involves recanalization of the affected vessel through mechanical or pharmacological mechanisms.

One of the first pharmacological mechanisms for treatment of acute ischemic strokes was IV recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (IV rtPA). Approved in 1996 in the United States for patients presenting within the first 3 hours of symptoms onset. Recent data support the use of IV-rtPA between 3 to 4.5 hours.

While limited by symptom onset, IV rtPA is still considered one of the gold standards of care in the setting of acute ischemic stroke. Currently, the use of IV rtPA in the setting of acute ischemic stroke in the absence of contraindications is widespread within the United States, and research is ongoing into ways to enhance medical management of acute ischemic events.