Hydroxyapatite crystal deposition disease is a relatively common pathologic entity resulting from the formation of calcium crystal deposits within and around tendons and other connective tissue structures.

HADD is most often diagnosed on radiographs. Frequently HADD is noted involving the rotator cuff tendons on chest radiographs. On radiography, hydroxyapatite crystals are found to be "fluffy" and "globular" in appearance. These crystals can either be well-defined or ill-defined based on their chronicity, with well-defined crystals suggesting a chronic deposit. CT can also be used to diagnose calcific tendinitis of the longus colli muscle, especially when evaluating for deep neck soft tissue infection and trauma.

The rotator cuff tendons constitute the most common site of HADD. The supraspinatus, subscapularis, infraspinatus, and the teres minor muscle tendons form a covering over the humeral head. Deposition of HA at these tendons is often noted on radiographs at the respective tendon sites at or adjacent to the humeral head. Considering the tendon fibers are not visualized on radiography, HA is often noted as floating radiopaque densities close to or at the insertion of these tendons. The supraspinatus tendon constitutes one of the most common sites of HADD involvement. The supraspinatus muscle originates from the supraspinatus fossa of the scapula and inserts onto the greater tuberosity on the superior (most anterior adjacent to the bicipital groove) and most anterior aspect of the middle facet of the humerus as the supraspinatus tendon.

Ultrasound plays a primary role in image-guided treatment, such as in the setting of barbotage and steroid injection for pain relief, and is safe and effective.