Significant complications of IRV include lung trauma, accumulation of auto-PEEP, hypoventilation, and hemodynamic compromise.

Though IRV requires lower peak pressures to achieve the same MAP compared to conventional ventilation, the average pressure in the lungs is increased overall. Thus the patient remains at increased risk for barotrauma. Volume trauma may also occur if there is a high gradient between the P-high and P-low.

Auto-PEEP (also called breath stacking or air trapping) occurs when a patient cannot wholly exhale a breath before the next inspiratory phase begins, resulting in elevated airway pressures. IRV may potentiate this process due to the relatively short expiratory phase or P-low time. There are indications that this auto-PEEP effect may benefit oxygenation in IRV; however, the increased pressures may exacerbate lung trauma and hemodynamic stress. Patients with preexisting obstructive disease (COPD/asthma) who rely on prolonged expiratory times are at increased risk.

IRV increases oxygenation by increasing MAP, which has the additional consequence of increasing the average intrathoracic pressure. Similar to the hemodynamic effects seen with high PEEP, increased MAP can cause compromise by increasing intrathoracic pressure, thus impeding venous return to the heart and reducing preload. This can be pronounced in patients already preload deficient, such as hypovolemia or vasodilatory shock, and is especially problematic in patients in a significant preload-dependent state, such as those in obstructive shock. If the patient develops Auto-PEEP, the risk of hemodynamic compromise is increased.