The glossopharyngeal nerve is a mixed sensorimotor nerve that exits the brainstem from the upper medulla. From that point, it leaves the skull through the jugular foramen, along with the vagus and accessory nerves. It continues its path between the internal jugular vein and the internal carotid artery as it descends and then continues beneath the styloid process. It then curves to make an arch on the side of the neck as it passes under the hyoglossus muscle to its final distribution of the base of the tongue, the palatine tonsil, and the glands of the mouth. A motor efferent supplies the stylopharyngeus muscle, which is essential in swallowing. Sensory afferents provide information from the inner surface of the tympanic membrane, the upper pharynx, as well as the posterior one-third of the tongue. Another important branch is the one to the carotid body and sinus is known as Hering's nerve. It communicates with the vagus nerve and carries information from chemoreceptors in the carotid body and baroreceptors in the carotid sinus; this is important clinically as activation of the visceral sensory branch of the glossopharyngeal neuralgia can activate the vagus nerve (tractus solitarius and dorsal motor nucleus) and produce a reflex arrhythmia. This vagal activation may explain the cardiac-related syncopal episodes sometimes associated with glossopharyngeal neuralgia.  Overall the glossopharyngeal nerve is a very small nerve that runs deep in the neck, and it is sometimes resected accidentally during open-neck dissections. For this same reason, it is often called ‘the neglected cranial nerve.’ Any infectious, inflammatory, or compressive etiologies across the glossopharyngeal nerve’s path from the end organs to the brainstem may result in hyperexcitability of the nerve and produce pain.