**So how do we reduce the risk of adverse events involving oral anticoagulants?**

Almost every healthcare institution has faced issues with the use of oral anticoagulation, and over the years many have developed strategies to reduce the risk of harm to patients. While the education of healthcare workers is important, it also relies on the fact that individuals will remain compliant with the education on the prevention of harm. Most experts feel that strategies that are based on the entire system (i.e., involve everyone from the pharmacist to the eventual patient) are far more effective as they function at many levels, and the errors can hopefully be picked up before the drug even gets to the patient. Some of the risk prevention strategies designed to prevent harm from oral anticoagulants include the following:

- The pharmacists should review each of the patient’s medications whenever an oral anticoagulant is prescribed as this may help reduce drug interactions.

- Place alerts in the system whenever two drugs of the same class are prescribed.

- Avoiding duplication of therapy is critical to decreasing bleeding with oral anticoagulants.

- Eliminate the use of verbal orders for oral anticoagulants. Verbal orders can be misunderstood, misinterpreted, or not correctly transcribed. Unless there is an emergency, the use of verbal orders should be permitted.

- If a verbal order is permitted, then the nurse who takes this order must first enter it electronically and read it back to the prescriber to make sure there is no mistake in dose, frequency, or duration.

- Standardize the way orders on oral anticoagulants are written since many drugs are prescribed based on body weight and/or renal function-  make sure that this information is always present on the chart before ordering oral anticoagulants.

- The computer system must have all the latest labs so the prescriber can see them when prescribing oral anticoagulants.

- When the patient is an elderly individual, then check the renal function and body weight. Many seniors require lower doses because of low body mass and when renal function is diminished (Routledge et al., 2004)

- Develop a system for ‘hold’ order to prevent duplication or inadvertent dosing of the patient despite the hold order. The ‘hold’ order should be written in different color ink, and it must be renewed every day. A reminder should be placed near the ‘hold’ order to check lab values first. If the hospital uses an electronic medical record, a ‘hold’ order should be placed in the form of a nursing communication.

- Create an anticoagulation management service program for monitoring and dosing of oral anticoagulants. The first step is to assess the current clinical practice and develop guidelines on the use of oral anticoagulants. The anticoagulation management service should frequently audit the charts to make sure that the protocol is working as planned.

- Develop a standard protocol for emergency reversal of anticoagulation and how to restart them. The effects of vitamin K may last 5-7 days; hence one must develop guidelines on how and when to start anticoagulation.

- Do not write an order for 'resume all medications' in the blank order. All medications have to be individually checked with the nurse’s list first to see if the patient needs them and then transcribed in the chart.

- During handoffs, nurses should develop a protocol for high-risk medications like oral anticoagulants. The oncoming nurse should be told about the dose and any pending labs.

- Do not permit the use of abbreviations when writing out any medication. Abbreviations can be misunderstood or misinterpreted leading to either double dosing or dose omission.

- All patients on oral anticoagulants should have an alert placed in the chart indicating that the patient is on a high-risk medication.

- The dosing of warfarin should be done at a set time every day as this can allow one to look at the laboratory results first and make any necessary dose adjustments.

- To ensure there is no redundancy in the system, the pharmacist should check the automated dispensing cabinets every day and verify all new orders with the nurse.

- The nurse should also speak to the pharmacist when an order for an oral anticoagulant is made so that there is no duplication of the order.

- It is important to use currently recommended electronic healthcare technology for all orders as this can help avert dosing and duplicate errors. More important computerized systems also have alerts for potential drug interactions and abnormal lab errors.

- To reduce errors in the pharmacy, barcode scanning must be used as it also helps with the correct dosage and proper drug selection.

**Bleeding Risk Assessment Tools**

Even though oral anticoagulants are effective drugs, there is a concern that these drugs may cause bleeding problems while on therapy. Hence, today several bleeding risk assessment tools based on patient risk factors have been developed. These tools are now being incorporated into clinical decision-making. These tools help the clinician better quantify the individual risk of hemorrhage and help classify the patient as low or high risk. The one thing to appreciate is that all the presently available bleeding risk assessment tools were developed for patients treated with warfarin and to date, it is not known whether these same tools can be applied to the newer oral anticoagulants.

The three widely used Bleeding risk Assessment tools include the following:

- Has-Bled Score

- Hemorrhages

- Atria

All of these bleeding risk tools are relatively easy to use than their predecessors. With all these tools, one can obtain the common risk factors from the patient medical history or routinely obtained laboratory investigations that are performed in patients with atrial fibrillation or deep vein thrombosis. The Atria and HAS-Bled score utilizes fewer variables and no genetic testing is necessary. The HAS-Bled tool has been validated in several clinical trials and is currently the most frequently used tool to screen for risk of bleeding. Further, the Has-Bled tool also incorporates labile INR, which is obtained following the start of warfarin therapy.

The atria bleeding risk tool is best suited for use in high-risk patients. The one major limitation of the Atria tool is that the score does not include comorbid conditions like blood pressure or the use of medications that can increase the risk of bleeding. Currently, Atria is not very widely used and is awaiting clinical validation.

The Hemorr2hages score is comprehensive, and while it takes into account the comorbidity and medications that can increase bleeding, it also requires genetic testing for liver enzymes. The downside is that genetic testing is not always practical in emergency situations and many hospitals lack the capability to conduct such testing.

**Bleeding Risk Tools in Clinical Practice**

So far there is no evidence that one risk bleeding tool is better than the other and the choice to use one is based on experience and personal preference. Many of the risk factors in the different tools overlap. Older age is a common risk factor with all risk bleeding tools. Other similar risk factors in the tools include the history of bleeding, renal disease, and anemia. All of them require the need to monitor INR and place control limits on the levels. However, these risk tools may not be applicable to patients on the newer oral anticoagulants who do not require INR monitoring. In addition, genetic testing is not only prohibitively expensive; it may not be available in most healthcare institutions. While several validation studies have been performed in subgroups of participants in clinical trials, the overall observation is that these bleeding risk tools only have a modest predictive value in patients with atrial fibrillation.

To enhance the effectiveness of these bleeding risk tools, it is important to understand that even if these tools predict bleeding, will anticoagulation therapy be discontinued? Remember the negative consequence of thromboembolism are also serious and in many cases outweigh the consequence of hemorrhage. Today no risk tool has been designed to predict the risk of hemorrhage in the brain. Although some risk tools may predict the risk of an intracranial bleed, the threshold at which this bleeding will occur is not known. In reality, these risk bleeding tools are more useful in patients at low risk of thromboembolism where the net benefit of anticoagulation is small, and the risk of bleeding is real. These bleeding risk tools may also identify low-risk patients who can be told that their risk of bleeding is low

**Therapeutic Monitoring**

- Whenever an oral anticoagulant is to be prescribed, baseline laboratory test, coagulation profile, and renal function should be obtained.

- If INR is being used to monitor treatment, the levels should be available in 24 hours. Levels of INR do not change rapidly and hence ordering INR levels every few hours is not recommended.

- To assist with anticoagulation with warfarin, a template should be made to help the healthcare worker know the therapeutic INR for different conditions.