No definite pathophysiologic mechanism for CRPS has been identified yet. Therefore, no gold standard diagnostic test for CRPS exists.

**Budapest Criteria**

**A. They should report continuing pain disproportionate to the inciting event.**

**B. They should report at least one symptom in three of the four following categories:**

- Sensory: Reports of hyperalgesia and/or allodynia,

- Vasomotor: Reports of temperature asymmetry and/or skin color changes and/or skin color asymmetry,

- Sudomotor/edema: Reports of edema and/or sweating changes and/or sweating asymmetry,

- Motor/trophic: Reports of decreased range of motion and/or motor dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, skin, nails).

**C. Additionally, they must display at least one sign at the time of evaluation in two or more of the following categories:**

- Sensory: Evidence of hyperalgesia (to pinprick) and/or allodynia (to light touch or deep somatic pressure),

- Vasomotor: Evidence of temperature asymmetry and/or skin color changes and/or asymmetry,

- Sudomotor/edema: Edema and/or sweating changes and/or sweating asymmetry,

-  Motor/trophic: Evidence of decreased range of motion and/or motor dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, skin, nails).

**D. Finally, there is no other diagnosis that better explains the signs and symptoms.**

Various objective testing measures have been utilized to include thermography, triple-phase bone scan, and the quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test. While these studies provide further data, they are not necessary to make the diagnosis of CRPS. The diagnosis of CRPS is largely clinical and one of exclusion. The differential diagnosis includes small or large fiber sensorimotor neuropathy, cellulitis, erythromelalgia, vasculitis, vascular insufficiency, lymphedema, deep vein thrombosis, and Reynaud’s phenomenon. Diagnostic tests in CRPS are primarily aimed at screening for other potential differential diagnoses.