Evaluating a patient with LPR should always begin with a thorough history to determine the presence of suggesting symptoms such as chronic cough, hoarseness, dysphagia, or throat clearing. Since gastroesophageal reflux disease shares many similarities with LPR, the next step is to rule out GERD. symptoms that worsen while upright and during periods of physical exertion are more suggestive of LPR. On the other hand, symptoms that get worse while lying down are more indicative of GERD. An example would be nocturnal asthma-like symptoms in GERD. Another symptom that suggests GERD rather than LPR is retrosternal burning chest pain (heartburn). A laryngoscope aids in the diagnosis of LPR by showing posterior laryngeal edema or vocal cord edema.

Treatment of LPR relies on a combination of dietary modification and pharmacological interventions. Dietary modifications include avoidance of acidic food such as citrus fruits, tomatoes, and salad dressings. Other dietary changes involve avoiding foods that can weaken the esophageal sphincters, including caffeine, peppermint, alcohol, chocolate, and fatty foods. When these interventions prove ineffective, adding a pharmacological treatment might help. The goal of treatment is to inhibit acid release from parietal cells. Recall that histamine is the primary stimulant of proton pumps in parietal cells. Therefore, histamine-blockers such as ranitidine and cimetidine can successfully suppress acid release, thereby decreasing pepsin activity.

**Pepsin Pearls**

- Pepsin is a stomach enzyme that serves to digest proteins found in ingested food.

- Gastric chief cells secrete pepsin as an inactive zymogen called pepsinogen.

- Parietal cells within the stomach lining secrete hydrochloric acid that lowers the pH of the stomach.

- A low pH (1.5 to 2) activates pepsin.

- Acetylcholine, gastrin, and histamine stimulate the proton pump in parietal cells to release hydrogen ions and decrease pH.

- A patient with weak upper and lower esophageal sphincters (UES and LES) can experience a retrograde flow of gastric juice, allowing pepsin to damage critical structures within the larynx.

- A weak UES and LES increase the risk of laryngopharyngeal reflux (LPR), a condition characterized by pepsin-mediated damage of structures within the larynx.

- Suspect LPR in a patient presenting with dysphagia, hoarseness, and chronic cough.

- Consider laryngoscopy for diagnostic confirmation.

- Manage patients with GERD and LPR by understanding what causes a weak UES and LES.

- Avoid caffeine, chocolate, fatty foods, alcohol to strengthen the LES and UES.

- Decreasing exertion during upright exercise can help strengthen the UES.