Conservative management is the initial policy for all single or multiple tumors less than 5 cm in size and associated with oral contraceptive pills. Management includes cessation of oral contraceptive pills and imaging surveillance and has been shown to cause near-total to complete regression in the size of the tumors in many cases. Resumption of oral contraceptive pill use must be followed with radiologic surveillance. The optimal duration of follow-up has not been established, and surveillance has been recommended until menopause by some authors. Tumors refractory to conservative management are typically associated with obesity.

The majority of hepatic adenomas remain stable during pregnancy. Most tertiary centers monitor adenomas less than 5 cm serially in pregnant women every three months and during the postpartum period. They do not discourage patients with small adenomas from getting pregnant.

Surgery with resection is recommended for all male patients regardless of the tumor size and for women with tumors greater than 5 cm. Surgical resection does not require a wide margin or regional lymphadenectomy. Elective resection is associated with a mortality rate of less than 1%. Emergent surgery for a ruptured hepatic adenoma with intraperitoneal bleeding has a mortality rate of 5% to 10%.

Transarterial embolization (TAE) is recommended for hepatic adenomas complicated by hemorrhage. Patients with intra-tumoral hemorrhage rarely present with hemodynamic instability, which allows for TAE followed by elective surgical resection of the adenoma. TAE is indicated within 2 to 3 days of tumoral hemorrhage.

Radiofrequency ablation is appropriate only for a very select patient population. It is not appropriate for hormone-sensitive tumors, underlying liver disease, surgical candidates, or those with a desire for pregnancy. It should be used to treat patients with adenomas less than 4 cm in size.

Obesity, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, and metabolic syndromes are associated with hepatic adenomatosis. The development of complications of hemorrhage or malignant transformation is not related to the development of adenomatosis but rather to the molecular signatures. Moreover, most liver adenomatoses are typically associated with HNF-1alpha mutations, which have a low risk for malignant transformations. For this reason, a liver transplant is not indicated for nonresectable hepatic adenomas as a rule. Exceptions involve men with an intrahepatic portosystemic venous shunt with nonresectable hepatic adenomas. Meanwhile, genetic counseling is recommended for patients with liver adenomatosis, particularly those associated with familial adenomatous polyposis or MODY3.

About 5% of hepatic adenomas are at risk for malignant transformation to hepatocellular carcinoma. Patients with Fanconi anemia and those with androgen treatment are at particular risk. The Wnt and beta-catenin pathways are particularly associated with malignant transformation. For this reason, surgical resections are typically recommended for this subtype.