Once the diagnosis of the disease is delivered to the patient, both short-and long-term responses to living with HD will occur. Recognizing the state of psychological response is crucial prior to delivering the diagnosis. In a minority of patients, this psychological readiness lags behind symptomatology and could result in significant adverse events. Therefore, understanding of the stages provides a framework for evaluating their state of mind and determining the readiness to receive the diagnoses.

The diagnosis is made on clinical signs and symptoms in a patient with a parent with proven HD. The presence of motor symptoms with or without psychiatric and cognitive disturbances or usually a combination of all three in the presence of positive family history is normally sufficient for a diagnosis. The sequence of the motor, psychiatric, and cognitive disturbances are variable and can lead to a delay in diagnosis or misdiagnosis.

Basic investigations should be performed before genetic testing is done. Lab testing becomes particularly useful to differentiate HD from other progressive hereditary HD-like syndromes. An increase in creatine kinase and liver enzymes are frequently seen in chorea-acanthocytosis and McLeod syndrome. Patients with pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration might show abnormal lipoprotein electrophoresis.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is useful for the diagnosis. MRI findings are present before overt clinical manifestation; brain volume and brain connections show changes several years before the onset of clinical manifestation. Adult-onset of HD is typically characterized by early striatal atrophy in the caudate. Cerebellar and cortical atrophy is seen later in the disease. MRI is important to help differentiate HD from all forms of spinocerebellar ataxia and can be used to aid in the diagnosis of juvenile HD from other metal accumulation disorders such as Wilson’s disease and aceruloplasminemia. However, several progressive HD-like syndromes are indistinguishable based on MRI findings. Both chorea-acanthocytosis and McLeod’s syndrome show caudate atrophy accompanied by the dilatation of the anterior horns of the lateral ventricle.

The gold standard for evaluation is genetic testing. This includes targeted testing of the CAG repeat size. A patient with 26 or fewer repeats is not associated with the HD phenotype. Allele sizes of 27-35 are not common and have not been associated with the HD phenotype. However, due to the instability of CAG, they may be at risk of having a child with an allele in the disease-causing range. Allele sizes of 36 to 39, also known as reduced penetrance HD-causing alleles, are at risk for developing HD but may not be symptomatic. It is common to find asymptomatic elderly patients with CAG repeats in this range. Allele size of 40 or more repeats is associated with the development of the disease.

Prenatal diagnosis is made with chorionic villi sampling, which is performed between the 10th to 12th week of pregnancy and amniocentesis between the 15th to 17th week, where DNA-testing can be carried out. The procedure is only done if the parents are already aware of their own genetic status. Preimplantation diagnosis is also offered in several countries during the last decade where a cell from the embryo in its eight-cell stage is removed for genetic testing. Analysis of monogenic disorders can be done by a polymerase chain reaction to amplify the DNA and to detect the repeat sizes of each chromosome. The eggs are harvested, fertilized in vitro, tested, and the embryo without the CAG repeats is then placed back in the mother’s womb for normal pregnancy to develop.