Real-time teledermatology involves a live video consultation with the patient, while in store-and-forward teledermatology, the images of the patient are transmitted to the teleconsultant as the first step, and this is followed by the consultant giving a relevant plan of action regarding diagnosis or management. Hybrid teledermatology combines elements of "real-time" and "store-and-forward" teledermatology. Teledermatology using mobile phones is referred to as mobile-teledermatology. Extensions of teledermatology include teledermoscopy in which doctors consult on dermoscopic images transmitted electronically and teledermatopathology or telecytology in which dermatopathology or cytology images are transmitted.

Teledermatology has grown in potential over the last two decades. The inherent visual nature of dermatology makes it ideal for the practice of telemedicine. The US Department of Defense has been one of the pioneers in developing teledermatology protocols that have been adapted to develop civilian programs.

Systematic reviews of the literature have shown that teledermatology is most commonly used for patient management purposes, for patient consultation in remote locations, or for medical support in nursing homes and home care settings. Based on published data, the practice of teledermatology is the highest in North America and Europe. Countries that have a lower physician to patient ratio seem to be underrepresented as far as teledermatology practice is concerned.

Telemedicine, in general, is considered to be cost-effective, although systematic reviews have suggested that more rigorous studies are required to study the economic aspects of telemedicine.

**Related Concepts**

**Telepathology and Telecytology**

Telepathology and Telecytology combine clinical data with a high-quality, supporting pathology and cytology data to improve the diagnostic capability of teledermatology. Teledermatopathology has become more feasible and effective because of advances in digitization of histopathology slides and the development of robot-assisted microscopy.

**Teledermoscopy**

With dermoscopic patterns being well established for a wide range of dermatological conditions, especially skin malignancies, the combination of clinical teledermatology with teledermoscopy has shown to improve the effectiveness of teledermatology consultations. Teledermoscopy will enhance the triage of teleconsultations involving a possible diagnosis of malignancy. Direct, patient-initiated teledermoscopy also has been found acceptable and effective in triage and early detection of skin cancers.

**Teledermatology in the context of aesthetic medicine**

The advantage of using teledermatology in the context of aesthetic medicine is that usually, it involves conditions that are not emergencies or life-threatening situations. Teledermatology can be used for the initial diagnosis of aesthetic conditions and follow-up with aesthetic patients, especially postprocedure such as when monitoring patients who have undergone laser resurfacing.

**Smartphone teledermatology/mobile teledermatology**

One of the limitations of teledermatology during the early years of practice was the relatively cumbersome and expensive equipment that was required to exchange data. Technology has improved the quality of image capture, storage, and transmission of clinical images using smart-phones. Smartphones can also be easily connected to internet networks. Smartphone-based teledermatology and teledermoscopy have been found to be effective in diagnosis and triage of dermatological conditions, including malignancies. The ease of use also makes smartphone teledermatology the ideal tool for patient-initiated teledermatology. An extension of the practice of teledermatology using smartphones is the use of social media platforms to discuss dermatology cases. The advantage of these platforms is that a larger number of doctors can view and comment on clinical cases, in both the context of diagnosis and management.

Effective teledermatology requires good infrastructure on both sides of the consultation. Often remote areas have poor infrastructures and lack image capture devices and internet connectivity, thereby reducing the quality of clinical data. All practitioners involved in teledermatology must have basic training related to dermatological imaging as well as dermatology nomenclature. A proper system for electronic medical records, including storage of linked images, is integral to the concept of teledermatology. The practice and extent of maintaining electronic medical records show significant variations across the world. Standardization of both dermatological imaging and related electronic medical records would be an important part of improving the quality and effectiveness of teledermatology practices.

Clarity regarding the legal and ethical issues, especially related to the confidentiality of patient data, must be established on a global level. The referring side should ensure to obtain informed consent for taking images, and they should take the time to thoroughly explain to the patients how the images will be used.