**Approved Drugs**

At the moment, the only antiretroviral combination approved for pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis is tenofovir/emtricitabine. Tenofovir not only has a long half-life, but it also is safe, relatively inexpensive, and can be found in high concentrations in macrophages, monocytes, and genital secretions. The few clinical trials that have taken place have involved tenofovir with or without emtricitabine. The combination of tenofovir/emtricitabine was approved several years ago for pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis against HIV in men who have sex with men, as well as for heterosexually-active, serodiscordant men and women.

Another agent that could potentially be used in pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis is maraviroc. The drug is classified as a CCR5 co-receptor antagonist. It is known to achieve high concentrations in rectal and genital secretions. Plans are to study the drug in future clinical trials.

**Pre-Exposure Chemoprophylaxis Pilot Programs**

To ensure that pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis is safe and effective many pilot programs have been conducted both in the United States and abroad. It is one of the first pilot programs implemented in San Francisco in 2012. Over the past five years, data indicates high adherence and no new HIV infections among the individuals who have participated. The San Francisco program also has a website that sends reminders about the importance of medication adherence to new clients.

Another program with high success is one in Brazil that has focused on men who have sex with men and transgender women. In 2011, only 22% of men who have sex with men had heard about the program, but over the next four years participation grew to 60%, and it is anticipated that it will reach 95% in the next 12 months. Unlike other countries, Brazil is offering free, pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis to those who cannot afford it (

Other similar programs have taken place Zimbabwe, Kenya, Uganda, and South Africa. A key feature of the African program is offering legal advice and informing sex workers of their basic human rights. The limited data available indicate that the programs seem to be working and not many new cases of HIV are being reported in the individuals who have participated (

**Concerns with Pre-Exposure Chemoprophylaxis**

While there are many advantages to using pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis to prevent HIV in high-risk patients, experts state that the following points need to be kept in mind:

- It may lead to changes in sexual behavior. Because such a treatment is available, more people may again develop liberal, sexual habits like those in the pre-HIV era and stop using condoms or engage in high-risk sexual activities

- There is a concern that drug resistance may become a major issue and widespread use of antiretroviral drugs could get out of control

- Burkitt lymphoma

- Candidiasis

- Coccidiodomycosis and valley fever

- Cryptococcosis

- Cryptosporidiosis

- Cytomegalovirus

- Hepes simplex virus

- High grade malignant immunoblastic lymphoma

- MAC

- Toxoplasmosis

- Some individuals have high genetic resistance to tenofovir, and thus the treatment may not work

- Cost is a significant issue and may be a deterrent for many high-risk individuals

**Monitoring After Initiation Pre-Exposure Chemoprophylaxis**

When an individual is prescribed tenofovir/emtricitabine as part of pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis, healthcare workers should do the following:

- Because this drug combination is not 100% effective in preventing HIV, the patient must be educated on changes in lifestyle to prevent the acquisition of HIV

- Perform an HIV test to make sure that the individual is HIV-negative before initiating tenofovir/emtricitabine chemoprophylaxis

- Ensure drug treatment adherence to make sure that the prophylaxis is effective. This is done by checking blood levels of the antiretroviral drugs

- If the patient has symptoms that are consistent with an acute viral infection for less than four weeks, one should delay starting pre-exposure prophylaxis and reconfirm their HIV status

- Check the status of HIV if there is any doubt that the individual is missing the medications and yet engaging in high-risk sexual behavior

- Check for adverse effects of the antiretroviral medications

- Educate on adherence to medication use

- Monitor lifestyle and types of risky behaviors that increase the risk of acquiring HIV

**Cost Benefit**

Pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis is significantly less costly than the actual treatment of HIV infection, both in terms of duration of use and per dose. Pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis is prescribed to high-risk individuals and is supposed to be taken daily until the risk factors diminish; whereas, those who acquire HIV need lifelong HAART to prolong life. Further, HAART consists of multiple drug combinations which are prohibitively expensive; whereas pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis uses only one drug combination, which is relatively less costly. Unfortunately, surveys conducted by the CDC reported that in 21 out of the 31 countries, the cost of pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis was a major factor in the wider implementation of this treatment regimen (

**Demand for Pre-Exposure Chemoprophylaxis**

While delivering pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis to prevent HIV is an admirable goal, what exactly is the demand? A recent multi-country survey of individuals at high-risk for HIV indicated that at least 70% of participants would most definitely use the treatment if it were available. In addition, another study from India revealed that close to 90% of men who have sex with men would use pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis if it were readily available.

Another study from the United Kingdom revealed that nearly 50% of men who have sex with men showed an interest in pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis, and it is believed that such an approach could prevent close to 7000 new HIV infections by the year 2020 (

Similar findings have been noted in Latin America among men who have sex with men, sex workers, and transgender women. Unfortunately in Latin America, despite the huge demand, only Brazil has a publicly available pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis program (

In England, the National Health Service has started to provide individual access to pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis in small clinical trials, which has led many other individuals to purchase generic versions of tenofovir and emtricitabine from online sources. Further, the British Council for Drug Safety has analyzed the online antiretroviral drugs and found them to be of similar quality and as effective as those sold in retail stores (

**Adherence**

For pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis to be successful, medication adherence is vital. While short-term clinical trials under controlled conditions have shown high adherence rates, data from outpatient clinics (outside of clinical trials) reveal that adherence can vary from 13% to 52%.

Factors that lead to low adherence include the following:

- Lack of availability of the drug regimen

- Individual’s lifestyle

- Exposure to abuse and violence within a relationship

- Stress

- Partner throwing away the pills

- Forgetfulness

- The stigma of being at risk for HIV

- Discrimination

Some clinics have started to use cognitive behavioral therapy for patients at risk for low adherence to improve adherence. So far there are no data to determine if this therapy can change the adherence rates. Two clinical trials are underway using a long-acting injectable antiretroviral formula to avoid the low adherence.