**Myasthenia Gravis**

Among the most common diseases of the skeletal neuromuscular junction is myasthenia gravis (MG). In over 60% of cases, hyperplasia of the thymus gland is present when excessive T cells may predispose to an autoimmune response. MG is an autoimmune disorder in which the body produces antibodies against its own ACh receptors in the postsynaptic membrane. These antibodies bind to the ACh receptors and block the interaction of ACh with them, resulting in the blockage of NMJ transmission, muscle weakness, and paralysis. Acetylcholine receptor antibodies are present in about 85% of patients with generalized symptoms, but only 50% of patients with purely ocular involvement MG characteristically presents with double vision (diplopia), drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis), difficulty in speaking (dysarthria), difficulty in swallowing (dysphagia) and general muscle fatigue. The symptoms are typically least expressed in the morning and are worse in the evening as the amount of ACh bound to the postsynaptic membrane receptor decreases due to various muscle activities during the day. In the progressive form of the disease, the weakness may become steadily worse, may cause myasthenic crisis and death. Decrement of over 10% observed following repetitive nerve stimulation is a diagnostic criterion for MG due to depletion of functional ACh in the synaptic cleft.

Muscle weakness can be temporarily relieved by ACh-esterase drugs such as physostigmine or neostigmine since they increase the amount of ACh in the synaptic cleft and enhance conduction through the NMJ. Corticosteroids and steroid-sparing agents (azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, tacrolimus, or mycophenolate) are used to inhibit the immune response in MG. Rituximab, an anti-CD20 B cell monoclonal antibody, may be used in refractory patients, especially with MuSK. Plasmapheresis is used to remove antibodies from the body. Plasmapheresis and IV immunoglobulins are used to treat complications of MG that include acute flare-ups of myasthenic crises and respiratory involvement. Patients with a respiratory crisis may also require ventilatory support.

**Lambert Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome**

LEMS is another autoimmune disease affecting skeletal muscle NMJ when the body produces antibodies against its own presynaptic membrane Ca2+ channels. Blocking Ca2+ channels in the presynaptic membrane leads to less calcium entry into the nerve terminal and less ACh being released, resulting in weakness of skeletal muscles and fatigue that usually improves after physical activity. The exact cause of LEMS is unknown but correlates with tumors of the lung, usually small cell lung cancer. The symptoms of LES are similar to MG, such as muscle weakness and fatigue; however, what separates LES from MG is that in LES, proximal limb muscles are involved in the presence of depressed tendon reflexes a weakness improves with use. This is because with repeated attempts at muscle contraction, a calcium gradient builds up outside the presynaptic Ca channel, eventually allowing the endogenous calcium to outcompete the auto-antibodies to trigger the release of ACh in the synaptic cleft. 80% of LES patients complain of proximal muscle weakness in both arms and legs.  Oropharyngeal and ocular muscles are mildly affected so, eyelid ptosis and mild diplopia may also be present. Autonomic symptoms such as dry mouth, constipation, impotence in males, and postural hypotension may be seen. The triad of proximal muscle weakness, areflexia, and autonomic dysfunction aids in making the diagnosis. The increased response following repetitive nerve stimulation is a diagnostic criterion for LEMS due to increased Ca2+ after supra-maximal stimulation, resulting in increased functional ACh in the synaptic cleft.

**Botulism**

Botulism is a potentially fatal syndrome of diffuse, flaccid paralysis caused by neurotoxins produced caused by Clostridium botulinum, an anaerobic gram-positive, spore-forming bacterium. Of the several types of neurotoxins produced by C. botulinum toxins B, D, F, and G selectively affect one or all of these SNARE proteins and block docking, a fusion of SVs and exocytosis of Ach, resulting in muscle weakness or reversible flaccid paralysis. Botulism can be foodborne. In adults, ingestion of food contaminated with spores or toxins (home-canned food) of clostridium botulism result in nausea, vomiting, blurred vision, diplopia, and descending flaccid paralysis. In severe cases, bulbar paralysis and respiratory failure may occur rapidly. Infant botulism can occur due to ingestion of honey contaminated with spores of C. botulism. Toxins are produced within the GI tract of infants, and infants present with constipation, weak feeding, weak crying, and flaccid paralysis. History, clinical presentation, and the detection of botulinum toxin and the presence of C. botulinum in serum, stool, gastrointestinal content, or wound exudates form the basis of diagnosis. Treatment is done by administering antitoxin. Early administration of antitoxin decreases mortality and shortens the disease course. Patients may require prolonged periods of ventilation. Botulism can also occur due to contamination of a wound with dust containing C. botulism spores. Such infection particularly common after traumatic injuries and among drug abusers. Therapeutically, botulinum toxin is used to treat spasticity in conditions such as blepharospasm, torticollis, anal sphincter spasm, etc. It is also used to treat axillary hyperhidrosis and cosmetically used to correct wrinkles.