The retina is comprised of two types of photoreceptor cells: rods and cones. Rods are the cells primarily responsible for scotopic vision, or low-light vision. Rods are the more abundant cell-type of the retina and reach their maximum density approximately 15 to 20 degrees from the fovea, a small depression in the retina of the eye where visual acuity is highest. There are approximately 90 million rod cells in the human retina. The cones confer color vision and high spatial acuity and are the cell-type most activated at higher light levels when photopic vision predominates. The fovea has the highest density of cones and is free of rods. The human retina contains approximately 6 million cone cells. It should be noted that there is a visual field "blind spot" at the site of the optic nerve where photoreceptor cells are absent.

In comparing the photoreceptor cell types, rods have more photopigment and exhibit high amplification, highly convergent retinal pathways, and high sensitivity, while cones have a faster response with short integration times, are directionally selective, and exhibit high acuity. The term "bleaching" refers to the absorption of a photon by a pigment molecule. Rods are achromatic, meaning they contain one type of pigment, while cones are arranged in a chromatic organization of three different pigments. In the fovea, this arrangement takes on the form of what is referred to as the "cone mosaic." Photopigment molecules are embedded in the membranes of photoreceptors.