- Hemiballismus is a hyperkinetic involuntary movement disorder characterized by intermittent, sudden, violent, involuntary, flinging, or ballistic high amplitude movements involving the ipsilateral arm and leg caused dysfunction in the central nervous system of the contralateral side.

- Global incidence and prevalence are largely unknown, given the wide variety of etiologies but estimated to be 1-2/1,000,000, classifying it as a rare disorder.

- It is caused by excessive subcortical excitatory activity as a result of damage to the inhibitory circuits within the basal ganglia (hyperkinetic theory).

- Etiologies can be vascular, traumatic, neoplastic or paraneoplastic, toxic-metabolic, neuroinfectious, neuroinflammatory, iatrogenic, vitamin deficiency, hereditary-neurodevelopment, or neurodegenerative.

- Pathophysiology of hemiballismus is complex but thought to include decreased excitatory transmission of the GPi and the disinhibition of the thalamus, creating an overactivation of corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts.

- Diagnostic workup includes a thorough history and physical exam, advanced imaging (CT, CTA, MRI with contrast, DSA), extensive serum (CBC, CMP, A1C, ESR, CRP,  ANA, ENA, ANCA, hemoglobin A1C), and CSF analysis, vitamin panel (including B1, B12), drugs of abuse toxicology, sexually transmitted disease screening, among other immune and infectious markers. Genetic studies should be included when indicated.

- Treatment modalities are mostly supportive as the prognosis is good, and it tends to self-resolve when underlying etiology is addressed.

- Pharmacological treatments include first and second-generation antidopaminergic drugs (risperidone, haloperidol, perphenazine), benzodiazepines (clonazepam), anti-epileptics (topiramate), intrathecal baclofen, and tetrabenazine.

- Surgery is considered in refractory cases with severe impairment of activities of daily living. A targeted stereotactic posteroventral pallidotomy is the procedure of choice. Deep brain stimulation is not recommended at this time.