# Continuing Education Activity

Frostbite, also known as freezing cold injury is tissue damage that occurs due to cold exposure, occurring at temperatures below zero degrees celsius. Homeless populations, children, and the elderly are especially vulnerable to frostbite. Prolonged duration and lower temperatures increase the risk of frostbite and the extent of the injury. Certain pre-existing conditions, including peripheral vascular disease, malnutrition, Raynaud's disease, diabetes mellitus, and tobacco use may worsen frostbite-related tissue damage. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of frostbite and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the epidemiology of frostbite.
- Summarize how to evaluate a patient for frostbite.
- Review the treatment and management options available for frostbite.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies to improve care coordination and communication to advance treatment and prevention of frostbite, in turn leading to better patient outcomes.

# Introduction

Frostbite, also known as freezing cold injury (FCI) is tissue damage as a result to cold exposure, occurring at temperatures below 0 degrees C. It is included in a spectrum of injury, from FCI to non-FCI and frostnip.

Frostbite tend to occur when the body is exposed to intense cold, resulting in vasoconstriction. The resulting decrease in blood flow fails to deliver heat to the tissues and eventually leads to ice crystal formation. Body parts most prone to frostbite include the feet, hand, ears, lips, and nose. Most cases of frostbite occur in the winter; homeless people and those who perform outdoors activity are most susceptible to the injury. The goal of treatment is to salvage as much tissue as possible so that maximal function remains.

# Etiology

Skin exposure to freezing conditions causes frostbite. Prolonged duration and lower temperatures increase the likelihood and the extent of the injury. Certain pre-existing conditions may worsen tissue injury because of frostbite, including peripheral vascular disease, malnutrition, Raynaud's disease, diabetes mellitus, tobacco use, etc. A unifying pattern among these conditions is poor impaired internal organ insulation or dysfunctional vasculature.

Risk factors for frostbite include:

- Winter season

- No or inadequate shelter from the cold

- High wind chill factor

- Exposure at a high altitude

- Prolonged duration of exposure

- Prolonged exposure to a wet condition

- Altered mental status

- Alcohol or drug abuse

- Malnutrition

- Immobilization

- Extremes of age

- Homeless

- Presence of medical disorders like diabetes, hypothyroidism, peripheral vascular disease, stroke or arthritis

- Smoker

# Epidemiology

Classically, frostbite injuries were common in military personnel. However, with the increase in technology and accessibility, recreational sports have become a significant repository for frostbite cases. Homeless populations, children, and the elderly are especially vulnerable to frostbite. Risk factors include behavioral (lack of clothing, alcohol/drug consumption, access to shelter), physiological (dehydration, high altitudes, hypoxia), and other comorbidities with a predilection for tissue hypoxia (diabetes, peripheral vascular disease, Raynaud phenomenon).

# Pathophysiology

Frostbite has a prejudice for distal extremities, digits, and those portions of exposed skin with decreased perfusion (nose, ears) and less insulation. As the temperature of exposed skin drops, endothelial cell damage can cause localized edema in the extremity. Hyperviscous intravascular flow and vasodilation causes slowing forces, resulting in microthrombi. The constellation of microvascular injury, venous stasis, and microthrombi all contribute to the development of ischemia attributed to frostbite. Depending on the extent of the exposure and subsequent cellular damage, injuries may be reversible or irreversible.

Normal skin blood flow is about 250 ml/min but during frostbite, the flow drops to less than 20-50 ml/min. As the temperature drops to below 0 degrees Centigrade, blood flow ceases. The slower venous system freezes before the arterial system.

Frostbite causes injury in the following ways:

- Direct damage of the cold to the tissues

- Indirect damage caused by dehydration

- Formation of ice crystals that leads to alteration in electrolytes and lipid layers

- Stasis of the microvessels leading to thrombus formation and ischemia

- Reperfusion injury

Recovery

Frostbite injury is classified into three zones which include:

- Zone of coagulation which is the most distal and often the most severely injured. Here the injury is irreversible

- Zone of stasis is the middle zone where the injury can be moderate to severe. but it reversible.

- Zone of hyperemia is the proximal zone, which is the least injured.

In most cases, recovery from frostbite can take 5-30 days, depending on the severity of injury.

# Histopathology

Initially, extracellular ice crystals form in exposed tissue. Continued cold exposure can cause intracellular ice crystals to form. Cell membrane damage results in electrolyte imbalances. As the transmembrane osmolarity gradient increases, cell membranes can rupture, resulting in cell death. Should tissue thawing occur, a reperfusion-associated inflammatory response through proinflammatory cytokines may cause additional tissue damage. Even more dangerous, additional cycles of thaw-refreeze can cause progressively worsening tissue ischemia and subsequent thrombosis.

# History and Physical

History of the patient should include duration and external temperatures during exposures.

Physical examination may reveal blanched, white skin. Patients may complain of heaviness in an exposed extremity as numbness progresses. In later stages of frostbite, exposed areas may become dark or purplish in hue due to poor vascular tone and pooling of blood. Superficial frostbite affecting the epidermis and subcutaneous fat will have pale, white blisters upon rewarming. Deep, full-thickness frostbite will become hemorrhagic with rewarming and may become gangrenous.

It is important to know that the initial exam will not accurately reveal the final depth and extent of the injury.

Rewarming injury

During rewarming, edema may start to appear within 3-5 hours and may last 7 days. Blisters tend to appear within 4-24 hours.

Presence of eschar will be obvious at 10-15 days and mummification with a line of demarcation may develop in 3-8 weeks.

# Evaluation

Frostbite is a clinical diagnosis. Using additional laboratory testing may be helpful in determining the extent to which comorbid conditions may be contributing to tissue ischemia. Technetium-99 (Tc-99) triple phase scanning and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) may help to determine extent of amputation in the first few days after injury.

# Treatment / Management

Patients should have protection from further injury by covering exposed areas. The care of patients with frostbite begins with rewarming in the field if there is no anticipation of refreezing, as thaw-refreezing may worsen injuries.

In-hospital management includes warm water baths, approximately 40-42 degrees C. Patients with systemic hypothermia should be managed by raising core temperature above 35 degrees C using warm IV fluids, and this should precede warming of the affected extremity.

Although controversial, some sources recommend drainage or excision on white, cloudy-appearing blisters, while hemorrhagic blisters should be left intact. As with burn patients, particular care to prevent infections and dehydration should be a priority. Overly aggressive surgical debridement may remove skin that is otherwise viable, so complete rewarming should be achieved before surgical debridement. Signs of compartment syndrome (edema, pulselessness, extreme pain) should prompt urgent surgery. Delayed amputation (up to 6 weeks following injury) until the determination of tissue viability may prevent surgical morbidity from unnecessary procedures.

Patients with full-thickness injuries and evidence of ischemia and no restoration of tissue perfusion after rewarming may be candidates for thrombolytic (tPA) therapy.

# Differential Diagnosis

Careful assessment for systemic hypothermia and full-thickness tissue injury are essential in patients with apparent frostbite. Failure to correct for underlying comorbidities associated with frostbite (i.e., intoxication, cardiovascular compromise, significant environmental exposure, trauma) may cause systemic collapse and death.

# Staging

Traditionally, frostbite has a staging system similar to burns:

- **First degree**- numbness, central pallor, surrounding erythema/edema, desquamation, dysesthesia

- **Second degree**- skin blistering with surrounding erythema/edema

- **Third degree**- tissue loss involving entire thickness of skin, hemorrhagic blisters

- **Fourth degree**- tissue loss involving deeper structures, resulting in loss of the affected part

Another classification based on frostbite on hands/feet has been proposed, which incorporate early imaging studies and may better predict outcomes.

- **Grade 1 -**no cyanosis on the extremity; no risk of amputation or sequelae predicted

- **Grade 2 -**cyanosis on distal phalanx only; amputation to soft tissue and sequelae of fingernail/toenail sequelae predicted

- **Grade 3 -**cyanosis on intermediate and proximal phalanges; amputation to the bone of the digit and functional sequelae predicted

- **Grade 4 -**cyanosis over carpal/tarsal bones; amputation to limb and functional sequelae predicted.

With this classification system, as grade increases, so does the likelihood of limb amputation.

# Prognosis

Functional sequelae of frostbitten areas depend on the extent of tissue injury.

Frostbite injury is associated with morbidity which is worse in the presence of the following:

- Presence of hemorrhagic blisters

- No edema

- Ongoing mottling

- Frank presence of frozen tissue

Complications of frostbite include:

- Paresthesias

- Loss of nails

- Anhidrosis of hyperhidrosis

- Cracked skin

- Atrophy of muscles

- Chronic pain

- Joint stiffness

- Phantom pain

- Tremor

# Complications

Frostbite survivors may have an intolerance to cold in previously frostbitten areas, which may be a consequence of vasospasm and abnormal autonomic tone following cold injury. Complex regional pain syndrome is a common complication.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Risk modification including proper clothing, access to shelter, and maintaining hydration and nutrition are vital for protection against frostbite.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Frostbite is a very common problem during winter and is associated with high morbidity. Because any part of the body can be affected, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes the emergency department physician, internist, wound care nurse, and a surgeon.

A multimodal approach to the treatment of patients with frostbite may provide the best chance for functional recovery.

The key is patient education; frostbite in many instances can be prevented. Patients should be advised to dress well during winter, carry extra clothing supplies if they are into winter sports and avoid tight restrictive clothing. The nurse should advise against the use of alcohol, illicit drugs, and tobacco. For those with medical problems. it is important to ensure that their health is stable before venturing on an outdoors trip during winter.

Early consultation with the surgical services specializing in frostbite is crucial. During recovery from frostbite, as with other traumatic injuries with an expected loss of, function, consultation with rehabilitation services is vital, including wound care, physical therapy, occupational therapy, physical medicine & rehabilitation specialists, among others.

Finally, one should not immediately recommend amputation. The aim is to salvage all viable tissue. Thus, a wound care nurse should follow the patient and only debride infected superficial dead skin and let the damaged skin slough off on its own. Open communication with the interprofessional team is the key so that all patients receive the optimal standard of care.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes after frostbite injury are guarded and depend on the extent of the injury. Most people tend to have some residual deficits; either sensory or functional.