Treatment of PCV is based on the location of the disease and disease activity. As mentioned above, the presence of intraretinal/subretinal fluid, sub-RPE/subretinal hemorrhage, or vision loss of > 5 letters are the signs of active disease. Inactive disease must be observed and closely monitored. In clinically active but asymptomatic cases such as peripheral or peripapillary PCV, the decision to treat is based on the treating physician's discretion.

Different treatment modalities that can be used in the treatment of PCV are:

- Photodynamic therapy

- Anti-VEGF drugs

- Thermal laser

- Combination therapy

**Photodynamic Therapy (PDT)**

PDT is indicated in subfoveal or extrafoveal polyps and extension of AVN subfoveal. Isolated extrafoveal polyps and extrafoveal polyps may be treated with a thermal laser. The thermal laser can result in scotoma and hemorrhage. Hence, PDT is a safer option for large extrafoveal lesions. TL for extrafoveal lesions should be reserved for smaller polyps without AVN.

PDT uses verteporfin dye, which acts as a photosensitizer. When injected intravenously, dye accumulates within endothelial cells of abnormal choroidal vessels. Diode laser causes photo thrombosis within these abnormal blood vessels resulting in occlusion and resolution of exudation. The spot size for PDT is best determined using ICGA. The drawing tool on the software is used to draw the best-fit circle around the polyp and AVN, and the corresponding spot size on the diode laser should be used. The maximum lesion size can be best estimated in early-phase ICGA in 90% of cases.

In most cases, polyp and AVN can be covered by the largest spot size available on PDT. In lesions larger than this, the current recommendation is to pretreat with three loading doses of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) agents and PDT over the lesion using the largest spot size. ICGA should be repeated after three months to determine disease activity. PDT can be repeated if polyps are still active.

The most common complication reported after full fluence PDT is subretinal hemorrhage, which is most commonly reported within one month of PDT. The common risk factors for subretinal bleeding are larger lesion size, large spot size, and leaking polyps.

Other treatment protocols are half-dose PDT or reduced fluence PDT, which may have lesser side effects compared to full fluence PDT. In reduced fluence PDT, light energy of 25 J/cm2 instead of 50 J/cm^2) with a full dose of 6 mg/m2 of verteporfin dye. In half-dose PDT, 3mg/m2 dye is used. Although the risk of subretinal bleeding is lesser with these two protocols, incomplete resolution of polyps and AVN are reported.

**Anti-VEGF Drugs**

Anti-VEGF drugs reduce the permeability of abnormal vascular networks and polyps, thereby reducing exudation and preserving vision. Most studies suggested induction with three monthly injections, followed by as-needed intravitreal injections. Anti-VEGF agents reduce subretinal hemorrhage, macular edema, and stabilization of vision in 80% to 100% of cases.

Polyps and AVN persistence have been noted in short-term and long-term studies using anti-VEGF monotherapy. The current recommendation is to rule out polyps using ICGA if a suboptimal response with anti-VEGF drugs is seen in a case of presumed neovascular AMD. No studies have proven the superiority of one drug or the other. However, aflibercept has certain advantages over bevacizumab and ranibizumab, including a longer half-life, greater affinity to VEGF, and potency against the placental growth factor. Few studies suggested switching to aflibercept in case tachyphylaxis is noted to ranibizumab.

**Combination Therapy**

Combination therapy combines the prothrombotic effect of PDT with the anti-permeability effect of anti-VEGF and has been shown to have better results. The landmark EVEREST trial reported polyp regression in 77.8% of cases with combination therapy, while ranibizumab monotherapy resulted in polyp regression in only 28.6% of cases.

**Thermal Laser**

Thermal laser (TL) has been used for extrafoveal polyps. It is an effective and relatively inexpensive treatment modality compared to PDT. TL can result in chorioretinal scar, scotoma, and secondary CNVM. Hence it is indicated for lesions located greater than 1000 microns from the center of the fovea. For lesions located within 500 to 1000 microns from the center of the fovea, TL can be considered if the lesion size is less than 1000 microns. Complete ablation of AVN must be avoided with TL due to the above-mentioned complications. However, if the feeder can be recognized using video ICGA, selective ablation of the feeder vessel must be done.