- The supraspinatus muscle externally rotates and adducts the humerus; It classifies as a pennate muscle.

- The infraspinatus muscle abducts and externally rotates the shoulder; it works best as a rotator with the patient in a prone position, and it is considered a pennate muscle.

- The teres minor muscle externally rotates the shoulder; it is considered a fusiform muscle.

- The teres major provides internal rotation, extension, and adduction of the shoulder; it's considered a fusiform muscle.

- The subscapularis muscle internally rotates the humerus; the upper portion of the muscle influences abduction, while the lower area influences adduction. It is considered a multipennate muscle.

- The deltoid muscle is a multipennate muscle; intervenes in the flexion of the shoulder, in the internal rotation, and in the front adduction on a horizontal plane (with the anterior bundles); intervenes in the abduction of the shoulder (with the lateral bundles); intervenes in the external rotation, in the extension, and the posterior adduction on a horizontal plane (with the posterior bundles).

- The coracobrachialis muscle participates in flexion and adduction on a horizontal plane of the shoulder; it is a fusiform muscle.

- The biceps brachialis muscle influence at shoulder level is the flexion and the adduction on a horizontal plane; it is a fusiform muscle.

- The brachial triceps intervene in the extension of the arm and the posterior adduction through the long head; it is a multipennate muscle.

- The latissimus dorsi muscle at the level of the shoulder is the most important internal rotator, as it is the most important for the adduction and extension of the shoulder. It is a fusiform muscle.

- The pectoralis major muscle helps flexion, internal rotation, and adduction on a horizontal plane.

- The trapezius muscle influences the movements of the scapula and indirectly helps the shoulder in adduction and flexion in the initial degrees of movement.