**Hemodynamics**

A detailed look at the ventricular filling and contraction can be visualized on a pressure-volume curve with the pressure on the Y-axis and the volume on the X-axis.  Frequently, this only represents the left ventricle, but an analogous process occurs in the right ventricle, albeit at much lower pressures.

The ventricular function can be divided into four phases: isovolumic relaxation, ventricular filling, isovolumic contraction, and rapid ventricular ejection. Isovolumic relaxation is the period immediately after ventricular contraction when the aortic valve has closed, but the mitral valve has not yet opened. This period represents a time of very low pressure in the ventricle, which helps create the gradient, which opens the mitral valve. The mitral valve opens, signifying the beginning of ventricular filling where the high pressure from the blood vessels forces blood into the expanding ventricle. After the ventricle fills and transitions to contracting, the pressure eventually exceeds that of the blood vessels. This gradient closes the mitral valve, which marks the beginning of systole and causes the first heart sound (in concert with the tricuspid valve), denoted as S1. The time between this closing of the mitral valve and the opening of the aortic valve is the isovolumic contraction period. This is where pressure builds, yet the blood does not leave the ventricle. Eventually, the pressure within the ventricle exceeds the pressure in the arteries, and the aortic valve opens, marking the beginning of rapid ventricular ejection. A healthy ventricle will eject more than 60% of its volume, and after the aortic valve closes, the cycle begins again. The aortic valve closure is the source of the second heart sound (in concert with the pulmonic valve) denoted as S2.

The energy propelling the blood into the ventricle during diastole is derived from the potential energy from the elasticity of the blood vessels. During systole, the blood vessels are distended by the heart forcing blood from the ventricles into the systemic (or pulmonic) system. This energy is stored in the blood vessel walls like an elastic tube. The blood vessels now contain blood under higher pressure than the ventricles due to a combination of that elasticity and ventricular relaxation.

**Heart Chamber (Max/Min Pressure in mmHg)**

- Left ventricle (120/15)

- Right ventricle (25/5)

- Right atria (mean 4 to 5)

- Pulmonary arteries/left atria (25/10)

- Aorta (120/80)