**Cough:**The mechanism of action that causes a dry cough in patients taking ACE inhibitors is related to reduced bradykinin degradation. Bradykinin (BK) is a known mediator present in the upper respiratory tract, which can cause cough. The incidence of ACE inhibitor-related cough is 5% to 35%.

**Hypotension:**Benazepril has been rarely associated with hypotension in uncomplicated patients with hypertension. Significant hypotension is most likely to occur in patients who have been volume and salt depleted due to diuretic therapy, salt restriction, dialysis, diarrhea, or vomiting. Volume and salt depletion should be corrected before initiating therapy with benazepril. Treatment with benazepril should be restored once the blood pressure and volume are restored.

**Renal Insufficiency:**In patients with volume depletion, hypotension leading to decreased renal perfusion can occur, leading to permanent renal impairment. The prescriber should take action to ensure euvolemia and reduce the dosage of the ACE inhibitor. Furthermore, if a patient has bilateral renal artery stenosis, initiation of an ACE inhibitor therapy can precipitate renal failure due to the reduction of glomerular hydrostatic pressure.

**Hyperkalemia:**Because ACE inhibitors reduce the serum aldosterone concentration, they can increase serum potassium concentration. Patients with renal insufficiency, diabetes, or patients taking diuretic therapy are at high risk of developing hyperkalemia.

**Drug Interactions**

**Diuretics:**Coadministration of diuretics and benazepril can result in excessive lower blood pressure, especially with the initiation of benazepril. It can be managed by discontinuing or lowering the diuretic dose before starting benazepril therapy. Potassium-sparing diuretics (amiloride, spironolactone, and triamterene), when coadministered with benazepril, increase the risk of hyperkalemia. Monitor patient’s serum potassium levels when combination can not be avoided.

**Antidiabetic medicines:**Insulins and oral hypoglycemic agents when coadministered with benazepril increase the potential for hypoglycemia.

**Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents (selective COX-2 Inhibitors):**In volume-depleted patients (e.g., on diuretic therapy), elderly, or with impaired renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs with benazepril can result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually. Monitor renal function periodically in these patients. Furthermore, the antihypertensive efficacy of ACE inhibitors, including benazepril, can be reduced by NSAIDs.

**Dual Blockade of the RAS:**Dual Blockade of the RAS with ACE inhibitors, ARBs, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hyperkalemia, hypotension, and worsening in renal function compared to monotherapy. Generally, the combination should be avoided. When using agents that cause dual blockade of RAS, monitor patients closely for blood pressure, electrolytes, and renal function.

- Do not coadminister aliskiren with benazepril in patients with diabetes.

- Avoid the use of aliskiren with benazepril in patients with renal impairment (CrCL < 60 mL/min).

**Mammalian Target of Rapamycin (mTOR) Inhibitors:**ACE inhibitor and mTOR inhibitor (e.g., sirolimus, everolimus, temsirolimus) coadministration can increase the risk for angioedema. Monitor for signs of angioedema

**Lithium:**Lithium toxicity is reported in patients receiving benazepril and lithium concomitantly. Although toxicity is reversible in nature upon discontinuation of benazepril or lithium, it is recommended to monitor for serum lithium levels while using both.

**Neprilysin Inhibitor:**Administration of neprilysin inhibitors and benazepril concomitantly may increase the risk for angioedema.