Practitioners base treatment of trigger thumb on severity and duration of symptoms. Initial treatment entails conservative management and adjunctive pain relief. Common medications for pain relief are nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen or naproxen. Conservative therapy consists of several modalities such as rest for three to four weeks, avoiding activities that require repetitive gripping, repeated grasping, or the prolonged use of vibrating hand-held machinery. Patients may experience improvement in symptoms with the use of ice on the palm several times a day. Others may see more benefit with warm-water soaks, particularly first thing in the morning. Splinting at night to keep the affected finger in an extended position. The splinting reduces passive flexion of thumb while sleeping, as patients usually have flexed position of thumb which is worse in the morning. Gentle passive movement of thumb to maintain mobility reduces joint stiffness due to prolonged non-use.

A practitioner may recommend minor invasive or surgical procedures after failed conservative management. The most common treatment is a steroid injection into the tendon sheath. The steroid reduces inflammation and allows the tendons to glide within the sheath freely. It is effective in up to 90% of patients. Diabetic patients should be encouraged to monitor their blood sugar carefully as the steroid injection may adversely affect it. A second injection can be offered six weeks after initial treatment. However, repeated injections may lead to damage of the tendon itself. Percutaneous release can be performed in office or procedure room. A digital block is performed with local anesthetic after which a needle is used to release the pulley blindly. This has demonstrated short-term relief of symptoms, however, is not recommended as a routine procedure. The main complication is damage to the radial digital nerve which crosses obliquely at the MCP joint. Open surgical treatment is the gold standard in patients that have failed other modes of treatment. It is typically performed as an ambulatory procedure through an incision over the MCP joint. The A1 pulley is then identified and released allowing the flexor pollicis longus tendon to glide freely. The patient should be advised to move their thumb as early as possible as this reduces the formation of scar tissue which could lead to a recurrence. Patients should then follow up in the outpatient clinic to assess for function and improvement.