# Continuing Education Activity

Pulmonary hamartomas are benign malformations of the lung and include an abnormal mixture of tissue components such as cartilage, epithelium, fat, or muscle which are common to the lung but the organ architecture is not preserved. This activity describes the evaluation and management of pulmonary hamartoma and explains the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the epidemiology of pulmonary hamartoma.
- Identify the typical 'popcorn' or 'comma-shaped' appearance of calcification on imaging of pulmonary hamartoma.
- Outline the use of surgery in the management of pulmonary hamartoma.
- Review the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team members to improve the delivery of care for patients affected by pulmonary hamartoma.

# Introduction

A lesion first described by German pathologist Eugen Albrecht in 1904, hamartomas are generally benign tumors that may occur in the lungs, skin, heart, breast and other regions of the body. The word hamartoma derives from “hamartia,” the Greek word for ‘erroneous,” or “faulty."

Pulmonary hamartomas can, therefore, be viewed as benign malformations of common lung tissue, to include cartilage, epithelium, fat, or muscle. They are the most common benign pulmonary neoplasm in adults. However, they are much more rare in children.

# Etiology

Historically, no specific risk factors have been identified for pulmonary hamartoma. Occasionally, a relationship between lesions that have undergone sarcomatous transformation and specific genomic alterations has been described,

# Epidemiology

Pulmonary hamartomas occur with an incidence of 0.025 to 0.032% within the adult population. They usually present in the fifth and sixth decade of life, with males being four times more likely to be affected than females.

# Histopathology

Also known as chondroid hamartomas, the histological makeup of these tumors is a mixture of mature mesenchymal tissue, like adipose tissue, cartilage, bone, or smooth muscle bundles, and fibromyxoid tissue, with varying proportions of each component. They are non-invasive, slow-growing, nodular lesions, sometimes displaying cleft-like spaces within, lined by respiratory epithelium.

# History and Physical

In adults the majority of parenchymal hamartomas produce no symptoms, often being incidental findings. Depending on the location and size of the lesion, however, patients can still develop an array of complaints, including persistent coughing or wheezing, dyspnea, hemoptysis, rhonchi, higher likelihood of pneumonia, atelectasis or even pneumothorax. Endobronchial masses additionally pose the danger of airway obstruction. Hamartomas that have become symptomatic require a thorough diagnostic approach, and surgical resection can become necessary.

# Evaluation

Hamartomas are often incidental findings on imaging and can mimic pulmonary malignancies. Once found, or in the case of asymptomatic hamartoma, there are multiple diagnostic strategies available to determine the nature of the lesion. On imaging, e.g., chest X-ray or CT scans, masses present as coin- shaped and solitary, with well-defined edges, typically measuring less than 4 cm in diameter. Calcification is present in 25% to 30% of patients. The “popcorn” or “comma-shaped” appearance of calcification is pathognomonic for hamartomas.

# Treatment / Management

Surgery remains the only definitive curative option available. In the event of surgery, preservation of functional lung tissue is the primary goal. Therefore, enucleation and wedge resections are the most common surgical choice, with more radical lobectomy or total pneumonectomy reserved for particularly deep lesions, multiple or large lesions that are making wedge resection impossible, or lesions adhering severely to the hilum of the lung. To avoid overlooking underlying malignant potential, obtaining intraoperative frozen sections is generally recommended.

# Differential Diagnosis

The most significant consideration when encountering a possible hamartomatous lesion should go to distinguishing the lesion from and excluding the possibility of underlying malignancy. Upon exclusion of malignancy, other benign pulmonary tumors should be considered when deliberating the nature of a solitary pulmonary nodule, to include infectious granuloma, lipoma, lipoid pneumonia, or pulmonary papilloma.

# Prognosis

The prognosis for patients with lung hamartoma is generally excellent. Lesions are slow-growing and, in cases where symptoms are present and persistent, surgery is curative. Malignant transformation or subsequent malignancy are rare occurrences, and if patients adhere to a conservative observation schedule, are likely to be diagnosed early on.

# Complications

Beyond the possibility of airway obstruction, with subsequent atelectasis or recurrent pneumonia, pulmonary hamartomas have in rare cases been noted to bear potential for sarcomatous transformation. Common signs of malignant alteration are the rapid growth of the lesion and systemic symptoms like weight loss, weakness or fatigue. Histologically, this malignant change may not always be apparent, however macroscopic signs, like an invasion of adjacent tissue or distant metastases may be present. In some cases, a possible relationship between the presence of genomic abnormalities of 12q14 and 6q21, encoding the high mobility group A (HMGA), and the occurrence of pulmonary hamartoma has been observed. Also, incidence rates of lung cancer have been reported to be six times higher in patients with pulmonary hamartomas than in healthy subjects, making genetic predisposition to either malignant change or subsequent development of malignancy a possibility.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

There are no risk factors associated with the development of pulmonary hamartomas, nor are there defined screening guidelines, considering the mostly sporadic nature of the lesions. Considering the risk, albeit small, of malignant change and development of subsequent malignancy, patients should be advised to adhere to a schedule conservative observation in the form of periodical imaging and comparison with previous results.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients with lung lesions often first come to the attention of the primary care provider and nurse practitioner. Because there is always the possibility of malignancy, these patients should obtain a referral to an interprofessional team that includes an oncologist, thoracic surgeon, radiologist, and a pulmonologist. If observation is deemed to be the management plan, the most important facet is to ensure that the lesion is not malignant. No matter how technically skilled the radiologist is interpreting lung lesions, the definitive diagnosis is only possible with a biopsy. If observation is the chosen course, serial CT scans are recommended to ensure that the lesion is not growing.