The auscultation of an Austin Flint murmur correlates with severe aortic regurgitation. Coordinated care between the cardiologist, cardiothoracic surgeon, and an interventional cardiologist is an integral part of managing these complex patients. In patients that are candidates for replacement, surgical aortic valve replacement is the gold standard of care.[Level 1] In patients with prohibitively high STS scores, the surgeon should discuss the option for a transcatheter aortic valve approach with the patient.[Level 1] In patients that are not candidates for replacement, long-term monitoring, as well as patient education on symptom management, can help delay the need for surgery. Specialty-trained nurses in cardiology can help educate the patient on adequate medical management of symptoms, daily weight measurements, medication compliance, and compliance with routine testing to ensure patients receive optimal care. Asymptomatic patients with this disease should be screened for changes in exercise capacity and symptoms regularly. Specialty nurses can help obtain this data from patients at regularly scheduled intervals and notify the clinicians if symptoms develop. This will help optimize the timing of surgery and prevent complications.

The recovery time from an aortic valve replacement is 4 to 8 weeks.  The most important factors in recovery are nutrition and exercise. Nutritional guidance should be provided before discharge, and follow-up with a nutritionist after discharge may be beneficial in high-risk patients. When anticoagulation is appropriate, a board-certified cardiology specialty pharmacist should also provide input. Patients that are elderly or with significant comorbidities benefit from cardiac rehabilitation, which has shown to increase aerobic capacity and quality of life.