C8-T1 radiculopathies are relatively rare in comparison to peripheral ulnar nerve compression syndromes, and given that it has a similar presentation to peripheral ulnar nerve compression, the condition is frequently overlooked by diagnosticians.

The ulnar nerve provides innervation to much of the hand, including the muscles of the hypothenar eminence, the palmar and dorsal interossei, the third and fourth lumbricals, and a portion of the thenar eminence including adductor pollicis and the deep head of the flexor pollicis brevis (FPB). The median nerve alternatively enters the hand through the carpal tunnel. It innervates the remainder of the thenar eminence, including the abductor pollicis, opponens pollicis, and the remainder of the flexor pollicis brevis (FPB), as well as the first and second lumbricals. In a purely isolated ulnar nerve compressive neuropathy, these five muscles would theoretically remain unaffected, while C8-T1 radiculopathy often does manifest in weakness of these muscles via the median nerve.

In most patients, the ulnar nerve provides sensation to the ulnar half of the fourth finger, the small finger, and the hypothenar region of the hand on both the palmar and dorsal side. However, the ulnar nerve does not provide sensation to the medial forearm. Instead, sensation to the medial forearm is provided by the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve, which arises from the medial cord of the brachial plexus. Therefore sensory deficits in the medial forearm should prompt evaluation for radiculopathy or Pancoast tumors that may compress the brachial plexus. Intact sensation to the medial forearm should alternatively prompt a search for a more peripheral ulnar nerve compressive syndrome.