# Continuing Education Activity

The abdominal thrust maneuver, also known as the Heimlich maneuver, is used to treat upper airway obstructions caused by foreign bodies. This maneuver is commonly taught during basic life support and advanced cardiac life support classes but is not given as much attention as chest compressions. Although this maneuver can save lives and is generally safe to perform, serious intra-abdominal harm can ensue if this maneuver is not performed correctly. To prevent intra-abdominal damage, practitioners at all levels should be familiar with how to perform this technique safely. This activity reviews the indications and contraindications of this procedure and describes how to perform it safely. This activity highlights the role of interprofessional teamwork in improving patient outcomes.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications and contraindications for the abdominal thrust maneuver.
- Describe how to perform the abdominal thrust maneuver.
- Identify potential complications associated with the abdominal thrust maneuver.
- Explain the role of interprofessional teamwork in improving outcomes for patients with upper airway obstruction due to foreign bodies.

# Introduction

Abdominal thrusts or the Heimlich maneuver is a first-aid procedure used to treat upper airway obstruction caused by a foreign body. This skill is commonly taught during basic life support (BLS) and advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) classes, but it never receives as much attention as chest compressions and rescue breaths do. The abdominal thrust maneuver can be performed in both children and adults via different techniques.

In the 1960s, choking on food, toys, and other objects was the sixth leading cause of accidental death in the United States. Slapping individuals on the back was the main response and was frequently found to be ineffective, at times even lodging the object further down.

The Heimlich maneuver was initially introduced in 1974 by Dr. Henry Heimlich after proving his theory that the reserve of air in the lung could serve to dislodge objects from the esophagus by quick upwards thrust under the ribcage.

Today, the Heimlich maneuver is accepted and taught during BLS and ACLS for conscious adults, but backslaps are still a recommendation for infants, and chest compressions are recommended for unconscious patients. Furthermore, different techniques of the maneuver have been developed with conflicting effectiveness results.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The anatomy associated with the Heimlich maneuver mainly focuses on expelling a foreign body by standing on the rear of the patient, placing arms around, and delivering a sharp inward and upward thrust to the abdomen below the rib cage.

Physiologically, the abdominal thrust maneuver is effective due to increasing intrathoracic pressure affecting the lung/airway, stomach, and esophagus produced by diaphragmatic thrusts.

# Indications

The only accepted indication for the abdominal thrust maneuver is that of the conscious choking adult from a lodged supra-laryngeal foreign body. The universal choking sign is the main indication for the Heimlich maneuver. This sign consists of the inability to speak, breathe, or cough while holding both hands up to one's own throat.

Although initially reported to help with asthma and drowning patients, the Heimlich maneuver has not proven to help with these diagnoses.

# Contraindications

Although there are no absolute contraindications, the abdominal thrust maneuver is not recommended by the AHA for infants or unconscious patients. Also, pregnant subjects should receive management with sternal compressions, as opposed to abdominal.

# Personnel

The importance and utility of the Heimlich maneuver lie in the fact that it does not require expertise but simple training of the public.

# Preparation

Cases of choking happen in mere seconds and unexpectedly, making preparation nearly impossible. As mentioned above, the Heimlich maneuver is taught during BLS for the conscious choking adult.

# Technique or Treatment

The commonly known abdominal thrust maneuver, known as the Heimlich maneuver, is performed by a bystander on a person who appears to be choking. The bystander stands behind the subject and wraps his/her arms around the upper abdominal region, about two inches above the belly button. Making a fist with one hand and wrapping the other hand tightly over the fist and delivering five sharp midline thrusts inward and upward.

Other studies report higher effectiveness of lateral thoracic and abdominal thrusts in the generation of airway pressure as studied in pigs.

# Complications

Ever since the introduction of the Heimlich maneuver, cases of harm inflicted by the forceful displacement of the diaphragm and sudden increase in intrathoracic pressure have driven numerous studies and reviews. Although this maneuver is considered life-saving and generally safe to perform, serious intra-abdominal harm can ensue from incorrect technique and unusually vigorous application.

# Clinical Significance

The abdominal thrust maneuver impact on basic life support, both in the medical and public sector, cannot be quantified. Despite the rare instances of intraabdominal complications, the Heimlich maneuver is considered a quick and inexpensive technique that does not require medical knowledge or expertise to perform.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The Heimlich maneuver exemplifies what is achievable by involving the general population in community healthcare. BLS training is progressively a requirement for an increasing part of the community, even including high-school students.