Acute and chronic pain is a significant problem in the United States and worldwide. In the United States alone, it affects more than 100 million Americans annually. The cost of evaluating and treating pain is substantial, estimated to be over 600 billion dollars annually, including those unable to work as a direct consequence of pain syndromes.

**Pain Frequency**

Pain is among the primary reasons individuals receive federal and private disability payment support.

- Pain syndromes affect as much as 50% of the United States population at some point in their lifetime.

- For those over 21 years of age, approximately 10% have experienced pain for 3 to 12 months, and almost 50% have had pain longer than one year. Nearly half report their pain is uncontrolled.

- Over 5 million Americans are receiving long-term opioid analgesics for chronic pain. For many of those, the pain is disabling.

**The frequency of Acute and Chronic Pain is Believed to be Increasing for Several Reasons**

- The increased average age of the population

- Increased diversion of pain medications due to state and federal enforcement of illicit drugs

- Increased frequency of surgery and post-operative pain management with opioid analgesics

- Increased obesity with comorbid problems such as muscle strain and joint deterioration

- Increased treatment of pain

- The survival of military and civilians with traumatic conditions has increased with increased numbers in pain during recovery

**Frequency of Opioid-Related Concerns**

**The Frequency of Opioid Prescribing and Consumption**

- Even though the lay literature reports that opioid prescribing is on the rise, opioid analgesic prescribing is actually declining.

- Hydrocodone, methadone and fentanyl prescribing has decreased by as much as one-third since peaking in 2011.

- Before 1990, physicians rarely prescribed opioids for noncancer pain. Starting in the 1990s, physicians were encouraged to control pain as this was the "fifth vital sign." The use of opioid analgesic pain medicine increased substantially. The consensus is that overprescribing of opioid analgesics occurs, but it is still unclear in the literature where this occurs and the exact circumstances when prescriptions are inappropriate.

- There has been a drastic reduction in opioid analgesic prescribing and overdose, but it has also resulted in sometimes making it difficult for patients with legitimate pain to receive pain relief.

- Abuse in the healthcare system has resulted in increasing barriers to access; for some, increasing difficulty finding health professionals willing or able to prescribe pain medication.

- Opioid analgesic prescribing has also declined in Florida.

- Worldwide, the consumption of opioid analgesics has substantially increased over the last 20 years.

**Opioid Overdose**

- Nationally, opioid-related overdose fatalities are decreasing, peaking in 2011 and dropping since.

- In Florida, fatalities from illicit drugs have increased, whereas there has been a decrease in prescription overdose fatalities.

- Opioid analgesic fatalities often occur with co-ingestion of benzodiazepines, e.g., diazepam.

**Controlled Substance Use And Addiction/Use Disorder**

The use disorder of prescription drugs has become a common problem. Those afflicted may not fit the profile of an individual addicted to street drugs. They are often individuals with jobs and chronic pain syndromes. For multiple reasons, they may have sought self-medication to control the pain while maintaining their lifestyles. As societal views normalize using prescription drugs, access may be easier and safer than obtaining illicit drugs. Since medications may be covered under insurance, more and more people choose to figure out ways to obtain prescription drugs over the use of illicit drugs.

Prescription drug use disorder is more common in some demographic populations than others. It is a more common problem with:

- Individuals that use opioids inappropriately

- Those who regularly use opioids

- Those that use alcohol or tobacco

- Women who tend to abuse sedatives and tranquilizers

Illicit drug use is growing. In the United States, since the restrictions on prescription drug use, heroin use has increased dramatically. Heroin used to be a rare problem, but as drug enforcement agencies clamped down on prescription abuse, those addicted turned to Schedule I drugs such as heroin. Individuals may also move from abusing Schedule II prescription drugs to abusing Schedule I illicit drugs. Those with use disorder tend to follow the path of least resistance. If unable to easily obtain prescription drugs, they turn to illicit drugs or vice versa.

Often, patients are not appropriately educated on the addictive potential of controlled substances such as benzodiazepines or opioids. They are not aware of the danger when prescription renewals are easily accessible, especially if they see more than one prescriber.

Of those patients receiving treatment in an emergency department, some are actually seeking additional medication to supplement their current consumption of opioids. Studies have found that of patients prescribed opioids in an emergency setting, 5% to 10% are already consuming opioid medications from other prescribers. Many states have made this problem less prevalent by instituting statewide reporting of controlled substance prescriptions.