In the normal anatomical state, the neurosensory retina is attached to the retinal pigment epithelium. This is due to the following reasons:

- Interphotoreceptor matrix

- The cell junction between photoreceptor and retinal pigment epithelium

- The active pumping of fluid from the retina to the choroid by the retinal pigment epithelium

There are two blood-retina barriers present which prevent efflux of fluid in retinal layers: the inner barrier is due to the non-fenestrated endothelium of capillaries secured by zonula occludens, and the outer barrier is due to tight junctions between the retinal pigment epithelial cells, which prevents leakage of fluid from the choroid to the retina.

In the presence of uveitis, there is a breakdown of this blood-retina barrier due to the release of various factors in the presence of inflammation: vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), TNF-a, TGF-β, angiotensin 2, IL-1, adenosine, histamine, and glucose. Thus, there is leakage of fluid into the retinal tissue, which forms cystic spaces in the outer plexiform layer, or within all layers of the retina. Defective retinal pigment epithelium function leads to accumulation beneath the neurosensory retina.

Muller cells also maintain the structural integrity of retinal layers and metabolic hemostasis. In the uveitic state, the function is also affected, leading to the release of VEGF and other inflammatory mediators, dysfunction of potassium rectifying channels, and swelling of Muller cells that leads to cytotoxic macular edema. This is also the mechanism of macular edema after surgery as there is an increase in arachidonic acid metabolites that affects Muller cells.

The third cause is the tractional component that leads to stretching of retinal layers and subsequent ooze from the blood vessels and thus edema. Traction can be from the epiretinal membrane or vitreous traction.