Poor drainage in pediatric patients less than 18 months might be transient and might improve after a few months spontaneously, given that the patient has normal kidney function. In older patients with a split renal function of more than 40%, the renal scan should be repeated at 3, 6, and 12 months intervals. Surgery is to be performed if the function has deteriorated.

Surgical intervention is the gold standard treatment of ureteropelvic junction obstruction (UPJO) if indicated.

The indications for surgical treatment include:

- UPJO with less than 40% in the split function of the affected kidney on the diuretic renogram.

- Renal parenchymal atrophy due to severe bilateral UPJO

- Recurrent infections despite using prophylactic antibiotics

- Symptomatic obstructive UPJO, or associated with an abdominal mass

**Options of Surgery**

- Endourology

- Enodopyelotomy: This can be done in a retrograde antegrade fashion endopyelotomy by knife or laser. This procedure is reserved for patients with a history of disease recurrence after pyeloplasty and older patients with moderate hydronephrosis; however, it is associated with a high recurrence rate.

- Pyeloplasty

- Open pyeloplasty

- Dismembered pyeloplasty is the gold standard technique used by surgeons. The main advantage of this procedure is to save the crossing vessel if present.
- Non-dismembered pyeloplasty is used in case of high insertion of the ureter and no crossing vessel. However, it is inferior to dismembered pyeloplasty.


- Laparoscopic pyeloplasty

- Transperitoneal/retroperitoneal approach

- The retroperitoneal approach is safer than transperitoneal, due to a lower complication rate such as colonic injury.
- The retroperitoneal approach takes shorter operative time and hospital stay and is associated with better recovery for the intestinal function.




- Robotic-assisted pyeloplasty

- This is a feasible and effective intervention for the treatment of UPJO in challenging cases, especially in patients with irregular anatomy or recurrent UPJO after endoscopic or open surgery. This method could replace the open surgery approach as it has excellent results even in complicated cases. The surgeon should be aware of the complications associated with this approach, such as colonic injury, which has been reported in the literature.

Medical management is considered to maintain sterile urine, treating urinary tract infections, and assess renal function and the grade of hydronephrosis on a regular basis. However, UPJO cannot be revered using medical management solely.

Finally, in patients with split kidney function less than 10%, asymptomatic patients can be observed. A nephrectomy might be indicated in the case of recurrent urinary tract infection, persistent loin pain, or hematuria.