Mounting an immune response after vaccination is dependent on active immunity. Toxoid vaccines, such as the tetanus toxoid vaccine, activate the immune response similar to antigens utilizing TH2 and B cells to stimulate the production of immunoglobulins against the toxoid. One downside to this method of vaccination is that it requires multiple doses to achieve high immunogenicity. Advantages include no chance of the vaccine causing the targeted disease or spreading to those without immunity.

Inactivated and killed vaccines also create immunity through interactions with B and TH2 cells but create a much broader cohort of immunoglobulins against many antigens. Dendritic cells ingest the entire organism, either an inactivated bacteria or a killed virus, digest it, and present multiple, different antigenic fragments; this allows for the development of immunoglobulins specific to several antigens. Inactivated or killed vaccinations also require multiple doses to mount a strong response.

Polysaccharide subunit vaccines, such as the 23-polysaccharide pneumococcal vaccine, create a T-independent immune response. TH2 cells only respond to proteins, so the polysaccharide vaccines are unable to activate them. Instead, the polysaccharide molecules bind specific B-cell receptors with such high affinity they do not require T-cell activation. This process leads to the production of IgM. Without TH2 involvement, the production of IgG and memory B cells is limited. Immune responses can become strengthened by conjugating or attaching the polysaccharide vaccine to a protein. This process allows for phagocytosis by dendritic cells, the involvement of TH2 cells, and the production of IgG and memory B cells.

Live attenuated vaccines, including those for measles, mumps, and rubella, elicit their immune response through intracellular pathways. Live, altered virions can enter cells via receptor-mediated endocytosis, where they are degraded and presented by MHC-I molecules on the cell surface. Cytotoxic T cells specific to those receptors bind and promote apoptosis. Long-term immunity occurs when some of these cytotoxic T cells become memory cells. The mechanism behind the production of memory T cells is not well understood. In addition to this cytotoxic T cell response, TH4 and B cells will also create IgG and memory B cells. Live vaccines provide a defense for infected cells as well as free antigens in the bloodstream but, come with a risk of possibly contracting the targeted illness.

Our active immune system is essential for protection against infectious diseases. It is crucial to understand how this system should work so that healthcare professionals can recognize and appropriately intervene when processes go haywire. Preventative health and vaccinations would not be as effective as they are today without the study of these complex mechanisms.