Ingestion of V. cholerae can lead to colonization of the small intestine. Its flagella allow the organism to swim through mucus and arrive at the intestinal wall. There, toxigenic V. cholerae produces toxin-coregulated pilus that attaches to gangliosides receptors in the mucosal wall. Cholera toxin is produced, which ADP-ribosylates the Gs subunit of the G protein complex in the gut epithelium. This leads to constitutive action of adenylate cyclase, thereby increasing cAMP intracellularly. As a result, increased secretion of chloride, bicarbonate, sodium, and potassium is observed. The secretion of these electrolytes pulls water out of the intestinal cells osmotically, thereby causing diarrhea.

Host susceptibility is affected by previous exposure to the organism which can result in immunity, although this is dependent on the biotype and serotype of the previous organism encountered. Since it is a labile acid organism, a large inoculation dose is required to cause infection in a healthy adult. This can explain why lowered gastric acidity (as seen in cases of achlorhydria) can lower the threshold needed for the bacteria to cause infection. Interestingly, blood type O has also been associated with an increased likelihood of infection. The mechanism of this increased susceptibility to disease is not yet clear.

The use of proton pump inhibitors and antihistamines can increase the risk of infection and make the patient susceptible to more severe symptoms. The fluid losses typically occur from the duodenum, whereas the colon is insensitive to the toxin. Because the enterotoxin has a local effect and is not invasive, in most cases no neutrophils are observed in fecal specimens.