# Definition/Introduction

Discharge planning is the process of transitioning a patient from one level of care to the next. Ideally, discharge plans are individualized instructions provided to the patient as they move from the hospital to home or instructions provided to subsequent healthcare providers as they move to a longer-term care facility.

# Issues of Concern

Increased life expectancy in the general population has led to an increased incidence of people living with chronic diseases and hospitalizations. The management of chronic conditions directly correlates with a patient's quality of life.

Before releasing a patient from the hospital, it is a requirement that the discharge can be completed safely.

Institutions with high rates of readmission incur financial penalties, which include reduced or no reimbursement for readmission visits.

# Clinical Significance

Patients with multiple chronic illnesses are more likely to be hospitalized, and coordinating their care after discharge can be challenging.

Specific patient populations may require robust and meticulous discharge planning. For example, elderly patients, patients admitted for psychiatric treatment, and those who experienced major life events like myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular accidents, or major surgical procedures will require a more robust discharge plan. Such patient populations will often require additional coordination of care with rehabilitation facilities, long-term care, or home health care, as these services may increase the patient’s quality of life and reduce the rate of re-admission.

The implementation of electronic health records (EHR) has streamlined the process of discharge planning. An EHR is shown to facilitate communication between providers, and many have the ability to coordinate patient care between clinicians and facilities.

To discharge patients to their homes where they can heal and recover, it is imperative to perform an assessment of their home situation, caregiver support, and access to necessary follow-up care. By assessing their home situation, you must factor in their mobility, ease of food preparation, toileting, and other activities of daily living. In the event that the patient requires ongoing medical care that may not be available at the current facility or at home, the patient may need to be discharged from the inpatient service to a facility where this care can be provided.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Effective collaboration is the key to successful discharge planning. The discharge planning process involves an interprofessional team approach. Physicians are responsible for deciding the patient is safe for discharge, creating the discharge plan in conjunction with the rest of the team, and communicating instructions to the discharge nurse or designated discharge personnel.

The effectiveness of discharge planning is difficult to evaluate due to the complexity of the intervention and the numerous variables involved.