In the peri-surgical environment surrounding a BKA, close communication across all healthcare disciplines forming the interprofessional team is paramount. The initial workup of ischemic and infectious limb-compromising diagnoses often begins in the emergency department or local clinic, where prompt assessment, triage, and workup are critical. The emergency clinician must recognize which patients require emergent versus urgent versus planned surgical care. This is determined via the clinical picture, including vital signs and exam, and through an assessment of infectious labs, CBC, BMP, lactic acid, base deficit, blood cultures, and radiographic imaging.

Once surgical services, typically orthopedics, general surgery, or vascular surgery, are consulted, preparation may be made for the operative management of critical lower limb disease. At this point, the healthcare team includes the surgeon, the patient (who must provide informed consent for a BKA, either personally or via proxy), anesthesia providers in the operating room, operating room management and staff, and the bedside nurses either in the emergency department or on the floor. In all urgent cases, close communication between all team members is critical. For instance, a delay in an operating room is available due to inadequate anesthesia coverage can significantly affect a patient's outcome.

After BKA, floor nursing plays a significant role in managing pain, recording drain outputs, and informing the covering physicians of any change in vital signs or overall status. Surgical and hospitalist services should closely monitor the postoperative patient for the potential necessity of reoperation, vascular insufficiency at the BKA site, systemic electrolyte disturbances, sepsis, or other medical problems requiring management. Discussion may now be initiated regarding prosthetic devices and a postoperative plan, starting with devices such as a stump shrinker, limb protector, and knee immobilizer.

Finally, attention should be given to the postoperative patient's mental status, including the potential need for psychiatric evaluation and care. Every postoperative patient should have an attentive primary healthcare provider to follow up closely after hospital discharge.