Procidentia is a severe form of pelvic organ prolapse (POP) that includes herniation of the anterior, posterior, and apical vaginal compartments through the vaginal introitus. Pelvic organ prolapse can include all three compartments, such as in procidentia, or individual compartments. When the anterior vaginal compartment herniates through the vaginal introitus, it is a cystocele. When the posterior vaginal compartment is herniating through the vaginal introitus, it is a rectocele. When the apical vaginal compartment is herniating through the vaginal introitus, this area can include bowel or uterus, describing an enterocele or uterovaginal prolapse respectively.

The first recorded documentation of pelvic organ prolapse dates back to 1550 BC in the Egyptian medical papyrus of herbal knowledge, Ebers Papyrus.

Prolapse is not usually painful or life-threatening, but symptoms can impact daily activity, body image, and sexuality to the point of desperation as exemplified when a peasant woman in the 17th century took a sharp knife to her own uterine prolapse and cut what she thought was a polypoid growth from her vagina. Her bleeding eventually stopped, and reportedly she lived for many years with urinary incontinence likely from a vesicovaginal fistula.

Over the 19th and 20th centuries, improvements in surgical instrumentation, anesthesia, and antibiotics decreased the morbidity rates of performing hysterectomies. This article covers the etiology, epidemiology, differential diagnosis, and treatment options for pelvic organ prolapse.