The initial management of suspected or confirmed venomous snakebite patients is divided into pre-hospital and emergency department care.

**Pre-hospital Setting**

- Ensuring the patient is in a safe, comfortable place (away from the snake)

- Calming and reassure the patient

- Immobilization of the affected extremity with a sling if possible

- Cleansing the wound

- Monitoring for swelling or skin changes surrounding the wound

- Oral hydration with clear fluids if the patient is able to tolerate them

- Identification of the snake only if it does not put the patient or others at risk of further injury

- Rapidly evacuation of the patient to an emergency center

Do not incise the wound or attempt to suck the venom out by mouth or with commercial suction devices. Avoid applying ice to the wound or giving the patient alcoholic beverages.

**Emergency Department**

- Placement of two large-bore intravenous catheters

- Initiation of intravenous fluid (lactated Ringer's solution or normal saline)

- Rapid determination of the severity of envenomation and whether to give antivenom

- Cleaning of the snakebite wound

- Consideration of surgical consultation if compartment syndrome unresponsive to antivenom is suspected

- Monitor minimal or moderate envenomation patients for at least 12 to 24 hours

- Tetanus immunization as indicated

Envenomation severity is classified into five grades (0 to IV), with grade IV being very severe envenomation characterized by rapidly progressing swelling, bleb formation, and necrosis as well as systemic symptoms including weakness, nausea, vomiting, muscle cramping, and convulsions. Minimal envenomation (grade 0) is characterized by fang wounds without other signs of envenomation and less than one inch of surrounding erythema, without systemic signs or symptoms of envenomation. Current treatment recommendations for crotalid (pit viper) envenomation is to use antivenom for progressive swelling, moderate envenomation, or laboratory findings or coagulopathy. Dosing is largely based on the severity of symptoms at initial presentation and response to treatment. Treatment of moderate envenomation should start with at least four vials.

Minimal envenomation does not require treatment with antivenom, but these patients should be monitored for a minimum of 12 hours.

In North American there are two Crotalidae Antivenoms approved for use:

**Crotalidae Polyvalent Immune Fab Dosing**

Crotalidae Polyvalent Immune Fab is derived from 4 snake species (Western Diamondback, Eastern Diamondback, Mojave rattlesnake, and Cottonmouth) and immunized into sheep (ovine-derived). The whole immunoglobin is extracted, affinity purified, and cleaved by papain into the terminal Fab fragment of the immunoglobin. This reduces its size by about 1/3 and allows tissue penetration. However, it is cleared renally, and repeat dosing is usually necessary.

The initial controlling dose consists of 4-6 vials mixed in 250 mL normal saline (NS) administered over one hour (same number of vials for children). Initiate treatment at a rate of 10 mL/hr observing for adverse effects. If none, then increase every few minutes to achieve complete administration in one hour. Observe patients for local swelling and systemic symptoms. If there are signs of progression, then repeat with 4-6 vials over one hour.  Do not administer to try to completely normalize abnormal coagulation markers. Repeat until initial control is achieved (local swelling improves or stops, resolution of systemic signs, and resolution of clinically relevant bleeding). After achieving control, maintenance doses of 2 vials every 6 hours for 18 hours are recommended for rattlesnakes, patients with coagulopathy, and those with severe clinical envenomations. This is not usually required for moderate copperhead envenomations. However, if only a controlling dose is used, close and repeated monitoring for progression is important to decide if any additional doses are required. Remember that if recurrent swelling or coagulopathy occurs during maintenance doses, repeat the initial bolus protocol.

Repeat coagulation panel (PT/PTT/INR), fibrinogen, platelets, and hemoglobin on days 2-3 and days 5-7. Recurrent coagulopathy without clinically significant bleeding has been known to occur. Some repeat and follow parameters to normalization. Indications for repeat dosing if coagulopathy occurs between 3 and 7 days after the last dose of Crofab are:

- INR > 3.0

- PTT > 50 seconds

- Platelet Count < 25,000

- Fibrinogen < 50 ug/ml

- Multi-component coagulopathy

**Crotalidae Immune F(ab)2 Dosing**

Crotalidae Immune F(ab)2 is derived from 2 snakes species (Bothris asper and Crotalus duressis) and immunized in horses (equine-derived).  The whole immunoglobin is extracted, purified, and cleaved by pepsin digestion into a fragment with 2 binding sites for venom components - F(ab)2.  Despite being derived from horses it is less immunogenic than the original rattlesnake antivenom produced. It is larger in size than Crotalidae Polyvalent Immune Fab and persists in the serum longer with a more sustained duration of the activity, therefore usually not requiring repeat maintenance dosing.

The initial controlling dose consists of 10 vials mixed in 250 mL normal saline (NS) administered over one hour (same number of vials for children). The initial infusion rate for the first 10 minutes should start at 25 to 50 ml/hr, then if no adverse reaction occurs the remained of the 250 ml solution can be given over 1 hour.

It is best to evaluate the number fo each of the antivenoms available and not mix loading and maintenance doses between the two products.

In rare severe envenomations, a repeat dose of 10 vials of Anavip may be needed.

Crotalidae Polyvalent Immune Fab is contraindicated in a patient with a known allergy to sheep protein, in which case Crotalidae Immune F(ab)2 can be administered.

Crotalidae Immune F(ab)2 is contraindicated with a known allergy to horse protein, in which case Crotalidae Polyvalent Immune Fab should be used.