In patients with PAH (WHO group 1), treprostinil has been shown to improve the quality of life and the exercise capacity of patients who receive treatment. The effects of this drug have been the subject of study in multiple randomized controlled trials (RCT).

- TRUST trial showed that intravenous treprostinil improves the exercise capacity and dyspnea in treatment-naive patients with pulmonary artery hypertension.

- TRIUMPH trial showed that inhaled treprostinil improved the quality of life and 6MWD in patients who were symptomatic on bosentan and sildenafil.

However, patients with PAH will benefit from an interprofessional team approach to determine the optimal management. Patients with pulmonary hypertension, when treated with treprostinil, need close monitoring as adverse effects are common. Nursing will be at the front lines in this aspect since they have the first contact with the patient at each visit. They must report any suspected therapy failure or adverse effects to the prescribing physician immediately. Also, not all patients have the same response to the drug. Patients need to receive education from the pharmacist that medication compliance is critical for optimal response. Pharmacists must also perform medication reconciliation and verify dosing parameters. Only through interprofessional collaboration, as outlined above, can the patient achieve the best available results from treprostinil therapy. [Level 5]

However, the outcomes for most patients with pulmonary hypertension are guarded; to date, medications do improve the quality of life but offer no cure. The life expectancy of these patients is also markedly reduced.