Microcystic adnexal carcinoma often presents as a firm plaque on the upper lip or medial cheek. Histologically, MAC has a "paisley-tie" cellular pattern with a dense red sclerotic stroma. It must be histologically differentiated from the other common paisley-tie-pattern lesions: syringoma, morpheaform basal cell carcinoma, and desmoplastic trichoepithelioma. The MAC tumor can have both eccrine and follicular differentiation.

Superficially, it is composed of keratin horn cysts (support a follicular origin) and islands of cells with basaloid and squamous epithelium with ductal differentiation (support an eccrine origin). The deeper component of the tumor consists of nests and strands of cells embedded in the hyalinized stroma. Perineural invasion is frequently noted. Perivascular lymphoid aggregates are common in tumor stroma. Minimal atypia and mitoses are noted. Due to all these features, this tumor is thought to be derived from a pluripotent adnexal keratinocyte which can have both eccrine and follicular differentiation.

The histologic differential diagnosis includes:

- Trichoadenoma

- Syringoma

- Desmoplastic trichoepithelioma

- Morpheaform basal cell carcinoma

Superficially, MAC mimics syringoma, desmoplastic trichoepithelioma, or infiltrative BCC, making it challenging to diagnose MAC correctly without a good sample of the deep histologic architecture. And without a deeper biopsy enabling confirmation of the diagnosis early, MAC can progress and result in increased morbidity.

Immunohistochemical staining can be somewhat unreliable, with conflicting staining patterns reported in the literature.

- Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) has been reported in half the cases of MAC, which can help distinguish it from BCC and SCC. Numerous other stains have been investigated over the past decade--including Ki67, CK7, AE14, CK19, and CK20--in an attempt to accurately differentiate MAC from its histologic look likes, but none of these have so far been particularly reliable.

- Epithelial membrane antigen and cytokeratin are noted in MAC, which can, in some cases, help make the diagnosis.