When the history of the present illness is taken, it is important to understand the intrinsic and extrinsic causes of falls. Tailoring questions to the following causes can help provide an accurate assessment of a patient's fall risk.

**Intrinsic Causes**

- History of falls: Predisposes one to an increased risk of recurrent falls

- Age: Increased age is associated with decreased reaction time, particularly in step initiation and execution timing.

- Gender: In most elderly individuals, women fall more often than men

- Race: Studies show that Whites fall more often than Africans, Caribbeans, Hispanics, and South Asians.

- Drugs: If more than four medications are taken, the risk of falls is raised significantly. The use of benzodiazepines in the elderly increases the risk of night falls and hip fractures by 44%. Drugs such as antiarrhythmics, digoxin, diuretics, sedatives, and psychotropics also increase the risk of falling substantially.

- Solitary lifestyle: Living alone appears to be a risk factor in falls. Injuries and consequences can be increased if the fallen individual cannot get up from the floor.

- Medical conditions associated with an increased risk in falls include vascular diseases, arthritis, thyroid dysfunction, diabetes, depression, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Vertigo and incontinence are common in populations with falls.

- Impairment in gait and mobility: After the age of 30, strength and endurance decrease by 10% per decade. When strength, power, and endurance are decreased, a slip or trip can turn into a fall. Any lower limb disability can increase the risk of falling, and difficulty rising from a seated position in a chair is associated with an increased risk as well.

- Immobility/Deconditioning: Sedentary individuals fall more than those who are relatively active.

- Fear of falling: Among individuals with a recent fall, up to 70% report fears of falling. Of these individuals, 50% may limit or exclude physical or social activity because of this fear, thereby increasing their fall risk.

- Poor nutrition: Deficiencies in nutrients can result in low body mass index, which is associated with an increased risk of falls. Vitamin D deficiency can result in muscle weakness, osteoporosis, and impaired gait patterns.

- Cognitive disorders: Dementia, poor memory, and a score of under 26 on the Mini-Mental State Exam are all related to an increased risk of falls.

- Impaired vision: Glaucoma, cataracts, visual acuity, the field of vision, and contrast sensitivity lead to an increased risk of falls.

- Foot issues: General pain when walking, calluses, long toe deformities, ulcers, and nail deformities increase balance difficulty and risk of falling.

**Extrinsic Causes**

Environmental factors correlated with falls in the elderly population include poor lighting, uneven surfaces, and floors that are slippery. Studies show that these factors account for 30%-50% of falls in this population. Missed steps, slips, and trips occur with more frequency in elderly populations.

**Physical Exam**

The physical examination should correlate to the above-mentioned causes of falls and is tailored to the patient's history of present illness. Blood pressure and postural changes can rule out orthostatic hypotension. Examination of the feet can point to any foot deformities. A targeted neurological exam may reveal visual acuity deficits or eighth cranial nerve deficits that can point to possible vestibular issues. Manual muscle motor testing can point to generalized or lower extremity weakness.

**Screening Tools**

To date, none of the screening tools is able to accurately assess the fall risk among elderly individuals. There are many tools available. Some of which are: The Tinetti Gait and Balance Assessment Tool and The one-legged and tandem stance assessments. Neither of these tests accurately identifies fall risks and are poor predictors.

**Activities of Daily Living**

Because patients with difficulties with basic or instrumental activities of daily living (ADLs) are at increased risk of falling, assessment of the patient's functional status should be completed in detail. Assessment of basic ADLs should include bathing, toileting, dressing, feeding, grooming, and ambulation. Assessment of instrumental ADLs should include shopping, cooking, managing their own finances, telephone use, laundry, housekeeping, and transportation. Asking patients about any difficulties completing these activities can provide valuable information.