**Applications of Autoregulation Neuromonitoring**

Numerous studies in recent years have demonstrated that large differences between actual mean arterial pressure and an optimal, calculated mean arterial pressure (based on autoregulatory status) are associated with poor outcomes. These papers encompass traumatic brain injury, intracerebral hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage, ischemic stroke, adults undergoing cardiac bypass surgery, children with moyamoya vasculopathy, and neonates with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy.

Nevertheless, blood pressure management guidelines persistently recommend a single, fixed target value for many critically ill patients. For example, the American Heart Association endorses a systolic blood pressure of less than 140 mmHg after intracerebral hemorrhage; they also suggest systolic pressures under 160 mmHg before aneurysm obliteration and less than 140 mmHg after clipping or coiling of the aneurysm following subarachnoid hemorrhage. The same society recommends systolic readings of less than 180 mmHg after intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator for large-vessel occlusion ischemic stroke. These guidelines, however, do not currently consider autoregulation-guided hemodynamic management of critically ill patients. In this omission, many questions in the field of neuromonitoring are left unanswered.

Notwithstanding such unanswered questions, the science of autoregulation has come a long way since 1959, when Dr. Niels Lassen published the first consolidated review on cerebral autoregulation.

With the idea of an individualized, optimal cerebral perfusion pressure range in mind, researchers have carried out many observational studies in both adult and pediatric settings to personalize hemodynamic care. These studies now stand on the shoulders of Lassen’s autoregulatory curve, just now seeing eye-to-eye with society-endorsed guidelines that recommend impersonal, imprecise hemodynamic management of patients with cerebrovascular disease. Nonetheless, randomized controlled trials are lacking. Furthermore, the specialized equipment to monitor and determine optimal pressures is expensive and demanding, not universally available, and requires a moderate degree of training and interpretation abilities. ICM+ software licenses (University of Cambridge, UK) are required to perform this work, so data regarding effectiveness in randomized trials are needed before the widespread distribution of licenses becomes a reality.