Since the oculomotor nerve and the trochlear nerve run through the midbrain, a lesion at the midbrain could cause a palsy of either nerve. An oculomotor nerve palsy would present with the eye positioned in a downward and outward direction because the eye cannot look inward or upward. It would also present with a dilated pupil, droopy eyelid, diplopia, and no accommodation.

When presenting with midbrain pathology symptoms, it is possible to determine which part of the midbrain has been affected depending on what symptoms present, even though overlapping symptoms may be present. The syndromes got their names according to the location of the lesion within the midbrain. Parinaud syndrome, or dorsal midbrain syndrome, is one example. The syndrome is inducible by ischemic lesions, neoplasms of the corpora quadrigemina, pinealomas, hydrocephalus, cysticercosis, multiple sclerosis, and arteriovenous malformations. Its distinguishing symptom is a decreased or absent gaze upwards.Weber syndrome, or ventromedial midbrain syndrome, is caused by mesencephalic ischemia due to the occlusion of the paramedian branches of the PCA or involving a basilar perforating artery. Clinically, it presents with oculomotor nerve palsy on the same side as the lesion and weakness on the opposite side of the lesion.

Apart from lesional syndromes (for example, on a vascular basis or due to cancers), a series of pathologies of considerable medical interest concern the midbrain. The essential pathology associated with a mesencephalic alteration is Parkinson disease (PD). It is a neurodegenerative disorder with substantial morbidity and mortality and featuring a progressive disabling motor, cognitive impairment, and non-motor symptoms (NMS) such as mood disorders, sleep alterations, and pain.

Another degenerative condition is the Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome or Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), in which the neurodegeneration involves atrophy in the midbrain (substantia nigra) and other brain structures, including the subthalamic nucleus and the globus pallidus.

The reticular substance is also involved in the genesis of pathological conditions. Researchers have identified ARAS functional alterations in various sleep disorders, such as narcolepsy. Degeneration in the ARAS is also present in the early stages of PD.