Histopathology and polymerase chain reaction can be used to definitively diagnose trichodysplasia spinulosa and rule out the other clinically similar conditions listed below.

- Trichostasis spinulosa: usually asymptomatic, dilated hyperkeratotic follicles with several vellus hairs.

- Follicular hyperkeratotic spicules: predominantly associated with multiple myeloma and located on the face.

- Lichen spinulosus: follicular papules, keratin spines, favors trunk and extremities.

- Spiky follicular mycosis fungicides: erythematous, hyperkeratotic follicular papules associated with lymphoma.

- Disseminated spiked hyperkeratosis: small, non-follicular keratin spikes with a genetic association.

- Ulerythema ophryogenes (keratosis pilaris atrophicans fasciei): erythematous facial papules, scarring alopecia of eyebrows, permanent eyebrow loss.

- Follicular-based graft versus host disease: hyperkeratotic, erythematous, folliculocentric papules, occurs post-bone marrow transplant.

Other polyomaviruses of the skin: Seven different species of polyomavirus have been detected in the skin. In addition to TSPyV, Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) and human polyomaviruses 6, 7, 9, 10, and 13 have been isolated from the skin. However, only MCPyV, HPyV6, and HPyV7 have pathologic associations at this time, particularly in the immunocompromised setting. MCPyV causes Merkel cell carcinoma, classically described as a painless, rapidly growing, reddish-blue nodule. HPVy6 and HPVy7 are associated with pruritic and dyskeratotic dermatosis, described as pruritic, hyperpigmented, lichenified plaques on the torso and extremities. However, case reports are limited such that declaring a “classic” presentation is premature.