# Continuing Education Activity

Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia is a non-invasive squamous lesion and precursor of squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia.

- Identify risk factors for developing vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia.

- Identify the etiology of the vulvar lesion.

- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients with vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia.

# Introduction

Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia, also known as VIN, is a non-invasive squamous lesion and precursor of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the vulva. There is no screening test for vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia. Diagnosis of VIN is made clinically and confirmed with a biopsy.

# Etiology

There are two different classifications of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia: usual type (uVIN) that has correlations with human papillomavirus (HPV), or differentiated type (dVIN) that correlates with chronic inflammation. Classification of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia is made on morphology and does not involve HPV testing. Differentiated type correlates with a greater potential for progression to invasive squamous cell carcinoma. The likelihood of other anogenital cancers increases with the usual type of VIN.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia is higher in white women, with the highest reported incidence during the fourth decade.

# Pathophysiology

HPV is a single-stranded DNA virus. uVIN occurs when the body fails to produce an effective immune response to high-risk HPV subtypes. The viral DNA integrates into the host cells resulting in the production of oncoproteins E6 and E7 which interfere with normal cellular function.

# Histopathology

The histological feature necessary for a diagnosis of VIN is the proliferation of atypical basal cells. The five criteria for atypia are as follows: basal layer involvement, enlarged nuclei, hyperchromasia, pleomorphic cells and increased numbers of mitotic figures.

uVIN proliferation begins at the basal layer and involves partial to the full thickness of the squamous epithelium.

dVIN possesses a high oncogenic potential, and its characteristics are more subtle.

Immunohistochemistry markers can be used to differentiate between uVIN and dVIN. P53 positive and p16 negative supports dVIN while the converse supports uVIN.

# History and Physical

Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia is a clinical diagnosis.

# Evaluation

uVIN and dVIN are clinically different. uVIN is commonly multifocal and elevated seen around the introitus and on labia majora.

# Treatment / Management

The ideal treatment of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia involves the complete destruction of the lesion, improving symptoms, and preserving vulvar function.

**uVIN**

Cold knife surgery and loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP) are the treatments of choice of uVIN. However, margin status does not predict the risk of invasive or recurrent disease.

**dVIN**

Differentiated vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia is associated with lichen sclerosis and invasive disease, such as squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva.

There are no currently approved medications for the treatment of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia. However, many drugs have been attempted to avoid surgery. Cidofovir is an acyclic nucleoside analog with antiviral properties that promotes apoptosis of HPV-infected cells.

Spontaneous regression is reported in uVIN but is adversely influenced by the increasing age of the patient, clinical presentation with chronic immunosuppression and multifocal disease, and longer duration of the lesion.

HPV vaccination has reduced the incidence of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia in young women.

# Differential Diagnosis

Any observed lesion of the vulva requires a biopsy for diagnosis.  Benign lesions include common dermatopathology such as lichen simplex, lichen sclerosis, or lichen planus.  Vulvar lesions may also result from infection such as vestibulitis, candidiasis, or herpes.  Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia is a preinvasive lesion that may appear similar to these more common changes of the skin or typical malignancies such as basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, Paget disease, or melanoma.  Treatment without biopsy confirmation risks progression and delays the diagnosis of potential malignancy.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of biopsy-confirmed vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia that receives prompt treatment is uniformly good.  There is rarely progression to invasive cancer unless treatment is declined or markedly delayed.

# Complications

The most severe complication of untreated vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia is progression to invasive carcinoma.  Malignant disease of the vulva necessitates more involved radical resection that is commonly associated with perioperative morbidity such as pain, infection, or wound dehiscence as well as altered appearance.  Complications of surgical resection are dependent on location, distribution, and size of treatable lesions.  Topical therapies may result in topical irritation, burning, or ulceration.

# Pearls and Other Issues

There are two types of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia, one related to HPV infection and another related to chronic oxidative damage, uVIN, and dVIN respectfully. dVIN only accounts for a small percentage of all VIN lesions and has a higher association with invasive cancer than uVIN. The majority of uVIN are related to HPV-16 DNA; however, there are reports of other high-risk HPV subtypes in histologically confirmed uVIN.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

When the primary care provider, nurse practitioner, and internist suspect that a patient may have vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia, a referral to a gynecologist is the recommended next step. The diagnosis is made clinically with inspection and biopsy, often utilizing immunohistochemistry. Treatment depends on lesion type, location, size, and extent of disease. Lifelong surveillance is essential since resection of individual lesions does not guarantee the prevention of invasive cancer.

Diagnosis and subsequent treatment and follow-up care are best accomplished via an interprofessional, interprofessional team that includes physicians, mid-level practitioners, and nursing to achieve the best possible patient outcomes. [Level 5]