Patients who develop optic atrophy often complain of loss of vision with the segmental or diffuse blurring of the visual field. History should be directed to the suspected cause of visual impairment. Certain important points in history include the nature of the presenting illness; visual and ocular history; family, medical and surgical history; medication and social history; and hospital or institutional admission history. History of systemic infections and diseases such as diabetes and thyroid disorders, dietary disturbances, addictions to alcohol, tobacco or recreational drugs, trauma, and other factors should be elicited.

Optic neuritis is an important cause of optic atrophy. It usually occurs in individuals between 10-50 years of age. Patients typically present with sudden, the usually severe visual loss associated with pain on ocular movements. AION occurs in individuals above 50 years of age with headache and tenderness of the temporal artery. In optic atrophy due to tumors, there is an insidious history of slowly progressive visual impairment. However, hemorrhage within or due to the tumor eroding surrounding vessels would cause a sudden visual loss. Reduced color saturation or contrast sensitivity may develop before the occurrence of defective vision. Red color desaturation is seen in optic neuritis. While defects in identifying blue-yellow color may be an early sign of dominant optic atrophy, the normal linear association between stereoacuity and Snellen visual acuity could also be lost in optic atrophy.

On examining a case of optic atrophy, the observer may notice reduced visual acuity and contrast sensitivity, as well as the presence of a relative afferent pupillary defect (unless the condition is bilateral). Ophthalmoscopic findings vary from a chalky white disc in advanced cases to subtler changes in milder forms. In the latter case, the color of the optic disc in the fellow eye can be compared. Also, the surface capillary net can be examined on high magnification. In optic atrophy, the net is thin or absent, depending upon the stage of the disease. Another early finding, which may occur even before the development of optic disc color changes, is the loss of peripapillary retinal striations. These changes appear first in the superior or inferior arcades, as dark bands, called "rake defects," due to their resemblance to marks in the soil made from rakes.

Optic atrophy can be classified using different parameters. These can be clinical, pathological, and those based upon the extent and etiology.

**Clinical Types**

**Primary optic atrophy**occurs without any preceding swelling of the optic nerve head. The condition is caused by lesions in the anterior visual system extending from the RGCs to the lateral geniculate body (LGB). The etiology of primary optic atrophy varies from conditions such as pituitary or optic nerve tumors and aneurysms, hereditary- and traumatic- optic neuropathies, toxic- and nutritional-optic neuropathies, following retrobulbar neuritis to multiple sclerosis. In this condition, the axons degenerate in an orderly manner. Subsequently, the resolution is characterized by the laying down of columns of glial cells.

As mentioned earlier, in primary optic atrophy, there is an orderly degeneration of the nerve fibers. The architecture of the optic nerve head is maintained, and the disc appears pale and chalky-white due to cupping and visibility of the lamina cribrosa. Margins of the disc are sharply defined, parapapillary blood vessels attenuated, and retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thinned out. There is a loss of the overlying capillary net, a clinical feature known as Kestenbaum sign. Normally, the number of capillaries visible on the optic nerve head is 10. However, in OA, the counts may reduce to 6.

**Secondary optic atrophy**ensues optic disc swelling, such as that seen in papilledema, optic neuritis, or AION. The fibers of the optic nerve exhibit marked degeneration and profuse glial tissue proliferation. The optic nerve head architecture is lost, and disc margins become indistinct. The color of the disc is grey or dirty-grey. In this condition, the lamina cribrosa is not visible due to the filling of the cup by overlying proliferative fibroglial tissue. Hyaline bodies (corpora amylacea) or drusen may occur. Peripapillary sheathing of arteries, tortuous veins, and optociliary shunt vessels may be observed. Peripapillary retinochoroidal folds known as Paton Lines, especially temporal to the disc, may be present. Functional tests demonstrate progressive contraction of visual fields in these cases.

**Consecutive optic atrophy**is associated with diseases that affect the inner retina or its blood supply. Some of those conditions include retinitis pigmentosa, pathological myopia, following pan-retinal photocoagulation, extensive retinochoroiditis, and central retinal artery occlusion. In this type of optic atrophy, the optic nerve head is waxy pale with a normal disc margin, marked attenuation of arteries, and a normal physiologic cup. Clinical features of predisposing retino-choroidal conditions provide a clue to this type of optic atrophy.

**Glaucomatous optic atrophy**is a completely distinct entity. It is characterized by certain specific mechanical and vascular changes in the optic disc, such as an increase in the cup: disc ratio and changes in the blood vessels as well as thinning of surrounding RNFL. This type of optic atrophy will not be considered further in this article.

**Pathological Types**

**Ascending optic atrophy**is also known as Wallerian degeneration. This**anterograde**degeneration occurs as a consequence of injury to the retinal elements or ONH axons. The subsequent degeneration ascends towards the LGB and superior colliculus.

**Descending optic atrophy**or**retrograde optic atrophy**follows a higher-order lesion leading to neuronal death**upstream**in the pathway. Occipital lesions have been reported to cause bilateral optic atrophy. However, lesions beyond the LGB are unlikely to cause optic atrophy, since the second-order neurons (RGC axons) synapse in the LGB. More commonly, tumors involving the retrobulbar segments of the optic nerve or the chiasm may cause secondary optic atrophy of the descending type.

**Classification based on extent:**Optic atrophy can also be classified depending upon the extent of the neural loss.

**Partial optic atrophy**occurs when there is some preservation of neural elements, and the disc may show only mild changes. Visual acuity may range from moderate visual loss to counting fingers. Visual field analysis usually shows concentric contraction with tubular vision. In such cases, only the temporal side of the disc could be pale and known as**temporal pallor**. This appearance of the disc indicates atrophy of the papillomacular fibers. It can be seen in traumatic or nutritional optic atrophy and multiple sclerosis patients following optic neuritis. In retrobulbar optic neuritis, the optic disc appearance is normal. In suspicious cases, the disc appearance should not be regarded as normal temporal pallor seen in some healthy discs and investigations performed to rule out any pathology. Another phenomenon is**band atrophy**or**bow-tie atrophy**. It is characterized by butterfly-shaped nasal as well as temporal optic disc atrophy. It is seen in lesions of the optic chiasm or optic tract.

**Total optic atrophy**is characterized by complete loss of the nerve fibers in the optic nerve. In such cases, the optic disc is completely pale, and vision is usually no perception-to-light.