In the adult, the axons of about 1.2 million retinal ganglion cells converge at the optic disc to form the optic nerve. The optic disc is devoid of photoreceptors and therefore, forms a blind spot in each eye's visual field. At the optic disc, the optic nerve fibers exit the eye through fenestrations within the sclera, termed the lamina cribrosa. The retinal ganglion cell axons remain unmyelinated until traversing the lamina cribrosa. This is advantageous, as myelinated fibers within the retina would interfere with the path of incoming light. Accompanied by the ophthalmic artery, the optic nerve enters the bony skull through the optic foramen and travels within the optic canal to reach the middle cranial fossa. Located in the middle cranial fossa is the optic chiasm.

The optic nerves of both eyes meet at the optic chiasm and form the optic tracts. At the optic chiasm, the nasal retinal fibers from each optic nerve decussate (crossover) into the contralateral optic tract, while the temporal retinal fibers remain in the ipsilateral optic tract. The nasal retinal fibers relay sensory information from the temporal visual field of the corresponding eye. The temporal retinal fibers relay sensory information from the nasal visual field of the corresponding eye. Therefore, the optic tracts relay sensory information from the contralateral visual fields. For example, the right optic tract relays sensory information from the left visual field. Also, before forming the optic tracts, some nerve fibers from each eye will travel superiorly to synapse in the SCN located within the hypothalamus. This synaptic input influences the circadian rhythm controlled by the SCN.

The majority of the optic tract fibers synapse in the LGN of the thalamus. A small group of fibers synapses in the pretectal nucleus of the midbrain to initiate the pupillary light reflex. Another small group of fibers synapses in the superior colliculus to influence eye movements in response to environmental stimuli, such as noises and movements. Axons of the LGN form the optic radiations, also known as the geniculocalcarine tracts. The optic radiations are present bilaterally and are divided into superior and inferior divisions. The superior division (Baum’s loop) is composed of fibers from the superior retina, relaying sensory information from the inferior visual field. The inferior division (Meyer’s loop) is composed of fibers from the inferior retina, relaying sensory information from the superior visual field. Both divisions terminate in the primary visual cortex located around the calcarine sulcus of the occipital lobe. Visual information is processed in the primary visual cortex and is further analyzed through visual association areas within the CNS.

**Pupillary Light Reflex**

The optic nerve is the afferent limb for the pupillary light reflex. When light is introduced to the eye, the photoreceptors become stimulated and propagate the signal to the retinal ganglion cells. The nasal retinal fibers relay the stimulus to the contralateral pretectal nucleus, and the temporal retinal fibers relay the stimulus to the ipsilateral pretectal nucleus. The fibers of both pretectal nuclei activate neurons in the Edinger-Westphal nucleus bilaterally, initiating the efferent limb of the reflex. The axons of these preganglionic parasympathetic neurons, travel along the periphery of the oculomotor nerve (CN III) and innervate the ciliary ganglion. The postganglionic parasympathetic axons of the ciliary ganglion form the short ciliary nerves. The short ciliary nerves stimulate the sphincter pupillae to constrict causing miosis. Due to the bilateral activation of both the pretectal nuclei and Edinger-Westphal nuclei, stimulation of one eye with light will cause pupillary constriction in the ipsilateral eye (direct response), as well as pupillary constriction in the contralateral eye (consensual response).

**Accommodation Reflex**

The accommodation reflex is initiated by a transition of focus to a near object. The optic nerve is the afferent limb of this reflex. Unlike in the pupillary light reflex, an afferent stimulus is required to be relayed through the visual pathway reaching the primary visual cortex and visual association areas. The neurons in the visual association areas initiate the efferent limb of the reflex by stimulating the Edinger-Westphal nucleus and oculomotor nucleus located in the midbrain. Similar to the pupillary light reflex, pupillary constriction results from the activation of the two neuron system previously described. In addition to the stimulation of the sphincter pupillae, the short ciliary nerves also innervate the ciliary muscle. The contraction of the ciliary muscle causes the zonular fibers attached to the lens to relax. This relaxation results in the axial thickness to increase resulting in higher refractive power. Finally, the somatic fibers of the oculomotor nerves are responsible for the stimulation of the medial rectus muscle. Contraction of the medial rectus muscles will cause the adduction of the eyes, and when this coincides, convergence is achieved. Thus, the accommodation reflex is a combination of miosis, an increase in lens refractive power, and convergence.