- Cholera is an acute secretory diarrheal illness caused by the toxins of the comma-shaped gram-negative Vibrio cholerae bacterium that is known worldwide for its pandemic potential.

- Cholera affects resource-poor and developing countries where water, sanitation, and hygiene infrastructure are lacking. Historically, it has been responsible for 7 pandemics. Currently, it is endemic in 69 countries with particular severity in Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East.

- Infection begins with ingestion of food or water contaminated with V. cholerae that goes on to colonize the small intestine and produce toxins. These toxins produce changes in the electrolyte channels causing massive fluid and electrolyte losses in the form of watery diarrhea.

- The clinical presentation consists of painless severe watery diarrhea that often resembles rice water and can rapidly lead to hypovolemic shock from massive volume depletion in the first 6 hours if not treated.

- Diagnosis is clinical, but confirmation using stool cultures on special selective media is recognized as the gold standard. Given stool cultures are impractical for use in the field, the use of rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) such as dipsticks has been favored for outbreak surveillance and control.

- Oral rehydration solution (ORS) is the mainstay treatment for cholera and consists of aggressive volume repletion depending on the initial level of volume depletion and ongoing fluid losses.

- Patients with cholera must be front-loaded with fluids by replacing the initial volume deficit in the first 4 to 6 hours and as much as 350 ml/kg in the first 24 hours. Close monitoring of ongoing fluid losses is essential to preventing mortality.

- Isotonic oral fluids are favored except in severe cases and in patients who are actively vomiting when intravenous (IV) hydration may be needed.

- Other treatment modalities such as antibiotics and nutritional supplements have been proven to help with symptom duration and severity. Tetracyclines and macrolides are considered respective first- and second-line therapy.

- Although adequate water, sanitation, and hygiene infrastructure is the main preventive measure, oral cholera vaccines (OCVs) have been found to be effective, comparably inexpensive, and safe for outbreak control in high-risk endemic areas.