Cholecalciferol gets generated in the skin upon sun exposure. Light energy is absorbed in the skin via 7-dehydrocholesterol, where the ultraviolet B (UVB) converts 7-dehydrocholesterol to cholecalciferol, an inactive vitamin D molecule.

Cholecalciferol undergoes two hydroxylation processes to activate it. The initial hydroxylation occurs in the liver via the enzyme 25-hydroxylase and results in 25-hydroxycholecalciferol, which is used to assess the body’s reserve of vitamin D because it has a longer half-life compared to 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol. 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol has a half-life of 15 hours, while 25-hydroxycholecalciferol has a half-life of 15 days.

The second hydroxylation occurs in the kidneys via the enzyme 1-alpha-hydroxylase, yielding 1,25- dihydroxycholecalciferol (calcitriol), the biologically active form of vitamin D. 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol production in the kidneys undergoes regulation by parathyroid hormone (PTH), calcium, and phosphorus levels.

Calcitriol is a hydrophobic molecule requiring a carrier protein such as vitamin D-binding protein for transport in the bloodstream. Once released, calcitriol binds intracellular vitamin D receptors (VDR) that researchers discovered to not only be in the small intestines, renal tubules, and bones but also various types of cell types such as lymphocytes, pancreatic cells, keratinocytes, parathyroid, and pituitary gland cells. The activated VDR, in turn, induces transcription activation of certain genes and suppression of others.

Calcitriol is the main hormone controlling mineral homeostasis and bone function. It promotes calcium and phosphate absorption from the small intestine, increases bone mineral density by suppressing bone resorption, and increases phosphate secretion in the renal tubule.

**Hypertension**

Recent studies indicated that calcitriol regulates the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) by decreasing renin expression via a VDR-mediated mechanism.

**Type 1 Diabetes**

Experimental studies have shown significant improvement in fasting glucose and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) in type 1 diabetes rat models after vitamin D supplementation.

**Type 2 Diabetes**

The anti-inflammatory effects of vitamin D also appear in type 2 diabetes, where it was noted to significantly reduce insulin resistance by decreasing the pancreatic oxidative stress and inflammation markers. Similarly, another study indicated that vitamin D enhances leptin levels, decreasing C reactive protein, ESR, and TNF-alpha. Several clinical trials suggested that vitamin D supplementation improved glycemic control in prediabetics, patients with diabetes, and patients with gestational diabetes.

**Cardiovascular Disease**

In addition to its anti-inflammatory effect on the endothelial cells and its regulation of the RAS, vitamin D also exerts its positive effects on the cardiovascular system by its antithrombotic effects. Vitamin D was shown to downregulate the expression of prothrombotic factors such as thrombospondin, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, and tissue factors such as vascular smooth muscle cell-derived tissue factor (VSMC-derived TF) via a VDR-mediated mechanism.

**Cancer**

Vitamin D has been noted to have an inhibitory effect on angiogenesis, proliferation, and metastasis of cancer cells. In a study on the effect of vitamin D on gastric cancer cell proliferation, the research showed that vitamin D inhibited the growth of gastric cancer cells by p21 stimulation and CDK2 suppression, which are important cell cycle regulatory molecules.

**Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome**

Vitamin D deficiency is common in patients with polycystic ovarian syndrome.

Similarly, several experimental studies and RCTs have attributed the positive effects of vitamin D on other diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, multiple sclerosis, atopic dermatitis, and psoriasis its anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory functions.