Treatment often involves an interprofessional approach. Surveillance for associated complications is paramount. Lifelong annual skin screening, as well as sun protection, is warranted to detect and protect from cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Dental examinations twice per year are recommended by a dental professional to screen for oral malignancies. Yearly examinations by an otolaryngologist may be warranted to screen for squamous cell carcinoma. Gastroenterologists' involvement with screening endoscopies of the esophagus and/or colon for strictures or malignancies may be beneficial. Bone marrow examination should be performed at the time of diagnosis, and then accordingly pending biannual blood counts to screen for bone marrow failure or malignancy changes. Pulmonary function tests should be done yearly to screen for signs of fibrosis. Calcium and vitamin D levels should be regularly checked and treated accordingly to prevent osteoporosis and/or fractures. Eyes may develop complications like a corneal abrasion secondary to associated eye problems like ectropion. Thus, regular eye examinations may be beneficial. Ultrasound of the liver should be done regularly, along with annual liver function tests.

Transfusions may help intermittently alleviate bone marrow failure.  Medical treatment of bone marrow failure with stem cell transplantation is done when severe, but stem cell transplantation still has a poor long-term survival rate.

Patients should be encouraged to not participate in any carcinogenic habits or practices such as smoking, alcohol, or unprotected sun exposure. Surgical interventions should be acted upon accordingly.