In the elderly, dysphagia can be oropharyngeal, esophageal, or mixed dysphagia. The pathogenesis of oropharyngeal dysphagia includes dysfunction in the salivary production, loss of jaw strength, and gum and dentation problems, and age-related changes in the muscles of the jaw and the tongue resulting in poor mixing of food with saliva and delayed oral phase. In the pharyngeal phase, several age-related changes, including the threshold for laryngeal elevation, resulting in delayed pharyngeal swallowing. The esophageal phase could also be delayed in the elderly as a result of a loss of upper esophageal sphincter elasticity and function.

In patients with stroke, cerebral, cerebellar, or brainstem strokes can impair swallowing function. These lesions can interrupt voluntary control of mastication and bolus transport during the oropharyngeal phase. Furthermore, cortical lesions involving the precentral gyrus cause contralateral impairment of facial muscles, lips, and tongue movements. The changes are also associated with contralateral changes in pharyngeal peristalsis. Brainstem stroke lesions are less common but result in significant swallowing compromise. Patients will lose sensations of the mouth, tongue, and cheeks, as well as the timing of pharyngeal swallow, and laryngeal elevation, glottic closure, and physiological regulation of oropharyngeal swallow; this is because of involvement of cranial nerves emerging from the brainstem.

In patients with advanced head and neck cancer who are treated with chemotherapy containing cisplatin, and radiotherapy may develop severe dysphagia related to mucositis. Also, candida species colonize in the esophagus in more than 70% of these patients. The breakdown of the mucosal barrier leads to the failure of physiological mechanisms (provided via the mucosal epithelium and T cells to suppress the candida), leading to opportunistic candidiasis. Mucosal candidiasis causes oropharyngeal dysfunction and dysphagia.

In achalasia, several mechanisms are involved in the pathogenesis, including the following:

- Immune-mediated ganglionitis: Chronic ganglionitis results in the loss of the esophageal myenteric neurons. These neurons are normally responsible for the coordination of the relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter. The pathological changes result in aperistalsis and impaired relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter. Antibodies against myenteric neurons have been detected in the serum of patients with achalasia,

- It is possible that viruses such as herpes simplex virus 1 (a neurotropic virus), measles, and human papillomavirus play a role in the pathogenesis of achalasia. However, the current evidence shows that herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 triggers immune activation and subsequent esophageal enteric neuron loss in genetically susceptible individuals.

- Gene polymorphisms in the HLA class II molecules, vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor 1, KIT, and interleukin 10 play a role in the pathogenesis of achalasia.

The dysphagia in patients with systemic sclerosis is characterized by a relative sparing of somatic innervation of the proximal esophagus. The lesion usually involves impairment of innervation of the distal esophagus. The motility disorder in these patients is characterized by

- Normal proximal esophageal motility

- Reduced or absent lower esophageal sphincter pressure

- Ineffective distal esophageal body peristalsis

- In-coordinated peristalsis and lower esophageal function