Due to non-specificity of the clinical presentation and limited experience with coronary sinus thrombosis, it is usually is not very high on the list of differentials. The following possible differential diagnoses need to be considered.

- Myocardial Infarction (MI): With a presentation of chest pain, dyspnea, hypotension, tachycardia, elevated troponins and ischemic changes on the ECG, MI due to coronary artery disease is high on the differential. Coronary sinus thrombosis can also present with a similar picture. However, a coronary angiogram can differentiate both conditions and diagnose coronary sinus thrombosis. Establishing a clear cause and diagnosis is critical as management of MI due to CAD is very different from MI due to Coronary sinus thrombosis.

- Pericardial effusion and tamponade: It is very pertinent to differentiate pericardial effusion due to coronary sinus thrombosis from pericardial effusion due to multiple other causes such as cancer, infection or autoimmune disorders, as again the management differs significantly according to the etiology.

- Septic shock: Acutely decompensated cases with coronary sinus thrombosis can present with a cardiogenic shock which has to be differentiated from septic shock. Clinical parameters like the source of infection, signs of sepsis, labs, and investigations pertaining to sepsis workup should help distinguish both conditions.

- An incidental dilated coronary sinus due to thrombosis has to be differentiated from other causes of coronary sinus dilation such as congenital disorders causing an abnormally increased venous return to the coronary sinus. These include patent left SVC, anomalous hepatic and pulmonary venous drainage, and coronary arteriovenous fistulae. A dilated coronary sinus can also be seen in right heart failure with ventricular dysfunction and conditions causing increased right atrial pressure such as pulmonary hypertension.