Evaluating for oral mucositis is dependent upon clinical history and physical exam findings. Laboratory and radiography are not as helpful. If ulcers are present on the hard palate, attached gingiva, or tongue dorsum, cultures should be obtained to rule out viral or fungal etiology.

The severity of mucositis is measured on a well-defined scale, and several different scales have been developed.

**Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE)**

The CTAE was developed by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and is rated from 1 to 5. This scale is divided into two parts: a clinical exam and a functional/symptoms-based exam.

**Functional/Symptoms-Based Exam**

- Grade 1 = Asymptomatic or mild symptoms, and intervention is not indicated as well as the patient maintains a normal diet.

- Grade 2 = Moderate pain or ulcer that does not interfere with oral intake, and the patient requires a modified diet.

- Grade 3 = Severe pain which interferes with oral intake

- Grade 4 = Life-Threatening consequences that require urgent intervention

- Grade 5 = Death

**Clinical Exam**

- Grade 1 = mucosal erythema

- Grade 2 = patchy ulceration or pseudomembranes

- Grade 3 = Minor trauma resulting in bleeding, confluent ulcers, or pseudomembranes.

- Grade 4 = Tissue necrosis, spontaneous bleeding, life-threatening events.

- Grade 5 = Death.

**World Health Organization (WHO)**

The World Health Organization (WHO) scale combines both subjective and objective measures of oral mucositis.

- Grade 0 = No oral mucositis

- Grade 1 = Erythema and soreness

- Grade 2 = Ulcers, able to eat solids

- Grade 3 = Ulcers, requires a liquid diet (due to mucositis)

- Grade 4 = Ulcers, alimentation not possible (due to mucositis)

**Oral Mucositis Assessment Scale (OMAS)**

The Oral Mucositis Assessment Scale (OMAS) is an objective scale that measures erythema and ulceration at nine sites within the oral cavity.

**Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) common toxicity**criteria are used in oncology trials.