The most common presentation is abnormal uterine bleeding, which may be in the form of menorrhagia (heavy menstrual bleeding), metrorrhagia (irregular bleeding), unscheduled bleeding (patients on HRT) or postmenopausal bleeding. Some women may present with abnormal discharge, which may be foul-smelling or blood-stained. The PAP smear may show abnormal glandular cells or atypical endometrial cells, which warrant further evaluation.

Patients presenting with these symptoms with a corroborating history evoke a clinical suspicion of endometrial hyperplasia. However, the confirmation requires a histological examination of endometrial tissue, which can be obtained either by a minor outpatient procedure or by an inpatient endometrial sampling.

The investigations required are basic blood work, PAP smear, and a transvaginal ultrasound to rule out focal endometrial pathologies such as a polyp, small submucous myoma, and ovarian status.

**Role of Transvaginal Ultrasound in Premenopausal Women**

Studies have shown that in premenopausal women, there could be an overlap between normal and abnormal endometrial thickness. This suggests that the ultrasound mainly plays the role of picking up structural abnormalities. However, as per the Royal College of Obstetrician and Gynecologists (RCOG) guidance, a TVS should be performed in women with abnormal uterine bleeding, PCOS, and absent withdrawal bleed. A prospective study in women with  PCOS had shown that when the endometrial thickness was less than 7mm, no cases of endometrial hyperplasia were detected in these women. The RCOG guidance thus concluded that the presence of hyperplasia below 7mm thickness of the endometrium is unlikely.

**Role of**Transvaginal Ultrasound in Postmenopausal Women****

Postmenopausal women with bleeding per vagina are advised to have a transvaginal sonogram (TVS). If TVS shows an increased endometrial thickness or irregular endometrium, it is advisable to do an endometrial biopsy. Systematic reviews have suggested that when the endometrial thickness is less than 3 or 4 mm, the probability of endometrial cancer is reduced to less than 1%, and thus sampling is not required.

**Endometrial Sampling**

The most important criteria for any tissue sampling technique are high sensitivity and specificity towards detecting endometrial hyperplasia and exclusion of endometrial carcinoma. It is quite challenging for the pathologists to rule out completely invasive cancer in non-hysterectomy specimens. Almost 40% of the patients who are diagnosed as having precancerous endometrial hyperplasia by endometrial suction curette are found to have a postoperative concurrent endometrial malignancy in the hysterectomy specimen.

The endometrial sample can be obtained through outpatient endometrial biopsy. A systematic review evaluating the efficacy of office endometrial biopsy has reported a pooled likelihood ratio (LR) of 12.0 (95% Confidence Interval (CI) 7.8-18.6) for a positive test. On the other side, a negative office biopsy test has a likelihood ratio of 0.2 (95% CI 0.1-0.3).

The methods of obtaining tissue samples through dilatation and curettage (D&C) or suction curette have been shown to detect endometrial carcinoma with an equal rate in women with abnormal uterine bleeding.