The long-term persistence of inflammatory processes leads to cognitive deficits in depression.

Depression is the dominating cause of memory loss in the elderly population. Numerous factors contribute to the development of depressive cognitive disorders:

- Neurotransmitter hypothesis— The serotonin hypothesis formulates the basis of the treatment of major depressive disorder and the accompanying memory impairment. The serotonin 5-HT-1B receptor is proposed as a likely factor in the etiology of depressive disorders. The dysfunction of 5-HT-1B receptors is detected in the brains of depressive patients.

- Neurological pathways— Memory and learning process is linked with an intricate circuitry that involves the amygdala and its associations with the structures in the frontal and temporal lobes: The medial temporal gyrus, prefrontal, and the anterior cingulate cortex. Major depressive disorder mainly affects these brain structures (specifically the amygdala and hippocampus), leading to deficits in memory and the verbal learning process.

- Neuroendocrine factors— Researchers have found that hypercortisolemia attributed to depressive disorder is related to the degeneration of neurons in the hippocampus leading to cognitive impairment.

- Genetic factors— C9ORF72 repeats on chromosome 9 are found in patients suffering from depressive cognitive disorders. This has been earlier correlated with neurodegenerative dementia. This finding confirms the genetic association of depressive cognitive disorders.

- Psychosocial and environmental factors— the interplay of various factors such as abuse (mental and physical) in the past, poor social support, loss of a job, negative life events, and substance abuse leads to increased stress and depression by altering the hypothalamic-pituitary axis, which eventually causes cognitive impairment.