Symptoms of ovarian cancer are non-specific, and hence they can be easily missed at an early stage as the symptoms can be attributed to other possible disease processes. The symptoms often become apparent in the late stage (stage III or stage IV). The presenting symptoms include a combination of abdominal fullness, bloating, nausea, abdominal distention, early satiety, fatigue, change in bowel movements, urinary symptoms, back pain, dyspareunia, and loss of weight. The symptoms occur vaguely months before the diagnosis of ovarian cancer.

A thorough physical examination should be done, including rectovaginal examination on an empty bladder to look for pelvic and abdominal masses in clinical cases of high suspicion. In advanced cases, a palpable pelvic mass or ascites or diminished breath sounds due to the presence of pleural effusions can also be found. As a result of metastases to the umbilicus, a sister Mary Joseph nodule will rarely be seen. Sign of Lesar-Trélat, which refers to a sudden increase in the finding of seborrheic keratosis, also gives a clinical clue indicating the presence of occult cancer.

Paraneoplastic syndromes can be infrequently associated with ovarian cancer. Subacute cerebellar degeneration due to tumor-induced autoimmune reactivity against cerebellar antigens can lead to symptoms like ataxia, dysarthria, nystagmus vertigo, and diplopia. This condition commonly precedes the occurrence of the primary ovarian tumor by months or years. Trousseau's syndrome has also been associated with ovarian cancer. Increased levels of circulating parathyroid hormone-releasing protein can lead to hypercalcemia, which can manifest as altered mental status, fatigue, constipation, abdominal pain, and increased thirst and urinary frequency. Such early warning signs of various paraneoplastic syndromes should be considered well in advance to avoid the diagnosis of ovarian cancer directly at an advanced stage where the patient may not be amenable to curative therapy.