The key anatomy is for penile injection and aspiration is basic penile anatomy. This starts superficially with the skin and dartos fascia. Beneath the dartos is the superficial dorsal vein. Deep to that is Bucks fascia that surrounds 3 cylindrical structures and the dorsal neurovascular bundle. The three cylinders within the penis are a paired corpora cavernosa, which lies superiorly and laterally to the final cylinder, the corpora spongiosum. These cylinders perform vastly different functions. The corpora spongiosum surrounds and supports the urethra and prevents occlusion of the urethra during erection. The paired corpora cavernosa are the cylinders that fill with blood during erection, causing the rigidity of the penis. This rigidity is imparted by a tough covering called the tunica albuginea and the blood contained within these cylinders. The cylinders of the corpora are connected by fenestrations that allow blood to flow freely between the cylinders.

Normal erection physiology begins with sexual stimulation, which causes relaxation of smooth muscles of the corpora via parasympathetic signals causing an increase in nitric oxide (NO) to cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) ratio. The arterial system dilates, increasing blood flow into the corpora while also decreasing outflow by compression of the subtunical venous plexus and the emissary veins. When the penis reaches its erect state, the pressure is around 100 mmHg. Detumescence begins with a decrease in the NO/cGMP ratio stimulating contraction of smooth muscle, in turn triggering a decrease in pressure. This is likely due to decreased obstruction of venous outflow and reduction of the arterial flow back to baseline.

Ischemic priapism is limited oxygenated blood inflow and deoxygenated blood outflow. This is believed to originate from the dysregulation of NO/cGMP, leading to decreased venous return. There is stasis of blood within the corpora, which becomes thick and coagulates, preventing further venous outflow. This stasis causes endothelial and smooth muscle damage, further preventing venous outflow and leading to fibrosis.

Non-ischemic priapism is often secondary to trauma resulting in injury to the arterial system. This injury causes unopposed arterial flow into the corpora but unrestricted venous outflow. Treatment involves observation, embolization, or surgical ligation.