A deeper understanding of enkephalins and the related ligands, receptors, and signaling pathways that constitute the endogenous opioid system can hold the potential for significant advances in developing therapies pertinent to the wide variety of physiological processes and organ systems in which these agents play a role. Two particular areas of research that may produce improved treatments in the foreseeable future are the creation of potent analgesic therapies without the associated deleterious side effects of opioidergic agents, and the use of met-enkephalin (MENK) in the treatment of various cancers and immune-related diseases.

**Analgesia**

Postulates regarding the role of enkephalins in producing analgesia existed before their experimental discovery and successfully demonstrated soon after that in animal models.

One approach has been to chemically modify enkephalins so that they are more difficult to degrade while retaining their ligand specificity for mu and delta-opioid receptors and thus preserving their analgesic efficacy. Many iterations of this approach have been described to this end, beginning with the work of Pert et al. in 1976 with D-Ala-methionine-enkephalin administered into the cerebral ventricles of rats.

An alternative approach has been to target the peptidases themselves to amplify the effect of endogenous opioids that are already present but rapidly catabolized under normal physiological conditions. Early work demonstrated that while blocking either enkephalinase or aminopeptidase on its own produced no significant analgesia in either humans or animals, the additive effect of simultaneously blocking both peptidases did indeed produce potent analgesia. This insight prompted investigators to focus their efforts on compounds aptly dubbed dual enkephalinase inhibitors (DENKIs). Perhaps the most promising finding related to DENKIs, is that, unlike exogenous opioids, the undesirable side effects of tolerance, sedation, respiratory depression, constipation, and dependence have yet to be demonstrated. Researchers postulate this to be due in part to their hyper-local effect. Since enkephalins will only be physiologically released at needed areas, DENKIs will only enhance their impact on those areas where enkephalins are present in sufficient quantity. This model is in contrast to exogenously administered opioids, whose agonistic effects will be induced anywhere in the body where sufficient opioid receptors are present. Further factors explaining these findings are differential effects on enkephalin's ability to stimulate receptor internalization and recycling as compared to exogenous opioids, as well as producing a relatively weaker dopamine response in the brains' reward circuitry.

**Immunoregulation and Cancer Therapy**

Shortly after the experimental discovery of enkephalins, evidence for opioid receptors on the surface of various classes of immune cells began to come to light.