Non-Surgical: Diplopia can be managed with the use of prism glasses.

Surgical: Surgical correction is required in many cases, and the choice of the procedure depends on the pattern and severity of deviation. The most commonly performed procedure is inferior oblique weakening with additional vertical and horizontal rectus surgery if needed. The general principles that guide the management are mentioned below:

- Intraoperatively, forced duction testing of the obliques is done. This helps in the identification of a lax tendon, often seen in cases with congenital superior oblique palsy. Superior oblique tuck is a procedure performed in such cases.

- For cases with hypertropia (less than 15 prism dioptres) and inferior oblique overaction, weakening procedures of the inferior oblique muscle are done. They include myectomy, recession, and anterior transposition.

- If there is no overaction of the inferior oblique, the surgical options include the recession of the ipsilateral superior rectus muscle or the contralateral inferior rectus muscle.

- For deviations of more than 15 prism dioptres, inferior oblique weakening procedures can be combined with a recession of ipsilateral superior rectus or contralateral inferior rectus, or both.

- Large degrees of excyclotorsion seen in bilateral cases cannot be sufficiently corrected with inferior oblique weakening. The Harada-Ito procedure has been described for such cases and involves the splitting of the superior oblique and the advancement of the anterior half of the tendon. The advantage of this procedure is that the vertically acting posterior fibers can be left undisturbed, and only the anterior fibers that are responsible for torsion are operated upon. The Harada-Ito procedure has been classically described for objective torsion more than 10 degrees but being performed for lesser degrees of torsion by some surgeons.