As previously discussed, the slow waves initiated by ICC result in the depolarization of L-type calcium channels and, ultimately, the contraction of smooth muscle cells. ICC are both chronotropic and inotropic, regulating the strength of the contractile response. Currently, motility disorders associated with ICC dysfunction are at the forefront of research, especially concerning motility pathologies such as Hirschsprung disease, gastroparesis, and achalasia.

**Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD)**

GERD occurs when stomach acid or contents flow back into the esophagus, irritating its lining and potentially causing heartburn. Transient lower esophageal sphincter (LES) relaxation, hypotensive LES, bolus transit abnormalities, and ineffective esophageal peristalsis are strongly implicated in developing GERD. Under normal circumstances, the LES contracts after the passage of food, preventing reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus, and esophageal peristalsis clears refluxate back into the stomach. Impairment of the LES or dysfunctional esophageal motility contributes to the pathology of GERD.

**Hirschsprung Disease**

During the first 12 weeks of gestation, craniocaudal migration of neuroblasts originating from the neural crest occurs. Cells from the neural crest migrate to the colon to form the myenteric and submucosal plexus. In Hirschsprung disease (also called congenital aganglionic megacolon), there is a defect in this migration, causing the distal colon to lack the necessary nerve bodies to regulate colonic activity. In turn, the colon cannot relax or pass stool, creating an obstruction.

**Gastroparesis**

Gastroparesis is a chronic disease with three known subclasses: diabetic, idiopathic, and postsurgical gastroparesis. Clinical symptoms of gastroparesis include nausea, vomiting, early satiety, bloating, and abdominal pain. These symptoms, in conjunction with an objective finding of delayed gastric emptying and a documented absence of gastric outlet obstruction, are required for diagnosis. The pathophysiology behind gastroparesis is complex, with ongoing research; however, full-thickness gastric biopsies of individuals affected by gastroparesis found decreased ICC cells. This decrease in ICC cells leads to a lack of communication between smooth muscle cells, thus causing peristaltic dysfunction. In cases of diabetic gastroparesis, chronically elevated blood glucose levels can lead to neuronal damage, affecting the myenteric plexus and, therefore, peristalsis.

**Achalasia**

Achalasia is a motility disorder characterized by impaired relaxation of the LES and the absence of esophageal peristalsis. The classic presentation of achalasia includes dysphagia to solids and liquids and regurgitation of saliva or undigested food. Many studies suggest an imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory neurons of the myenteric plexus causes the neuronal cause of achalasia. Studies have shown that absent or abnormal inhibitory innervation in achalasia is due to extrinsic or intrinsic causes. Extrinsic causes include CNS lesions involving the dorsal motor nucleus or vagal nerve fibers, while the intrinsic loss may be due to the loss of inhibitory ganglionic cells within the myenteric plexus.

**Retroperistalsis (Vomiting)**

Pathologically, retroperistalsis is the forceful removal of gastrointestinal contents due to diverse emetic stimuli. The reversal of peristalsis typically begins in the small intestine (duodenum) and continues up through an open pyloric sphincter. Retroperistalsis occurs not only pathologically to initiate vomiting but physiologically as well. Physiologic retroperistalsis occurs at the level of the duodenum to protect GI mucosa from acidic stomach contents and at the terminal ileum to allow for maximum absorption of water and nutrients.