Several controversies persist regarding RSI. The most prominent debate centers on the use of rocuronium versus succinylcholine for standard RSI paralysis. Advocates of rocuronium cite its lack of contraindications and avoidance of depolarization in the middle of an intubation attempt. Advocates for succinylcholine argue for its rapid onset and rapid recovery time thought to be potentially helpful in a critically ill patient who is difficult to intubate and oxygenate. One of the main differences between these two types of neuromuscular-blocking drugs is in their reversal and pharmacokinetics. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitor drugs reverse non-depolarizing blockers since they are competitive antagonists at the ACh receptor site and thus, reverse by increasing in ACh. On the other hand, the depolarizing blockers are more resistant to acetylcholinesterase resulting in a prolonged effect under the administration of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. The argument is mostly academic. Both agents are excellent, and when dosed properly, result in comparable intubating conditions.

When using depolarizing neuromuscular blockade drugs, it is important to have an interprofessional team involved, including clinicians and specialists, anesthesiologists and/or nurse anesthetists, pharmacists, nurses, and EMT personnel. These individual disciplines need to function as a cohesive unit and exercise open communication so the patient can receive the necessary anesthesia and other procedures and achieve optimal outcomes. [Level 5]