A detailed history regarding the previous cerebrovascular accident with underlying risk factors e.g., uncontrolled hypertension or diabetes, medication non-compliance, personality disorders, seizures/epilepsy, migraines, balance disorders, etc. should be obtained carefully in patients with suspected post-stroke spatial neglect syndrome. Since patients do not complain of deficits due to anosognosia, symptoms are commonly reported by family members or caregivers. Reported findings include behavioral changes, inability to dress, or use the contralateral limb.

Spatial neglect can affect the following aspects of spatial processing:

- Perception-attention neglect: People with neglect having no disorder of sensation may still fail to perceive events on the neglected side.

- Motor intentional aiming deficits: Patients may exhibit difficulty in initiating or performing movements on the contralesional side even when the motor system of the neglected side is intact.

- Representational neglect: Also known as imagery neglect, first reported in an experiment by Bisiach and Luzzatti in 1978. In this scenario, the patient will have a defective left-sided internal mapping of scenes or objects.

A patient can have the following behavioral changes:

- The patient may have anosognosia, which is the unawareness of the deficit.

- Self-neglect: The patient will perform all tasks from the non-neglected right side due to unawareness of his left side of the body, e.g., asymmetric shaving, grooming, etc.

- Anosodiaphoria: this is an unconcerned behavior about the deficit due to emotional dysfunction secondarily to the involvement of the limbic system in the right cerebral hemisphere stroke. Hyperarousal is also observable in neglect disorder.

On examination, the patient may exhibit any of these following signs:

- After the stroke, the bed-ridden patients look away from the right side. The patient in a wheelchair will have difficulty in navigating towards the left side.

- Allochiria: This is an illusory visual phenomenon in which patients with neglect will only respond to stimuli presented to the right side of their body as if it had been to the other side while neglecting the left sided-stimuli. When one approaches such patients from the left side, they respond looking at the right side; a phenomenon also labeled as allesthesia.

- Somatoparaphrenia: The patient develops a delusional belief that the neglected side of the body belongs to someone else.

- The patient may have peripersonal or extrapersonal neglect, depending on the inability to reach out in the space within the reaching distance or outside that distance.