Complications following treatment variable depending on the type of chemotherapy used and if radiation or surgery were used as adjunctive measures. Common adverse events of chemotherapy include myelosuppression, neutropenic fever, and immunosuppression. Myelosuppression is treated with transfusions (red cells and platelets) or the administration of colony-stimulating factors (e.g., granulocyte colony-stimulating factor). Neutropenia leads to an increased risk of infections from bacteria, viruses, and fungi. Management is dependent on the degree of neutropenia and if febrile. Patients are also susceptible to infections like Varicella and herpes zoster. Post-exposure prophylaxis is given against varicella-zoster infection.

Multiple chemotherapeutic agents induce nausea and vomiting. Usually, anti-emetic serotonin receptor antagonists and/or benzodiazepines, among other agents, are used for treatment and prophylaxis.

Anthracycline can cause cardiotoxicity, especially doxorubicin. Dexrazoxane has shown significant benefits in anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity. Radiotherapy can also cause heart failure, but the mechanism is different from that of chemotherapy. It causes diffuse fibrosis in the interstitium of the myocardium and progressive fibrosis of pericardial layers, cells in the conduction system, and the cusps or leaflets of the valves. The left ventricular ejection fraction is usually preserved.

Vincristine can cause neurotoxicity.

Long-term fatigue is a common symptom present in two-thirds of survivors of NHL. Fatigue usually improves in the year after treatment completion, but a significant number of patients continue to experience fatigue for months or years after treatment.

The risk of developing a second malignancy is increased in long-term survivors of NHL. The risk of developing a second malignancy differs depending upon the subtype of NHL and the treatment received. The risk of developing myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia is high. The risk of developing lung cancer and cutaneous melanoma was increased among survivors of follicular lymphoma. Depending on the area of radiation, patients can develop squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck and breast cancer.

Radiation to the neck and mediastinum can result in hypothyroidism. Patients undergoing hematopoietic cell transplantation with total body irradiation (TBI) conditioning were documented to suffer from growth hormone deficiency, hypogonadism, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia.

NHL survivors are at risk for developing endocrine abnormalities such as gonadal dysfunction and hypothyroidism. Cytotoxic agents and radiation therapy can produce gonadal dysfunction in both males and females. Fertility preservation should be offered to all. Options include freezing (cryopreservation) of embryos, oocytes, and spermatozoa.

Cranial irradiation, a history of intrathecal chemotherapy, older age at the time of treatment, and hematopoietic cell transplantation can lead to neurologic and psychiatric complications like post-traumatic stress disorder. Patients treated with an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab) are at risk of developing progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML). All patients at increased risk should undergo screening for neurocognitive impairment so that appropriate occupational therapy and social services referrals may be made.