The auriculotemporal nerve contains secretomotor, somatosensory, and vasomotor fibers. This nerve originates from the sensory nucleus of the trigeminal nerve in the pons. The mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve exits the cranium out of the foramen ovale. After exiting the skull, the auriculotemporal nerve branches off where it has a superior and posterior root encircling the middle meningeal artery before joining together to form one nerve. After both roots fuse, it continues posterior to the lateral pterygoid muscle and travels between the sphenomandibular ligament and the neck of the mandible. The nerve lies posterior the parotid gland where it gives off parasympathetic and vasomotor fibers before it travels just inferior to the superior aspect of the mandibular condyle of the temporal mandibular joint.  As it continues to travel superior, past the temporal mandibular joint, in the infratemporal fossa, it shares an intimate relationship with the superficial temporal artery. Along its path, it anastomoses with the facial nerve on the and the otic ganglion.

The superior root of the auriculotemporal nerve contains general somatic afferent fibers that provide sensation to the tragus and helix of the ear, the external portion of the tympanic membrane, the posterior temporomandibular joint, and the temple. The fibers originate from the trigeminal nucleus in the pons and travel with the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve through the foramen ovale.

The inferior root of the auriculotemporal nerve contains general visceral efferent fibers that provide autonomic parasympathetic innervation to the parotid gland. The fibers originate in the inferior salivary nucleus as part of cranial nerve nine, the glossopharyngeal nerve, it passes through the tympanic canaliculus and divides into its branches, including, the lesser petrosal nerve. The lesser petrosal nerve synapses in the otic ganglion and the postsynaptic fibers pass to the auriculotemporal nerve.