**Radiation Field Design**

Target delineation is a crucial skill in creating radiation fields. Traditionally, bony anatomical landmarks were utilized to create “ports,” resulting in large volumes of normal tissue radiated to target the high-risk areas within. This limited the maximum doses achievable with acceptable toxicity. Since many histologies require high doses of radiation for effective cell kill, this approach reduced radiation’s potential for a cancer cure. Over time, however, the ability to deliver more conformal treatments has dramatically improved, with the advent of CT-based target delineation, dynamic multi-leaf collimators that can reshape the field while radiation is delivered from multiple angles, and computer-generated inverse radiation planning (intensity-modulated radiation therapy [IMRT]) to create complex radiation dose distributions that target the tumor while sparing normal tissue.

The margin for error is now typically on the order of millimeters, allowing providers to drastically reduce the normal tissue volume radiated. But to take full advantage of modern machine capabilities, the prescribing radiation oncologist must be able to accurately delineate the gross disease and predict pathways of spread. Therefore, it is critical to use clinical and diagnostic information, along with the planning images which are CT-based. Conceptually, a visible tumor is delineated as the gross tumor volume or GTV. A CTV or clinical target volume is then generated to target areas at risk for microscopic spread, typically with a geometric expansion which is then anatomically modified to respect local boundaries to spread. For example, a primary tumor (GTV) in the lung with spiculated borders may have a surrounding area of about 1 cm at risk for microscopic spread (CTV) but will not spread outside the parenchyma. Therefore a 1 cm expansion is drawn from the gross disease in all directions, but carved off the chest wall or bone. In radiation sites such as the lung with expected internal motion affecting the position of the target, an ITV or internal target volume is generated, encompassing the extent of that internal motion as identified on 4-dimensional CT, ensuring target coverage at all times during treatment delivery, even while it is moving. Finally, a planning target volume or PTV is added to account for expected uncertainties in a daily setup, typically between 5 to 10 mm depending on the institution and type of immobilization.

Given small margins for error, good immobilization is the foundation of quality radiation therapy. Great care is taken in the patient’s initial planning stages to ensure that the treatment position will be reproducible daily. A combination of small, permanent tattoos as well as semi-permanent markers or paint is used to help align the patient accurately every day. Some form of position verification is utilized for each course: at least once every five fractions, but ideally performed daily for targets expected to have a significant internal variation or treated with a high degree of conformality. Image verification may be bone or soft-tissue-based.

**Logistics of Radiation Therapy**

Fractionating radiation therapy means that a treatment course usually takes several weeks, but course length can be modified based on patient and disease requirements. Palliative regimens typically run anywhere from 1 to 10 fractions, with the choice depending on the type of tumor and goal of treatment, as well as logistics such as difficulty with travel for daily sessions. On the other hand, curative courses of radiation are more standardized and typically take 6 to 8 weeks. Of note, however, hypofractionation (short course of high-dose radiation) is becoming an increasingly common technique where the goal of radiation is the ablation of a small area of targeted tissue rather than differential cell death within the target. This strategy is used to treat small targets with rapid dose falloff, sparing nearby critical structures. Examples of this strategy include stereotactic body radiotherapy for lung cancer (usually 3 to 5 treatments) and stereotactic radiosurgery for brain metastases (one fraction).