**Periapical Cyst**

Histologically, a periapical cyst has one to two thin cell layers of nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium associated with inflamed fibrous connective tissue and inflammatory infiltrates. The luminal epithelium will appear “looped and arcaded” due to the inflammatory hyperplasia.

**Residual Cyst**

Residual cysts are histologically identical to periapical cysts.

**Paradental Cyst**

Histologically, the paradental cysts are indistinguishable from periapical cysts; however, they are located pericoronally instead of periapically.

**Dentigerous Cyst**

Histologically, dentigerous cysts have nonkeratinized-stratified squamous epithelium with sometimes elongated interconnecting rete ridges. Dentigerous cysts can also demonstrate mucous, ciliated, and sometimes sebaceous cells.

**Eruption Cyst**

Histologically, an eruption cyst is similar to a dentigerous cyst.

**Lateral Periodontal Cyst**

Histologically, lateral periodontal cysts have three to eight cell layers of nonkeratinized squamous or cuboidal luminal epithelium that often contains some focal thickening (swirls) with clear cells, which contain glycogen.

**Odontogenic Keratocyst**

Histologically, odontogenic keratocysts (OKC) have six to ten cell layers stratified squamous epithelium with a distinct wavy or corrugated parakeratinized layer. The basal cells are cuboidal to columnar and are palisaded and hyperchromatic.

**Orthokeratinizing Odontogenic Cyst**

Histologically, orthokeratinizing odontogenic cysts have a varied thickness of orthokeratinized-stratified squamous epithelium. The cyst lacks the palisaded or hyperchromatic basal layer.

**Glandular Odontogenic Cyst**

Histologically, glandular odontogenic cysts show varied thicknesses of squamous epithelium lined with hobnail cells or surface eosinophilic cuboidal cells. Commonly, epithelial spheres or plaque-like thickenings are observed within the cyst wall. Glandular odontogenic cysts often contain mucus goblet cells, respiratory epithelium, or duct-like structures.