# Introduction

The autonomic nervous system is a component of the peripheral nervous system that regulates involuntary physiologic processes including heart rate, blood pressure, respiration, digestion, and sexual arousal. It contains three anatomically distinct divisions: sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric.

The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) contain both afferent and efferent fibers that provide sensory input and motor output, respectively, to the central nervous system (CNS). Generally, the SNS and PNS motor pathways consist of a two-neuron series: a preganglionic neuron with a cell body in the CNS and a postganglionic neuron with a cell body in the periphery that innervates target tissues. The enteric nervous system (ENS) is an extensive, web-like structure that is capable of function independently of the remainder of the nervous system.

Activation of the SNS leads to a state of overall elevated activity and attention: the “fight or flight” response. In this process, blood pressure and heart rate increase, glycogenolysis ensues, gastrointestinal peristalsis ceases, etc.

Presynaptic neurons of both the SNS and PNS utilize acetylcholine (ACh) as their neurotransmitter. Postsynaptic sympathetic neurons generally produce norepinephrine (NE) as their effector transmitter to act upon target tissues, while postsynaptic parasympathetic neurons use ACh throughout.

# Structure and Function

**Sympathetic Nervous System**

Sympathetic neurons have cell bodies located in the intermediolateral columns, or lateral horns, of the spinal cord. The presynaptic fibers exit the spinal cord through anterior roots and enter the anterior rami of T1-L2 spinal nerves and onto the sympathetic trunks via white rami communicantes. From here, the fibers may ascend or descend the sympathetic trunk to a superior or inferior paravertebral ganglion, respectively, pass to adjacent anterior spinal nerve rami via gray rami communicantes, or cross through the trunk without synapsing and continue through an abdominopelvic splanchnic nerve to reach prevertebral ganglia. Because of the central location of the sympathetic ganglia, presynaptic fibers tend to be shorter than their postsynaptic counterparts.

Paravertebral ganglia exist as nodules throughout the sympathetic trunk, adjacent to the spinal column, where pre- and postganglionic neurons synapse. While the numbers may vary by individual, generally, there are three cervical, 12 thoracic, four lumbar, and five sacral ganglia. Of these, only the cervical have names of superior, middle, and inferior cervical ganglia. The inferior cervical ganglion may fuse with the first thoracic ganglion to form the stellate ganglion.

All nerves distal to the paravertebral ganglia are splanchnic nerves. These convey afferent and efferent fibers between the CNS and the viscera. Cardiopulmonary splanchnic nerves carry the postsynaptic fibers destined for the thoracic cavity.

Nerves that will innervate the abdominal and pelvic viscera pass through the paravertebral without synapsing, becoming abdominopelvic splanchnic nerves. These nerves include the greater, lesser, least, and lumbar splanchnic nerves. The presynaptic nerves finally synapse in prevertebral ganglia that are closer to their target organ. Prevertebral ganglia are part of the nervous plexuses that surround the branches of the aorta. These include the celiac, aorticorenal, and superior and inferior mesenteric ganglia. The celiac ganglion receives input from the greater splanchnic nerve, the aorticorenal from the lesser and least splanchnic nerves, and the superior and inferior mesenteric from the least and lumbar splanchnic nerves. The celiac ganglion innervates organs derived from the foregut: distal esophagus, stomach, proximal duodenum, pancreas, liver, biliary system, spleen, and adrenal glands. The superior mesenteric ganglion innervates the derivatives of the midgut: distal duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, appendix, ascending colon, and proximal transverse colon. Lastly, the inferior mesenteric ganglion provides sympathetic innervation to the structures developed from the hindgut: distal transverse, descending, and sigmoid colon; rectum and upper anal canal; as well as the bladder, external genitalia, and gonads.

The two-neuron general rule for SNS and PNS circuits has several notable exceptions. Sympathetic and parasympathetic postganglionic neurons that synapse onto the ENS are functionally part of a three-or-more neuron chain. The presynaptic sympathetic fibers that are destined for the adrenal medulla pass through the celiac ganglia and synapse directly onto chromaffin cells. These unique cells function as postganglionic fibers that secrete epinephrine directly into the venous system.

Postganglionic sympathetic neurons release NE that acts on adrenergic receptors in the target tissue. The subtype of the receptor, alpha-1, alpha-2, beta-1, beta-2, or beta-3, and the tissues in which they express influences the affinity of NE for the receptor.

As stated, the SNS enables the body to handle stressors via the “fight-or-flight” response. This reaction primarily regulates blood vessels. Vessels are tonically innervated, and in most cases, an increase in sympathetic signals leads to vasoconstriction and the opposite of vasodilation. The exceptions include coronary vessels and those that supply the skeletal muscles and external genitalia, for which the opposite reaction occurs.

The SNS is constantly active, even in non-stressful situations. In addition to the aforementioned tonic stimulation of blood vessels, the SNS is active during the normal respiratory cycle. Sympathetic activation complements the PNS by acting during inspiration to dilate the airways allowing for an appropriate inflow of air.

Additionally, the SNS regulates immunity through the innervation of immune organs such as the spleen, thymus, and lymph nodes.

The majority of postganglionic sympathetic neurons are noradrenergic, and also release one or more peptides such as neuropeptide Y or somatostatin. NE/neuropeptide Y neurons innervate blood vessels of the heart, thus regulating blood flow,

Peptides also have associations with cholinergic sympathetic postganglionic neurons. These neurons are most commonly found innervating sweat glands and precapillary resistance vessels in skeletal muscle and produce vasoactive intestinal polypeptide along with ACh. Calcitonin gene-related peptide, a potent vasodilator, has also been discovered in paravertebral sympathetic neurons.

**Parasympathetic Nervous System**

Parasympathetic fibers exit the CNS via cranial nerves (CN) III, VII, IX, and X, as well as through the S2-4 nerve roots. There are four pairs of parasympathetic ganglia, and they are all located in the head. CN III, via the ciliary ganglion, innervates the iris and ciliary muscles of the eye. CN VII innervates the lacrimal, nasal, palatine, and pharyngeal glands via the pterygopalatine ganglion, as well as the sublingual and submandibular glands via the submandibular ganglion. CN IX innervates the parotid glands via the otic ganglion.****Every other presynaptic parasympathetic fiber synapses in a ganglion near or on the wall of the target tissue; this leads to the presynaptic fibers being significantly longer than the postsynaptic. The location of these ganglia gives the PNS its name: “para-” means adjacent to, hence, “parasympathetic.”

The vagus nerve, CN X, makes up about 75% of the PNS and provides parasympathetic input to most of the thoracic and abdominal viscera, with the sacral parasympathetic fibers innervating the descending and sigmoid colon and rectum.  The vagus nerve has four cell bodies in the medulla oblongata. These include the following

- Dorsal nucleus: provides parasympathetic output to the viscera

- Nucleus ambiguus: produces motor fibers and preganglionic neurons that innervate the heart

- Nucleus solitarius: receives afferents of taste sensation and that from viscera, and lastly

- Spinal trigeminal nucleus: receives information of touch, pain, and temperature of the outer ear, the mucosa of the larynx, and part of the dura

Additionally, the vagus nerve conducts sensory information from baroreceptors of the carotid sinus and the aortic arch to the medulla.

As mentioned in the introduction, the vagus nerve is responsible for the “rest and digest” processes. The vagus nerve promotes cardiac relaxation in several aspects of function. It decreases contractility in the atria and less so in the ventricles. Primarily, it reduces conduction speed through the atrioventricular node. It is by this mechanism that carotid sinus massage acts to limit reentry in Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.

Due to the expansive nature of the vagus nerve, it has been described as an ideal “early warning system” for foreign invaders as well as for monitoring the body’s recovery. Up to 80% of vagal fibers are sensory and innervate nearly all major organs. Parasympathetic ganglia have been found to express receptors for interleukin-1, a key cytokine in the inflammatory immune response.

Postganglionic parasympathetic neurons release ACh that acts on muscarinic and nicotinic receptors, each with various subunits: M1, M2, and M3, and N1 and N2, with “M” and “N” standing for muscarine and nicotine, respectively.

**Enteric Nervous System (ENS)**

The ENS is composed of two ganglionated plexuses: the myenteric (Auerbach) and the submucosal (Meissner). The myenteric plexus sits in between the longitudinal and circular smooth muscle of the GI tract, while the submucosal plexus is present within the submucosa. The ENS is self-contained, functioning through local reflex activity, but often receives input from, and provides feedback to, the SNS and PNS. The ENS may receive input from postganglionic sympathetic neurons or preganglionic parasympathetic neurons.

The submucosal plexus governs the movement of water and electrolytes across the intestinal wall, while the myenteric plexus coordinates the contractility of the circular and longitudinal muscle cells of the gut to produce peristalsis.

Motility is produced in the ENS through a reflex circuit involving the circular and longitudinal muscles. Nicotinic synapses between interneurons mediate the reflex circuits.

The ENS maintains several similarities to the CNS. As in the CNS, enteric neurons can be bipolar, pseudounipolar, and multipolar, between which neuromodulation via excitatory and inhibitory communication.

While much of this discussion has focused on the efferent functions of the ANS, the afferent fibers are responsible for numerous reflex activities that regulate everything from heart rate to the immune system. Feedback from the ANS is usually processed at a subconscious level to produce reflex actions in the visceral or somatic portions of the body. The conscious sensation of the viscera is often interpreted as diffuse pain or cramps that may correlate with hunger, fullness, or nausea. These sensations most commonly result from sudden distention/contractions, chemical irritants, or pathological conditions such as ischemia.

# Embryology

The peripheral nervous system derives from neural crest cells. The neural crest is divided axially into the cranial, vagal, truncal, and lumbosacral neural crest cells. Truncal neural crest cells contribute to the dorsal root of the spinal cord and the sympathetic ganglia. The parasympathetic innervation of the heart forms from the vagal neural crest.

The ENS originates from the vagal neural crest with cells that migrate in a rostral-to-caudal pattern through the intestinal wall, forming a network of glia and neurons of various subtypes.

# Surgical Considerations

Horner syndrome is a mild, rare condition often presenting with unilateral ptosis, miotic, but a reactive pupil, and facial anhidrosis secondary to sympathetic nerve damage in the oculosympathetic pathway.

Hyperhidrosis is a common disease characterized by excessive sweating, primarily of the face, palms, soles, and/or axilla. While the cause of primary hyperhidrosis is not fully understood, it has been attributed to increased cholinergic stimulation. Treatment can be either clinical or surgical.

# Clinical Significance

Due to the extensive nature of the autonomic nervous system, it can be affected by a wide range of conditions. Some of these include

- Inherited

- Amyloidosis
- Fabry disease
- Hereditary sensory autonomic neuropathy
- Porphyrias

- Acquired

- 
              
- Diabetes mellitus
              
              
- Uremic neuropathy/chronic liver diseases
              
              
- Vitamin B12 deficiency
              
              
- Toxin/drug-induced: alcohol, amiodarone, chemotherapy
              
              
- Infections: Botulism, Chagas disease, HIV, leprosy, Lyme disease, tetanus
              
              
- Autoimmune: Guillain-Barre, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, Sjogren, systemic lupus erythematosus
              
              
- Neurological: multiple system atrophy/Shy-Drager syndrome, Parkinson disease, Lewy body dementia
              
              
- Neoplasia: Brain tumors, paraneoplastic syndromes

Likewise, autonomic neuropathy can present in nearly any system. Orthostatic hypotension is the most common autonomic dysautonomia, but numerous other, less understood, findings may present

- Cardiovascular

- 
              
- Fixed heart rate
              
              
- Postural hypotension
              
              
- Resting tachycardia

- Gastrointestinal

- 
              
- Dysphagia
              
              
- Gastroparesis; nausea, vomiting, abdominal fullness
              
              
- Constipation

- Genitourinary

- 
              
- Bladder atony

- Pupillary

- 
              
- Absent/delayed light reflexes
              
              
- Decreased pupil size

- Sexual

- 
              
- Erectile dysfunction
              
              
- Retrograde ejaculation

- Sudomotor

- 
              
- Anhidrosis
              
              
- Gustatory sweating

- Vasomotor

- 
              
- Cold extremities (due to loss of vasomotor responses)
              
              
- Edema (due to loss of vasomotor tone and increased vascular permeability)

The most prevalent symptoms of orthostatic hypotension are lightheadedness, tunnel vision, and discomfort in the head, neck, or chest. It may present concomitantly with supine hypertension due to increased peripheral resistance, which induces natriuresis, exacerbating orthostatic hypotension. There are numerous other, more benign stimuli that may either lower blood pressure (standing, food, Valsalva, dehydration, exercise, hyperventilation, etc.) or raise blood pressure (lying supine, water ingestion, coffee, head-down tilt, hypoventilation, etc.).

Orthostatic hypotension evaluation is commonly done through orthostatic testing via repeated blood pressure and heart rate readings in supine and standing positions, but also through the use of the tilt-table test. However, the advantage of this latter test is minimal over the orthostatic test, with the main benefit being safety and convenience to the patient.

Patients with dysautonomia are prone to hypotension during anesthesia

The sympathetic nervous system is well known to play a role in nociception. There are suggestions that the ANS has a regulatory inhibitory effect on pain, the loss of which creates a positive feedback circuit leading to hyperexcitability of nociceptive nerve fibers. The fact that the effect of sympathetic blocks often persists beyond the duration of the anesthetic agents administered supports this hypothesis.

Most conditions related to the ENS are congenital in origin and present during early childhood.