During the 3rd week of embryogenesis, the blastocyst is reorganized into a 3 layer structure, a process known as gastrulation. The layers are the endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm. The notochord (a transient embryonic structure just below the ectoderm which later becomes the nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral disk in adults) induces the overlying ectoderm to differentiate into the neural plate. The neural plate then gives rise to the neural tube and neural crest cells. The neural tube gives rise to 3 vesicles, the prosencephalon, mesencephalon, and telencephalon, which will ultimately develop into the brain. The prosencephalon gives rise to the telencephalon (which develops into the cerebral hemispheres and lateral ventricles) and the diencephalon (which develops into the thalamus, hypothalamus, and the third ventricle). The mesencephalon develops into the midbrain and aqueduct of Sylvius. The telencephalon gives rise to the metencephalon (which develops into the pons, cerebellum and the upper part of the fourth ventricle) and the myelencephalon (which develops into the medulla and lower part of the fourth ventricle). It seems that the cerebellar hemispheres develop independently from the cerebellar vermis. At weeks 7-9, the rhombic lip (the posterior part of the developing metencephalon) fuses with the midbrain and the developing choroid plexus to form the cerebellar hemispheres. The cerebellar vermis develops after the cerebellar hemispheres from a cluster of cells near the cerebral aqueduct. The developing cerebellar hemispheres undergo mechanical stress (eg. rotation, shear stress) that lead to the development of fissures found on the surface of the mature cerebellar hemispheres.