**External ear:**

A few studies exist on epidemiological factors of anotia and microtia. A recent study in Japan found that approximately 60% of cases are male, and 85% are unilateral. Unilateral microtia presents in 1 per 10000 patients.

There are many syndromes associated with these outer ear malformations. Arguably, the external ear malformations lead to the most overall distress because of the cosmetic appearance. The most well known is Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS). This syndrome consists of disproportionate ears bilaterally that may present as rotated, and occur in 77% of patients with TCS. Along with external ear malformation, there is mandibular hypoplasia. These malformations occur together because both develop embryonically from the first and second branchial arches. Recent studies have shown that the ear malformations consist of roughly 50% decrease in ear volume, approximately 19% decrease in ear length, and about 28% decrease in ear width. Naturally, these external anomalies lead to a weakened self-confidence in these patients and result in problems with communication.

**Middle ear:**

Cholesteatomas are the primary defect of the middle ear. Although these can be acquired, there are congenital cholesteatomas as well. Current theories include that they are the remaining remnants of embryonic epithelial tissue. These malformations are more common in males. The age of diagnosis is lower in congenital than in acquired cholesteatomas. Many patients do not have chief auditory complaints but receive a referral from the pediatrician due to the presence of a white mass behind the tympanic membrane.

**Inner ear:**

About 20% of congenital sensorineural hearing loss is due to inner ear malformations. Cochlear implants are the treatment of choice but have been found to have variable clinical results.