**Latent Tuberculosis**

2020 LTBI treatment guidelines include the NTCA- and CDC-recommended treatment regimens that comprise three preferred rifamycin-based regimens and two alternative monotherapy regimens with daily isoniazid. These are only recommended for persons infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis that is presumed to be susceptible to isoniazid or rifampin. A regimen of 3 months of once-weekly isoniazid plus rifapentine is a preferred regimen that is strongly recommended for children aged more than 2 years and adults. Another option is 4 months of daily rifampin for HIV-negative adults and children of all ages. Three months of daily isoniazid plus rifampin is a preferred treatment that is conditionally recommended for adults and children of all ages and for patients with HIV. Regimens of 6 or 9 months of daily isoniazid are alternative recommended regimens.

**Treatment of Active Infection**

Treatment of confirmed TB requires a combination of drugs. Combination therapy is always indicated, and monotherapy should never be used for tuberculosis. The  most common regimen for TB includes the following anti-TB medications:

**First-Line Medications, Group 1
**

- Isoniazid -                                                                                                                                                                                                Adults (maximum): 5 mg/kg (300 mg) daily; 15 mg/kg (900 mg) once, twice, or three times weekly.Children (maximum): 10-15 mg/kg (300 mg) daily; 20--30 mg/kg (900 mg) twice weekly (3).Preparations. Tablets (50 mg, 100 mg, 300 mg); syrup (50 mg/5 ml); aqueous solution (100 mg/ml) for IV or IM injection.

- Rifampicin -                                                                                                                                                                                        Adults (maximum): 10 mg/kg (600 mg) once daily, twice weekly, or three times weekly.Children (maximum): 10-20 mg/kg (600 mg) once daily or twice weekly.Preparations. Capsules (150 mg, 300 mg)

- Rifabutin-                                                                                                                                                                                           Adults (maximum): 5 mg/kg (300 mg) daily, twice, or three times weekly. When rifabutin is used with efavirenz the dose of rifabutin should be increased to 450--600 mg either daily or intermittently.Children (maximum): Appropriate dosing for children is unknown.                                                                                               Preparations: Capsules (150 mg) for oral administration.

- RIfapentine -                                                                                                                                                                                      Adults (maximum): 10 mg/kg (600 mg), once weekly (continuation phase of treatment)Children: The drug is not approved for use in children.Preparation. Tablet (150 mg, film-coated).

- Pyrazinamide -                                                                                                                                                                                    Adults: 20-25 mg/kg per day.                                                                                                                                                          Children (maximum): 15-30 mg/kg (2.0 g) daily; 50 mg/kg twice weekly (2.0 g).Preparations. Tablets (500 mg).

- Ethambutol -                                                                                                                                                                                    Adults: 15-20 mg/kg per day: Children (maximum): 15-20 mg/kg per day (2.5 g); 50 mg/kg twice weekly (2.5 g). The drug can be used safely in older children but should be used with caution in children in whom visual acuity cannot be monitored (generally less than 5 years of age) (66). In younger children, EMB can be used if there is a concern with resistance to INH or RIF.Preparations. Tablets (100 mg, 400 mg) for oral administration.

Isoniazid and Rifampicin follow a 4-drug regimen (usually including Isoniazid, Rifampicin, Ethambutol, and Pyrazinamide) for 2 months or six months. Vitamin B6 is always given with Isoniazid to prevent neural damage (neuropathies).

Several other antimicrobials are effective against tuberculosis including the following categories:

**Second-Line Anti-tuberculosis Drugs, Group 2**

Injectables aminoglycosides and injectable polypeptides

Injectable aminoglycosides

- Amikacin

- Kanamycin

- Streptomycin

Injectable polypeptides

- Capreomycin

- Viomycin

**Second**-**Line Anti-Tuberculosis Drugs, Group 3, Oral and Injectable Fluoroquinolones**

Fluoroquinolones

- Levofloxacin

- Moxifloxacin

- Ofloxacin

- Gatifloxacin

**Second-Line Anti-tuberculosis Drugs, Group 4**

- Para-aminosalicylic acid

- Cycloserine

- Terizidone

- Ethionamide

- Prothionamide

- Thioacetazone

- Linezolid

**Third-Line Anti-Tuberculosis Drugs, Group 5**

These are medications with variable but unproven efficacy against TB. They are used for total drug-resistant TB as drugs of last resort.

- Clofazimine

- Linezolid

- Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid

- Imipenem/cilastatin

- Clarithromycin

**MDR-TB, XDR-TB**

Multi-drug resistant TB is becoming increasingly common.

The combination of first-line and second-line medications is used at high doses to treat this condition.

**Bedaquiline**

On December 28, 2012, the United States Food and Drug Administration Agency (FDA), approved Bedaquiline as a drug for treating MDR-TB. This is the first FDA approval for an anti-TB medication in 40 years. While showing remarkable promise in drug-resistant tuberculosis, cost remains a big obstacle to delivering this drug to the people most affected by MDR-TB.

**Clinical and Laboratory Monitoring**

Liver function test is required for all patients taking isoniazid. Other monitoring in TB includes monitoring for retinopathies for patients on ethambutol.