Metformin is a biguanide drug that reduces blood glucose levels by decreasing glucose production in the liver, decreasing intestinal absorption, and increasing insulin sensitivity. Metformin decreases both basal and postprandial blood glucose levels. In PCOS, Metformin decreases insulin levels, which then decreases luteinizing hormone and androgen levels. Thus acting to normalize the menstruation cycle. It is important to advise premenopausal women of the increased potential for pregnancy when taking metformin.

In gestational diabetes, metformin is recommended as an alternative to insulin. Hyperglycemia is associated with congenital malformations. Therefore, metformin works to decrease blood glucose during pregnancy. Per Facts and Comparisons, metformin was in the class B pregnancy category under the old FDA system. It crosses the placenta and is present in breast milk.

Metformin is considered weight neutral with the potential for modest weight loss. It is also unlikely to cause hypoglycemia and may be potentially cardioprotective.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- Bioavailability: 50 to 60% for metformin hydrochloride 500 mg tablet based on fasted conditions

- Food effect: Decrease extent of absorption and delays absorption (Cmax 40% lower, AUC 25% lower, Tmax extend by 35 minutes for fed vs. fasted)

- The volume of distribution: 654 ± 358 L for 850 mg strength

- Plasma protein binding: Negligible

- Steady-state plasma concentration: within 24 to 48 hours

- Elimination: Excreted unchanged in the urine (no hepatic metabolism or biliary excretion)

- Elimination half-life: approximately 6.2 hours