On gross examination, the abnormal columnar epithelium is described classically as salmon-colored with a velvet-like texture, in contrast to the pale and glossy squamous epithelium of the distal esophagus. Based on the endoscopic appearance, Barrett's esophagus can be classified as long-segment (the metaplastic segment extends at least 3 cm above the esophagogastric junction) or short-segment (when it is limited to less than 3 cm of the distal esophagus).

Histologically, intestinal metaplasia with goblet cells is pathognomonic for Barrett's esophagus and carries pre-malignant potential. Some experts have suggested that gastric cardia type epithelium above the esophagogastric junction is evidence of metaplasia with malignant potential. This observation remains to be proven.

By accruing genetic mutations, Barrett's cells become dysplastic (also called intraepithelial neoplasia) before final transformation into adenocarcinoma. Histologically, cells are recognized as dysplastic if they demonstrate a lack of cytoplasmic maturation, crowding of tubules, or nuclear changes such as hyperchromatism, stratification, and atypical mitoses.

Dysplasia can be classified into low-grade dysplasia (LGD) and high-grade dysplasia (HGD) depending on the degree of abnormalities, with a high-grade representative of more severe changes. Two expert pathologists should confirm the histopathology of LGD and HGD. Any dysplasia increases the risk of progression into adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. Once diagnosed, they should be recommended to be ablated or resected.