Managing sacroiliac joint injury can be challenging. Low back pain secondary to SI joint dysfunction requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes a primary care provider, physical therapist, primary care sports medicine specialist, pain medicine physician, radiologist, orthopedic surgeon, nurse specialist, and in cases of sacroiliitis, a rheumatologist. Without proper management, the morbidity associated with SI joint injury can become a chronic and debilitating injury. There are multiple steps involved in the injury assessment of the sacroiliac joint, the evaluation of the underlying injury, and treatment of sacroiliac injury:

- History and physical should be complete by the primary care provider, including special physical exam tests as well as initial x-ray imaging.

- Imaging to be interpreted by the radiologist. Standard imaging includes a weight-bearing AP view of the SI joint, MRI of the pelvis and sacrum, or CT of the pelvis.

- Initial therapy often provided by the primary care provider or orthopedist includes home exercise programs, over-the-counter pain medications, bracing, belts, manipulative therapy, and physical therapy.

- The physical therapist is crucial in the strengthening of the core muscles as well as the gluteus muscles, which are needed to help support the SI joint.

- Corticosteroid injection or anesthetic injections can be done either via ultrasound or fluoroscopy injections. A primary care sports medicine physician or pain medicine specialist is often utilized for this procedure.

- Refractory treatment such as radiofrequency ablation or rhizotomy can be complete with a pain medicine specialist as well.

- Suspected inflammatory SI Joint injury usually requires further assessment, including labs and management by a rheumatologist.

- Surgery can be necessary in refractory cases. Either an orthopedic surgeon specializing in spinal surgery or a neurosurgeon often performs the procedure.

- Many cases of SI joint injury occur in athletes. A sports medicine specialist best manages long-term treatment and management of SI joint injuries.

The management of a sacroiliac joint injury can be both acute and chronic. Treatments range from conservative management to surgery. Diagnosis requires a high index of suspension in suspected cases. However, most cases improve conservatively. Many cases require the time and effort of multiple healthcare providers. [Level 5]