Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and remodeling early on, are very important compensatory processes that develop over time in response to wall stress or any significant hemodynamic pressure or volumetric burden. The increased mass of muscle fibers or wall thickness serves initially as a compensatory mechanism that helps to maintain contractile forces and counteracts the increased ventricular wall stress. The benefits of increased wall thickness to compensate for elevated wall stress are offset by a significant increase in the degree of stiffness of the hypertrophied walls associated with a significant increase in diastolic ventricular pressures, which are subsequently transmitted back into the left atrium as well as the pulmonary vasculature.

As previously indicated, LVH is a compensatory but ultimately, an abnormal increase in the mass of the myocardium of the left ventricle induced by a chronically elevated workload on the heart muscle. But, pathologic LVH once developed, puts the patient at significant risk for the development of heart failure, dysrhythmias, and sudden death. The most common etiologic cause is the heart contracting against an elevated afterload, as seen in hypertension and also seen in valvar aortic stenosis. Another cause is increased filling of the left ventricle inducing diastolic overload, which is the underlying mechanism for eccentric LVH in patients with regurgitant valvular lesions such as aortic regurgitation or mitral regurgitation and also seen in dilated cardiomyopathy. Coronary artery disease has been demonstrated to play a role in the pathogenesis of LVH, as the normal myocardium tries to compensate for tissue that has become ischemic or infarcted. One key pathophysiologic component in LVH is the concomitant development of myocardial fibrosis. Initially, fibrosis is clinically manifested by diastolic dysfunction, but systolic dysfunction will also develop with progressive disease.

Based on relative wall thickness (posterior wall thickness x 2 / LV internal diameter at end-diastole), and the left ventricular mass (LVM) index (left ventricular mass normalized for body surface area or height), the left ventricular hypertrophy can be categorized into 2 types; concentric hypertrophy (increased LWM index and relative wall thickness (RWT) more than 0.42) or eccentric hypertrophy (increased LWM index and RWT less than or equal to 0.42).

Concentric left ventricular hypertrophy is an abnormal increase in left ventricular myocardial mass caused by chronically increased workload on the heart, most commonly resulting from pressure overload-induced by arteriolar vasoconstriction as occurs in, chronic hypertension or aortic stenosis.

Eccentric left ventricular hypertrophy is induced by an increased filling pressure of the left ventricle, otherwise known as diastolic overload, which represents the underlying mechanism for volumetric or diastolic overload in patients with regurgitant valve lesions such as aortic or mitral regurgitation as well as in the case of dilated cardiomyopathy. In patients with coronary artery disease, these mechanisms can play a role in an attempt to compensate for ischemic or infarcted myocardial tissue. This type of sustained increase in wall stress along with cytokine and neuro-activation stimulates the development of myocardial hypertrophy or increasing muscle thickness with the deposition of the extracellular matrix. This increased mass of muscle fibers or wall thickness serves initially as a compensatory mechanism that helps to maintain contractile forces and counteracts the increased ventricular wall stress. The benefits of increased wall thickness to compensate for elevated wall stress are offset by a significant increase in the degree of stiffness of the hypertrophied walls associated with a significant increase in diastolic ventricular pressures, which are subsequently transmitted back into the left atrium as well as the pulmonary vasculature.

One key pathophysiologic component in LVH is the concomitant development of myocardial fibrosis. Initially, fibrosis is clinically manifested by diastolic dysfunction, but systolic dysfunction will also develop with progressive disease.

Myocardial fibrosis appears to be pathophysiologically linked to the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). Evidence has been established that angiotensin II produces a profibrotic effect in the myocardial tissue of hypertensive patients. This explains why angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) are among the most potent agents in the treatment of hypertension, especially from the standpoint of morbidity and mortality. LVH has been shown to be a consistent predictor of cardiovascular morbidity as well as mortality in hypertensive patients.

Genomics may also play a significant role in the pathogenesis of LVH. Mutated genes that encode proteins of the sarcomere have a direct etiologic relationship in patients who present with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Also, there seems to be a genetic predisposition evidenced by the fact that some mildly hypertensive patients develop LVH while others do not.