**Maintain Accurate Medical Records Regarding Opiate Prescriptions**

All clinicians should maintain accurate, complete, and current medical records, including:

- Records of prescriptions for controlled substances

- Record instructions provided

- Detailed history, physical, monitoring, and reasons prescribed

**Federal and State Laws**

Several regulations and programs at the federal and state level to reduce prescription opioid abuse, diversion, and overdose.

- Immunity from prosecution for individuals seeking assistance during an overdose

- Pain clinic oversight

- Patient identification prior to dispensing

- A physical examination prior to prescribing opioids

- Prescription limits

- A prohibition from obtaining controlled substance prescriptions

- Tamper-resistant prescriptions

**Federal Laws**

The US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) sets national standards for controlled substances. Drug scheduling was mandated under The Federal Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. The law addresses controlled substances within Title II. The DEA maintains a list of controlled medications and illicit substances categorized from schedule I to V. The five categories have their basis on the medication's proper and beneficial medical use and the medication's potential for dependency and abuse. The purpose of the law is to provide government oversight over the manufacturing and distribution of these types of substances. Prescribers and dispensers are required to have a DEA license to supply these drugs. The licensing provides links to users, prescribers, and distributors.

The schedules range from Schedule I to V. Schedule I drugs are considered to have the highest risk of abuse, while Schedule V drugs have the lowest potential for abuse. Other factors considered by the DEA include pharmacological effect, evidenced-based knowledge of the drug, risk to public health, trends in the use of the drug, and whether or not the drug has the potential to be made more dangerous with minor chemical modifications.

- "High abuse potential with no accepted medical use; medications within this schedule may not be prescribed, dispensed, or administered"

-  Examples include marijuana (cannabis), heroin, mescaline (peyote), lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), and methaqualone.

- "High abuse potential with severe psychological or physical dependence; however, these medications have an accepted medical use and may be prescribed, dispensed, or administered"

-  Examples include fentanyl, oxycodone, morphine, methylphenidate, hydromorphone, amphetamine, methamphetamine (meth), pentobarbital, and secobarbital.

- Schedule II drugs may not receive a refill

- "Intermediate abuse potential (i.e., less than Schedule II but more than Schedule IV medications)"

- Examples include anabolic steroids, testosterone, and ketamine

- "Abuse potential less than Schedule II but more than Schedule V medications"

- Examples include diazepam, alprazolam, and tramadol

- "Medications with the least potential for abuse among the controlled substances."

- Examples include pregabalin, Diphenoxylate/atropine, dextromethorphan

It is essential to understand the DEA controlled-substance scheduling both to ensure adequate caution when prescribing medications with high abuse potential and also to ensure against prescribing outside of one's authority.

The Controlled Substances Act has great potential to improve patient safety by providing federal oversight for drugs with a high potential for abuse. Providers of scheduled substances (physicians, dentists, podiatrists, advanced practitioners) may have links to the distribution of these substances. They are required to have a DEA license and record prescriptions of scheduled drugs. This licensing prevents overprescribing and obligates providers to be wary of potential drug-seeking patients. The dispenser must also be aware of a patient's medication history and be mindful of the potential for polypharmacy if a patient seeks multiple providers. The current opioid epidemic is a time where federal oversight and interdisciplinary coordination have the potential to reduce harm to patients prescribed scheduled drugs drastically. However, it will take further time and evaluation to know if drug scheduling reduces abuse, addiction, and overdose.

See Table 1 for information regarding registration, records, prescriptions, refills, distribution, security, and theft or significant loss of controlled substances.

See Table 2 for information regarding DEA forms 106, 222, 224, and 224a.

**Vermont State Statutes Regarding Controlled Substances**

- Authorized professional use of regulated drugs (Stature 4214)

- A licensed provider may prescribe, administer, and dispense regulated drugs for medical purposes by a nurse, medical or dental assistant, resident, the patient himself, or a responsible member of the family
- When prescribed medication is no longer required or applicable, the prescribed regulated substance must be returned to the prescribing provider

- Authorized sales by pharmacists (Statute 4215)

- A licensed pharmacist may sell and dispense regulated drugs to any person with a written prescription or upon receiving an oral prescription from a licensed provider
- The oral prescription must be promptly converted to a written script by the pharmacist and shall be signed by the pharmacist. It must bear the full name and date of birth of the patient and the full name of the person prescribing 
- A prescription shall not be refilled unless the practitioner authorizes refilling on the original prescription
- When filling a schedule II prescription, the pharmacist must sign on the face of the prescription or enter the date of filling on an electronic script
- A prescription for a schedule II drug shall not be filled more than 30 days after the date of issue
- A prescription for a schedule II drug for a future date shall not be filled more than 90 days after the date of issue

- Unused Prescription Drug Disposal Program (Statute 4224) 

- The Department of Health maintains an unused prescription drug disposal program for the safe disposal of unused and unwanted prescription drugs
- This program and its established secure collection and disposal sites shall be utilized for the safe disposal and destruction of unused prescriptions
- The drop-off centers across the state can be found via the website: http://www.healthvermont.gov/alcohol-drugs/services/prescription-drug-disposal

**Vermont State Rule Governing the Prescribing of Opioids for Pain (18 VSA 4289, Section 14(e) of Act 75 (2013) and Section 2a of Act 173 (2016))**

- Medical providers should prescribe opioids in the smallest doses for the shortest periods in accordance with the indication and severity of pain.

- The recommended daily maximums for adults (given in the table below) are provided to guide therapy but should not be considered absolute limits. They recommend up to 5 days of therapy for acute pain.

- For patients with severe pain and extreme circumstance, the opioid may be prescribed for up to 7 days if the reason is documented in the medical record.

- For children 0 to 17 years of age, the recommended daily maximum for moderate to severe pain is 24 MME (morphine milligram equivalents) per day with a total prescription MME of 72 MME for 0 to 3 days.

- If opioids are prescribed at an average daily dose of 32 MME (morphine milligram equivalents) or higher, the reason must be justified in the medical record.

- Extended-release or long-acting opioids are not indicated for acute pain.

- Before writing a prescription for an opioid, the providers must:

- Consider non-opioid and non-pharmacological treatment and discuss non-opioid alternatives with the patient
- Query the Vermont Prescription Monitoring System
- Discuss the risk of addiction, abuse, dependence, and overdose with the patient
- Provide the patient with the Vermont Department of Health Patient Education Sheet
- Obtain a signed informed consent from the patient acknowledging the risk of abuse/dependence, overdose, tolerance, side effects, and alternative treatment options

- When prescribing opiates for chronic pain, the prescriber must:

- Conduct a thorough medical evaluation and physical examination
- Assess the patient's risk of misuse, abuse, diversion, addiction, or overdose, using a risk assessment screening tool (a list of which is available on the Vermont Department of Health website)
- Discuss non-opioid alternatives with the patient and discuss the risk of abuse/dependence, overdose, tolerance, and potential side effects of opiate therapy with the patient
- Query the Vermont Prescription Monitoring System
- Obtain a signed Controlled Substance Treatment Agreement from the patient and renew it at least every 365 days.

- The prescription must include a maximum daily dose or a "not to exceed" equivalent on the prescription.

- If a patient is being prescribed a morphine milligram equivalent (MME) daily dose of 90 or more, the prescriber must discuss the risk of fatal and non-fatal overdose and advise any precautions the patient should take.

- Chronic pain associated with cancer or cancer treatment is exempt from the above requirements.

- Providers must ensure that the patient is in possession of naloxone if their prescribed amount exceeds 90 MME or if they are prescribed benzodiazepines in addition to opioids.

- The provider must query the Vermont Prescription Monitoring System at least every 120 days for any patient prescribed 40 mg or greater of hydrocodone or 30 mg or greater of oxycodone per day of extended-release hydrocodone or oxycodone.

**Opioid Daily Limits As Advised by the Vermont Board of Health for Adults**

0 to 3 days 72 MME

1 to 5 days 120 MME

0 to 3 days 96 MME

1 to 5 days 160 MME

**Vermont Prescription Monitoring System (VPMS)**

The Vermont Prescription Monitoring System provides information regarding any prescriptions for controlled substances for the queried patient, including the dispensing pharmacy, prescriber, and date dispensed. However, it does not include prescriptions written for a duration of less than or equal to 48 hours, prescriptions from methadone treatment facilities, or prescriptions from veterinary offices.

A "threshold letter" is provided to the prescriber if the patient exceeds the set number of pharmacies or prescribers allowed by the VPMS. When a provider receives such a letter, the recommended course of action by the Vermont Board of Health is to contact the other providers listed to determine the best course of action for the patient and discuss the findings with the patient to determine if they need drug abuse/addiction treatment.

According to the Vermont Board of Health, the following instances require a query of the VPMS:

- The first time a provider prescribes an opioid schedule II, III, or IV controlled substance to treat acute pain of 10 days or longer

- The first time a provider prescribes an opioid schedule II, III, or IV controlled substance to treat chronic pain or long-term pain therapy for 90 days or more

- When treating acute pain with an opioid schedule II, III, or IV controlled substance for a duration of 21 days or longer

- At least annually for patients receiving ongoing treatment with a controlled substance

- When prescribing an extension/refill of a chronic opioid schedule II, III, or IV controlled substance prescription in an emergency department or an urgent care center