Aphasia is caused by different disease processes and consists of many syndromes. Because of this, it is easily misdiagnosed. The initial challenge of diagnosing aphasia is that patients are unable to communicate to provide an adequate history for diagnosis. This may require a history from family members or friends, which can be unreliable or unavailable. Therefore, the healthcare professional needs to be familiar with the signs and symptoms of aphasia.

Initially, patients will present to primary care or emergency clinicians. The ability to recognize aphasia can aid in the diagnosis of its underlining cause. For example, patients with an acute stroke can initially present with aphasia and can be misdiagnosed as delirium. Aphasia has many underlining causes and requires an interprofessional team that includes a physiatrist, psychiatrist, neurologist, speech-language pathologist, and neuropsychologist to manage comorbidities and deficits.

The speech-language pathologist plays a vital role in identifying the type of aphasia syndrome and formulating an individualized rehabilitation regimen with the assistance of the physiatrist. Depending on the patient’s comorbidities, other specialists are required. Patients who suffered from a stroke may have cardiac, pulmonary, renal, or integumentary issues requiring a cardiologist, pulmonologist, nephrologist, and wound care clinician. Physical therapists and occupational therapists will be a part of the interprofessional team to treat physical deficits and aid in aphasia treatment. Patients with neurodegenerative disease will require a neurologist, while patients with infectious causes require infectious disease specialists.

Patients with aphasia will likely suffer from depression and require support from healthcare professionals such as a neuropsychologist, psychologist, and psychiatrist. Patients will also require social support. Family members, friends, and/or religious leaders will require extensive education to assist patients in their recovery process.

There is no specific protocol in treating patients with aphasia. The treatment and rehabilitation regimen is highly individualized and requires an extensive interprofessional team. Proper consultation of specialists and education of family members and friends is required to optimize patient treatment and allow patients to regain their greatest level of independence.