The development of nasopharyngeal carcinoma depends on multiple factors, such as genetic susceptibility, environmental factors, and infections such as Epstein-Barr virus (EPV) infection. Many studies linked multiple genes to the pathogenesis of the NPC; one of these genes is a region in human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes at chromosome 6. Other genes have been identified in different locations on different chromosomes such as 13q12, 3q26, 5p15, 6p21, and 9p21.

- **Latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1)**: it is a membrane protein encoded by the virus, and plays a major role in inducing tumorigenesis. Its main effect is related to the nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kB). Activation of NF-kB will lead to affect many other proteins that play an important role in cell division, adhesion, cell differentiation, cell survival. In addition to NF-kB, LMP1 affects many other factors, proteins, and DNA regulation processes that affect the oncogenesis process, such as TP53, EGFR, VEGF, stemness-related genes, fibronectin, etc. LMP1 is associated with poor prognosis.

- **Latent Membrane Protein 2A (LMP2A):**it is a membrane oncoprotein that is encoded in the viral DNA, it has a role in epithelial-mesenchymal transition, hence invasion and migration.

- **MicroRNAs (miRNA):**it is non-coding RNA molecules that have a function in the regulation of the gene expression process, and hence affect the cell functions and division. EBV expresses a high level of miRNA, such as complementary strand transcripts, i.e., BamHI-A rightward transcripts (BARTs), which is highly associated with the NPC pathogenesis, e.g., miR-BART3, miR-BART7, and miR-BART13. Since these molecules are copious and could be excreted extracellularly, these miRNA can be used as a biomarker for diagnosis and predicting prognosis.

- **Other molecules:**such as metastatic tumor antigen 1 (MTA1), which is correlated with tumor metastasis. Epstein–Barr nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1) protein is a nuclear protein that is associated with transcription of the virus and the lymphatic metastasis.