**Caries and Periodontal Disease**

Bitewings radiographs are the most appropriate method to evaluate for dental caries and should be considered even in preschool children. CBCTs should not be used as a routine method for detecting caries; however, if a CBCT is done for another reason, the presence of caries must be evaluated too.

Notably, CBCT provides information in 3 dimensions but has a lower resolution than intraoral radiographs. Furthermore, metallic restorations in the path of the X-ray beam produce dark stains creating caries-like radiolucencies on the crowns of other teeth or even masking true carious lesions.

The diagnosis of periodontal disease is based mainly on clinical examination, further supplemented by radiographic evaluation, where the latter may give more information that could influence the prognosis and treatment of the disease. Bitewings provide accurate geometry and details. Bitewings radiographs that have already been indicated for detecting caries can be used to assess bone levels around teeth without further radiation exposure.

Digital radiographs may provide a better definition than conventional radiographs to evaluate alveolar bone levels.

CBCT is not recommended as a routine method to evaluate periodontal bone support. However, CBCT is more accurate in assessing bone defects and furcation lesions than conventional two-dimensional intraoral radiographs.

**Endodontics**

A small FOV CBCT should be considered in endodontics in cases where lower-dose conventional radiography does not provide sufficient information and if the use of CBCT is likely to change the diagnosis and treatment plan.

The European Society of Endodontology recommends a small FOV CBCT in the following cases if evaluation with conventional radiographs is inconclusive or insufficient.

- Assessment and management of dentoalveolar trauma.

- Evaluation of complex root canal systems before endodontic therapy.

- Inspection of complex root canal anatomy.

- Evaluation of endodontic complications like post perforation.

- Evaluation of root resorption.

- Identification of obliterated root canals.

- Detection of periradicular bone changes that suggest root fractures.

- Presurgical review before endodontic surgery.

**Implantology**

Dental implants are placed to replace missing teeth. Currently, CBCT is the imaging modality of choice before dental implant placement.

Bone quality and reports on implant success and failure are used in implant treatment. The quality and quantity of bone available at the implant site are critical local patient factors in determining the success of dental implants.

Local patient factors like the quality and quantity of bone available at the implant site are crucial in determining the success of dental implants. Bone quality is categorized into four groups. An implant placed in type 4 bone (very thin cortical bone with low-density trabecular bone with poor strength) has a higher chance of failure. This type of bone is often found in the posterior maxilla, and some studies report higher implant failure rates in this region.

Bone density can be obtained from CT units and expressed in Hounsfield units (HU). This is not part of the system international (SI) system but is a practical unit representing the relative deviation of the measured linear attenuation of material from that of water. Unlike CT scans, CBCT does not allow for the measurement of bone density in Hounsfield units. Methods have been proposed to convert CT numbers measured on cone beam computed tomography scans to HU.

For HUs on CBCT to be used, the accuracy of the HU should be known. With more advanced CBCT software and methods, it should be possible to improve the accuracy of CBCT HU values when determining bone densities at implant sites. Cone beam computed tomography provides a subjective assessment of bone quality, not an objective one.

Computer-generated surgical guides can be fabricated by integrating cone beam computed tomography scans and computer-aided design manufacturing technology. The planned implant's type and size, position within the bone, relationship to the planned restoration and adjacent teeth or implants, and proximity to vital structures can be determined before surgery.

There are three types of computer-generated surgical guides available:

- Tooth-supported: they are used in partially edentulous cases.

- Mucosa supported: they are used primarily in fully edentulous cases and are designed to rest on the mucosa.

- Bone supported: can be used in partially or fully edentulous cases, but they are used mainly in fully edentulous instances in which significant ridge atrophy is present, and good seating of a mucosa-supported guide is questionable.

**Maxillary Sinus Floor Elevation**

In the posterior maxilla, tooth replacement with dental implants requires sinus lifting surgery when the maxillary sinus is pneumatized, extending toward the alveolar process. This surgery increases bone quality and quantity in the maxilla's posterior region.

If the amount of bone between the ridge crest and the maxillary sinus floor is inadequate, <5 mm, an open sinus lift procedure is indicated. Preoperative CBCT or CT before open sinus lift surgery is recommended to evaluate certain factors like membrane thickness, presence of sinus septa, alveolar antral artery trajectory, and residual bone height.

**Extraction of Teeth**

Preoperative CBCT before tooth extraction is mainly related to impacted mandibular third molars due to the risk of injuring the inferior alveolar nerve (IAN) during surgery.

CBCT imaging must only be indicated in specific cases where the operator has a clinical question that panoramic or intraoral radiographs cannot answer.

**Orthodontics**

Small FOV CBCT may be indicated in the following cases as part of orthodontic treatment planning when conventional radiographs do not provide enough information:

- Unerupted permanent maxillary canines.

- Dilacerated teeth.

- Unerupted or supernumerary teeth that are close to the inferior alveolar canal.

- Clefts that may require grafting.

Large FOV CBCT is sometimes indicated in orthognathic surgery planning where 3D data are required.

**Pathological Lesions of The Jaws**

Cone beam computed tomography may help evaluate large odontogenic and non-odontogenic cysts and benign tumors of the jaws. CBCT can show the extent of the lesion and the closeness to essential structures, such as the maxillary sinus; it may also help plan the surgical approach.

**Dental and Facial Trauma**

The radiographic modality of choice to evaluate traumatic dental injuries (TDIs) are intraoral radiographs. Cone beam computed tomography may help diagnose root fractures, fractures of the alveolar bone, and displaced teeth.

CBCT can be implemented to evaluate facial trauma when soft tissue detail is not required, e.g., fractures of the condyle, zygomatic arch, and some zygomatic complex fractures.

**Sinus Disease**

Cone beam computed tomography can be an alternative to multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT) to evaluate chronic rhinosinusitis.

**Temporomandibular Joint (TMJ)**

Most patients with TMJ symptoms suffer from internal disc derangement or myofascial pain, where radiography does not tend to provide extra helpful information.