Biological weapons are devices or agents used or intended to be used in a deliberate attempt to disseminate disease-producing organisms or toxins using aerosol, food, water, or insect vectors. Their mechanism of action tends to be broadly through infection or intoxication.

Biological weapons may be developed or used as part of a government policy in biological warfare or by terrorist groups or criminals. Biological weapons can initiate large-scale epidemics with an unparalleled lethality, and nation-states and terrorist groups have used dangerous and destructive biological weapons in the past.

Keeping in mind the horrific nature of these agents, the Geneva protocol, first signed in 1925, and currently signed by 65 out of 121 country states, prohibited the development, production, and use of biological weapons in war.

Healthcare professionals need to be aware of the essentials of bioterrorism and biological weapons, as these may be used as part of a terrorist attack in any part of the world. Thus, healthcare professionals need to be trained and prepared in case of a potentially catastrophic event, where quick action and decision-making may potentially save lives. This article reviews the previous incidents of biological terrorism, types of biological weapons, evaluation of patients exposed to potential biological weapons, and treatment of patients who have been potentially exposed to the various commonly employed biological weapons. This article also aims to discuss an inter-professional team's role in evaluating and managing a bioterrorism attack. For this activity, bioterrorism's biological weapons have been broadly classified under four major headings, including bacterial agents, viral agents, fungal agents, protozoal agents, and toxins.