**Medical Management**

**NSAIDs**

NSAIDs are commonly used as first-line agents for the use of fibroid-related dysmenorrhea given their affordability, limited adverse effects, and availability.

**Combined Oral Contraceptives**

Combined oral contraceptives work by preventing endometrial proliferation and have shown some benefits in improving fibroid-related heavy menstrual bleeding. However, there is no evidence to support their use for the relief of bulk symptoms.

**Levonorgestrel Intrauterine Device**

Levonorgestrel IUDs (LNG-IUD) are currently FDA approved for the treatment of HMB, including fibroid-related uterine bleeding.

**Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) Agonists**

Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) agonists are peptide analogs of the GnRH molecule that act as agonists at the GnRH receptor in the pituitary gland.  Their initial activation at the GnRH receptor causes a flare effect, temporarily increasing serum gonadotropins and downstream sex hormone concentrations. Prolonged activation of the GnRH receptor, typically following 2-4 weeks of continuous therapy, leads to involution or downregulation of the receptor, thereby suppressing pituitary function leading to hypoestrogenism.

GnRH agonists are often used to decrease uterine volume prior to surgical therapy, which may ultimately allow for a more minimally invasive surgical approach. In a recent Cochrane review, GnRH agonists were shown to reduce uterine volume by 175ml and fibroid volume by 155 ml compared to placebo controls. The same review demonstrated GnRH agonist benefit in increasing preoperative hemoglobin by an average of 0.88 g/dL, decreasing intraoperative blood loss, and decreasing postoperative complications.

With prolonged therapy, there is a risk of chemically induced menopause leading to vasomotor symptoms, bone loss, vaginal atrophy/dryness, and unfavorable changes to lipid profile.

**Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) Antagonists**

Elagolix and relugolix are oral, non-peptide, GnRH antagonists that function by reversible, dose-dependent suppression of GnRH, thereby suppressing gonadotropins and ovarian sex hormones and leading to a hypoestrogenic state.

Regarding efficacy, elagolix has been shown to be efficacious in reducing fibroid-related bleeding. In two recent identical double-blinded, randomized, placebo-controlled, 6-month phase III trials (trials UF1 and UF2), 68.5% of 206 women in UF-1 and 76.5% of 189 women in UF-2 receiving elagolix + add back therapy achieved the primary endpoint of reduced menstrual blood loss to less than 80 mL during the final month of treatment and at least a 50% reduction in menstrual blood loss compared to baseline. In those who received elagolix alone (without add-back therapy), the same primary endpoint was met in 84.1% of 104 women in UF-1 and 77% of 95 women in UF-2.

In a subsequent extension phase III trial, when therapy was given for an additional six months (total of 12 months of treatment), more than half of the participants demonstrated amenorrhea showing a significant improvement in quality of life.

Following the elagolix trials, the protocol was replicated for two international, randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled, 24-week, phase 3 trials for the study of relugolix. The relugolix trials demonstrated a reduction of menstrual blood loss in 71 to 80 % of participants compared to placebo and resulted in a significant decrease in pain, anemia, bulk-related symptoms, and uterine volume.

**Selective Progesterone Receptor Modulators (SPRMs)**

SPRMs are a class of synthetic steroids that bind to progesterone receptors and have tissue-specific antagonist effects of varying degrees.

Clinical efficacy in the reduction of AUB-L and fibroid volume has been demonstrated in the European-based PEARL trials.

**Aromatase Inhibitors**

Letrozole is a reversible non-steroidal competitive aromatase inhibitor that works by inhibiting the conversion of androgens into estrogens. Studies have demonstrated that uterine fibroid tissue over-expresses aromatase. Thus, aromatase inhibitors reduce the local production of estrogen from the fibroid itself, thereby preventing further fibroid proliferation and assisting in fibroid volume reduction.

**Surgical Management**

Myomectomy is the surgical removal of uterine fibroids via hysteroscopic, laparoscopic, or abdominal surgery. Common indications for myomectomy include AUB with or without a history of symptomatic anemia, bulk-related symptoms such as urinary urgency, frequency, hydronephrosis, constipation, infertility, prevention of obstetrical complications, and in some cases, for the evaluation of potential malignancy. Establishing the type (location), size, and quantity of fibroids using the modalities described above is a crucial step in a patient’s evaluation that guides the optimal excision strategy.

**Hysteroscopic Myomectomy**

Hysteroscopic myomectomy (HSC-M) is a minimally invasive approach to fibroid removal with high success rates and low risk for complications in the appropriately selected patient (figure 5).  The feasibility of performing a successful HSC-M is largely dependent on the type and size of the existing fibroids. HSC-M has shown to be most successful in resecting Type 0 and Type I fibroids.

HSC-M can be used for type 2 fibroids; however, this often involves repeat procedures due to the lower complete resection rate of 61 to 83%. The type of fibroid also correlates to operative time and the amount of distention fluid absorbed during the procedure. The deeper the penetration of the fibroid into the myometrium, the greater the volume of fluid absorbed (type 0: 450 ml, type I: 957 ml, type II: 1682ml).

HSC-M has a 94.4% success rate, defined as improved quality of life (QoL) scores and resolution of symptoms.

Regarding fertility, a 2009 study of infertile women with submucosal fibroids by Pritts et al. found that women who underwent submucosal myomectomy were twice as likely to become pregnant than women who did not undergo myomectomy (RR 2.03, CI 1.08–3.82).

HSC-M is overall a very safe procedure with a complication rate of <1%.

**Laparoscopic Myomectomy**

Laparoscopic myomectomy (LSC-M) is a minimally invasive surgical approach to remove symptomatic fibroids of type 2 through 8. Location, size, and the number of fibroids are all important determinants for the success of the surgery and reducing recurrence.

LSC-M provides an 80% success rate in the relief of symptoms, similar to abdominal myomectomy. However, it comes with significantly fewer complications.

In another study looking at outcomes immediately post-op, patients who underwent laparoscopic myomectomy had less post-op pain at the 6-hour and 48-hour mark, a 50% lower chance of perioperative fever, and shorter hospitalization compared to those who underwent abdominal myomectomy.

Risk of complication during LSC-M is increased in patients with fibroids >5 cm, >3 total fibroids, and in those with intramural and intraligamentous fibroids.

Conversion to laparotomy is overall a rare event. In a study looking at over 700 intended laparoscopic myomectomies, only seven had to be converted to an abdominal open approach.

It is worth mentioning the use of robot-assisted laparoscopic myomectomy (RLSC-M), which has grown in popularity amongst many minimally invasive gynecologic surgeons in recent years. Preference for the use of either technique is based on the surgeon’s skill level in using the conventional vs. robotic approach in handling complex cases. Surgeons tend to prefer RLSC-M in cases that involve ≥10 fibroids ≤ 7 cm or in patients with obesity due to improved visibility.

Regarding outcomes and complications, a meta-analysis of eight retrospective trials comparing the two techniques demonstrated no significant difference in complications, operative time, length of hospital stays, and postoperative fertility.

**Abdominal Myomectomy**

Abdominal myomectomy (ABD-M) is a major surgical procedure typically reserved for complex cases where a minimally invasive approach is contraindicated or in failed intended laparoscopy cases. Similar to LSC-M, an abdominal myomectomy is best used for symptomatic intramural and subserosal fibroids.

In a retrospective cohort study looking at 30 patients who underwent ABD-M, overall symptoms improved in 90% of patients, and 79% of patients were satisfied with their choice of the procedure.

Despite the similar outcomes in symptom reduction, fertility, and benefits in operative time, ABD-M is associated with significant morbidity. Blood loss is significantly higher with ABD-M compared to its minimally invasive alternatives, with an average of 200 mL blood loss during ABD-M compared to 150 ml and 100 ml in LSC-M and RLSC-M, respectively.

**Myomectomy for Improving Fertility**

Many studies have demonstrated a clear relationship between uterine fibroids and infertility; however surgical management of fibroids for the sole purpose of improving fertility (i.e., in otherwise asymptomatic patients) is less clear cut and largely depends on the location of the fibroids.

Fibroids that distort the uterine cavity, i.e., submucosal fibroids (FIGO Type 0-2), strongly influence reproductive outcomes.

The negative impact of intramural (IM) fibroids on fertility outcomes has been demonstrated in multiple studies. However, limited data suggest whether or not the removal of the intramural fibroids improves these outcomes. In general, women with intramural fibroids have a lower implantation rate, clinical pregnancy, and ongoing pregnancy/live birth.

An RCT of 181 women with a solitary fibroid < 4 cm and at least one year of infertility showed that myomectomy was not associated with an improved clinical pregnancy rate in women with intramural fibroids (n=23, 56.5%, NS).

Studies looking at subserosal (SS) fibroids suggest they do not play a role in infertility and thus do not need to be removed to improve reproductive outcomes.

**Alternative Procedural Treatment Modalities**

**Uterine Artery Embolization (UAE)**

Uterine artery embolization (UAE) is a percutaneous transcatheter embolization technique that occludes the cervicovaginal branch of both uterine arteries to deprive fibroids of their blood supply leading to degeneration

In a study looking at ten-year follow-up after UAE, 62% of patients reported their HMB had resolved at two years, which increased to 83% at five years post-procedure. Overall, 78% of patients reported they were very satisfied with the treatment at the ten-year mark.

Although the UAE can provide relief for many patients and avoid surgery-associated risks, studies have shown that as many as 19-38% of patients undergo reintervention for persisting symptoms.

Minor complications include fever, pain, nausea, pelvic infection, postembolization syndrome, and vaginal discharge. There is conflicting data regarding reproductive outcomes after UAE compared to myomectomy. Overall, UAE is not the ideal treatment option for patients who desire future fertility due to a potential post-procedure decline in ovarian reserve and increased risk of pregnancy-related complications. Regarding pregnancy-related complications, UAE for uterine fibroids is associated with an increase of miscarriage (35.2% versus 16.5%; OR, 2.8; 95% CI, 2.0–3.8), cesarean delivery (66% versus 48.5%; OR, 2.1; 95% CI, 1.4–2.9), and postpartum hemorrhage (13.9% versus 2.5%; OR, 6.4; 95% CI, 3.5–11.7) compared to expectant management.

**Magnetic Resonance–guided Focused Ultrasound Surgery (MRgFUS)**

Magnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound surgery is a form of therapy that involves continuous waves of ultrasound energy over a 3 to the 5-hour period under magnetic resonance guidance. Eventually, the goal is to heat the entire fibroid to >57 degrees C for at least 1 second to induce coagulative necrosis.

A study performed by Funaki et al. looking at 91 women over 24 months who underwent MRgFUS demonstrated a mean reduction in the volume of 36.5% at six months and 39.5% at 24 months.

The overall complication rate with MRgFUS is low at about 13.1% in a study that looked at 150 women who underwent the procedure. However, only one of these was a major complication (deep vein thrombosis).

**Ultrasound-guided Radiofrequency Ablation (Laparoscopic RFA)**

Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is a therapy that involves applying energy via ultrasound which utilizes direct thermal conduction to induce coagulative necrosis in tissue.

In a prospective international trial observing a cohort of 135 women with fibroids and HMB, menstrual blood loss decreased from baseline levels by 38.3 months, and fibroid volume decreased by 45.1% at the 1-year mark. Furthermore, symptom severity scores improved significantly along with the quality of life, and 94% of women reported satisfaction with the procedure.

There is very limited data on fertility and pregnancy after RFA. There is documentation of 15 pregnancies in 13 patients yielding 13 live births after RFA for fibroids.

A meta-analysis regarding the rate of surgical reintervention after RFA was 4.2%, 8.2%, and 11.5% at 1, 2, and 3 years, respectively.