Management of tarsal tunnel syndrome remains challenging due to diagnostic uncertainty and lack of clarity over which patients would benefit from conservative versus surgical management. Tarsal tunnel syndrome can be managed nonoperatively or operatively. This decision is generally guided by the etiology of the disease, degree of loss of function of the foot and ankle, as well as muscle atrophy.

Conservative management and success vary based upon the etiology of tarsal tunnel syndrome. The goal is to decrease pain, inflammation, and tissue stress. Ice can be used. Oral analgesics including acetaminophen and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can be helpful. Neuropathic pain medications include gabapentin, pregabalin, and tricyclic antidepressants can be tried. Topical medications can also be used, including lidocaine and NSAIDs.

Physical therapy soft tissue modalities that may help include ultrasound, iontophoresis, phonophoresis, and E-stim. Calf stretching and nerve mobility or nerve gliding can also help with symptoms. Strengthening the tibialis posterior can help. Activity modification also plays a role in managing symptoms. Kinesiology tape can be used for arch support and biomechanical stress reduction.

Orthotic shoes can be used to correct biomechanical abnormalities and offload the tarsal tunnel. A medial heel wedge or heel seat may reduce traction on the nerve by inverting the heel. Night splints can be tried, and patients who fail to respond to the above therapy can be placed in a walking boot temporarily. Footwear with appropriate arch support may help reduce symptoms. CAM (controlled, ankle, motion) walker or walking boots may be tried.

If a ganglion cyst is present, it can be aspirated under ultrasound guidance. Corticosteroid injections into the tarsal tunnel may help with edema.

Surgery is indicated if conservative management fails to resolve the patient’s symptoms or if a definitive cause of entrapment is identified. Patients with symptoms caused by a space-occupying lesion generally respond well to surgical management. Abnormally slow nerve conduction across the posterior tibial nerve is predictive of failed conservative therapy.

Surgical management involves the release of the flexor retinaculum from its proximal attachment near the medial malleolus down to the sustentaculum tali. Surgical success rates vary from 44% to 96%. Patients with a positive Tinel sign preoperatively tend to respond better to surgical decompression than those who do not. Younger patients and those with a short history of symptoms, early diagnosis, clear etiology, and no previous ankle pathology tend to respond better to surgery.