The goals of therapy include controlling symptoms and physical signs of inflammation as well as laboratory markers of inflammation. It also includes preventing end-organ damage and keeping the long term effects of therapy to the minimum.

The efficacy of treatment interventions for ASD is derived from observational studies and clinical experience

The initial therapeutic decisions are based on the degree of disease activity and the subsequent ones are based on the clinical response.

Mild disease presents with fevers, rash, arthralgia, or mild arthritis. Patients with mild disease may respond to NSAIDs alone, but most of them require at least a low dose of glucocorticoid for better control. The dose of NSAIDs is in the anti-inflammatory range.

Moderate disease presents with debilitating joint symptoms, high-grade fever, or internal organ involvement which is not life-threatening. The patients with moderate disease severity are initially treated with glucocorticoids initiated with prednisone 0.5 to 1 mg/kg per day, depending upon disease severity.  Biologic, as well as non-biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs, might be needed if the steroids cannot be successfully tapered. Anakinra is favored as the initial agent in patients without joint erosions, and methotrexate is preferred in patients with prevalent joint disease.

Those with severe disease have life-threatening organ involvement like cardiac tamponade, disseminated intravascular involvement, or severe hepatic involvement. Those with severe disease require initial therapy with pulse IV methylprednisolone 1000 mg daily for three days, and this approach has been proven effective in many case reports and series

Patients should be monitored with periodic complete blood count (CBC), blood urea nitrogen and creatinine, electrolytes, ferritin, D-dimer, and alanine and aspartate aminotransferases (ALT, AST).

Most patients with AOSD are eventually able to stop therapy. Some may have a "monocyclic" form of AOSD. There are no available protocols for tapering and discontinuation of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs.

For patients in complete remission for at least three months, gradually taper medications with the hope of discontinuation of all drugs.