**CAMT**

1. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) is the only curative option for patients with CAMT with c-Mpl mutations (the majority of cases).

2. Supportive treatment with irradiated, leukocyte-reduced platelet transfusions, antifibrinolytics like tranexamic acid, avoidance of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and aspirin is important. Once pancytopenia develops, packed red blood cells and antibiotics may be needed.

3. Romiplostim-a THPO peptide mimetic and Eltrombopag-a small molecule agonist of the MPL receptor, which induces conformational changes in the receptor, can be used for CAMT cases with THPO mutations.

4. Experimental therapies: Gene therapy with lentiviral vectors have been used to repair the mutant c-Mpl gene. However, concerns about the leukemogenicity of this approach remain.

**AAMT**

The goal of therapy must be to treat the underlying etiology of AAMT, e.g., resection of the thymus in thymoma-associated AAMT.

The following medications and therapies have been used for the treatment of AMMT: steroids which suppress immune B and T cell-mediated autoimmunity, high dose intravenous immunoglobulin therapy, which binds antibodies against THPO and megakaryocytes, rituximab which suppresses the production of autoantibodies by B cells, cyclosporine which is a calcineurin inhibitor, anti-thymocyte globulin which suppresses T cell-mediated autoimmunity and stimulates hematopoiesis directly, bone marrow transplant, cyclophosphamide, azathioprine especially in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, lithium carbonate, vincristine, mycophenolate mofetil, danazol, eltrombopag, recombinant IL-11. A case report described successful treatment of adult-onset Still’s disease with tocilizumab and cyclosporine.