Glycopyrrolate administration can be intravenous, intramuscular, oral, or topical.

- Glycopyrrolate for injection comes packaged as a solution of 0.2 mg/mL. Before intravenous administration, inspect the syringe to ensure no particulate matter. Intramuscular or intravenous administration requires no dilution and should be at 0.2 mg over 1 to 2 minutes. Additionally, it may be administered via the tubing of a running intravenous infusion of a compatible solution.

- Oral tablets are available in 1 mg, 1.5 mg, and 2 mg strength and oral solution is available in 1mg/5mL strength. The starting dose is 1 to 2 mg twice a day and titrated upward gradually based on patient response to the treatment.

- The topical formulation is available as a single-use cloth pre-moistened with a 2.4% glycopyrronium solution. It is used no more than once every 24 hours on both underarms.

- Inhalation formulation available as the dry powder inhaler 15.6 mcg capsule twice daily and as the nebulization solution of one 25 mcg vial inhaled twice daily.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Glycopyrrolate in usual doses does not influence fetal heart rate or fetal heart rate variability to a significant extent. After parenteral administration, there is a low concentration of glycopyrrolate in umbilical venous and arterial blood and the amniotic fluid. Glycopyrrolate does not seem to penetrate through the placental barrier significantly. As animal reproduction studies are not consistently predictive of human response, this drug should be used during pregnancy only if needed. In general, because of limited data in human pregnancy studies, both atropine and glycopyrrolate are considered acceptable anticholinergics, and usage varies based on the clinician's preference.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Glycopyrrolate is a quaternary ammonium compound; it is not likely to be absorbed and reach the infant's bloodstream, particularly when given by inhalation or applied topically on the skin. Long-term oral use of glycopyrrolate might reduce milk production or milk letdown, but a single dose is unlikely to interfere with breastfeeding. Observe for signs of decreased lactation (e.g., insatiety, poor weight gain).

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**According to product labeling, dose adjustment might be necessary. Clinicain should exercise caution when using glycopyrrolate in patients with renal impairment.

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**According to product labeling, information on patients with hepatic impairment is unavailable. Use with caution.

Pediatrics Patients: Usage should generally be avoided in neonates. A hyperexcitability reaction can potentially occur with higher than recommended dosages; use with caution.