Congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigmented epithelium (CHRPE) is a term that is frequently used to describe a group of conditions that share many clinical features but differ significantly in etiology, histopathology, prognosis, and management. The following names and abbreviations have been gathered from various studies to more accurately describe and differentiate between these conditions.

- **Typical CHRPEs**are generally unilateral and solitary lesions that are not associated with systemic conditions. They develop sporadically and are almost always benign. These are the only 'true' CHRPEs.

- **Grouped pigmentation of the retina (GPR)**is also unilateral, and lesions appear similar to CHRPE but are multifocal and present in clusters within a single quadrant of the retina. They are commonly referred to as "bear tracks" and are also congenital and benign in nature, with no associated systemic conditions.

- **Pigmented ocular fundus lesions of familial adenomatous polyposis (PO-FLs)**are multifocal, similar to GPR; however, lesions are typically bilateral. Unlike other CHRPE variants, PO-FLs are associated with a group of hereditary genetic colonic polyposis conditions, described below.

Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant inherited condition that results from a mutation in the APC tumor suppressor gene. This condition is characterized by the development of hundreds of polyps within the colon that progresses to colorectal cancer in 95% of patients if left untreated. It often presents with extracolonic manifestations, one of which being CHRPE-appearing lesions in the retina.