# Continuing Education Activity

Sturge-Weber syndrome, also known as encephalotrigeminal angiomatosis, is a neurocutaneous disorder characterized by angiomas involving the face, choroid, and leptomeninges. It is the third most common neurocutaneous syndrome after neurofibromatosis and tuberous sclerosis. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of Sturge-Weber syndrome and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the epidemiology of Sturge-Weber syndrome.
- Describe the presentation of patients with Sturge-Weber syndrome.
- Outline management considerations for Sturge-Weber syndrome.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the care of patients with Sturge-Weber syndrome and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Sturge-Weber syndrome (SWS) is a neurocutaneous syndrome characterized by angiomas involving the face, choroid, and leptomeninges. The facial capillary vascular malformation is also known as "port-wine stain" or "nevus flammeus" and usually is seen in the territory of the trigeminal nerve. Sturge-Weber syndrome is also called encephalotrigeminal angiomatosis. It is the third most common neurocutaneous syndrome after neurofibromatosis and tuberous sclerosis.

# Etiology

Sturge-Weber syndrome is a sporadic developmental disorder caused by somatic mosaic mutations in the GNAQ gene which is located on the long arm of chromosome 9.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of Sturge-Weber syndrome is not well known and estimated to be 1 in 20,000-50,000 live births. SWS affects males and females equally and there is no race predilection.

# Pathophysiology

The facial nevus is composed of multiple thin-walled vessels that resemble capillaries. The neuropathological finding is an angioma that consists of multiple capillaries and small venous channels and is usually confined to the pia mater. There is a relative lack of superficial cortical veins, and the blood is shunted to the deep venous system by the enlarged medullary veins which result in stasis and ischemic changes.

# History and Physical

A seizure is usually the first neurological manifestation of Sturge-Weber syndrome. Infantile spasms are seen in approximately 90% of affected patients in the first year of life followed by atonic, tonic, or myoclonic seizures. Increasing hemiparesis commonly accompanies seizures. Seizures progressively become refractory to medication.

# Evaluation

Diagnosis of Sturge-Weber syndrome is based on typical clinical symptoms, facial appearance, and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings.

# Treatment / Management

There is no specific treatment for Sturge-Weber syndrome. The primary aim is to minimize seizure activity with anticonvulsive medications. Surgery may be considered in patients who fail medical management and continue to have refractory seizures. The surgical procedures for Sturge-Weber syndrome include hemispherectomy or focal resection of the seizure focus. Patients with bilateral involvement are typically not good candidates for surgery.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome

- Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome

- PHACES (posterior fossa abnormalities, hemangiomas, arterial anomalies, cardiac, eye, and sternal anomalies)

- Wyburg-Mason syndrome

Sturge-Weber syndrome can easily be differentiated from these conditions based on clinical history, physical examination, and brain MRI findings.

# Prognosis

The prognosis for these patients is guarded and depends on the severity of associated anomalies.

# Complications

- Seizures

- Stroke-like episodes

- Glaucoma

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The patient and parents should be made to understand that there is no cure for this disease and the maximum we can offer is to give symptomatic treatment and control the neurologic and ocular manifestations.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The management of Sturge-Weber syndrome is best accomplished with an interprofessional team approach. The team may include a geneticist, pediatricians, pediatric ophthalmologists, pediatric radiologists, pediatric neurologists, nurse practitioners, and pediatric neurosurgeons. There is no cure for the syndrome and all treatments are symptom-based. In addition to preventing seizures, patients need ophthalmology follow-up due to the risk of developing glaucoma. The skin lesions can be managed by a dermatologist. Nurses play an important role in patient and parent education.