A complete history for a patient presenting with signs or symptoms of OSA must be obtained, including symptoms of daytime sleepiness, associated sleep symptoms, snoring, coughing, or choking during sleep, morning headaches, chest pain, dyspnea, or neuropsychiatric changes. Inquiring regarding sleep hygiene and screening for other sleep-related diagnoses is also important. One of the key points is to determine whether the patient is experiencing sleepiness associated with OSA from fatigue, which indicates alternative medical diagnoses.

A comprehensive history and physical examination are crucial in the workup for suspected OSA, with special attention to all possible sites of the upper airway obstruction. The nasal cavity is carefully evaluated for conditions that decrease the patency of the nasal airway, including septal deviation, inferior turbinate hypertrophy, masses or lesions, nasal valve collapse, or adenoid hypertrophy. The oropharynx is also carefully examined with attention to factors that may decrease patency, including an enlarged or elongated soft palate or uvula, which is often seen in patients with chronic obstructive respiratory disorders. The physician also evaluates palatine tonsil hypertrophy and macroglossia and their effect on oropharyngeal airway patency. The Updated Friedmann Staging System for Obstructive Sleep Apnea is a widely used screening tool for evaluating oropharyngeal patency, including tongue position, palatine tonsil size, and body mass index into stage I-IV.

The hypopharyngeal and laryngeal evaluation includes assessing lateral pharyngeal wall anatomy and collapse, epiglottis size and shape, lingual tonsillar hypertrophy, and assessment for any obstructive lesions or masses. The evaluation of the hypopharynx and laryngeal airway remains controversial. Some advocate an awake assessment of these structures using mirror laryngoscopy or flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy. Scoring systems such as the Modified Cormack-Lehane scoring systems have been developed, which are useful for efficiently and effectively communicating laryngeal anatomy findings to evaluate obstructive sleep apnea.

Drug-induced sleep endoscopy (DISE) has emerged as an alternative evaluation of the upper airway during which the patient is evaluated by flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy while lying supine under sedation, thus providing a more physiologic representation of sleep-related dynamics of the upper airway. DISE is believed to be useful in improving treatment outcomes for patients with OSA; however, controversy exists regarding its use due to lack of standardization as well as the most appropriate use in the workup and treatment for obstructive sleep apnea.

The physical examination also includes evaluating the craniofacial skeleton with an assessment of mandibular anatomy, such as retrognathia, narrow mandibular or maxillary arches, maxillomandibular insufficiency, or any bony lesions that may affect obstruction, such as large mandibular tori. Neck anatomy should also be examined. A neck circumference greater than 17 inches for men and 15.5 inches for women is associated with an increased risk of OSA. Evaluation of general body habitus includes evaluation for obesity and adipose distribution, achondroplasia, or chest wall deformities. The physical examination should also include evaluation for possible cardiovascular sequelae, including arterial hypertension and peripheral edema.