# Introduction

Ghrelin is a peptide hormone known for its role in the stimulation of appetite and feeding behavior, energy homeostasis, and carbohydrate metabolism. Ghrelin’s orexigenic (appetite-stimulating) effects get mediated via metabolic need-driven homeostatic feeding as well as central actions on reward, memory, and motivated feeding behavior.

# Cellular Level

Ghrelin gets processed as preproghrelin, which is cleaved to proghrelin and finally ghrelin in the cell.

# Molecular Level

Ghrelin is produced mainly by the PD/D1 cells of the stomach but is also present in other tissues, including the small intestine, hypothalamus, pancreas, pituitary, and adrenal gland.

# Function

Ghrelin contributes to a large number of bodily functions, including appetite regulation and fat storage, inhibition of insulin secretion, stimulation of growth hormone release, reward processing, increased gastric acid secretion, intestinal motility, and other potential effects. It circulates in 2 forms, acyl-Ghrelin, and des-acyl ghrelin.

Ghrelin’s notable effects of appetite stimulation, increased food intake, and increased fat storage have dubbed it the “hunger hormone.” Ghrelin acts on the hypothalamus, an area of the brain which contains the satiety center which is responsible for appetite regulation. Ghrelin is thought to be part of a neural network that is involved in feeding regulation, modulating the appetitive response to food cues as well as increasing brain response in areas responsible for visual processing, attention, and memory associated with images of food.

Ghrelin is also known to inhibit insulin secretion in both humans and animals, thereby increasing blood glucose levels. In clinical studies, the administration of ghrelin in humans has resulted in increased glucose levels with little change in insulin levels.

Another function of ghrelin is the stimulation of growth hormone (GH) release from the pituitary gland. Exogenous ghrelin has been found to stimulate growth hormone release from the pituitary via a mechanism involving endogenous GH-releasing hormone.

Ghrelin is also known to act on reward-processing regions of the brain such as the amygdala; its binding activates the cholinergic-dopaminergic reward link, potentially contributing to food and alcohol addiction.

Additionally, ghrelin has been found to stimulate gastric motility as well as gastric acid secretion via a mechanism involving the vagal nerve.

Ghrelin is also thought to be involved in sleep-wake cycle regulation. Studies have shown that shorter sleep duration is associated with elevated levels of ghrelin and reduced leptin.

# Mechanism

Ghrelin levels in the body are regulated primarily by the intake of food; its secretion becomes activated when the stomach is empty (during fasting) and inhibited when it is stretched (after a meal).

Once secreted, ghrelin exerts its orexigenic effects by binding to the ghrelin/growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHS-R1-alpha).

These neurons respond to ghrelin with a variety of functions including increased appetite/food intake, increased fat storage, and sleep-wake cycle regulation; these effects contribute to ghrelin’s role in energy homeostasis

# Clinical Significance

The many functions of ghrelin have stimulated interest in several potential clinical applications including obesity, anorexia, COPD, cancer cachexia, gastroparesis, growth hormone deficiency, alcohol addiction, and many others.

Given its functions in appetite regulation, the role of ghrelin in obesity is of great interest. Multiple studies have demonstrated that, in obese individuals, there is inadequate postprandial suppression of ghrelin, leading to a continued sense of hunger and difficulty losing weight.

Ghrelin has therapeutic potential for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Emphysema, a subtype of  COPD, involves lung damage and dilation as well as extrapulmonary effects including cor pulmonale. Given ghrelin’s anti-inflammatory effects, stimulation of muscle anabolism, vasodilatory effects, and cardio-protective functions, it is being considered as a way to reduce lung inflammation and improve cardiac function in patients with emphysema.

Ghrelin has also gained interest as both a diagnostic measure and treatment in cancer. Studies have found that nearly all gastro-entero-pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors stain for ghrelin, which has led to an interest in ghrelin as a marker for therapeutic response.

Another potential clinical application of ghrelin is in the treatment of gastroparesis, a disease characterized by delayed gastric emptying causing symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, pain, early satiety, and bloating. Ghrelin receptor agonists have been a topic of research as a treatment for gastroparesis due to ghrelin’s prokinetic effects on gastrointestinal motility.

Due to ghrelin's growth hormone-stimulating effects, oral ghrelin mimetics have already received approval for diagnostic use in adult growth hormone deficiency. Clinical studies using this method have proven reliable, safe, and simple; this provides a useful alternative to the insulin tolerance test (the historical gold standard for adult growth hormone deficiency), which can be inconvenient and has contraindications in some patients such as those with conditions such as coronary heart disease or seizure disorder.

Because ghrelin is involved in reward-processing, the ghrelin system is also being studied as a target in the context of alcohol misuse disorder. Rodent studies have found that administration of ghrelin increased alcohol intake, while ghrelin receptor blockade had the opposite effect. Preliminary studies involving heavy users of alcohol have found that ghrelin administration increases alcohol cravings, while PF-5190457, a GHS-R1-alpha-blocker, appeared to reduce cravings.