The earliest prehospital ultrasound studies focused on the aeromedical field. The patients were critical and their treatment time-sensitive in nature. In 2000, Price et al. (OHSU, UC Davis) performed a study to evaluate the feasibility of carrying out a standard Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma (FAST) exam during a helicopter transport

This was a small study. It included ten sonographers, including emergency medicine attendings, residents, flight nurses, and US technologists, who performed 21 studies on 14 patients (five actual, and nine simulated). In the study, sonographers rated the difficulty of performing the ultrasound exam. The accounted for factors such as vibration, bedding, intravenous catheters, monitor cables, ventilator (least difficult), backboard straps (moderately difficult), and sunlight, patient position, spider straps, gurney position, and clothing (most difficult). The mean exam duration was 3.0 min (range 1.5 min to 5.5 min). Despite the obstructing factors, the overall result of the study was that both authors and study participants felt that ultrasound could easily be performed in the prehospital environment.

In 2001, Polk et al. performed another feasibility study of prehospital ultrasound

Melanson et al. were not as optimistic. In a study also performed in 2001, non-physician flight teams underwent three hours of training in the Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma exam and then attempted ultrasound studies on 71 patients, most of whom were victims of blunt trauma

Meanwhile, in 2002, a German group was the first to show that ultrasound can make a difference in both prehospital and hospital patient management

In 2005 through 2006, Walcher et al. performed a larger study with 230 trauma patients suffering from suspected abdominal injury

As a result of this study, Walcher et al. also recommended that prehospital providers repeat the prehospital Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma every 15 minutes. Initial prehospital ultrasound may be too early to detect significant intraabdominal bleeding.

At around the same time, other researchers began to consider the possibility of using prehospital ultrasound for reasons other than Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma exams in trauma patients. In 2003, Plummer et al. explored ultrasound as a means to differentiate shock in the prehospital setting by trying to assign patients with hypotension of unknown etiology to categories such as cardiogenic shock (left ventricular dysfunction), hypovolemia, cardiac tamponade, and right ventricular dysfunction/outflow obstruction

Also in 2004, Heegard et al. developed a template for didactic prehospital ultrasound training as well as additional hands-on training

Two years later, in 2006, a Norwegian team published the Prehospital Application of Sonography in Emergencies (PHASE) protocol, which combined lung, heart, and peritoneal scanning, in both trauma and medical patients

Ultrasound has also been shown to be of benefit in the field of disaster medicine. In 2007, Ma et al. reviewed ultrasound use in disasters such as the 1988 Armenian and 1999 Turkish earthquakes

In 2010, Jorgensen et al. then set out to review what had been accomplished in prehospital ultrasound thus far, especially in regards to trauma patients

A Danish study came to a similar conclusion in 2014 but looked at non-trauma patients. Rudolph et al. stated that at that time, there were no randomized, controlled trials on the use of prehospital ultrasound for non-trauma patients

At around the same time, a British study group found that, in the United Kingdom, there was no evidence that prehospital ultrasound had an effect on patient morbidity and mortality

Meanwhile, new and innovative advances were being made in other areas of prehospital ultrasound, although perhaps not accomplishing the large, high-powered study suggested by researchers. For example, in 2010, Breitkreutz et al. performed a prehospital study where a focused echocardiography algorithm was used in patients in shock or undergoing CPR, the focused echocardiographic evaluation in life support (FEEL)

Also in 2010, a group from Ohio State University and the University of Pennsylvania proposed the CAVEAT examination, a comprehensive sonographic examination in the evaluation of chest, abdomen, vena cava, and extremities in acute triage

In 2011, a Korean group performed a blinded prospective study where intermediate-level emergency management technicians were trained to do FAST exams in the emergency department

The prehospital ultrasound evaluation of lung pathology has also shown some promising recent developments. In 2012, Lyon et al. performed a blinded, randomized study using a cadaveric model, which indicated that prehospital providers can accurately determine the presence or absence of a sliding lung sign (SLS) on ultrasound, a useful skill when trying to diagnose a pneumothorax

Most recently, in 2013, El Sayed et al. summarized the uses for prehospital ultrasound discovered thus far, including prehospital Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma, cardiac arrest, undifferentiated shock, sliding lung sign in both pneumothorax and endotracheal intubation, and prehospital transcranial color-coded sonography in stroke patients

Back in the United States, in 2014, Taylor et al. carried out a survey of emergency management services medical directors across North America in an effort to determine current usage patterns of prehospital ultrasound

Research into the viability of prehospital ultrasound for various applications has grown even faster over the past several years; 20 studies and reviews have been published from 2015 to the present. Many of these studied the use of the Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma, but at least five studies examined lung ultrasound, and others looked at echocardiography during resuscitation, ultrasound to evaluate orotracheal tube placement, and even ultrasound-guided placement of Zone III Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta (REBOA). Although the breadth of topics and number of prehospital ultrasound studies being carried out is promising, the vast majority of these studies were small, and did not include other characteristics of high-quality studies such as blinding and randomization.