Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) has a central role in the pathophysiology of a migraine. Its metabolism is abnormal in patients with migraines, and intravenous administration of 5-hydroxytryptamine can alleviate migraine attacks. Antimigraine drugs share the ability to activate 5-hydroxytryptamine receptors. Headaches, a prominent feature of a migraine, are believed to result from the following: excessive dilatation of extracerebral cranial (dural or meningeal) arteries, arteriovenous shunts, or both; neurogenic dural plasma extravasation; or a combination of these mechanisms. Sumatriptan (3-[2-(dimethylamino)ethyl]-N-methylindole-5-methanesulfonamide) is a selective agonist of 5-hydroxytryptamine1-like receptors that block plasma leakage from the dura and venous sinuses, stimulated by perivascular trigeminal fibers that release substance P, calcitonin G-related peptide, and neurokinin A. This pain mechanism may provide the final common pathway for other cephalgias and migraines, explaining the overlap and similarities between different headache syndromes—subcutaneous administration of sumatriptan results in the rapid attainment of peak plasma levels.

Sumatriptan is a 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonist and leads to vasoconstriction in the basilar artery and the blood vessels of the dura mater. It decreases peripheral nociception either by selective cranial vasoconstriction or an effect on trigeminovascular nerves. The blocking effect of sumatriptan indicated a peripheral effect on trigeminal vascular nerves in neurogenically mediated plasma extravasation. Sumatriptan inhibits the presynaptic terminal of the trigeminal nucleus caudalis, which leads to the reversal of facial allodynia. Triptans decrease transmission of the pain impulses to the trigeminal nucleus caudalis and reduce inflammatory mediators from trigeminal nerves, therefore reducing calcitonin gene-related peptide-mediated vasodilation. Migraine pain is associated with middle cerebral artery dilatation, which leads to a lower velocity of regional cerebral blood flow. Sumatriptan reverses the dilatation of MCA, which suggests that the 5-HT receptor system has a role in the pathogenesis of a migraine.

An acute dose of sumatriptan (100 micrograms/kg) decreases the 5-HT synthesis rate in many brain regions, including the dorsal raphe nucleus. Chronically, sumatriptan (300 micrograms/kg per day) induced significant increases in the 5-HT synthesis rate in many projection areas but did not affect the dorsal raphe nucleus.