The management of Erb's palsy depends upon its severity, with some cases requiring surgical intervention while others can be managed by physiotherapy alone. Recommended treatment includes early immobilization followed by passive and active range of motion exercises. Different treatment modalities suggested for Erb Palsy are:

**Hydrotherapy**

It is a form of physical therapy used because of the anti-gravity environment. It minimizes the stress on the musculoskeletal frame, allowing the neonate to move with less pain and, at the same time, strengthening muscles and reducing spasms. Paralyzed muscles relax in the opposite position of the waiter's tip posture by abduction at the shoulder, external rotation of the arm, and supination of the forearm. In addition, hydrotherapy helps encourage normal movements in the affected arm.

**Physiotherapy**

Physiotherapy is either done alone or in combination with hydrotherapy. Response to the therapy varies from patient to patient, with some healing earlier than others. Physical therapy can be required for severe cases to accompany surgery or, in case of mild conditions to work them through strengthening the area and healing on their own. Various forms of physical therapy exercises may include gentle stretching exercises, sensory stimulation, range of motion exercises, and strength exercises.

**Occupational Therapy**

Occupational therapy is usually required after the surgery or for those who sustained long-term damage to help them deal with everyday activities such as eating, tying shoes, playing, drawing, and more.

**Surgery**

Surgical intervention is the last resort and is usually put on hold unless there is no functional recovery by physical therapy. Surgical intervention includes nerve graft and nerve decompression. Nerve graft has the best chances of success.

**Medical Therapy**

Botulinum toxin injections are sometimes used to relieve contractures.