Obesity is a chronic disease with increasing prevalence worldwide, not only in adults but also in adolescents and children, and is now considered to be a global epidemic.

Epidemiologic studies have defined obesity by the body mass index (BMI), which is calculated by dividing a person’s weight in kilograms by the square of their height in meters. That helps to stratify obesity-related health risks at a population level. A BMI greater than 30 kg/m^2 is considered diagnostic for obesity and it is further subclassified into class 1 (30 to 34.9 kg/m^2), class 2 (35 to 39.9kg/m^2), and class 3 or morbid obesity (≥ 40kg/m^2).

The main therapy for obesity includes weight loss promotion by behavioral therapy, including diet, and a healthy lifestyle with regular physical activity. Weight loss produces a significant reduction in cardiovascular risk factors, prevention of disease, and improvements in self-esteem and function. Greater weight loss produces benefits in overall mortality, but moderate weight loss (5 to 10%), such as that achieved with lifestyle modifications and medications, has also been proven to cause significant improvements in many conditions, including type 2 diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia, cardiovascular disease, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, osteoarthritis, cancer, and sleep apnea.

Along with these measures, due to the challenges involved in losing and maintaining weight, it is often indicated to implement evidence-based pharmacologic therapy to achieve a better and longer-term response in the management of obesity. Health care providers must have a shared decision with patients for weighing risks and benefits and make the decision for the most appropriate choice of pharmacotherapy that better fits in a patient's profile. If all these measures fail, or if the patient has an urgent requirement to lose weight and has failed pharmacotherapy, surgical intervention can be recommended by bariatric surgery which has also shown to improve morbidity and mortality. Of importance, patients that have failed to engage in a weight loss program and refuse to be assisted in a behavioral program, have a high chance of failure or relapse of obesity following bariatric surgery and, therefore, in this scenario, it should not be recommended.