For full-term pregnancies, vaginal delivery is indicated when spontaneous labor occurs or if amniotic and chorionic membranes rupture. In addition, for complicated gestations or for post-term pregnancies, induction of labor is indicated, which is also an indication for vaginal delivery.

For women in spontaneous labor, the consensus in the review of the literature reveals that if the woman has regular contractions that require her focus and attention combined with either sufficient effacement (greater than or equal to 80%) and/or 4-5 cm of cervical dilation, the woman is in spontaneous labor and should be admitted to the hospital for a normal spontaneous vaginal delivery. It is important to note that woman near labor can feel regular contractions, but can present without cervical effacement or dilation and can be discharged with a follow up after routine monitoring of the fetus’ heart rate and monitoring contractions with a tocodynamometer. Subsequently, some women with cervical dilation or effacement without sufficient spontaneous contractions can be admitted for augmentation and induction of labor using oxytocin.

The rupture of membranes is another indication of vaginal delivery. This may be indicated by a sudden gush of watery-fluid reported by the mother, which may be associated with a uterine contraction. Not all vaginal fluid is amniotic fluid, and this can be confirmed by multiple modalities, such as the pH of the fluid, microscopic visualization for the amniotic fluid for ferning, fetal fibronectin assays, and amniotic fluid nitrazine tests. Rupture of membranes at term gestation is an indication for vaginal delivery.

Certain conditions necessitate the induction of labor as timely delivery of pregnancy is important to peripartum outcomes of both the mother and fetus. Conditions such as post-term pregnancy (defined as gestation that is greater than 42 weeks and 0 days),