Most often, ventricular premature complexes are asymptomatic. However, some patients will report fatigue, palpitations, lightheadedness, or dizziness. In patients with pre-existing heart disease, frequent VPCs can cause dyspnea, angina, and palpitations. Patients may often report a sense of abnormal neck pulsation with palpitations when they experience VPCs. VPCs rarely may cause hemodynamic compromise leading to presyncope or syncope, mainly if they occur in sustained or frequent runs. In asymptomatic individuals, VPCs may be initially identified on a routine physical exam by an irregular rhythm consisting of a premature beat followed by a compensatory pause with subsequent return of regular rhythm, or cardiac auscultation revealing a sharp first heart sound or splitting of S2 or on a routine office electrocardiogram.

In some cases, VPC is the first manifestation of underlying structural heart disease. For this reason, in all patients with VPCs, one must perform a detailed clinical history of 12-lead EKG and chest X-ray. The indication for further evaluation by Holter-monitoring, stress test, or echocardiogram, depends on whether VPCs persist after the initial assessment of suspected structural heart disease or the onset of complex forms of ventricular arrhythmias.

For over 20 years, the accepted view is that the presence of VPCs in the absence of structural heart disease presents a favorable, benign prognosis, even when they arise frequently. Therefore treatment strategies of VPCs are planned according to the frequency of occurrence and symptoms. In some of the cases, very frequent VPCs can produce cardiomyopathy, being an indication for treatment, even in the absence of symptoms. However, the clinical importance of frequent VPCs in patients without any left ventricular dysfunction is still unclear.