# Continuing Education Activity

Vulvar hematoma is a rare but potentially fatal condition if left undiagnosed and untreated. Hence, prompt recognition of this condition is important. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of vulvar hematoma and explains the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of a vulvar hematoma.
- Explain the common presentation of a patient with vulvar hematoma.
- Outline the management options available for vulvar hematoma.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to enhance care coordination for patients affected by vulvar hematoma.

# Introduction

A vulvar hematoma is a collection of blood in the vulva. The vulva is soft tissue mainly composed of smooth muscle and loose connective tissue and is supplied by branches of the pudendal artery.

# Etiology

During labor, a vulvar hematoma can result from either direct or indirect injury to the soft tissue. Examples of causes of direct injuries include episiotomy, vaginal laceration repairs, or instrumental deliveries, while indirect injury can result from extensive stretching of the birth canal during vaginal delivery.

Non-obstetric vulvar hematomas can arise from any form of trauma to the perineum, such as a saddle injury,

# Epidemiology

Vulvar hematomas are more common in the obstetric population, with an incidence ranging from 1:300 to 1:1000 deliveries.

Non-obstetric vulvar hematoma follows a bimodal age distribution. It is more common during childhood or early adolescence because the labia majora, which is composed of fat for its protective functionality, is less developed in young pre-pubertal females.

# Pathophysiology

A hematoma is described as a collection of blood beneath an intact epidermis that presents as a swollen fluctuant lump. It can be extremely tender on palpation.

# History and Physical

Pain is the most common symptom of a vulvar hematoma. Patients can describe it as perineal, abdominal, or buttock pain.

If a vulvar hematoma is suspected, a detailed history should be taken to elicit possible causes associated with it. They include preceding coitus, accidents involving injury to their perineum, and recent deliveries or operations. It is also important to inquire about sexual assault in a sensitive manner.

As bleeding into the vulva is largely restricted only by the Colles fascia and the urogenital diaphragm, a hematoma in this area will be visible on physical examination.

During the examination, a thorough inspection should be performed for pelvic fractures and genital lacerations, especially if there is a history of significant trauma.

# Evaluation

Complete blood count (CBC), type and screen, and if deemed necessary, coagulation screening should be performed. If there is a likelihood of the need for a blood transfusion, blood should also be taken for cross-matching.

Ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis can be done to evaluate the size, site, and growth of the hematoma. MRI angiography of the pelvis may help in the detection of any aneurysms. Transperineal sonography is also a simple, non-invasive technique that can be useful for the follow-up and monitoring of patients undergoing expectant management of a vulvar hematoma.

In addition, further investigations can be done to evaluate for causes of hematoma formation, such as the presence of connective tissue disorders or coagulopathies. In cases associated with severe trauma or sexual assault, the extent of injury to the perineum and pelvis must also be assessed adequately. Additional investigations, such as a pelvic X-ray for pelvic bone fractures in cases of pelvic trauma, should be done.

# Treatment / Management

The majority of vulvar hematomas are small and can be managed conservatively. However, large (>10 cm in diameter) or progressively enlarging hematomas causing intense pain and distress to the patient require surgical intervention. Urgent surgical management is also warranted if the hematoma is large enough to cause hemodynamic instability, or urological or neurological signs and symptoms.

Conservative management usually involves the use of ice packs, local compressions, bed rest, and analgesics. In the event that conservative management has not been effective, surgery may be performed. In fact, conservative management of large hematomas has been found to be associated with a longer period of hospitalization, greater need for antibiotics, and blood transfusion

Surgical management includes surgical drainage of the hematoma, evacuation of any clots present, ligation of bleeding points, and the assessment for signs of pressure necrosis (a complication of vulva hematoma).

Alternatively, selective arterial embolization may be performed. This procedure was first described by Brown et al. for the treatment of postpartum hemorrhage.

# Differential Diagnosis

There are a few more frequently diagnosed vulvar conditions that can present similarly to a vulvar hematoma. These include Bartholin’s gland cysts and abscesses, vulvar varicosities, and folliculitis.

The Bartholin’s glands are two pea-sized glands located symmetrically at the vaginal opening. These glands function by lubricating the vagina through mucus production.

Vulvar varicosities can also be a differential diagnosis. However, it is important to note that there have been case reports of postoperative vulvar hematoma following surgical management for vulvar varicose veins.

Vulvar folliculitis arises due to inflammation of the hair follicles and often resembles acne in the genital region. Patients with vulvar folliculitis may present to the clinic with genital pain or itchiness. However, on examination, it is usually seen as small papules or pustules uniformly distributed over the vulva.

Finally, although vulvar carcinoma can present as a fleshy lump or mass, most cases have a history of pruritus and do not usually present with pain. In addition, vulvar carcinoma can also be described as ulcerated, leukoplakic, or warty.

# Prognosis

Vulvar hematomas may cause serious morbidity but rarely leads to mortality. A complete recovery is often seen. For small vulvar hematomas, most resolve spontaneously under conservative management.

# Complications

Necrosis is a complication that will necessitate surgical debridement. This complication arises due to the pressure applied by the large or growing hematoma on surrounding tissues.

As with any condition managed operatively, the risk of infection is a potential complication, and patients should follow up shortly after discharge from the hospital to check for recurrence of hematoma or infection. Prophylactic antibiotics may be prescribed if clinically indicated.

Selective pelvic arterial embolization, although not readily available, is an effective procedure in competent hands.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Early mobilization has been shown to have inherent benefits in minimizing the risk of venous thromboembolism.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Vulvar hematoma can be prevented by adopting measures to avoid the preceding causes, as mentioned above, whenever possible. Maintaining a safe home environment, such as through the use of non-slip floor material and having adequate illumination, especially at night. To minimize the risk of traumatic damage to a friable vulval epithelium in postmenopausal women, estrogen gels and other methods of therapy for vulvar and vaginal atrophy may be prescribed.

# Pearls and Other Issues

In conclusion, the main presentation of vulvar hematoma is perineal pain and unilateral swelling of the vulva. If the hematoma is not large or acutely expanding, conservative management can be considered. A serious case of vulvar hematoma can lead to hemodynamic instability and should be recognized and treated early. Surgical intervention may be necessary when the hematoma is expanding, larger than 10 cm in size, causing pressure necrosis, hemodynamic instability, or suspicion for another associated pelvic injury.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Obstetric vulvar hematoma is a concern for the obstetrician, but non-obstetric vulvar hematoma may present to the emergency clinician and primary clinicians. In the case of a small vulvar hematoma, expectant management is appropriate. Although the gynecologist is the primary clinician involved in the care of patients with a vulvar hematoma, if surgery or selective arterial embolization is necessary, an interprofessional team consisting of gynecologists, interventional radiologists, and vascular surgeons may be required. Therefore, it is important for healthcare workers in these fields to be familiar with the recognition and management of vulvar hematoma and to work together so as to provide optimal care for these patients, improve patient outcomes and reduce morbidity.