The syndrome may be secondary to adrenal hyperplasia, adrenal adenoma, aldosterone-secreting adrenal carcinoma (1%), or familial hyperaldosteronism (FH).

Various specific genetic alterations (see below) have been identified for rare familial forms of the disease. In a majority of these genetic alterations, the endpoint is Ca influx and membrane depolarization resulting in aldosterone hypersecretion.

- Familial hyperaldosteronism (FH) type 1: Unequal crossing over between highly homologous CYP11B2 and CYP11B1 genes that code of aldosterone synthase and steroid 11 B-hydroxylase, resulting in a chimeric gene that is under adrenocorticotrophin (ACTH) rather than RAS control.

- Familial hyperaldosteronism (FH) type 2: Autosomal dominant, heterogeneous, no response to dexamethasone suppression, possibly link with chromosome 7p22.

- Familial hyperaldosteronism (FH) type 3: Mutations in the gene encoding the inwardly rectifying potassium channel Kir3.4 (KCNJ5 gene). Specific mutations in the KCNJ5 gene, like those altering the G151E amino acid, are associated with a milder form of aldosteronism, compared to those with a G151R mutation that have a more severe form.

Mutations in three other genes encoding for membrane proteins (Na/K-ATPase (ATP1A), ca ATPase (ATP2B3) and Ca1.3 (CACNAID) are associated with Ca influx and/or activated calcium signaling pathways leading to increased production of aldosterone by CYP11B2 gene.

Recently, a single-nucleotide polymorphism (c.-2G>C) of the NR3C2 gene that codes for mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) has been shown to be associated with increased activation of RAS and increased blood pressure in the general population.

In most cases, the aldosteronomas arise from the zona fasciculata. There is often significant glandular hyperplasia.