**History**

Fecal incontinence can be differentiated as the following three different subtypes:

- Passive incontinence: Passive discharge of fecal material without any awareness; indicates neurological disease, impaired anorectal reflexes or sphincter dysfunction

- Urge Incontinence: Inability to retain stool despite active attempts with preserved sensation; indicates sphincter dysfunction or inability of the rectum to hold stool

- Fecal seepage: Undesired leakage of stool often after a bowel movement with normal continence.

Essential history to assess underlying etiology in FI include:

- Nature of incontinence (gas, stool consistency), history of urgency

- Onset, duration, timing

- Effect of FI on quality of life

- H/O constipation

- Medication which can cause constipation or diarrhea

- Medical history (IBD, DM, thyroid problems, spinal problem, neurological diseases, urinary incontinence)

- Obstetric history in females (use of forceps, perineal tears, number of deliveries).

There are Tools for evaluating fecal incontinence based on surveys.

**Physical Examination**

A detailed neurological exam should be performed to evaluate for neurological disease. A detailed rectal exam is a key in the evaluation of FI; it can be best divided into following steps, but the accuracy of rectal exam and evaluation of various structures depend to a large extent on examiner’s experience:

- Inspection: Examine for hemorrhoids, the presence of the fecal matter, scars, skin excoriation. Also, assess for prolapse and excess perineal descent (more than 3 cm).

- Anal wink reflex: Can be done by gently stroking perianal skin by cotton bud which will cause brisk contraction of the external anal sphincter. The absence of this reflex indicates a loss of spinal arc and possibly underlying neurological disease.

- During the digital rectal exam, a resting rectal tone should be assessed to evaluate the internal anal sphincter. After this, patients should be asked to bear down during which the function of puborectalis (to straighten the anorectal angle), as well as pelvic floor muscles, can be assessed. The final step is to ask the patient to squeeze during which increased pressure due to the contraction of the external anal sphincter is felt.

- The clinician can also insert a finger in the rectum and ask the patient to tighten the anal sphincter; this will give some idea about the muscle tone.