The management of acute mountain sickness is an interprofessional. While the physician may treat the acute symptoms, the key is to prevent the symptoms in the first place. The sports nurse, respiratory therapist, pulmonologist and physical therapist should educate the patient on the importance of staged ascents. If ever the individual develops symptoms at a certain height, the key is to go back down immediately. Anyone with symptoms following a mountain climb should seek immediate medical assistance, because the cerebral symptoms can quickly take a negative downturn. Finally, the pharmacist should educate the patient on routine prophylaxis with acetazolamide and discontinue smoking when climbing mountains. Today, there are portable oxygen sensors that one can wear which will sense the oxygen concentration in the body.

**Outcomes**

For most patients the outcome after suffering from acute mountain sickness is good; however, complete recovery may take time. Many climbers will develop symptoms of acute mountain sickness on an ascent. However, sometimes the symptoms may be delayed for 24-48 hours. One can reduce the intensity of symptoms by descending slightly and then resuming climbing. Complete resolution of symptoms can take 2-5 days, but if one continues to climb in the presence of symptoms, one can develop confusion, disorientation and lapse into a coma. Brain herniation has been reported and often the course is fatal. Those who survive may have memory and gait deficits that persist for months.