Before 2003, LGV was uncommon in the Western world. LGV was primarily endemic to tropical climates such as East/West Africa, India, Southeast Asia and the Caribbean with low prevalence in the industrialized world.

Though the determination of LGV incidence and prevalence has been challenging, data reflects a disease on the rise that disproportionately affects MSM. In 2004, as a result of the European outbreak, enhanced surveillance strategies were put in place in multiple European countries (Netherlands, UK, Germany, France, Sweden). The European Surveillance of Sexually Transmitted Infections (ESSTI) network was formed and enabled the sharing of data, along with the creation of alerts through the ESSTI_ALERT system. Using this data identified 1693 cases of LGV across eight European countries from 2004 to 2008. In all reporting countries, the incidence was trending upward. This data included countries without any LGV cases in the early stages of the outbreak, such as Denmark, Portugal, and Spain.Chlamydia infection in the US have continued to rise annually per the CDC’s surveillance data.

Patients with HIV have been disproportionately affected by LGV infections. In the ECDC data, of patients with a known HIV status, 87% of confirmed LGV cases occurred in HIV-positive patients. In a meta-analysis performed by Dougan et al., it was concluded that from 1996 to 2006, HIV-positive MSM accounted for 75% of LGV cases on average in Western Europe alone.Chlamydia infections. This data demonstrated an association that was stronger than other STIs that had reemerged during the same timeframe.

Other prevalence estimates and case-control studies have shown that HIV-infected MSM are disproportionately affected by the emergence of LGV due to an underlying pathophysiologic mechanism. Brenchley et al. proposed that acute and chronic infection with HIV cause impairment or depletion of effector-type T cells in gastrointestinal mucosa resulting in rapid depletion of CD4+ T cells.