The use of a protocolized approach in the management of ARDS with COVID-19 has been discussed in detail from the start of the pandemic. Initially, with an overwhelming number of cases in some centers, due to a shortage of equipment and staffing, a uniform approach to every case of COVID-19 remained difficult. The fluidity of the changing guidelines and discordance in the recommendations across borders led to confusion among healthcare professionals. Over the last year, a better understanding of the disease process and improvement in the quality of evidence have provided better guidelines as more evidence comes to light regarding the use of mechanical ventilation when indicated and the benefits of avoiding delays, a thorough understanding of the disease process and management protocols are pivotal to reaping the mortality benefits of available therapies.

Following the admission of a patient with moderate to severe COVID-19 ARDS, the physiology of the disease should warrant the use of medications aimed at the innate and adaptive immune system that leads to an overt immune response and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α that may potentiate lung injury and diffuse alveolar damage. Medications like corticosteroids and Baricitinib can be utilized to avoid worsening and decrease oxygen requirements. The parameters of ARDS severity as defined by the Berlin criterion should be utilized to gauge the severity of the disease.

When a patient has failed noninvasive therapy and meets the criteria for mechanical ventilation, efforts should be made to ensure the team's safety and ensure a high first-pass intubation rate. The healthcare team should have set defined goals and should do their part in aiding in patient care. Once the patient has been intubated, the measures that have shown to improve mortality, like low tidal volume ventilation, should narrate the ventilator management at every step. Prone positioning should be utilized, and appropriate steps should be taken to ensure the safe delivery of care while proning patients. The neuromuscular blockade should be utilized when needed, and the goal of care should be only to attain patient-ventilator synchrony. When the patient improves, sedation and paralysis vacation with a gradual withdrawal of mechanical support can help rehabilitate the patient back to health sooner.

Unfortunately, if the patient has not responded to mechanical ventilation, all efforts should involve the ECMO team for an early evaluation. Measures should occur to facilitate the successful implantation of ECMO, and for example, the right internal jugular vein should be avoided as a site for central line placement to allow for a smooth ECMO catheter cannulation if needed. Small efforts anticipating the possible steps ahead differentiate an expert center from others. Dissipating knowledge ensures an expert center level of care at the grassroots level in the communities. This will help provide excellent care and bring down the unacceptably high mortality associated with COVID-19 ARDS.