The adrenal cortex is the site for steroidogenesis and produces three significant steroids–glucocorticoids in the form of cortisol which regulates the body’s metabolism and immune response; the mineralocorticoid, aldosterone which modulates electrolytes, blood pressure, and vascular volume and adrenal androgens, the sex hormones which regulate secondary sex characteristics in females. Cholesterol got from endogenous synthesis, or dietary sources are the precursor for steroid synthesis. The pathway for steroid synthesis is mediated by various enzymes, including 21-hydroxylase, 11-beta-hydroxylase, and 17-alpha-hydroxylase. 21-hydroxylase is crucial in the path leading to the production of all steroids because it is required for the conversion of 17 hydroxyprogesterone (17OHP) to 11-deoxycortisol (the precursor for cortisol) and also the conversion of progesterone to 11 deoxycorticosterone (the precursor of aldosterone) while 11-beta-hydroxylase is essential for the production of cortisol and the androgen, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). Deficiency of either of these enzymes impairs production of the major steroids stimulating corticotropin mediated accumulation of cortisol precursors, causing a shift in steroid pathogenesis towards androgen production. Fetal androgen excess leads to various degrees of virilization at birth.

CAH is associated with a defective gene. The most common gene defect in 95% of cases is on CYP21A2, which is the gene coding for 21-hydroxylase, which is found on 6p21.3 as part of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex. Inefficiency produced by the specific alleles found in each patient introduces variability. Milder degrees of inefficiency lead to excessive sex hormone effects in childhood or adolescence. The mildest form interferes with ovulation and fertility in adults.