**Dopamine Receptors and Intracellular Signaling Mechanisms**

Dopamine agonists are chemical agents that bind to the dopamine receptors and activate cellular singling pathways. Dopamine receptors classify into two families based on their pharmacological, biochemical, and genetic properties: the D1-like dopamine receptor family includes D1 and D5 receptors, whereas the D2-like dopamine receptor family includes D2, D3, and D4 receptors. All dopamine receptors couple to G proteins. The D1 and D5 receptors couple to the Gs family of G proteins, and therefore an agonist binding to these receptors activate adenylyl cyclase and thus stimulates cAMP synthesis. The D2, D3, and D4 receptors couple to the Gi/o family of G proteins, and agonists inhibit adenylyl cyclase and thus cAMP synthesis. Increased intracellular cAMP activates protein kinase A, which phosphorylates many downstream protein targets, including 32-kDa dopamine and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein (DARPP-32), ionotropic glutamate receptor, and GABA receptors. Because the DARPP-32 inhibits protein phosphatase 1, this phosphoprotein regulates the phosphorylation state and thus activity of various protein kinase A target proteins and neuronal activity.

Research has shown that D1 and D2 dopamine receptors are primarily involved in the control of voluntary movement, reward and addictive behavior, and learning and memory. D2 dopamine receptors are important in the psychotic behavior manifested in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. The role of D3, D4, and D5 dopamine receptors in the brain is currently under investigation.

Dopamine receptors act not only as monomers but also as homodimers (e.g., D1-D1), heterodimers (e.g., D1-D2, D1-D3, or D2-D3), or heteromers (e.g., D2-D3-adenosine A2 receptor or D2-somatostatin receptor 5). Interestingly, D1-D2 receptor dimers, as well as D5 receptors, are coupled to the Gq family of G proteins that activate phospholipase C and increase intracellular calcium concentrations. Also, dopamine receptors may act via G protein-independent mechanisms, such as direct interactions of dopamine receptors with ion channels and cAMP-independent regulation of protein kinase B (Akt), inhibiting glycogen synthase kinase 3 activity. The latter signaling pathway has been suggested as an intracellular signaling mechanism for the development of schizophrenia, bipolar disorders, and other behavioral changes involved in dopamine receptor activity.

**Dopaminergic Pathways in the Brain**

Four major dopaminergic pathways exist in the brain: the nigrostriatal, mesolimbic, mesocortical, and tuberoinfundibular pathways. Dopaminergic neurons that originate from substantia nigra and project their axons to the dorsal striatum (nigrostriatal pathway) are involved in the coordination of voluntary movement. Parkinson disease is attributed to the decreased dopaminergic activity in the nigrostriatal pathway. Prolactin synthesis and secretion are regulated by dopaminergic neurons, originating from the hypothalamus and project towards the pituitary gland (tuberoinfundibular pathway). Neurons originating from the ventral tegmental area in the brainstem project to the nucleus accumbens to form the mesolimbic pathway, and the prefrontal cortex, to form the mesocortical pathway. The mesolimbic pathway becomes activated by addictive drugs. It may also be involved in the positive symptoms of schizophrenia, while dysfunction of the mesocortical pathway may underlie the negative symptoms of schizophrenia.

**Dopamine Agonists to Relieve Symptoms of Parkinson’s disease**

Damage to the dopaminergic neurons found in the substantia nigra has been the suggested cause of Parkinson disease. After the results of remarkable symptomatic relief by levodopa treatment, restoring dopaminergic activity has been the basis of the pharmacological treatment of Parkinson disease by administering dopamine precursors, dopamine receptor agonists, and inhibitors of dopamine metabolism. Because dopamine can’t pass the blood-brain barrier, the precursor of dopamine, levodopa, is administered. Levodopa is co-administered with carbidopa, which prevents the conversion of levodopa in the peripheral tissue and reduces side effects from high dopamine levels in the peripheral tissue. Various dopamine agonists can increase dopamine activity in the brain. The majority of dopamine agonists used in Parkinson disease are D2 dopamine receptor agonists.

**Dopamine Agonists to Treat Side Effects of Antipsychotic Agents**

Extrapyramidal symptoms similar to those in Parkinson disease are common in the patients treated with antipsychotic agents, especially first-generation drugs. The blockade of the D2 dopamine receptors in the nigrostriatal pathway is the suggested mechanism responsible for the extrapyramidal side effects. Administration of dopamine agonists or levodopa to treat antipsychotic-induced Parkinson syndrome may antagonize antipsychotic treatment and exacerbate psychotic symptoms. Atypical, second-generation antipsychotic agents exhibit lower affinity for D2 dopamine receptors and have activity at serotonin receptors, which is thought to reduce extrapyramidal side effects.

**Dopamine Agonists to Treat Hyperprolactinemia**

Dopamine gets released from the hypothalamus. It binds to dopamine D2 receptors and inhibits the synthesis and secretion of prolactin from the anterior pituitary gland. Antipsychotic agents, which have dopamine antagonist properties that block dopamine binding to its receptors. By eliminating the inhibitory effects of dopamine on prolactin secretion, hyperprolactinemia is a very common adverse effect of many antipsychotics. Estimates are that antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia occurs in up to 70% of patients. Hyperprolactinemia is more common with the typical antipsychotics than atypical, second-generation antipsychotics. Elevated prolactin has a negative feedback effect on the release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone from the hypothalamus, resulting in decreased estrogen levels in females and testosterone in the male. Clinical symptoms of hyperprolactinemia include sexual dysfunction, infertility, galactorrhea, amenorrhea in females, and gynecomastia and oligospermia in males.

**Dopamine Agonists to Treat Type 2 Diabetes**

The FDA has approved bromocriptine for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Bromocriptine is an agonist to the D2 receptor and an antagonist to the D1 receptor. Because insulin release gets inhibited by stimulation of the D2 receptor and inhibition of the D1 receptor, the molecular/cellular mechanism of action of bromocriptine in insulin release and improved glycemic control in type 2 diabetes is still unclear. It is, however, suggested that bromocriptine may improve glycemic control by normalizing hypothalamic circadian activities.

**Dopamine Agonists to Treat Hypertensive Emergency**

The D1 receptors are present on the smooth muscle of the renal, mesenteric, and coronary arteries and peripheral blood vessels in the skeletal muscle. Dopamine action on these receptors produces decreased blood pressure by reducing peripheral vascular resistance due to vasodilation. Dopamine agonists used to treat hypertensive emergencies do not show an affinity for D2 receptors.