Many organizations, including the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP), National Association of EMS Physicians (NAEMSP), and Air Medical Physician Association (AMPA), have recommendations for appropriate utilization of HEMS. When considering HEMS activation, evaluation of the following items, as outlined by the NAEMSP, can help determine appropriate HEMS activation:

- From a clinical standpoint, does the patient require minimal transport time outside of the hospital or critical care setting?

- Are there time critical evaluations or treatments for the patient which are required but unavailable at the referring facility?

- Are ground units able to access the patient for timely transport?

- Are the predicted and current weather conditions along the expected path and nearby areas amenable to rotor-wing flight?

- Do the patient and all accompanying equipment fall within the size and weight limitations of the aircraft?

- Are helipads, airports, or improved landing zones available near the referring and receiving hospitals?

- Can ground-based personnel provide the patient's care requirements, or does the patient require a higher level of care only available on a HEMS unit?

- Can local ground transport services adequately provide a local response if a unit is taken out of service for a prolonged transport?

- Is regional ground-based critical care transport a viable alternative to HEMS transportation?

It must be kept in mind that recommendations for HEMS activation are not intended to replace clinical judgment, nor are they intended to be the sole determinators as to which patients should be transported by HEMS units.