Paroxetine is administered orally. The medication should be titrated based on the patient's symptoms and tolerance to dosage. The drug can be taken with or without food. In addition to regular tablets, it is available in a controlled-release tablet and liquid form. Paroxetine may be administered at any time of the day, depending on toleration.

**Metabolism**

The steady-state mean value of T1/2 is 21 hours. Paroxetine undergoes metabolism via hepatic CYPP450 2D6. The urine excretes 2%, 62% metabolized over a 10-day post-dosing period, 36% excreted in the feces. Paroxetine inhibits CYP2D6 and, thus, its own metabolism; plasma concentrations can potentially double following dosage increases of 50%.

**For Major Depression**

Immediate-release formulas

- Adults: start with 20 mg by mouth daily and increase by 10 mg weekly with a max of 50 mg per day.

- Geriatric adults: start with 10 mg by mouth daily and then increase by 10 mg weekly with a max dose of 40 mg per day orally.

Controlled-release formulas:

- Adults: Start with 25 mg by mouth daily, then increase by 12.5 mg weekly with a max of 62.5 mg.

- Geriatrics: Start with 12.5 mg by mouth once daily, then increase to 12.5 if needed weekly.

**Generalized Anxiety Disorder**

Immediate release formulas

- Adults: 20 mg by mouth once daily. Titrate the dose by 10 mg per day at weekly intervals if required with a max dose of 60 mg per day.

- Geriatric Adults: 10 mg by mouth once daily and titrate 10 mg per day at weekly intervals. Usually effective at 20 mg by mouth daily but can increase up to 40 mg per day.

**Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorders**

Controlled-release tablet

- Adult Females: 12.5 mg per day orally. Effective doses were between 12.5 to 25 mg per day.

Immediate-release formulation

- Adult females: 5 mg per day to 30 mg per day.

**Vasomotor Disorder Secondary to Menopause**

Controlled release tablets: 12.5 mg by mouth daily and titrated to 25 mg by mouth weekly.

**Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder******

Immediate release formulation

- Adult: 20 mg once daily and increase by 10 mg per day weekly intervals if tolerated. Titrate the dose include 40 mg orally once daily with a max of 60 mg per day.

- Geriatric: 10 mg once daily. If needed, increase to 10 mg per day at weekly intervals with a max dose of 40 mg per day.

- Children and adolescents seven years and older: 10 to 50 mg by mouth; 10 mg per day increase at intervals of a week with a max of 50 mg per day.

**Panic Disorder**

Immediate-release formulation

- Adult: 10 mg orally once daily and increase the dose to 10 mg per day at weekly intervals with a target dose of 40 mg per day with a max dose of 60 mg per day.

- Geriatrics: 10 mg orally once daily and increase 10 mg per day at weekly intervals with a target dose of 40 mg per day. Max dose is 40 mg per day.

- Children and adolescents seven years and older: 10 mg orally; max dose 40 mg per day.

Controlled-release tablets

- Adults: 12.5 mg orally once daily and increase by 12.5 mg at weekly intervals. The effective dose range is 12.5 to 75 mg per day with a max dose of 75 mg daily.

- Geriatrics Adults: 12 mg by mouth daily and increase by 12.5 mg at weekly intervals. The effective dose is 12.5 to 75 mg per day. The recommended maximum dose is 50 mg per day.

**Post Traumatic Stress Disorder**

Immediate-release formulation

- Adults: 20 mg by mouth daily. Effective doses range from 20 to 50 mg per day. With a max dose of 60 mg per day.

- Geriatrics: 10 mg by mouth once daily and increase by 10 mg per day at a weekly interval. Max dose of 40 mg per day orally.

**Social Phobias**

Immediate release formulation

- Adult: 20 mg per day orally; Effective dose range is 20 to 60 mg per day; Titrate to 10 mg per day weekly; Max dose of 60 mg per day.

- Geriatric adults: 10 mg orally and titrate by 10 mg per day; target the dose 20 mg per day with a max dose of 40 mg per day.

- Children and adolescents eight years and older: 10 mg per day and titrate 10 mg per day at a weekly interval; The maximum dose of 50 mg per day orally.

Controlled release formulation

- Adult: 12.5 mg per day orally and titrate at intervals of at least one week and an increase of 12.5 mg per day; Max dose of 37.5 mg per day orally.

**Renal Impairment: Adults**

For patients with renal impairment, the dosage is based on creatinine clearance, as shown below.

- If the CrCL is 30 to 60 ml per minute: No need to change the dosing.

- If CrCl is less than 30 ml per minute:

- Immediate release formulation: 10 mg per day; increase if needed by 10 mg per day increments at an interval of at least a week; maximum dose: 40 mg per day.
- Controlled release formulation: 12.5 mg per day; increase if needed by 12.5 mg per day increments at interval one week; maximum dose: 50 mg per day.

**Hepatic Impairment Adults**

In hepatic impairment, plasma concertation of two times normal can occur.

- If mild to moderate: no change in dosage.

- If severe

- Immediate-release formulations: 10 mg per day and, if needed, increase by 10 mg per day at intervals of 1 week; maximum dose of 40 mg per day.
- Controlled release formulation: 12.5 mg per day; increase if needed by 12.5 mg per day increments at intervals of 1 week; maximum dose is 50 mg per day.