**Prevention of Rejection**

Like other solid organ transplants, an initial induction regimen with antilymphocyte/anti-thymocyte globulin (ALG/ATG) has a well-demonstrated role in reducing the incidence of acute rejection. However, their use in clinical practice has fallen since the introduction of the interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor antagonists basiliximab and daclizumab (the latter is no longer available commercially in the US).

ISHLT recommends a variety of maintenance immunosuppression regimens involving corticosteroids and 2 other agents. The most commonly adopted regimen is a calcineurin inhibitor – cyclosporin or tacrolimus with mycophenolate mofetil and prednisone.

**Treatment of Rejection**

- 
**Antibody-mediated**

There are no approved medications for the treatment of antibody-mediated lung transplant rejection. The therapeutic principle of interventions involves a reduction in circulating antibodies through intravenous immunoglobulins, exchange plasmapheresis, anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies (rituximab), or proteasome inhibitors such as bortezomib. Treatment choice is based on the severity of illness, clinical course, and response to therapy. In hyperacute rejection, antimicrobial therapy can be started until infection is ruled out.

- 
**Acute Cellular**

Treatment decision depends on two factors, the clinical features and degree of rejection on biopsy. Treatment is usually recommended for grade 3A and 4A. With lower grades of rejection, the decision may differ in between transplant centers and can be based on clinical presentation along with clinician and patient preference.

- 
**Bronchiolitis Obliterans Syndrome**

There is no clearly recommended protocol or guidelines for treatment. International Society of Heart and Lung Transplant /American Thoracic Society/ European Respiratory Society (ISHLT/ATS/ERS) suggested a trial of oral azithromycin for new-onset bronchiolitis obliterans, which may stop or reverse lung function deterioration. The dose is 250 mg per day for 5 days and then at 250 mg three times per week for a minimum of 3 months. There is no clear evidence of whether azithromycin should be continued long-term with a therapeutic response or discontinued without response.

If there is still a decline in the functional tests (FEV1/FVC) despite previous interventions, then plasmapheresis, extracorporeal photopheresis, inhaled cyclosporine, mTOR inhibitors are other potential treatments and might be used based on case-by-case selection. As gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) has been presented as a risk factor for BOS, testing for GERD is done for patients with new-onset BOS, and those patients who have confirmed reflux disease might benefit from evaluation for potential fundoplication. Although the corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment for acute lung transplant rejection, they are not recommended for the management of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome.

Treatment strategies of RAS are similar to BOS with high failure rates. There are anecdotal reports of some improvement with pirfenidone and a CD 52 antagonist alemtuzumab. More importantly, unlike BOS, retransplant outcomes in RAS are worse, and therefore lung allocation on a diagnosis of RAS involves stricter criteria.