Nerve cells can be studied histologically under light microscopy through several methods:

- Methods that highlight the cell body, the nucleus, and any organelles present in the soma but do not allow the precise study of the axon and branching.

- Methods of impregnating the nerve tissue through different heavy metal salts such as gold and silver - these approaches can allow the demonstration of the axon, despite less data on the structure of the soma are provides.

- Methods that are useful for the study of white matter (myelin sheaths)

- Immunohistochemical methods that allow highlighting neurons from glial cells but above all to identify neuronal subpopulations using antibodies directed towards specific cellular components (e.g., vesicular structures).

Methods can also divide into myelin (e.g., Weigert and Pal-Weigert) and cell (e.g., Nissl) approaches. Interestingly, the myelin-stained material can be viewed as a 'negative' image of the soma-stained section. Thus, on the myelin-stained section, soma structures appear paler, whereas myelinated regions appear darker than a corresponding soma-stained section.

There are essentially four most common methods. Of note, each of them takes the name of its inventor: the Golgi method, the Nissl method, the Weigert method, and the Cajal method. Over time, there have been proposals for several changes for each staining.

In 1873, the Italian Nobel Prize winner Camillo Golgi (1843-1926) developed the dichromate-silver impregnation technique, also known as the Golgi method.

For the study of neurons, the technic proposed by the German researcher Franz Alexander Nissl (1860-1919) is another option. Through basic aniline dyes such as cresyl violet, it intensely colors the cell body and dendrites as they contain granular endoplasmic reticulum and many free ribosomes. Due to the lack of such structures, axons are not are recognizable by Nissl's method. Despite these limitations, Nissl staining has allowed the acquisition of many notions of neurohistology. For example, the anatomist Korbinian Brodmann (1868-1918) carried out his studies on the structure of the mammalian cortex based on this type of staining. The method, thus, is still used for studying the structure of cortical layers.

Finally, the Cajal method, also termed as double impregnation technique, developed in 1891, allows the study of neurofibrils and shows fine details of the terminal branches. This method allowed for the first time to identify dendritic structures as authentic and not simply artifacts. Apart from this staining that represents a fast variant of the Golgi method, Cajal developed other methods for studying the nerve tissue, including the reduced silver nitrate method to stain neurofibrils, and the gold-sublimated staining that can be useful for staining astrocytes.

A classic method used for the study of white matter is the Weigert method for the myelin sheaths of axons, described by the German pathologist Karl Weigert (1845-1904), in 1882. Several variations, such as the Pal-Weigert method****and approaches for myelin staining, have been proposed. The Pal-Weigert method, for instance, is used for overcoming several difficulties of the original Weigert's technic such as the difficulty of observing the extent of the reaction occurring in the permanganate solution. Again, the osmium tetroxide stain colors the lipids of the myelin sheath in black but does not color the axons. Therefore, through this technic will be observed black rings corresponding to the myelin sheath of fiber the axon not colored (white) inside. A modification of the Pal-Weigert technic was proposed by Tolivia, in 1988.

Other methods are the Ruffini stain and the Bielchowsky method. The former is used for the coloring of nerve endings and large peripheral fibers and requires fresh tissue, without preventive treatments such as washing in distilled water. It involves coloring with gold chloride and maceration in glycerin for at least six months. The nerve endings appear colored in intense black on a violet background. The Bielchowsky method is a complicated and difficult approach used above all for the peripheral nervous system even if it allows a good vision of the nerve terminals. Its basis is the affinity that ammonia silver has for nerve fibers when it reduces from formaldehyde to metallic silver. If the coloring is well-performed, the nerve fibers appear intensely colored in black on a more or less intense gray background. Because of the non-rectilinear trend of the fibers, the sections must be at least 12 to 14 micrometers thick.

Although impregnation techniques, especially if well-executed, offer fascinating images of the axonal structure, these approaches have been largely replaced by immunohistochemical methods as they allow to obtain better information on neuronal connections and in vivo demonstration of the axonal functioning. These techniques use:

- antegrade tracers such as phytohemagglutinin-L (PHA-L), and biotinylated dextran amines (BDA) tracers;

- tracers for retrograde axonal transport such as the horseradish peroxidase (HRP), wheat germ agglutinin conjugated to HRP (WGA-HRP), and cholera toxin subunit B conjugated to HRP (CTB-HRP);

- mixed tracers, antegrade, and retrograde (e.g., CTB).

Moreover, recent experiments have found fluorescence microscopy to be exceptionally useful. Super-resolution fluorescence microscopy has revealed the structure of an unmyelinated axon to be made up of actin filaments that have adducin capping them at one end that form a ring-like structure around the circumference of the axon. These rings of actin connect via spectrin tetramers that orient longitudinally along the direction of the axon. It extends this cytoskeletal structure across the entire axon.