Symptoms need to be at least six weeks with negative urine cultures with no acceptable explanation or alternative diagnosis.

A baseline record of the patient's symptoms is useful to compare the efficacy of treatment. This may be in the form of a recommended pain scale index, a visual chart, or a patient-recorded 24-hour voiding diary.

Pain can be evaluated and recorded by using the interstitial cystitis symptoms index (ICSI), a visual analog chart, or the genitourinary pain index (GUPI).

Voided volumes and a 24-hour timed voiding diary document the degree and severity of the patient's urinary frequency symptoms.

IC/BPS should be considered in patients originally diagnosed with overactive bladder who do not improve on standard therapy.

Unusually high voided volumes or infrequent voiding would suggest an alternative diagnosis.

Urinary and related symptoms to record and document would include:

- Number of voids per day

- Episodes of incontinence

- Episodes of urgency

- Hematuria

- Details and characteristics of pain:

- Character
- Duration
- Dyspareunia (present or not) in women
- Dysuria present or not
- Ejaculatory dysfunction or pain (present or not) in men
- Location
- Pain relieved by voiding (yes or no)
- Presence of pressure or urge to void
- Relationship of pain to menstruation, food, or any other activity
- Severity (as well as any concomitant dysuria) should be recorded for at least a 24-hour period
- Time
- Unexplained fevers
- Vulvar pain

All patients suspected of having IC/BPS should have a neurological examination performed, including tone, reflexes, power, sensation, and cranial nerve testing.

A detailed gynecological history with a pelvic examination should be performed in all female patients suspected of IC/BPS.

An appropriate hematuria evaluation should be performed in patients with unexplained or previously unevaluated urinary blood, and considered in patients with symptoms of IC/BPS who also have a significant (10 pack-years or more) smoking history.

A detailed history and careful examination are needed to exclude other causes, as there is considerable overlap between IC/BPS and other conditions.

**Interstitial Cystitis/Bladder Pain Syndrome and Chronic Prostatitis/Chronic Pelvic Pain Syndrome**

Many experts believe that chronic prostatitis in men may often be misdiagnosed as interstitial cystitis, which may actually be the more common disorder even in males.

- Associated with psychosocial depression.

- Characterized by chronic pelvic pain and urinary symptoms, usually urgency and frequency but not incontinence.

- Diagnosis is primarily by exclusion.

- Dietary changes often have a significant impact on the disorder.

- Negative urine cultures.

- Oral medications can offer symptomatic relief.

- Pelvic floor dysfunction.

- Physical therapy offers relief to the majority of patients.

- Sensitivity to intravesical potassium instillation.

- Symptoms are aggravated by the same foods.

- Symptoms may last for years.

Men with interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome or chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome tend to have a higher incidence of erectile and ejaculatory dysfunction than normal males and were more likely to be associated with depression, pain, and stress.

Patients with IC/BPS who have not responded to standard therapy might actually have chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome, and consideration should be given to a change in therapy. Likewise, patients with chronic prostatitis who have not responded to conservative treatment should be evaluated for possible IC/BPS.

**Pudendal neuralgia**can mimic IC/BPS in many ways. Common symptoms include chronic pelvic pain, sexual dysfunction, discomfort with sexual activity, and urinary dysfunction. Pudendal neuralgia patients often have very tight, dysfunctional pelvic floor musculature, but so can patients with IC/BPS.

Patients with pudendal neuralgia tend to describe the pain as more intense and having a "burning" or "electrical shock" feeling to it.