Periodontal diseases arise as a result of several factors, including both patient-specific risk factors and inadequate oral hygiene.

The risk factors can be subdivided into modifiable risk factors, including smoking tobacco, poor oral hygiene, diabetes mellitus, and pregnancy, and non-modifiable risk factors, like age and heredity, including genetic diseases.

Inadequate oral hygiene practices play a significant role in the initiation and development of periodontal diseases. Improper oral hygiene techniques can lead to the build-up of bacteria and plaque on the teeth, initiating gingivitis and potentially progressing to periodontitis. This relationship has been demonstrated in the literature, with the increasing build-up of dental plaque being directly associated with increased severity and prevalence of periodontal diseases.

With inadequate oral hygiene, anaerobic organisms responsible for the progression of periodontal diseases can colonize in deeper areas of the periodontium where they can then execute their destructive actions. The main bacteria found in periodontitis include Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Treponema denticola, and Tannerella forsythia. When allowed to penetrate deep into the periodontium, these organisms produce inflammation by triggering the release of inflammatory mediators, and other defensive products from the host

The most noteworthy major modifiable risk factor of periodontal diseases is tobacco smoking. It can increase the risk for periodontal diseases 5-20 fold, with an odds ratio of 5.4 between smoking and chronic periodontitis. Additionally, tobacco smoking is associated with greater levels of bone loss, attachment loss, deep periodontal pockets associated with the disease, and tooth loss, as compared to non-smokers. In addition to the increased severity of periodontal diseases, tobacco smoking is also associated with a significant decrease in the effectiveness of treatments

Diabetes mellitus is also a major contributor to periodontal diseases. This disease is associated with certain pathologic processes that enhance periodontal breakdown, such as impaired wound healing. Further associations between diabetes mellitus and periodontal diseases can be found in the complications subheading. In patients with diabetes mellitus, severe periodontal disease correlates to an increased mortality risk as compared to patients with the absent or mild disease

Pregnancy is associated with fluctuations in hormone levels, changes that have been shown to promote an inflammatory response that is linked to gingivitis and periodontitis. Although not clearly understood, maternal hormones were shown to be positively correlated with levels of Porphyromonas gingivalis, a key microbe in the progression of periodontal disease. Both hypoestrogenism and hyperestrogenism have been shown to contribute to gingivitis

Age is a non-modifiable risk factor of periodontal diseases discussed extensively in the literature. Older individuals have been shown to have a more severe inflammatory response to plaque deposition, with the response containing a larger number of inflammatory cells. This aggregation of inflammatory cells puts older individuals at greater risk of experiencing the destruction of the periodontium. Additionally, due to aging being associated with a loss of dexterity, older individuals tend to be less proficient with their oral hygiene practices. This results in higher plaque levels, which is a known risk factor for the development of periodontal diseases. Furthermore, research has demonstrated increased clinical attachment loss (CAL) in individuals aged 60 to 90 as compared to those below the age of 5050

Lastly, several genetically linked systemic disorders have been shown to manifest as periodontal diseases. The etiology of the development of periodontal diseases within these systemic diseases has also been documented in the literature. These disorders include Down syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (types IV and VIII), and Crohn disease