**Pathological Findings of the Abdominal Aorta**

**Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm**

Ultrasound is highly sensitive and specific for the detection of abdominal aortic aneurysms.

Following the American College of Radiology, this author recommends that abdominal aortic diameters ≥ 3 cm should be considered aneurysmal.

Aneurysms are commonly classified as either fusiform (involving the entire diameter of the vessel) or saccular (a limited portion of the diameter is involved). This distinction is useful because the differential varies depending on the type of aneurysm.

**Intraluminal Pathology**

The abdominal aorta lumen is anechoic sonographically. Any other intraluminal appearance is likely pathological.

Hypoechoic structures adjacent to the aortic wall are likely intraluminal thrombi. Intraluminal thrombi can make the aortic lumen appear smaller; for this reason, the aortic diameter must be measured from the leading edge to the leading edge. There have also been case reports in which point-of-care ultrasound was used to identify complete aortic occlusion.

A linear echogenic structure within the lumen of the aorta, called an intimal flap, separates the aorta into two distinct lumens is thought to be highly specific for aortic dissection.

Note that the aorta becomes increasingly tortuous as people age. Sometimes, the sidewall of a tortuous aorta can appear similar to an intraluminal clot. This is further reason to image the aorta in two orthogonal axes, as pathology is usually visible in both axes.

**Post-Endovascular Graft Assessment**

Sonographers should be familiar with the normal appearance of endovascular grafts, given this increasingly common procedure. The sonographer should assess for fluid collections at the site of the graft.  Sonographers should also evaluate for endoleak by applying color and spectral Doppler and looking for flow within the aneurysm sac outside of the graft.

**Five Major Types of Endoleaks**

- Type I leaks are those that occur at the distal or proximal attachment sites.

- Type II endoleaks occur secondary to retrograde flow from aortic branch vessels into the sac.

- Type III endoleaks refer to those that occur due to the failure of the structural integrity of the graft itself.

- Type IV endoleaks occur due to the porosity of the stent.

- Type V endoleaks are those that occur when the aneurysm expands.

A 2017 Cochrane review notes that the sensitivity and specificity of color duplex ultrasound (CDUS) range from 82% to 91% and 93% to 96%, respectively.

**Pathological Findings of the Iliac Arteries**

Similar to the pathological findings discussed regarding the abdominal aorta, the iliac arteries can be aneurysmal, contain thrombi, or intraluminal flaps. The appearance of these findings is similar to those discussed above regarding the aorta. Note that the common iliac arteries are considered aneurysmal at ≥ 1.5 cm.

**Pathological Findings of the Mesenteric Arteries**

Variables such as bowel gas, body habitus, and the timing of the patient’s most recent meal can make the interpretation of doppler tracings difficult. A wide range of normal peak systolic velocities has been described for the mesenteric arteries.

**Pathological Findings of the IVC**

When visualized sonographically, the IVC should be anechoic within its lumen. Hypoechoic thrombi or IVC filters are examples of pathological intraluminal findings.

Note that the anteroposterior diameter of the IVC is often used to attempt to predict fluid responsiveness in critically ill patients. Although IVC diameter and collapsibility estimate CVP, it has not consistently shown utility in predicting a patient’s intravascular volume status or fluid responsiveness.