# Continuing Education Activity

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is one of the leading causes of death worldwide and the leading cause of death in the United States. Cardiac rehabilitation is customized to individual patients. Candidates for cardiac rehabilitation include patients with cardiovascular diseases such as ischemic heart disease, heart failure, myocardial infarctions, or patients who have undergone cardiovascular interventions such as coronary angioplasty or coronary artery bypass grafting. Cardiac rehabilitation programs aim to limit the psychological and physiological stresses associated with cardiovascular disease, reduce the risk of associated mortality, and improve cardiovascular function to help patients optimize their quality of life. This activity reviews the indications, contraindications, and phases of cardiac rehabilitation and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients undergoing cardiac rehabilitation.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the patient populations that may benefit from cardiac rehabilitation.
- Review the phases of cardiac rehabilitation.
- Outline the contraindications to cardiac rehabilitation.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for enhancing care coordination and communication to advance cardiac rehabilitation and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is one of the leading causes of death worldwide and is the leading cause of death in the United States.

Several organizations, including the American Heart Association (AHA), The American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation (AACVPR), and the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, agree that a comprehensive cardiac rehabilitation program should contain specific core components. These components should optimize cardiovascular risk reduction, reduce disability, encourage active and healthy lifestyle changes, and help maintain those healthy habits after rehabilitation is complete. Cardiac rehabilitation programs should focus on:

- Patient assessment nutritional counseling

- Weight management

- Blood pressure management

- Lipid management

- Diabetes management

- Tobacco cessation

- Psychosocial management

- Physical activity counseling

- Exercise training

# Indications

The indications for cardiac rehabilitation are:

- Recent myocardial infarction

- Acute coronary artery syndrome

- Chronic stable angina

- Congestive heart failure

- After coronary artery bypass surgery

- After a percutaneous coronary intervention

- Valvular surgery

- Cardiac transplantation

# Contraindications

Contraindications to cardiac rehabilitation only apply to the exercise aspect. They include:

- Unstable angina

- Acute decompensated congestive heart failure

- Complex ventricular arrhythmias

- Severe pulmonary hypertension (right ventricular systolic pressure greater than 60 mm Hg)

- Intracavitary thrombus

- Recent thrombophlebitis with or without pulmonary embolism

- Severe obstructive cardiomyopathies

- Severe or symptomatic aortic stenosis

- Uncontrolled inflammatory or infectious pathology

- Any musculoskeletal condition that prevents adequate participation in exercise

# Personnel

Cardiac rehabilitation under an interprofessional approach has well-established benefits.

- Patient

- Patient's family

- Physicians (surgeons, cardiologists, physiatrists, other specialists)

- Pharmacists

- Nurses

- Physical therapists

- Occupational therapists

- Speech and language pathologists

- Behavioral therapists

- Dietitian

- Case managers

# Technique or Treatment

Cardiac rehabilitation consists of three phases.

**Phase I: Clinical Phase**

- This phase begins in the inpatient setting soon after a cardiovascular event or completion of the intervention. It begins by assessing the patient's physical ability and motivation to tolerate rehabilitation. Therapists and nurses may start by guiding patients through non-strenuous exercises in the bed or at the bedside, focusing on a range of motion and limiting hospital deconditioning. The rehabilitation team may also focus on activities of daily living (ADLs) and educate the patient on avoiding excessive stress. Patients are encouraged to remain relatively rested until the completion of treatment of comorbid conditions or postoperative complications. The rehabilitation team assesses patient needs such as assistive devices, patient and family education, as well as discharge planning.

**Phase II: Outpatient Cardiac Rehab**

- Once a patient is stable and cleared by cardiology, outpatient cardiac rehabilitation may begin. Phase II typically lasts three to six weeks though some may last up to up to twelve weeks. Initially, patients have an assessment with a focus on identifying limitations in physical function, restrictions of participation secondary to comorbidities, and limitations to activities. A more rigorous patient-centered therapy plan is designed, comprising three modalities: information/advice, a tailored training program, and a relaxation program. The treatment phase intends to promote independence and lifestyle changes to prepare patients to return to their lives at home.

**Phase III: Post-cardiac Rehab**

- This phase involves more independence and self-monitoring. Phase III centers on increasing flexibility, strengthening, and aerobic conditioning. Patients receive encouragement towards maintaining an active lifestyle and continue the exercise. Outpatient visits to physician specialists are recommended to monitor cardiovascular health and medication regimens, promote healthy lifestyle changes and intervene when necessary to prevent relapse.

There is also a presurgery phase, where the patient starts cardiovascular rehabilitation. A small number of studies demonstrate that the post-surgical pathway is better tolerated by patients.

# Complications

A study in France reviewing the safety of cardiac rehabilitation found the cardiac arrest rate was 1.3 per million patient hours of exercise.

# Clinical Significance

**Benefits**

Overall cardiac rehabilitation increases the quality of life and decreases health care costs.

**Goals**

As stated above, cardiac rehabilitation goals can be designated into two broad categories:

- Short-term
- 
- Control cardiac symptoms
- Enhance functional capacity
- Limit unfavorable psychological and physiologic effects of cardiac illness
- Boost psychosocial and vocational status

- Long-term
- 
- Alter natural history of coronary artery disease
- Stabilize or reverse the progression of atherosclerosis
- Lessen the risk of sudden death and reinfarction

**Future Research**

In a systematic review of 19 random clinical trials, complex e-coaching was found to be an effective method of delivering therapies targeting physical capacity, clinical status, and psychosocial health; however, detailed protocols were not well described. Therefore, determining which aspects of e-coaching have the most benefit and need to be further developed have not been determined. In addition, basic e-coaching was not found to be effective.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Even though there is an overwhelming body of evidence to support the benefits of cardiac rehabilitation, patient participation is unusually low. Data from Medicare and the CDC reveal 14 to 35% of heart attack survivors and about 31% of coronary bypass grafting surgery patients utilized or enrolled in cardiac rehabilitation or secondary prevention programs.