**Endogenous Endophthalmitis**

Patients with endogenous fungal endophthalmitis present with variable clinical signs and symptoms, which can make diagnosis difficult. Patients most commonly present with a subacute onset of decreased vision and floaters that may be associated with a red, painful eye, ocular discomfort, and photophobia. They often have a history of immunosuppression or related aforementioned risk factors. Early or peripheral fungal lesions may be asymptomatic with a patient’s referral for ocular consultation on the basis of positive blood culture or diagnosis of systemic Candida infection.

Physical examination may reveal eyelid edema, conjunctival and circumcorneal congestion, anterior chamber inflammation with or without a hypopyon, absent red reflex, and vitreous exudates and haze. Intraretinal hemorrhages, nerve fiber layer infarcts, Roth spots (Figure 1), and cotton wool spots are nonspecific findings on fundus exam, which can be limited by intraocular inflammation obscuring the view of the fundus.

The hallmark for the diagnosis of Candida chorioretinitis is the presence of creamy white lesions at the level of the choroid and retina that is usually associated with vitreous haze. Early lesions are flat in the choroid with no or minimal vitritis. Untreated, they penetrate the blood-retina barrier and extend into the retina and vitreous. At this stage, the lesions become significantly elevated (Figure 2) and are associated with significant vitritis and later heal with scarring (Figure 3) that may result in retinal traction and tractional detachment. The lesions are commonly multiple and can be bilateral in two-thirds of cases.Candida endophthalmitis can also present with vitreal abscesses, which appear as puff ball-like lesions in the vitreous cavity.

Aspergillus endophthalmitis presents with yellow-white chorioretinal lesions involving the posterior pole that are often larger, more severe, and more likely to be hemorrhagic. Aspergillus commonly invades the retinal and choroidal vessels, which can lead to ischemic infarcts or full-thickness necrosis of the retina.

**Exogenous Endophthalmitis**

Postoperative fungal endophthalmitis manifests several weeks or months after surgery with symptoms similar to endogenous endophthalmitis.

Posttraumatic fungal endophthalmitis may occur within hours or several weeks after the traumatic injury, particularly with soil, dirty objects, or vegetable matter. Patients present with decreased vision, eye pain out of proportion to exam, edema of the eyelid, corneal ring ulcer, anterior chamber inflammation, hypopyon, vitritis, or frank purulence. The injury may be apparent, and the intraocular inflammation can appear clumped rather than diffuse on the exam. All clinical findings must be evaluated with regard to the degree of injury.

On examination of the cornea in suspected cases of fungal keratitis, the appearance of infiltrates with fuzzy or feathery borders and satellite lesions are highly suggestive of a mold infection. Frond-like projections extending from the back of the cornea into the aqueous or thick clumped material in the aqueous are concerning for the progression of fungal keratitis into endophthalmitis.