The goal of the treatment is to preserve visual function.  Treatment is directed at the elimination of infection if present and suppression of host inflammatory response. In infective conditions, the specific antimicrobial therapy gets coupled with anti-inflammatory agents, which are started 48 to 72 hours after the initiation of anti-infective agents. Treatment of noninfectious posterior uveitis is mainly corticosteroids and immunosuppressive agents. Therapy administration can be via multiple routes, including topical, periocular, and intraocular injections or systemic. It is essential to treat the underlying systemic disease, as well.

Ocular Toxoplasmosis: Treatment is a combination of antiparasitic drugs with systemic corticosteroids. **Pyrimethamine,**which is a folic acid antagonist, gets administered as a loading dose of 75 to 100 mg for 1 to 2 days, followed by 25 to 50 mg daily for four weeks. It is combined with oral folinic acid 5 mg three times a week to prevent folate deficiency.**Sulfadiazine**1 g four times daily for 3 to 4 weeks is usually in combination with pyrimethamine. Systemic steroids are typically started 72 hours after the initiation of antimicrobial therapy.

In the case of allergy to sulfonamides, clindamycin 300 mg four times daily or azithromycin 250 to 500 mg/day are therapeutic options. Sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim 800 mg/160 mg is another combination given. Atovaquone 750 mg four times daily can be dosed for 4 to 6 weeks. Spiramycin 2 g/day is the safest antiparasitic in pregnancy.

Systemic steroids serve as the mainstay of therapy in non-infective posterior uveitis. Oral Prednisolone is the most commonly given steroid at a dose of 1 to 1.5 mg/kg body weight. Vision-threatening lesions, such as those with optic nerve head or macular/foveal involvement, will require administration of intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g daily for three consecutive days should be administered, followed by oral prednisolone in tapering doses.

Steroid sparing immunomodulatory agents are useful in steroid-resistant cases or cases of complications from long term use of steroids. Systemic cyclosporine, azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, methotrexate may be administered.  Immunomodulators like tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitor like adalimumab or infliximab are also options when first-line agents fail.

Treatment of complications like choroidal neovascular membrane includes anti-VEGF agents such as bevacizumab, ranibizumab, local and systemic corticosteroids, photodynamic therapy. Surgical treatment like pars plana vitrectomy, cryotherapy, laser photocoagulation is for treatment of complications.