Patients typically present with a hard, conical projection, most commonly seen over the sun-exposed areas like face, eyelids, forearms, etc. Therefore, a history of poor or improper sun protection behaviors should raise the clinical suspicion for the presence of a horn.

Upon tactile discrimination, the examiner will find a firmly rooted exophytic growth. Absolute widths can vary from a few millimeters to several centimeters in diameter. Absolute heights of cutaneous horns are greater on average than widths by definition, but still within the range of millimeters to several centimeters. Heights greater than 1 cm are rarely encountered; however, giant horns up to 25 cm have been reported.

Regardless of its classification, horns tend to be evident, keratinous, elongated, yellowish, or white projections with a variety of sizes.

On dermoscopy, terrace morphology, indicative of benign disease, and base erythema, prognostic for malignant potential, are likely findings. Terrace morphology, defined as structural horizontal contours on the side of the horn, was recorded in the majority of cases of benign keratosis, actinic keratosis, and SCC in situ. Invasive SCC recorded the lowest significant incidence of terrace morphology. Base erythema is defined by a red, erythematous area in the base of the horn compared to the background skin within 5 mm from the horn base boundary. Base erythema occurred in over 55% of the four diagnostic categories studied by Pyne et al., which include: benign keratosis, actinic keratosis, SCC in situ, and invasive SCC. Invasive SCC displayed the greatest incidence (77%) of base erythema. Lastly, horns with a height one-to-two times greater than the base diameter have a higher incidence of malignant potential than those with lower height-to-base diameter ratios.