The immune system has the potential to produce several species of antibodies to remove a variety of different antigens. Immunoglobulins are glycoproteins produced by plasma cells known as antibodies that are present in extracellular fluid and serum. Different classes exist for Ig such as IgG with subtypes 1-4, IgA with subtypes 1-2, IgM, IgD, and IgE. Function and longevity of the subclasses differ with some living for weeks and others for hours. Anti-infectious immunity is primarily regulated by IgG, IgA, and IgM.

Ig heavy chain class switching takes place rapidly after the activation of mature naïve B cells. This results in a switch from expression of IgM and IgD to IgG, IgA, or IgE. This isotype switching of the antibody then enhances the immune reaction by adequate removal of the pathogen that initially induced the humoral response.

**X-linked Agammaglobulinemia (XLA) or Bruton Agammaglobulinemia**

Bruton tyrosine kinase gene (Btk) is essential for the development of mature B-cells. Mutations in this gene will cause low levels of plasma cells and immunoglobulins resulting in little to no humoral response.

**Common Variable Immunodeficiency (CVID)**

Defected B-cells lead to low levels of plasma cells and therefore low immunoglobulins. Defects in T cells and dendritic cells are present causing both humoral and cell-mediated immune response disturbance. CVID is defined based on age-specific levels of serum Ig, response to immunization (poor vs absent), absence of profound T-cell immunodeficiency, and any other immunodeficiency states.

**Transient Hypogammaglobulinemia of Infancy (THI)**

Seen in 3-6 months of life with low levels of immunoglobulins due to the presence of maternal antibodies crossing the placenta. This indirectly causes immunosuppression for the infant. In addition to IgG, IgM and IgA can also be suppressed during this stage. Ig levels normalize by 3 years of age in most children.

**Selective IgA Deficiency**

The main defect consists of immunoglobulin class switching. IgA bearing B lymphocyte cannot convert into an IgA secreting plasma cell.

**Hyper-IgM Syndrome**

This is a rare primary immunodeficiency disorder with normal to elevated IgM levels and decreased levels of IgG, IgA, and IgE immunoglobulins.