As discussed before, lipoprotein lipase is a potent metabolizer of triglycerides within VLDL. Mutations in this functionality will create an increased concentration of VLDL molecules and subsequently, triglycerides. This baseline elevation of triglyceride levels begins the cascade into other pathology.

Ultimately, the primary pathogenesis of pancreatitis must be understood as this is the most common effect of hypertriglyceridemia in the acute setting. Pancreatitis is a result of premature activation of pancreatic exocrine enzymes. Cleavage to active trypsin is important in the digestion of food boluses in the duodenum. However, premature activation within pancreatic tissue induces the digestion of local tissue and the initial presentation. In addition, local digestion and resolution disrupt pancreatic microvascular tissue causing an ischemia-reperfusion event at the pancreatic level.

The most common complication and precaution from hypertriglyceridemia is acute pancreatitis. The metabolism of triglycerides to free fatty acids (FFA) serves to trigger acute pancreatitis. Lipase, secreted from the pancreas, is responsible for metabolizing triglycerides to FFA. Lipotoxicity severity is dependent on both the direct response from the lipid metabolism, in addition to overall systemic inflammation levels.

Patient BMI can directly correlate to increased severity of acute pancreatitis episodes. Increased accumulation of intrapancreatic fat has been directly correlated with severe episodes of acute pancreatitis. Intrapancreatic fat becomes seeding areas for the increased development of acinar necrosis evident by macrophage infiltration. Additionally, increased calcium deposition is a prominent sign of necrosis in fat tissue due to saponification. This is relevant due to the common co-morbidities associated with familial hypertriglyceridemia discussed previously.