**Decontamination**

Due to the continued cutaneous absorption of carbamate pesticides, decontamination should take place as soon as possible. Medical providers should avoid self-contamination by wearing personal protective equipment (PPE). Neoprene or nitrile gloves provide adequate protection from cutaneous exposures, and the provider should wear full PPE with a minimum of a gown, mask, and face shield. Latex gloves do not provide adequate protection for insecticides. All clothing should be removed from the patients, and the skin should be triple-washed with water, then soap and water, and then rinsed again with water. Vomitus and diarrhea may cause cutaneous absorption in providers in cases of GI ingestions.

In massive, life-threatening ingestions, GI decontamination may be considered if (1) the patient has not had bouts of emesis, (2) the ingestion occurred within 1 hour, and (3) if the patient is protecting their airway. In this instance, nasogastric lavage can be instituted. In severe toxicity, patients may have seizures, respiratory paralysis, and coma. Airway protection should take place before GI decontamination if any of these features are present. Data is disputed regarding carbamate toxicity's adequate adsorption by activated charcoal. Some experts recommend administering 1 g/kg of single-dose activated charcoal if the patient presents within 1 hour of a massive life-threatening GI ingestion. Consultation with the poison center or regional toxicologist before GI decontamination may be a reasonable approach given the risk of aspiration of activated charcoal and the questionable benefit of this therapy.

**Respiratory**

Respiratory failure and hypoxemia is the primary cause of death after toxic exposure to AChE inhibitors. This is multifactorial secondary to bronchorrhea, muscular weakness with potential flaccid paralysis, and depression of CNS respiratory drive. After decontamination, initial patient assessment should be directed at ensuring adequate ventilation and oxygenation. Increased respiratory secretions may be treated with atropine via competitive inhibition of the excessive muscarinic receptor excitation. Early endotracheal intubation should be performed for patients with difficulty managing their respiratory secretions, comatose or severely depressed mental status, or significant skeletal muscle weakness. Depolarizing neuromuscular blockers such as succinylcholine should be avoided, as serum cholinesterases are inactivated by AChE inhibitors, and prolonged paralysis lasting up to several hours can occur. Instead, paralysis should be induced using nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockers such as rocuronium.

**Atropine**

Atropine competitively antagonizes the increased acetylcholine levels at muscarinic receptors and decreases symptoms of lacrimation, salivation, miosis, emesis, diarrhea, diaphoresis, urinary incontinence, bronchospasm, and excessive respiratory secretions. Atropine, starting at doses of 1 to 3 milligrams intravenously (IV) in adults or 0.05 mg/kg IV in pediatric patients with a minimum dose of 0.1mg, should be administered. The dose should be doubled every five minutes if the previous dose provides an inadequate response. Previous descriptions of “atropinization" (dry skin and mucous membranes, decreased bowel sounds, tachycardia, an absence of bronchospasm, and mydriasis) did not emphasize meaningful endpoints of resuscitation and treatment should be directed towards achieving cardiorespiratory stability. An adequate dose of atropine is reached when there is attenuation of tracheobronchial secretions and decreasing bronchoconstriction accompanied by adequate blood pressure and heart rate for tissue perfusion. After a stabilizing dose of atropine is reached, treatment response is maintained by a constant infusion of atropine that is usually 10% to 20% of the bolus dose per hour. Tachycardia is not a contraindication to atropine administration in patients presenting with carbamate poisoning, as tachycardia may be secondary to hypoxia and excessive bronchopulmonary secretions. Doses over 1000mg of atropine have been recorded over 24 hours to treat severe AChE inhibitor poisonings. Atropine does not reverse the skeletal muscle weakness caused by nicotinic receptor stimulation in carbamate toxicity. Patients need to have continued monitoring for potential respiratory failure, requiring mechanical ventilation after atropine administration.

**Oxime**

Pralidoxime (2-PAM) is commonly given to patients with OP toxicity early in the presentation to prevent the “aging” process as OPs irreversibly bind to AChE. Carbamates will spontaneously disassociate from AChE and recover function within 24 to 48 hours. Studies have shown potentially increased AChE inactivation if pralidoxime is administered in cases of carbaryl poisoning. However, the potential benefit from oxime therapy in aldicarb poisoning has been described. In cases of known single-agent carbamate toxicity without concern for possible concomitant OP exposure, pralidoxime therapy can be withheld. However, when faced with undifferentiated insecticide toxicity, pralidoxime can be given, as administration in carbamate toxicity is unlikely to be detrimental, and the benefit for OP intoxication is well described.

**Benzodiazepines**

Benzodiazepines are used for the treatment of seizures and agitation for intubated patients after carbamate toxicity. Limited data exist evaluating the efficacy of benzodiazepines for seizures secondary to insecticide poisonings, as seizures are uncommon in large case series of carbamate and OP toxicity. Due to this lack of data, standard abortive seizure therapy with benzodiazepines is commonly instituted.

**Disposition**

Carbamates typically have a more benign clinical course compared to OP poisonings due to transient cholinesterase inhibition and rapid reactivation of AChE enzymatic activity. Most patients will experience complete recovery within 24 hours. Patients who have depressed levels of consciousness can have significant mortality. Patients with mild initial symptoms not requiring atropine can be safely discharged after observation. Moderate poisonings will necessitate 24 hours of observation, and patients requiring atropine should be admitted to a monitored setting for continued assessment of their respiratory status.