The goal of surgical management of osteosarcoma is complete excision of the lesion, which typically takes place via resection with wide margins. Two main approaches exist to accomplish this objective: limb salvage and amputation.

**Limb Salvage**

- The vast majority of patients (about 85 to 90%) with osteosarcoma undergo limb salvage. Limb salvage involves the removal of a tumor from a limb without the removal of the entire limb itself. This process occurs in two main steps: initial resection and subsequent reconstruction. Resection is essential for the elimination of the disease. As previously mentioned, the surgical excision of the mass should also include the biopsy site/tract, with a minimum margin of 2 cm, to avoid recurrence of disease from tumor cells, which may have escaped during tissue sampling. Radiological imaging performed during the initial evaluation should be reviewed preoperatively to determine the volume of bone that requires removal. Ideally, the mass and reactive zone surrounding it should not be disturbed, such that the entirety of dissection occurs through normal healthy tissues, which typically includes an additional 6 to 7 cm of adjacent normal bone. Computer-generated anatomical reconstructions are very useful for this purpose, particularly in tumors of the flat bone of the pelvis and sacrum, where excessive resection of bone can create postoperative problems with structural stability.

- Because osteosarcoma is the most common primary osseous malignancy in the pediatric population, surgery presents a unique set of challenges. To achieve clear margins, excision may necessitate physeal resection, which can lead to growth disturbances as the child matures. In the past, a tumor that traversed the growth plate was considered to be an indication for amputation because there was no available means to restore function. With the advent of options that “grow” or expand with the patient (discussed below), masses that cross the growth plate are no longer considered a contraindication to limb salvage.

- Another difficulty that surgeons encounter in the quest for limb salvage is a mass that encompasses a joint; this is a common challenge due to the predilection of osteosarcoma for the knee. However, a combination of resection and tissue regeneration (discussed below) have helped to over this obstacle such that joint involvement is no longer considered a contraindication to limb salvage.

- After resection, reconstruction can begin. The purpose of reconstruction is the restoration of function to the affected limb. In the case of non-weight-bearing bones like the fibula or clavicle, reconstruction is unnecessary because the excision of these structures does not impart functional deficit. Reconstruction of weight-bearing bones, as one might imagine, is an arduous task. One of the greatest challenges for surgeons is a recapitulation of large swaths of missing bone. In recent years, several options have become available. These options fall into three main classes: allograft/autograft bone reconstruction, metallic (endoprosthesis) reconstruction, and tissue regeneration reconstruction.

- **Allograft/Autograft Bone Reconstruction**
- Allograft bone replacement utilizes bones collected in the postmortem period from organ donors. As with organ donation, potential donors undergo screening for communicable diseases. Once surgically grafted into the osteosarcoma patient, the native bone will grow into the allograft bone and heal. Rejection is rare because very few donor cells remain within the donated bone, and the bone itself is a relatively inert material. As one might imagine, the most serious complication that may arise with allograft reconstruction is the failure of fusion between patient bone and allograft bone. Infection and fracture are also important complications that require internal fixation or removal, respectively. A hybrid reconstructive device is available in the form of an allograft prosthetic composite (APC), which combines an allograft bone fragment with a metallic prosthesis. APC arthroplasty is useful for the reconstruction of weight-bearing joints such as the knee or hip. This device combines the easier reinsertion of a biological graft with the instant weight-bearing ability of a prosthetic.
- In centers without access to a donor bone bank, resected malignant bone can be irradiated (or less frequently, pasteurized or treated with liquid nitrogen) and reimplanted, resulting in a perfect match for the osseous defect at the surgical site. This process is known as autografting, and it can be very cost-effective. However, there are only limited indications for autografting, as donor bone for allograft is relatively easy to procure.

- **Metallic Prosthetics**
- Metallic prosthetics have revolutionized surgical reconstruction. So-called “mega prostheses” provide for the replacement of large segments of the bone and the joint that connects them. A decade ago, most of these devices had to be custom made but today, “off the shelf” options are available for immediate implantation. Some of these prostheses are expandable “growing” implants that permit interval lengthening. These are particularly efficacious in skeletally immature individuals. Because the growth plates of the affected segment of bone often get resected, the prosthesis can be elongated by 1 to 2 cm at a time, so the length of the previously diseased limb correlates with the contralateral healthy limb.

- **Tissue Regeneration**
- Tissue regeneration for reconstruction following resection of osteosarcoma is a relatively new field. In general, this process utilizes a combination of a patient’s own cells, purified intrinsic growth factors, and synthetic, scaffold-like matrix materials to induce autologous tissue regeneration. Until this emerging technology is more widely available, procedures such as the Ilizarov technique or spatial frame method utilize external fixation devices to promote the growth of long bones up to 1 millimeter per day (about 1 inch per month).

**Amputation**

- Amputation, previously considered the gold standard for surgical management of osteosarcoma, is reserved only for non-resectable masses with contamination of myotendinous and neurovascular that make limb salvage impossible. Amputation may be performed as a standalone treatment or in conjunction with rotationplasty.

- Rotationplasty is a procedure that involves resection of the lower extremity to the level of the distal femur. Resection is followed by a 180-degree rotation of the lower extremity with subsequent reattachment at the distal femur, essentially transforming the ankle into a “knee” joint such that the plantar flexors (soleus and gastrocnemius) get converted to knee extensors. The procedure has been shown to provide surprisingly favorable functionality. However, its unusual appearance has been known to cause psychological distress in some patients.

**Outcomes of Limb Salvage vs. Amputation**

- A few studies have demonstrated a slight increase in the rate of recurrence in patients with limb salvage when compared to amputees. Still, the overall rate of survival in patients who recur is comparable. Interestingly, though, several studies report higher survival rates in patients who have undergone limb salvage versus amputation. The vast majority of providers who treat osteosarcoma now favor limb salvage over amputation.