RFA is an ablation technique that creates areas of tissue necrosis by applying heat to cancerous tissues. To create the zone of ablation, alternating current is applied to the tumor via an electrode. To create a closed electrical circuit, the electrode operates as a cathode, while multiple grounding pads attached to the skin behave as an anode. Ions in close proximity to the electrode reverberate quickly while attempting to line up with the alternating current. This results in elevated temperatures within both the tumor (direct heating) as well as the surrounding tissues (indirect heating) - the combination of these effects comprise the final zone of ablation.

RFA requires 3 main pieces of equipment:

- A probe (electrode needle with deployable ablative tynes and thermocouples)

- An electrical generator

- Multiple grounding pads

There are two forms of needle electrodes. A straight, solid needle is the first type. The second type is more complex - the needle is straight but hollow, containing multiple curved tynes that are retracted until the needle tip is placed inside a lesion. Incorporated into the tips of the tynes are thermocouples which act as tiny thermometers, allowing for continuous temperature monitoring throughout the procedure. Once appropriately situated in the tumor, the electrode tynes are advanced. The extended tynes resemble the spokes of an open umbrella.

The RF generator is coupled to the electrode through insulated wires as well as multiple grounding pads, which are positioned on the skin of the thighs of the patient. The electrical generator creates an alternating current of approximately 300-500kHz (the RF range).