The main implication for the treatment of pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (PAVMs) is to prevent cerebral abscesses, stroke, and improve exercise tolerance and hypoxemia.

Patients are best managed at facilities such as hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia centers, where there are experts in PAVM treatment.

Deciding whether treatment should be offered to patients is dependent on factors such as the presence of symptoms, the feeding artery diameter, and if the patient is capable of tolerating the procedure. Patients who are asymptomatic with a feeding artery diameter (FAD) of less than 2 mm can be observed clinically, whereas patients who are symptomatic with lesions less than 2 mm or presence of grade 3 shunting warrant further treatment.

**Embolization Therapy**

The most widely used and successful form of treatment is percutaneous transcatheter embolization, which involves the occlusion of the feeding artery of the PAVM. Previously in the 1990s, only lesions with a feeding artery diameter of 3 mm or more were considered for embolization therapy. Since then, it has been reported that paradoxical emboli can occur independently of the FAD. Given these findings, embolization is now being recommended in lesions with a feeding artery diameter of less than 3 mm.

Embolotherapy can be done using either a coil or a balloon. Both techniques involve the localization of the feeding artery via angiography. A steel coil or balloon is advanced through the catheter and released at the site of the artery to disrupt blood flow. A pulmonary angiogram is repeated to ensure PAVM occlusion.

The most common complication of embolization therapy is self-limiting pleuritic chest pain, reported in 5% to 13% of cases. Less common complications include stroke, transient ischemic attack, and transient air embolization.

Follow-up is recommended three to six months post-embolization with contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography and transthoracic echocardiography and is used to confirm closure of the PAVM. If a PAVM persists at one year following initial treatment, repeat pulmonary angiography, and transcatheter embolization are indicated.

**Alternative Treatment**

Surgical excision is recommended in patients who fail embolization therapy or in patients with life-threatening pulmonary hemorrhage from a ruptured PAVM.

Lung transplantation is an option for those patients who are refractory to repeated embolization, usually in those with bilateral disease or those considered to have a high risk of mortality.

**Adjunctive Therapy**

Given the high risk of air embolism in these patients, the administration of intravenous fluids or medications should be done with caution. Scuba diving should also be avoided in this population.

Lastly, all patients should be given lifelong antibiotic prophylaxis before dental or surgical procedures to avoid the development of bacteremia and brain abscesses. This is recommended, even after embolization therapy.