Radiation therapy has been found to be more effective than NSAIDs in multiple trials. The effectiveness of indomethacin versus radiation therapy for HO prevention was compared in a prospective randomized trial comparing post-open reduction/internal fixation surgery for patients with an acetabular fracture. RT was given as 8 Gy in 1 fraction within 72 hours of surgery, and indomethacin was given for six weeks. There was a greater risk of nonunion of long bone fractures among those who received indomethacin over RT (26% versus 7%, p = 0.004)

**Radiation Dosing and Fractionation**

External beam radiation therapy for HO prophylaxis is often prescribed to a dose of 7 to 8 Gy single fraction, but various studies have shown that several fractionation and dosing regimens are acceptable. Historically, 20 Gy in 10 fractions was administered based on pediatric observational studies of bony growth inhibition. Sylvester et al. retrospectively compared this regimen to 10 Gy in 5 fractions in 27 hips after THA and found the two groups to be similarly effective

**Radiation Timing**

RT is typically given either preoperatively within 24 hours or postoperatively within 72 hours. If there is a planned surgery, it is ideal for the patient to be consulted and consented prior to surgery since the anesthesia may deem the patient unable to give informed consent. Also, the patient could be in more pain post-operatively and may not be able to lie still during treatment. However, in trauma or emergency situations, the radiation would be given post-operatively.

A randomized, multi-institutional trial by Gregoritch et al. compared patients treated with pre-op versus post-op 7-8 Gy in 1 fraction and found that the radiographic and clinical failure rate between the two groups were not significantly different

**Radiation Treatment Planning**

The general principle of treatment planning should include standard techniques with immobilization devices if necessary and placement of the patient in a comfortable position that will allow reproducibility for daily treatments. The target volumes should include the surfaces of the bone that are most often involved with HO or the periarticular HO. HO often forms between the femoral head and pelvis, either from the greater trochanter to the ilium and/or the lesser trochanter to the ischium, so these surfaces must be included in the radiation field.

The radiation techniques to treat a hip with HO have been well described for the hip as this is the most commonly treated site. The patient is treated in the supine position in a comfortable and reproducible position. Each field is customized to the patient’s anatomy, but generally the cranial border is about 3 cm above the acetabulum, the inferior border about 3 cm below the lesser trochanter of the femoral head or could include the upper 1/3 of the implant shaft (if used) with a field size of about 14 x 10 cm. Soft tissue can be blocked by a combination of collimating the field to use the field edges and/or using the multi-leaf collimators to shape the field to allow about a 1.5 to 2 cm margin on the bone and prior areas of HO. Three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3DCRT) using anterior-posterior/posterior-anterior (AP/PA) fields with 6 to 15MV photons are often used to create a homogeneous plan to cover the target to at least the 95% isodose line while minimizing dose to the surrounding soft tissue and skin [Image].

**Other Sites**

The hip is the most common site of HO development and treatment. However, other joints are also susceptible to HO. RT has been effective in these areas as well, particularly with the elbow. A study of 36 patients treated at the Cleveland Clinic with 7 Gy in 1 fraction following elbow surgery found that RT was associated with favorable functional and radiographic outcomes

**Toxicity from Radiation**

HO is not a malignant condition, yet it can cause pain, limited mobility, and negatively affect the quality of life. Thus the benefit of treatment must be weighed against the risks. Patients are often counseled that the low RT dose administered for HO prophylaxis decreases the risk of HO significantly with minimal side effects and is overall considered a safe treatment. Potential side effects are rare but include fatigue, wound healing delays, joint swelling, and an extremely low chance of secondary cancer from the RT.

Secondary malignancies from radiation can develop in the bone or tissues that were included in a previous RT field. Since the total dose that is given for HO prophylaxis is very low, the changes of secondary malignancies are also extremely low, but not zero. There have been at least two case reports describing secondary malignancies after single fraction. The first case described a 51-year-old patient who received 7 Gy x 1 for HO 15 years earlier. He underwent a second course of 7 Gy x 1 for debilitating HO but developed high-grade undifferentiated sarcoma of the proximal thigh 16 months after his second treatment

Trochanteric nonunion and wound healing complications are also potential toxicities from RT. One study found that the rate of nonunion ranged from 12% to 30% after RT, while the rate of nonunion was diminished in 2% to 15% of the time for those who did not get RT

For male patients, the RT dose to the testicles is of concern as there can be a reduction in sperm count, even from doses as low as 20 Gy. Use of testicular shielding is recommended as it can reduce dose to the testicles by approximately 50%.