Dermatofibromas have many histologic variants, including cellular, epithelioid, lipidized, aneurysmal, monster cell, and atypical (to name only a few), but the most frequently diagnosed is the common fibrous histiocytoma or common dermatofibroma.

The common dermatofibroma is characterized histopathologically by a localized proliferation of spindle-shaped fibrous cells admixed with histiocytoid cells within the dermis. This proliferation is usually nodular in appearance, with spiculated but moderately defined borders that may have a pushing appearance regarding the surrounding tissue. The spindle cells will form focally what is referred to as a “storiform” pattern, which describes a multi-centric whorling appearance of the elongated nuclei. There may be intermixed capillaries and lymphocytes or multinucleated giant cells. These proliferations are usually contained within the dermis, but it is not uncommon to observe a small portion of the lesion dipping down into the subcutaneous tissue along septal lines. A helpful and distinguishing characteristic is the presence of trapped collagen bundles or “collagen balls” within and between the fascicles of spindled fibrous cells. These entrapped collagen collections are more commonly found forming at the periphery of the lesion.

The overlying epidermis is usually separated by a clearly delineated and unaffected zone of separation, the "Grenz zone." Typical reactive epidermis changes include hyperkeratosis and acanthosis. The epidermis will also often exhibit elongated rete ridges diving into the dermis with hyperpigmented basal keratinocytes, referred to as the “dirty feet” sign.

Arguably the most important entity to distinguish dermatofibromas from is the similar-appearing, but much more worrisome, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP). These lesions are typically much more cellular, have marked storiform pattern, invade and involve the subcutis deeply, often entrapping fat as it dives and proliferates along the subcutaneous septae.