**Prevention**

Clinical assessment and accurate grading of thyroid eye disease are essential for appropriate management.

**Primary Prevention**– Smoking cessation

**Secondary Prevention**– Early detection of any dysthyroid state and prompt management to prevent disease progression.

**Tertiary Prevention**–  Artificial tears prevent the risk of exposure-keratopathy.

**Medical Management**

Prompt restoration of euthyroid status is essential.

**Mild TED**

Patients with corneal exposure and ocular surface symptoms require extensive lubrication with artificial tears, gels, and ointments. Over-night lid tapping, occlusive eye-pads, cold compresses, or sleeping with head-end elevation – are of questionable benefit.

Selenium supplements improve the quality of life, reduce inflammation, and retards TED progression.

Lid retraction < 2 mm is managed by:

- Transconjunctival injection - 5 unit botulinum toxin type A in LPS

- Transconjunctival injection - 10 mg of triamcinolone in LPS

Both techniques show excellent results with the resolution of lid retraction.

**Moderate-to-Severe TED**

**Active Cases**

Early immunosuppression is essential.

**Corticosteroids:**the first-line agent

EUGOGO management protocol is low-dose pulse therapy with intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP). 500 mg IVMP is administered weekly for the initial six weeks. Over the next six weeks, the dose is tapered to 250 mg weekly.

**Immunomodulators:**the second-line agents

Indications - steroid intolerance, steroid dependence, disease refractory to steroids, contraindications to steroid use

Methotrexate - weekly dosing of 7.5 to 10 mg shows a significant improvement in CAS and ocular motility within 12 months of treatment

Azathioprine - combined with low dose orbital radiation or IVMP for moderate-to-severe TED

Mycophenolate mofetil - standalone therapy shows better CAS response with minimal disease reactivation

**Immunobiologicals**

Rituximab - a humanized chimeric monoclonal antibody targeting CD 20 on B-cells, shows 100% response and minimal reactivation in moderate-to-severe TED.

Tocilizumab (anti-IL-6 receptor antibody), adalimumab (anti-TNF-a antibody), and infliximab (anti-TNF-a antibody) also show promising results.

Teprotumumab, a specific IGF-1R blocker, is a novel molecule. It is administered as eight infusions over 24 weeks. The improvement in CAS, proptosis, diplopia, and quality of life, with a reduction in proptosis, is comparable to surgical orbital decompression.

**Inactive Cases**

For cases with lagophthalmos, dry-eye disease symptoms, and exposure keratopathy, adequate lubrication is advised.

Appropriate surgical management yields good cosmetic results for residual proptosis, strabismus, lid retraction, and significant lagophthalmos.

**Sight-Threatening Disease**

High-dose systemic corticosteroid, 1 g IVMP for three days, is the most effective therapy for DON cases.

**Surgical Management**

Elective surgical options are reserved for inactive thyroid eye disease cases not responding to conservative or maximal medical management. During cosmetic rehabilitation, orbital decompression surgery is the primary procedure to correct proptosis. After six months, strabismus surgery achieves adequate ocular alignment. After an additional six months, a definitive lid retraction surgery helps restore the cosmetic and functional status.

Indications for orbital decompression in stable inactive TED are corneal exposure, DON, disfiguring proptosis, chronic pain/ discomfort, and congestion.

The surgical approaches are customized:

- Lateral wall decompression - by Kronlein, modified Kronlein, Stallard-Wright, Berke, and lateral eyelid crease incisions. The preferred technique is ab interno bone removal with sparing of the lateral orbital rim.

- Medial wall decompression - using trans-cutaneous, trans-conjunctival, or trans-nasal approaches. The transnasal endoscopic approach is ideal for medial wall surgeries.

- Floor decompression - trans-orbital approach by trans-cutaneous or trans-conjunctival incisions

- Two wall decompressions - combined medial wall and floor removal

- Combined lateral wall and floor decompression - trans-conjunctival or trans canthal swinging lid crease approach

- Three walls – floor, lateral wall, and medial wall, and sparing of the orbital roof

- Four wall decompression – floor, medial wall, lateral wall, posterolateral roof

- Fat decompression - in fat-predominant orbitopathy

- Balanced decompression – medial + lateral wall.

Surgical orbital decompression corrects the proptosis of 2 to 2.5 mm per wall.