**PTSD**

PTSD prognosis varies widely between individuals and can sometimes become a chronic condition. Approximately one-half of adults will recover within three months. Another one-third of patients will recover by twelve months, and a significant minority of patients may remain symptomatic after ten years. Those who will recover without treatment are likely to do so within the first year. Affected individuals are more likely to have educational or occupational problems, intimate relationship struggles, and less social support.

**Depression**

The course of MDD is variable, with less than half of cases resolving within 3 months of onset vs. approximately 80% improving within 12 months. A higher risk of recurrence is associated with major depressive episodes falling under the severe specifier and can sometimes become a chronic condition that will continue to require attention and maintenance. Studies have shown that patients who continued with pharmacotherapy for a minimum of six to twelve months following their first depressive episode experienced less risk of recurrence of symptoms compared to those who discontinued medication earlier (25% compared to 50%). While remission is the ultimate goal, trials show that continued care and collaborative treatment programs reduce the prevalence and incidence of major depressive episodes later in life.

**Suicide**

Patients with non-completed suicide attempts have a significantly increased risk for subsequent attempts. Although the risk of completed suicide is highest in the first year after an attempt, the danger can remain elevated for a decade.

**Substance Use Disorders**

One large study on VA patient-centered medical homes found that depression, severe mental illness (except for PTSD), and SUDs were associated with an increased one-year risk of hospitalization and death. The authors attributed the PTSD exemption to increased healthcare encounters in PTSD patients. This supports the idea that mental illnesses, including SUDs, are associated with poor outcomes but can be somewhat relieved by access to care.