# Continuing Education Activity

Endometrial receptivity describes the intricate process undertaken by the uterine lining to prepare for the implantation of an embryo. The accepted definition of endometrial receptivity is "the period of endometrial maturation during which the trophectoderm of the blastocyst can attach to the endometrial epithelial cells and subsequently invade the endometrial stroma and vasculature." Successful implantation and early pregnancy maintenance rely on endometrial receptivity, such that its deficiency or absence leads to early pregnancy loss and infertility. This activity reviews the concept of endometrial receptivity, embryo implantation, and the current technology available to assess endometrial receptivity.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the importance of endometrial receptivity in achieving clinical pregnancy.
- Describe the pathophysiology of endometrial receptivity.
- Identify factors that can disturb endometrial receptivity.
- Summarize the current methods for assessing endometrial receptivity.

# Introduction

Endometrial receptivity describes the intricate process undertaken by the uterine lining to prepare for the implantation of an embryo. While embryo development and endometrial preparation are concurrent yet independent processes, their synchronization is critical to the success of embryo apposition, adhesion, invasion, and further ongoing pregnancy.

Many molecular pathways involve hormones, adhesion molecules, cytokines, and growth factors acting in concert to create a synchronous window of implantation. When synchrony is lost or receptivity is not achieved, the consequence is early pregnancy loss or infertility.

# Function

Embryo implantation requires a receptive endometrium, a functional, normally developing embryo, and synchronized embryo-endometrial cross-talk.

The preparation of a receptive endometrium is established by sequential exposure to the steroid hormones estrogen and progesterone.

The cross-talk between the synchronized embryo and receptive endometrium is facilitated by estrogen and progesterone and permits the process of embryo implantation. Implantation is defined as the process by which an embryo attaches to the uterine wall and penetrates first the epithelium and then the circulatory system of the mother to form the placenta. The implantation process occurs in three steps - apposition, adhesion, and invasion.

In natural ovulatory menstrual cycles, the fertilized ovum (zygote) travels through the fallopian tube encased in the zona pellucida, a nonadhesive coating. During this journey, the fertilized ovum divides into the morula, a mass of 12 to 16 cells. Approximately 2 to 3 days after fertilization, the morula enters the uterine cavity.

Apposition involves the hatched blastocyst orienting correctly based on its polarity and weakly adhering to pinopods on the surface of the endometrium.

Adhesion results in a stronger connection between the blastocyst and endometrium. This process involves adhesion molecules, immune cells, and cytokines, namely beta-3 integrin and L selectin.

During the process of invasion, the blastocyst penetrates the epithelial layer and invades the decidual stroma in order to secure the blood supply.

Leukemia inhibiting factor (LIF) also plays a critical role in implantation. LIF is a pleiotropic cytokine from the interleukin-6 family produced by both the embryo and the endometrium. It is expressed in the luteal epithelium and decidualized stromal cells.

# Issues of Concern

Implantation failure can be caused by 1) issues related to embryo development and/or aneuploidy, 2) reduced or absent endometrial receptivity, and 3) embryo-endometrial asynchrony.

As described above, embryo maturation and endometrial development co-occur independently. In ART cycles, these two processes can diverge, resulting in an asynchronous window of implantation. Ovarian hyperstimulation leads to supraphysiological levels of estrogen and progesterone, which alter gene expression and hormone receptor presence, triggering rapid transformation to a secretory endometrium.

A large 2013 meta-analysis demonstrated that the progesterone level at which the phenomena occurs can be as low as 0.8-1.1 ng/ml and that higher progesterone levels on the day of ovulation trigger were associated with a greater reduction in pregnancy. Additionally, in a 2018 threshold analysis by Hill et al., progesterone of 2.0 ng/ml on the day of the trigger was associated with a 20% absolute reduction in a live birth in fresh cycles. They also reported that high progesterone levels on the day of ovulation trigger were positively associated with younger age, higher gonadotropin dosing, higher estrogen (E2) values during stimulation, and higher follicle count >14mm.

Endometrial receptivity can be further impaired by an imbalance of steroid hormones by way of progesterone resistance and estrogen dominance.

Estrogen dominance results in increased cell proliferation, inflammation, and angiogenesis, exacerbating the non-receptive endometrial state. In studies of endometriosis, a condition defined by excess estrogen and progesterone resistance, it has been shown that the resulting inflammation of the endometrium is associated with an overexpression of p450 aromatase, which changes the dynamic of progesterone-to-estrogen activity. The overexpression of aromatase has been associated with poor IVF outcomes.

Endometrial receptivity continues to be a very active area of research. The contributing factors to endometrial receptivity have not all been recognized and continue to be investigated.

# Clinical Significance

Understanding the molecular processes responsible for coordinating the window of implantation and facilitating normal embryo implantation is critical to developing diagnostic tests and treatments for receptivity defects that contribute to recurrent pregnancy loss, implantation failure, and infertility.

First and foremost, when an endometrial receptivity defect is due to an endometrial polyp or submucosal myoma, there is good evidence that removing these structures improves implantation and pregnancy outcomes.

When an asynchronous window of implantation is suspected based on a premature progesterone rise in fresh IVF cycles, conversion to a freeze-all cycle with a plan for a frozen embryo transfer (FET) is an efficient option to maximize the chance of pregnancy. This is supported by evidence that elevated progesterone in donor egg cycles did not affect the implantation rate in the recipient.

Regarding the prevention of a premature progesterone rise, researchers have suggested that using a mixed FSH/LH stimulation protocol is associated with a lower incidence of premature progesterone rise as compared to FSH-only protocols, likely due to LH activation of CYP 17 in theca cells, allowing for the conversion of rising progesterone to androgens, which are then subsequently aromatized to estrogen by granulosa cells.

Methods for assessing endometrial receptivity include transvaginal ultrasound imaging (TVUS), histologic evaluation by endometrial biopsy, endometrial receptivity array (ERA), and ReceptivaDx test (BCL6).

TVUS is a widely available tool that can be used to assess endometrial receptivity. TVUS can be used to measure the endometrial thickness, volume, and pattern. A recent meta-analysis found that endometrial thickness >7mm, endometrial volume >2mL, and trilaminar pattern had 99%, 93%, and 87% respective sensitivity for assessing endometrial receptivity.

Histologic evaluation of endometrial receptivity requires endometrial sampling. In the 1950s, the Noyes criteria were established to evaluate luteal phase deficiency (LPD). LPD is described as an abnormal luteal phase with a duration of less than or equal to 10 days and was one of the first known descriptions of endometrial receptivity.

The ERA is a molecular diagnostic tool used to identify a receptive endometrium via a specific transcriptomic signature present in both natural and hormone replacement therapy cycles. The technology has been applied clinically to identify a patient-specific window of implantation, which is then used to guide a personalized timing of embryo transfer for patients with recurrent implantation failure. This is done by taking an endometrial biopsy at specific times during the mid-luteal phase (LH surge+7 days in natural cycles, progesterone starts +5 days in hormone replacement/”artificial” cycles. The results of the ERA are then used to guide shifts in the timing of progesterone administration before embryo transfer in a future cycle. Most data evaluating ERA-timed embryo transfers and associated pregnancy rates have failed to see an improvement in the live birth rate in these cycles.

The ReceptivaDx test identifies endometrial receptivity defects associated with progesterone resistance. The BCL6 protein is overexpressed in women with endometriosis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients in the care of infertility practices are cared for by an interprofessional team of medical professionals, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), nurses, embryologists, lab technicians, and other health professionals. It is essential for all team members to be aware of the optimal time for the patient to achieve pregnancy to generate a thoughtful treatment plan with the highest likelihood of success; this requires open communication channels between team members and accurate, updated patient record keeping. This interprofessional approach will yield the best patient outcomes.