There are numerous diseases that affect the skin. The following discussion describes some common and uncommon diseases that affect the dermis. This discussion is not all-inclusive but demonstrates the importance of understanding the normal structure and function of the

Genetic diseases can affect dermal structure and function. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a group of genetic connective tissue disorders caused by various mutations in collagen. The mutations in dermal collagen result in skin hypermobility and fragility. Osteogenesis imperfecta is a genetic disorder of type I collagen causing decreased dermal collagen and impaired skin elasticity. FBN1 gene encoding fibrillin-1 protein. While skin complaints are not required for diagnosis, patients are prone to the development of striae distensae (stretch marks) due to rapid growth phases in adolescence.

Cushing's syndrome, chronic glucocorticoid use, and pregnancy are other conditions causing striae distensae. Glucocorticoids inhibit fibroblasts, thus disrupting the synthesis of collagen and ECM material. Histology of striae distensae reveals flattening of the epidermis with loss of rete ridges and changes in the architecture of collagen bundles coupled with elastin degeneration throughout the dermis.

The overactivity of fibroblasts have been implicated in many skin-related diseases. Myofibroblasts, expressing alpha-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), have been implicated in both hypertrophic scars and keloids.

Aging and chronic sun exposure can weaken the dermis. Solar elastosis is due to chronic ultraviolet (UV) radiation exposure, resulting in damage to elastic fibers. Histology reveals basophilic degeneration of elastic fibers in the dermis.

Urticaria is an inflammatory dermatosis characterized by vascular hyperpermeability, causing superficial dermal edema with resultant lymphatic dilation. The pathogenesis of urticaria often involves degranulation of mast cells and IgE-dependent pathways but is not true for all cases.Mycobacterium leprae infects Schwann cells of peripheral nerves leading to diminished or absent cutaneous sensation in leprosy.

Burns and ulcers are important to consider as the depth of burn or wound involvement affects patient diagnosis and management. Partial-thickness burns, also known as second-degree burns, destroy the epidermis and extend into the dermis.