It helps classify the causes of upper airway obstruction by the type of noisy breathing they can cause, i.e., stertor or stridor.

**Stertor**

A blockage can cause stertor at the level of the oral or nasal cavities or the level of the oropharynx or nasopharynx. Causes of a blockage at this level can be classified as congenital or acquired. Congenital causes of the nasal cavity or nasopharyngeal airway obstruction can cause symptoms soon after birth. Neonatal anatomy dictates that newborns are obligate nasal breathers for the first few months of life.

Bilateral choanal atresia will cause immediate upper airway obstruction and distress at birth, which is relieved by crying, as this facilitates breathing via the oral cavity. Acquired causes of nasal or nasopharyngeal obstruction include nasal turbinate hypertrophy secondary to allergic rhinitis, nasal polyposis, and nasal foreign bodies, septal deviation, or adenoidal hypertrophy. Congenital causes of upper airway obstruction at the level of the oral cavity include retrognathia (either isolated or associated with Pierre Robin Sequence), glossoptosis, macroglossia, and lymphovascular malformation. Acquired causes at this level include angioedema, Ludwig angina (floor of mouth abscess secondary to dental infection), oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer (squamous cell carcinoma most common, also consider lymphoma of tonsils), tonsillar hypertrophy, and parapharyngeal/retropharyngeal/peri-tonsillar abscess. Potential traumatic causes include penetrating neck injury, burns, or caustic injury, all of which can cause edema.

A very common cause of stertor in children is adenotonsillar hypertrophy.  This can lead to obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).

Adults also experience OSA.  However, OSA in adults has a different grading system for severity. Less than five events in an hour are normal, five to fifteen demonstrates mild sleep apnea, fifteen to thirty events correlate with moderate OSA, and anything above thirty is severe.

**Stridor**

Stridor is a high-pitched sound associated with obstruction at the level of the larynx. Congenital causes include laryngomalacia, unilateral or bilateral vocal cord palsy, laryngeal web, subglottic stenosis, subglottic hemangioma, or tracheomalacia. Acquired causes in childhood include recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP), vocal cord palsy, subglottic stenosis secondary to intubation, epiglottitis, tracheobronchitis/croup, and inhaled foreign body. It is worth noting that subglottic stenosis or subglottic hemangioma can present like croup, as they both can cause a ‘barking cough.’ It is common for patients with these causes of stridor to be treated on multiple occasions in the Emergency Department prior to being referred to an otorhinolaryngologist or pulmonologist for further evaluation. Such evaluation includes direct micro laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy.

Colloquially known as "choking," foreign body aspiration is an emergency that is more frequently encountered in children than in adults. Commonly aspirated materials in children include peanuts, buttons, and beads. One study showed that the majority of inhaled foreign bodies amongst their cohort were organic material.

Laryngomalacia is a common but usually not life-threatening form of upper airway obstruction affecting mostly neonates and can become evident within the first year of life.

Stridor in adults is usually worrying, as it can be a sign of laryngeal cancer. Adults with sudden onset stridor should be evaluated urgently, as it may signify a rapidly progressing airway emergency. Other causes of stridor in an adult include infectious causes such as epiglottitis or supraglottis, which may be caused by bacteria, fungi, or mycobacteria. Unusual causes of stridor in an adult include immunologic and auto-immune diseases such as Behcet’s disease, granulomatous polyangiitis, sarcoidosis, and amyloidosis. Acquired subglottic stenosis following prolonged intubation or trauma is also worth considering, especially in the case of biphasic stridor.

Bilateral vocal cord palsy is an uncommon but recognized cause of stridor. Airway burns are important causes of upper airway edema and inflammation, which may cause upper airway obstruction. Any patient following exposure to the fumes from a fire should be assessed, and anyone with singed nasal hairs and edema of the oral cavity should have a flexible nasendoscopy where possible and may need emergency intubation.

External compression of the trachea can occur as a congenital or acquired process. Some neonates are born with a vascular ring or aortic anomalies causing tracheal compression. In adults, a slow-growing thyroid goiter can cause tracheal compression, as can other cancers of the head and neck might impinge the larynx or trachea.