From an educational perspective, transfer-appropriate processing occurs when the cues available during information encoding/memorization are the same as those expected to be available at the time of memory recall. This approach requires a priori team task analysis to determine appropriate fidelity for task alignment for the taskwork skills related to individual performance, and the teamwork skills (cognitive, behavioral, and attitudinal) representing the performance of the team as a whole.

In the peri-surgical arena, the Oxford Non-technical skills (NOTECHS), which have both been used to assess team and behavior skills, and subsequently adapted for use in other environments.**.**Score improvement was noted in both simulated and actual trauma resuscitations after team training sessions. These higher scores were correlated with better performance in both simulated and actual team resuscitations, as evidenced by higher task completion rates and faster time to completion.  Notably, there was a higher intraclass correlation for video review situations than real-time assessments of either simulated and actual resuscitations (0.71 vs. 0.44 to 04.8, respectively).****This tool has subsequently been translated and validated with use in international multi-professional trauma simulations.

In the surgical environment, the observational teamwork assessment for surgery (OTAS) was used for the evaluation of non-technical skills. This was subsequently adapted to the medical resuscitation process through the development of the Observational Skill-based Clinical Assessment Tool for Resuscitation (OSCAR). With a Cronbach's alpha > 0.8: (0.736 to 0.96), the tool demonstrated high internal consistency in its ability to assess six behavioral domains of 3 separate rapid response team members (airway, team leader, and nurse). Investigators suggest this tool could be used in simulation centers, as well as simulated and authentic ward environments.****

The simulation team assessment tool (STAT) also evaluates domains of medical resuscitation: basic skills, circulation, human factors, and overall performance. Investigators were able to show excellent inter-rater reliability (ICC for overall performance equals 0.81), as well as the ability to discriminate between expert and resident teams (P < 0.01 for basic skills; p = 0.02 in circulation, human factors, and overall performance).****Recently, the NRP steering committee approved the use of a performance tool developed through simulated resuscitations.  The tool demonstrated excellent agreement, with an intra-class coefficient of 0.86**,**and was generalizable between academic and non-academic hospitals (p = 0.98).

The human factor skills for healthcare instrument represents an international, multidisciplinary collaboration to improve the assessment of human factors in the clinical setting. After undergoing an iterative approach to tool refinement, the final instrument was evaluated with 711 trainees. It was found to be valid and reliable in its ability to assess self-efficacy in non-technical skills across multiple clinical professions.