The target of GABA-positive allosteric modulators (PAM) is the GABA-A receptor. The GABA-A receptor is commonly composed of two α (alpha) subunits, two β (beta) subunits, and one γ (gamma) subunit that form a pentamer around the ligand-gated chloride channel. Depending on where the GABA-A receptor is in the CNS, the composition of the subunits in the GABA-A receptor will vary.

The GABA-A receptor is activated when its ligand, GABA, binds to the ligand-binding site. GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) is the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter of the central nervous system. When GABA binds to the ligand site of the GABA-A receptor, the channel opens to allow chloride into the cell. This action results in hyperpolarization of the cell and subsequently diminished action potential, preventing the release of excitatory neurotransmitters.

Drugs in this class exert their action by increasing the effects that an agonist has when achieving potentiation. Most general anesthetics are PAMs of GABA-A receptors. Positive allosteric modulators operate by increasing the frequency with which the chlorine channel opens when an agonist binds to its own site on the GABA receptor. This action results in an increase in the Cl- ion concentration in the postsynaptic neuron and causes immediate hyperpolarization of this neuron, making it less excitable and thus inhibiting the possibility of an action potential. Drugs that act like GABA agonists, the benzodiazepines, are widely used to manage seizures, muscle spasms, insomnia, delirium, and anxiety.

Most general anesthetics are positive allosteric modulators (PAM) of the GABA-A receptor. Positive allosteric modulators presumably work by enhancing the frequency of opening of the chloride channel when an agonist binds to its own receptor site on the GABA neurons. This change increases the concentration of Cl- ions in the postsynaptic neurons, which results in immediate hyperpolarization of the neuron. The result is that the neuron is less excitable and thus, unable to generate an action potential.

Alcohol (ethanol) appears to be a GABA-A receptor agonist. GABA is one of the significant inhibitory neurotransmitters in the central nervous system, and GABA-like drugs are often used therapeutically to decrease muscle spasms. The belief is that alcohol mimics the actions of GABA in the brain by binding to GABA-A receptors and inhibiting the generation of nerve action potentials/neuronal signaling.

Benzodiazepines work by increasing the frequency of chloride channel opening, which facilities GABA-A receptor potential, and reduces neuronal firing. Barbiturates work by increasing the duration of time chloride channels are opening, which facilitates GABA-A receptor potential, reducing neuronal firing. Ethanol helps potentiate GABA receptors.