Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease is also known as histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis. This is a rare benign self-limiting inflammatory disease that was first described in Japan in 1972 by Japanese pathologists Kikuchi and Fujimoto. Kikuchi disease mainly affects young and pediatric patients of Asian origin, although Kikuchi disease has been described in all ages and ethnicities. Presentation is acute to subacute, with painful, tender, mobile cervical lymphadenopathy associated with systemic symptoms including fevers, malaise, weight loss, and arthralgias; also notable are a variety of skin manifestations. Diagnosis is established through excisional lymph node biopsy, which will characteristically show a paucity of neutrophils and eosinophils, with immunohistochemistry showing histiocytes positive for myeloperoxidase and CD68, T-cells positive for CD8, and infrequent B cells. The histologic findings are crucial in differentiating Kikuchi disease from lymphomas and infectious etiologies, and cultures and serology are used to support the histologic diagnosis. While histology will appear similar in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) lymphadenitis, the presence of hematoxylin bodies in SLE lymphadenitis helps differentiate SLE from Kikuchi disease. Of note, SLE is the most common autoimmune pathology known to develop in connection with Kikuchi disease. However, unlike SLE, Kikuchi disease has a self-limiting course lasting several months, with a 3-4% recurrence rate. Management is typically supportive, with corticosteroids and immunosuppression reserved for severe or relapsing disease. The overall prognosis is excellent, with exceedingly rare complications such as hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). Diagnostic challenges do exist due to the rarity of the disease, as patients may be inappropriately treated for alternative etiologies. Thus, clinicians and pathologists can help improve patient outcomes by becoming more familiar with this rare condition.