# Introduction

Defecation is the term given for the act of expelling feces from the digestive tract via the anus. It is a complex function that requires coordinated involvement from the gastrointestinal system, the nervous system, as well as the musculoskeletal system.

# Cellular Level

The lining of the anus and rectum primarily columnar epithelium. This shifts to squamous epithelium in an area known as the transitional zone, located just superior to the dentate line.

# Development

Defecation begins as an involuntary process early in life. Through the process of toilet training, children learn to control the urge to defecate and only perform the action when it is socially acceptable to do so. The age for acquiring this skill depends on the age that toilet training began for the child, as well as the method of training used.

# Organ Systems Involved

The colon is responsible for propelling feces toward the rectum and beginning the urge to defecate. The external anal sphincter and the puborectalis muscle relax to allow the passage of feces out of the rectum. Valsalva maneuver and abdominal muscle contraction are performed to increase intra-abdominal pressure and expel feces more rapidly.

# Function

Defecation is necessary to expel undigested portions of food in addition to metabolic waste products like stercobilin from the body in the form of stool.  Stool also contains bacteria and cellular debris from the gastrointestinal tract.

# Mechanism

Colonic mass movements and peristalsis move intestinal contents distally into the rectum. Rectal filling activates mechanoreceptors in the rectal wall causing awareness of the need to defecate. As stool reaches the rectum, a small amount is allowed to pass through to the anal canal by an involuntary relaxation of the internal anal sphincter. This action, known as the rectoanal inhibitory reflex, is necessary for anal sampling, which is the process of determining if the rectal contents are of the gaseous, solid, or liquid form.

# Related Testing

Colonic and anorectal manometry can be used to assess the contraction ability of the colon and anal sphincter muscles, which is especially useful in the setting of constipation or fecal incontinence.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology associated with defecation can subdivide into the following three conditions: diarrhea, constipation, and fecal incontinence.

**Diarrhea**

Diarrhea is an increase in stool frequency, liquidity, or volume.

- Secretory

- Osmotic

- Inflammatory

- Functional

Secretory diarrhea is caused either by decreased absorption or increased secretion of electrolytes and water by the intestinal epithelium; this commonly occurs in the setting of certain infections by certain bacteria like Vibrio cholerae or with certain malignancies that increase secretion such as a VIPoma or carcinoid tumor.

Osmotic diarrhea is characterized by a substance such as lactose or gluten drawing water into the bowel down the concentration gradient. This type of diarrhea will frequently occur in malabsorption syndromes such as lactose intolerance or celiac disease. It can also result from the ingestion of osmotically active substances like magnesium or sulfate, which are common ingredients in laxatives.

Osmotic and secretory diarrhea is distinguishable from one another by calculating the fecal osmotic gap.

Fecal osmotic gap = 290 – 2 * (stool sodium + stool potassium)

A high osmotic gap (greater than 125 mOsm/kg) is characteristic of osmotic diarrhea whereas a low osmotic gap (less than 50 mOsm/kg) is more indicative of a secretory type.

Inflammatory diarrhea will occur in inflammatory bowel diseases such as Crohn disease or ulcerative colitis, as well as in certain invasive intestinal infections like Clostridium difficile or Shigella.

The most common form of functional diarrhea is irritable bowel syndrome, which is one of the functional gastrointestinal disorders. This syndrome is often considered a diagnosis of exclusion with the aid of Rome criteria.

**Constipation**

Constipation involves a decrease in defecation frequency, generally occurring 3 or fewer times per week. This can lead to hardening of the stool and straining when attempting defecation.

**Fecal Incontinence**

Fecal incontinence occurs most frequently in the elderly and is the inability to control the passage of stool.  It can be congenital, such as in the setting of spinal cord defects or anorectal malformations, or it can be an acquired condition, often associated with an injury occurring during labor or anorectal surgery.

# Clinical Significance

Changes in defecation habits (bowel habits) is a common symptom in many disease processes and a common side effect to many therapies. Additionally, these changes could indicate alarming conditions such as colorectal malignancy. The occurrence likelihood increases if the alteration in bowel motion frequency correlates with symptoms of rectal bleeding, loss of weight, anemia, palpable abdominal mass, and others.

Stool form alteration can be indicative of disease as in the case of steatorrhea. This term refers to excess fat in the stool which accompanies malabsorption related to the number of gastrointestinal conditions.

Stool content also can provide helpful diagnostic information to the clinician regarding an underlying disease process.