The three primary sites of insulin resistance are the muscle, liver, and adipose tissue. Insulin resistance is postulated to begin in muscle tissue with immune-mediated inflammatory change and excess free fatty acids, causing ectopic lipid deposition.

**Adipose Tissue**

By use of the hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp technique, researchers determined that lipolysis is most sensitive to insulin. Failure of insulin to suppress lipolysis in insulin-resistant adipose tissue, especially visceral adipose tissue, increases circulating free fatty acids. Higher levels of circulating FFAs directly affect both liver and muscle metabolism, further exacerbating insulin resistance.

**Muscle Tissue**

After intake of a caloric load and conversion to glucose, muscle is the primary site for glucose disposal, accounting for up to 70% of tissue glucose uptake. With excess calorie loads, glucose uptake by muscle exceeds capacity, and excess glucose returns to the liver where it triggers DNL. Increased DNL increases triglyceride and FFA production, causing ectopic fat deposition into the liver, muscle, and adipose tissue. As a result, insulin resistance increases as well as the production of inflammatory markers. Additional factors influencing insulin resistance in muscle tissue include physical inactivity and genetic risk.

**Hepatic Tissue**

Insulin resistance in muscle results in increased delivery of glucose substrate to the liver, which triggers DNL, with associated inflammation, and ectopic lipid deposition. Insulin resistance in adipose tissue results in increased lipolysis in adipocytes, resulting in increased circulating FFA and further exacerbating steatosis and insulin resistance in muscle tissue. In the presence of caloric intake, insulin reduces hepatic glucose production via inhibition of glycogenolysis, limiting the postprandial rise in glucose. With insulin resistance, this feedback mechanism is impaired, and hepatic glucose production continues to rise, even as postprandial glucose rises. Glucotoxicity, associated with elevated glucose levels, further contributes to insulin resistance.