The diagnosis and management of gastrointestinal malignancies require a multidisciplinary approach. Upper and lower GI endoscopies are generally the first lines of investigation for suspected gastrointestinal malignancy. Due to significant advancements in surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy, the overall survival from these cancers is on the rise. The judicial use of FDG-PET/CT in FDG avid gastrointestinal malignancies can reduce the risk of disease recurrence by accurately mapping the disease distribution and thus influencing the treatment strategy.

It has become more important to accurately stratify the patients who can benefit from curative resection because the failure of long-term survival with complete resection is often related to the failure to detect distant metastases at the time of surgery. This capability of PET/CT in detecting distant diseases justifies its use in the primary staging of FDG avid GI cancers. However, if the primary tumor is non-avid, the imaging is not reliable for assessing distant disease as the metastases are expected to match the metabolic profile of the primary tumor.

For patients undergoing neoadjuvant therapy, PET/CT can help assess poor responders and may alter management in this group of patients, although the exact time point of imaging and response criterion for PET/CT needs to be established with robust evidence through randomized control trials.

The same phenomenon by which 68Ga-DOTA-NOC PET/CT targets somatostatin receptors expressed by well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors is exploited for transporting personalized molecular radiotherapy (MRT) to these tumors; the procedure is called peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT). In this procedure, gallium-68 is replaced by a therapeutic radiotracer (mostly Lutetium-177). Before instituting therapy, the disease is mapped through Gallium PET or octreotide imaging to select the patient suitable for treatment; for the procedure to be effective, the majority of the tumor sites have to take up radiotracer above that of the liver. After therapy, planar imaging is performed to confirm the adequate distribution of radiotherapy in the disease sites.