Muscarinic agonists are agents that activate the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor. There are five different muscarinic receptors labeled M1-M5. Muscarinic agonists are parasympathomimetics, and their mechanism of action is different depending on which receptor is activated.

The M1, M3, and M5 are transmembrane receptors that couple to a Gq protein. The Gq protein upregulates phospholipase C (PLC). PLC cleaves phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into 1,2- diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3). DAG activates protein kinase C, which activates downstream protein and causes calcium influx. IP3 causes the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release stored calcium. Increased intracellular calcium causes smooth muscle contraction and exocrine glandular secretions.

The M2 and M4 receptors are Gi receptor, which inhibits adenylyl cyclase. Inhibition of adenylyl cyclase decreases cyclic adenosine 3’,5’-monophosphate (cAMP) production from ATP. The decrease in cAMP concentration subsequently decreases the activation of protein kinase A.

The clinically significant muscarinic receptors are the M1, M2, and M3 receptors.

The M1 muscarinic receptor is clinically significant in the central nervous system, and it influences neurologic functions. Muscarinic agonists play an important role in the treatment of Alzheimer disease(AD). Memory loss in Alzheimer disease patients is associated with a cholinergic deficit due to the reduced activity of choline acetyltransferase, which synthesizes acetylcholine. Another important feature of AD is the accumulation of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. Amyloid plaques are aggregates of amyloid-beta derived from cleaving amyloid precursor protein. Muscarinic agonists appear to increase the activity of a protease enzyme that cleaves amyloid precursor protein in such a manner that there is no production of amyloid-beta. Through such mechanisms, muscarinic agonists treat memory deficit and amyloid deposition in AD.

The M2 muscarinic receptor is the predominant receptor found in the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodal cells of the heart. The downstream effect, once the M2 receptor is activated, allows potassium efflux. Potassium efflux results in hyperpolarization and reduction of the action potential duration in the nodal cells. Therefore, the activation of the M2 receptor in the heart causes decreased heart rate and atrial contractility.

The M3 muscarinic receptor is clinically significant in the intestine's smooth muscle, bladder, airway, eye, exocrine glands, and blood vessels. Smooth muscle of the intestine, bladder, airway, and eye contracts when calcium concentration increase within the cell. Calcium binds with calmodulin to form a complex that can now activate the enzyme myosin light chain kinase. Myosin light chain kinase phosphorylates myosin resulting in contraction. Muscarinic agonists' action on blood vessels results in vasodilatation rather than vasoconstriction. Calcium in the endothelial cells activates nitric oxide synthase, converting L-arginine into nitric oxide. Nitric oxide diffuses into the underlying smooth muscle causing an increase in cGMP. cGMP activates myosin light chain phosphatase resulting in smooth muscle relaxation. When the endothelium is damaged, it does not produce nitric oxide and acetylcholine results in smooth muscle contraction.