Management decisions for vascular injuries of the groin will vary with clinical scenario, injured vessel, and patient stability. In hemodynamically stable patients, or patients responsive to resuscitative efforts following initial hemorrhage control, definitive repair may be necessary. Persistently hypotensive patients or patients with associated intrathoracic or intraabdominal trauma may benefit from damage-control of vascular injuries with a planned return to the operating room for definitive repair at a later time. Gastrointestinal or genitourinary injuries should be addressed to prevent ongoing abdominopelvic contamination.

Ultimately, operative intervention is required in an urgent to emergent fashion in any hemodynamically unstable patient or any patient with clinical findings of hard signs of vascular injury. Patients with imaging findings of vascular injury should undergo operative intervention for reperfusion within 6 hours,

For urgent/semi-elective cases in a stable patient with isolated vascular trauma, the lower abdomen, bilateral groins, and bilateral legs should get prepped into the field. For emergent cases, the patient should get prepped from the chest to the feet. Vascular instrumentation and suture should be immediately available or opened. Vascular shunts should be quickly available; in emergent settings, suction catheters, or drain tubing can suffice.

In the hemodynamically unstable patient, particularly those with concomitant injuries requiring operative management, the decision to forgo immediate definitive repair in favor of damage control may be necessary. Contiguous orthopedic injuries may also require temporary control of hemorrhage with definitive repair after completing orthopedic fixation. In these situations, the clinician can place and secure intraluminal arterial shunts. Shunt placement requires heparinization; patency can persist for up to 72 hours, allowing for revascularization of the lower extremity. Arterial ligation can provide definitive control of hemorrhage; however, it dramatically increases the postoperative ischemic complications and risk of amputation; iliac and femoral artery ligation confer a 50 to 80% risk of ischemia requiring amputation.

For the hemodynamically stable patient, and when feasible in the unstable patient, definitive repair should be attempted. Multiple strategies exist for arterial repair, depending on the degree and location of the injury. Small punctures and linear lacerations can undergo debridement and closure if care is taken to avoid narrowing the lumen. Larger punctures can be debrided and repaired with a vein, or less optimally bovine, patch to prevent stricture. Segmental loss of vessels less than 1 to 2 cm can have debridement to the healthy vessel, and primary anastomosis is a consideration if the ends easily approximate without tension. Long-segment loss of artery or ends that will not approximate without tension should be reconstructed with graft. Saphenous vein graft from the contralateral leg is preferred, particularly in contaminated wounds. PTFE merits consideration if the use of the saphenous vein is not feasible; adequate tissue coverage must be provided to limit the risk of graft infection. Regardless of the type of repair, several key steps must take place. Any damaged or devitalized vessel requires debridement as failure to do so increases the risk of pseudoaneurysm formation. Care must be taken to ensure no intimal flap is present to prevent dissection. Proximal and distal thrombectomy should also take place. Completion angiogram is a recommended modality for objective evaluation of distal perfusion. Data are lacking to support the use of endovascular techniques for repair.

Venous control often precedes arterial repair in simultaneous injuries to improve visualization for arterial revascularization. Venous control may be in the form of proximal and distal ligation; this increases the risk of venous hypertension and edema postoperatively. A primary venous repair is an option if practical.

Patients with peritonitis or with imaging evidence of intraabdominal injury should have an exploratory laparotomy. Temporary hemorrhage control should be obtained with abdominal packing upon entry into the peritoneal cavity. Sequential removal of packs from the four abdominal quadrants allows for localization of vascular injuries, including injuries to the liver or spleen; definitive hemostasis should be obtained with repair, ligation, or resection. Attention should then turn to the gastrointestinal tract. The small bowel requires an inspection from the ligament of Treitz to the terminal ileum; any encountered injuries should undergo resection with the creation of primary anastomosis. In an unstable patient, damage control principles encourage limiting contamination with resection or various methods of ligation, including umbilical tape and leaving the bowel in discontinuity for planned second-look laparotomy. The colon requires inspection, and mobilization of the white line of Toldt may be required. Colonic injuries should be repaired primarily or resected; in a stable patient, there is no needed for fecal diversion with ostomy formation, and primary repair/anastomosis are possible in spite of fecal contamination.

Intraperitoneal bladder injuries, whether visualized in the operating room or on imaging, require operative repair to prevent intraperitoneal spillage of urine. Single or double layer suture repair of the bladder are both options; permanent suture within the bladder lumen should be avoided to prevent nidus for stone formation. Foley catheter should be placed for bladder decompression and left in situ for two weeks to allow for healing; no sequential imaging is necessary following primary intraperitoneal repair. Extraperitoneal bladder leaks are often manageable with foley catheter alone for 2 to 3 weeks; contrast cystogram should be obtained before removal of the foley catheter to ensure resolution of the leak. Persistent urine leaks lasting longer than four weeks in spite of decompression will require surgical repair.

Urethral injuries are managed based upon location, tissue loss, and patient’s sex; the majority of urethral injuries occur in male patients. Males with anterior urethral injuries can often undergo primary repair with spatulated urethral ends; if the tissue loss is too great (greater than 2 to 3 cm bulbar urethra, over 1.5 cm penile urethra) marsupialization of the urethra with delayed (over three months) graft/flap repair is recommended. Posterior urethral injuries should have management with endoscopic alignment and foley placement in the stable patient; foley should remain in situ for four weeks. If the endoscopic alignment fails or in the unstable patient, it requires placement of a suprapubic catheter should, and urethral repair should be delayed (with care taken to ensure repair less than two weeks after injury). Female urethra injuries are rare; most are primarily repairable.

A perioperative dose of antibiotics is a requirement in the operative setting; however, the continuation of antibiotics in the postoperative setting is not indicated unless the patient develops evidence of septic complication.