Numerous clinical conditions associated with cerebral aneurysms have been discussed earlier. When encountering these conditions, an increased index of clinical suspicion and heightened surveillance is necessary. However, as a group, the presentation of intracranial aneurysms in children is quite similar to that of adults, though there are clinical features that are unique to pediatric aneurysms. Subarachnoid Hemorrhage (SAH) remains the most common initial manifestation of cerebral aneurysms in both adults and children.

**Subarachnoid Hemorrhage**

SAH remains the most common initial manifestation of cerebral aneurysms in both adults and children. Rates of SAH in children can range from 1.9% to 4.6%. Increased recognition of SAH in children is likely the result of improved diagnostic capabilities and increased clinical awareness.

For children with aneurysms, the incidence of rupture is surprisingly high. Amacher and Drake reported that 65% of their 52 childhood cases had already ruptured at diagnosis. Our own experience mirrors Drake’s experience, with a 74% incidence of SAH. When compared to the adult population, a greater proportion of childhood aneurysms are symptomatic at the time of diagnosis.

The onset of SAH is typically sudden, with headache, vomiting, deterioration in consciousness, seizures, coma, paresis, cranial nerve palsies, fever, and meningismus commonly reported. Warning signs heralding a major bleed are sometimes seen in the form of a "sentinel bleed" with an associated headache in 10 to 15% of patients. Patients can also present with focal neurological deficits correlating with the expansion of the aneurysm or, symptoms of mass effect and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) obstruction in the scenario of giant aneurysms. Unlike SAH, these warning signs are often transient and can be challenging to find in children. Aneurysms remain the leading cause of atraumatic SAH in patients under the age of 20.

Of children with aneurysms that rupture, the estimated mortality rate after the first bleed is 11 to 20%, as compared to 20 to 30% in adults. Of the ruptured aneurysms in our own experience, 7% rebled, with a subsequent 25% mortality rate. Proust reported a 52.4%incidence of rebleed in 22 pediatric aneurysm patients. The overall mortality rate of children with ruptured aneurysms ranges from 13 to 34% in the larger series.

**Mass Symptoms**

A large proportion of children present with signs and symptoms of a mass lesion. In our experience of 52 children with aneurysms, one third presented with signs of increased intracranial pressure. This finding shows special emphasis in certain clinical subgroups including children under the age of 5 years (56%, mass symptoms) and cases of giant aneurysms (90%). Concurrently, hydrocephalus was observed in 30% of all cases. Giant aneurysms (56%), posterior circulation lesions (60%), and early childhood cases (younger than five years; [36%]) were particularly prone to the development of obstructed CSF flow.

Findings such as lethargy; nausea; vomiting; a tense, anterior fontanelle; splayed sutures; papilledema; opisthotonic posture; and paresis or plegia can be present in children with mass effect related to an aneurysm.

Mass symptoms often correlate with ICH in children with ruptured aneurysms. Intraparenchymal and interventricular hemorrhage can often occur in conjunction with the initial SAH with an incidence of 30 to 40%.

The predilection for childhood aneurysms at the internal carotid bifurcation and distal middle cerebral vessels is thought to be partially responsible for ICH at presentation. The presence of ICH is associated with a higher risk of mortality and overall poorer prognosis. In one study of 43 children, the overall mortality of cases with an ICH (50%) was twice that of children without ICH (24%).

Enlargement of an aneurysm, hematoma formation, or hydrocephalus can often lead to focal neurological findings from cranial nerve parenchymal compression, which can include sixth-nerve palsies, focal third-nerve palsies, ophthalmoplegia, dysphasia, and other lower cranial palsies. Hemiparesis, hemiplegia, and quadriparesis secondary to pyramidal compression may also be present. Amacher and Drake reported a 34.4% incidence of neural compression in 32 children.

**Seizures**

Although seizures and epilepsy are often common for children with AVMs, they are comparatively uncommon with an unruptured aneurysm. Focal or generalized seizures can occur in 15 to 25% of children with SAH and may be more common in infants. In our experience, we found a 7% seizure rate at the time of presentation. Seizures occurred most frequently in children with giant (25%) and posterior (27%) circulation aneurysms. Other series have reported an incidence as high as 25% of seizures arising from possible microemboli from the aneurysmal sac itself. The majority of seizures occur within 24 hours of the initial hemorrhage but sometimes progress to epilepsy or status epilepticus. Elevations of arterial blood pressure and the concurrent risk of re-bleed should be avoided by effective management with anticonvulsant medications. From our experience, however, long-term seizure prophylaxis has generally not been necessary.