Chronic pancreatitis costs the healthcare system billions of dollars each year. These patients develop a wide range of complications including chronic pain and multiple admissions to the hospital are not unusual. The patients are generally managed by a team of healthcare professions that include a surgeon, gastroenterologist, radiologist, pain specialist, dietitian, pharmacist, and nurse. To reduce the morbidity and mortality of the disorder, the emphasis today is on behavior modification. Both the pharmacist and nurses play a critical role in educating the patient about the adverse effects of alcohol and tobacco smoking. By abstaining from alcohol, these patients can also obtain pain relief in the early stage of the disease. Patients who continue to drink alcohol, have a death rate 3 times higher than those who do not drink alcohol. For those who have malabsorption, the pharmacist should recommend the use of pancreatic enzymes. At the same time, the patients should be referred to an alcohol and chemical dependency program. Pharmacists will consult with the clinical team regarding the choice and dosing of pancreatic enzymes. The pharmacist should also recommend aids to stop tobacco and educate the patients on the benefits of a healthy diet. Referral to a pain specialist is necessary as many patients continually seek narcotics. A gastroenterology nurse should follow these patients to assess steatorrhea and body weight. A dietary consult should educate the patient on the importance of a low-fat diet and the need to take vitamin supplements.

Continual reassessment and monitoring of these patients is necessary to ensure that they abstain from alcohol.

**Outcome**

The outcome for patients with chronic pancreatitis depends on many factors such as smoking, age at diagnosis, continued use of alcohol, the presence of liver disease and other comorbidities. Data indicate that at 10 years, 70% of patients are alive and at 20 years, about 40% to 50% are alive. Furthermore, these patients also have a risk of developing pancreatic cancer in the future. With time, patients with chronic pancreatitis are also at risk of developing pseudocysts, pancreatic ascites, pleural effusions, portal hypertension, splenic vein thrombosis, and pseudoaneurysm. A significant number of these patients continue to have moderate to severe pain and malabsorption. Finally, about one-third of patients will end up with diabetes. For those who require surgery for a pseudoaneurysm, there are additional risks of death.