Salivary gland malignancies have a wide spectrum of prognoses due to the heterogeneous array of histologies. In general, the prognosis of salivary malignancies is better for children and adolescents than that for adults due to lower frequencies of cervical metastasis, absence of local soft tissue invasion, and more differentiated histologies. The 5-year overall survival for children after surgical treatment is 85% compared with 60% for adults.

Overexpression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGRF) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) have been identified in several salivary gland malignancies, such as salivary duct carcinoma. They tend to predict a higher incidence of cervical metastasis and worse survival.c-kit expression in AdCC is correlated with poorer prognosis.

- Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC): Low-grade MEC, especially cases with the MECT1-MAML2 gene fusion, have a good prognosis with a 5-year survival rate of more than 90%. However, the high-grade squamous variant of MEC has a high tendency for recurrence, cervical metastasis, and distant metastasis with 5-year survival as low as 30% to 41.6%.

- Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma (AdCC): Distant metastasis in AdCC takes a prolonged course and is often more common than cervical metastasis.

- Acinic cell carcinoma (ACC): Overall survival is influenced by male gender, age >45 years, tumor size larger than 3 cm, and presence of distant metastasis.

- Carcinoma Ex-Pleomorphic Adenoma (CExPA): CExPA can display a wide range of recurrence and survival rates depending on the extent of differentiation and invasion. Tumors with wide extracapsular invasion beyond 5 mm of the capsule present with a high risk of recurrence and distant metastasis.

- Polymorphous Low-Grade Adenocarcinoma (PLGA): Local recurrence is reported in 9-33% of cases with cervical lymph node metastasis present in 6% to 35% of cases and distant metastasis at 1%.

- Salivary duct carcinoma: Salivary duct carcinoma presents with perineural and lymphovascular invasion in 60% and 30% of cases, respectively.

- Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC): The overall 5-year survival of primary SCC of the salivary glands is influenced based on tumor staging and ranges from 50% to 80% for early-stage tumors and 15% for advanced staged tumors.

- Melanoma: The prognosis of melanoma of unknown primary is controversial, with some studies stating no difference compared with typical melanoma at the same stage.

- Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL): Patients with MALT have a 3-year overall survival of 80%.