The typical presentation of vestibular neuritis is usually with the acute onset of the following:

- Vertigo

- Nausea

- Vomiting

- Balance problems

The symptoms in vestibular neuritis are typically constant, in contrast to the episodic symptoms of other peripheral causes such as BPPV or Meniere's disease. Symptoms are worsened with head movement but not triggered. Symptoms generally develop over several hours, peak within the first 24 to 48 hours, and typically last several days before resolving without intervention. Patients will likely note a preceding or concurrent viral illness, but it is important to note that the lack of this history does not rule out the disease as it is reported to be absent in up to 50% of patients

Other symptoms, such as headaches, are usually absent. It is vital to ask the patient about accompanying symptoms that may suggest central disorders of vertigo, such as visual changes, somatosensory changes, weakness, dysarthria, incoordination, or an inability to walk. If any of these are present, one must broaden the differential with to central causes of vertigo. When the additional symptom of unilateral hearing loss is present, this shifts the diagnosis towards labyrinthitis

**Physical Exam**

Patients presenting with vestibular neuritis will have a normal physical exam and neurological exam. The clinician needs to look for clues that might point to a central cause of vertigo, warranting a more thorough evaluation. Central causes of vertigo are usually continuous symptoms along with truncal instability, an unsteady gait, dysarthria, and other focal neurological symptoms. Symptoms that are episodic in nature point to the more common other peripheral causes like BPPV and Meniere’s disease. Other findings that are consistent with peripheral causes of vertigo, like vestibular neuritis, include a negative HINTs exam. The HINTS examination (see figure 1) consists of three components: Head Impulse, Nystagmus, and Test of Skew. It has been found to have high sensitivity and specificity (100% and 96%) for distinguishing peripheral from central vertigo in patients presenting with acute vestibular syndrome when performed correctly by the experienced clinician.

- The head impulse is performed with the patient sitting facing the examiner. Head positioning is at about 20 degrees to the left and right from midline, and then the examiner will briskly turn the head toward the midline. The examiner will then check to see whether or not the patient can maintain visual fixation on the examiner. If the patient’s eyes are not able to fixate on the examiner during the maneuver, their eyes will be noted to saccade back toward the midline. When the saccade is present, the test is considered a positive test and points towards a peripheral etiology such as vestibular neuritis. If there is a corrective saccade in both directions, this is worrisome for a central pathology. When the patient can fixate on the examiner’s nose during the entire maneuver, the test is considered negative and points towards a central etiology.

- Nystagmus is another exam tool that is a part of the HINTS exam. It is important to note that the naming of nystagmus is for the direction of the fast component. Nystagmus follows a rule termed Alexander’s law, which states that the intensity of nystagmus increases when the patient looks towards the direction of the fast phase. The slow phase of the nystagmus beats towards the injured side. Spontaneous nystagmus (when a patient is looking straight ahead without fixation) is determined to be negative (peripheral) if it is described as horizontal beating or horizontal-torsional and is unidirectional (fast phase beats towards one direction regardless of the orientation of gaze, patient looking left or right). Vertigo that is observed to be vertical and or bidirectional is considered a positive finding and points to a central etiology.

- The test of skew is performed with the patient facing the examiner. The examiner then covers and uncovers the patient's eye one at a time with his hand while the patient attempts to fixate on the examiner.  Any deviation of one eye while it is covered, followed by correction after uncovering the eye, is considered a positive or abnormal test pointing to a central etiology. The patient with vestibular neuritis should be able to maintain symmetrical eye alignment without deviation during the entire exam.

Other neurologic signs and symptoms: dysarthria, dysphagia, facial droop, dysmetria, motor weakness, sensory loss, and abnormal reflexes are typically absent.