**Anatomy**

The facial nerve, or seventh cranial nerve, originates in the lower pons and crosses the CPA to enter the internal auditory meatus alongside the cochlear nerve and the superior and inferior vestibular nerves.

At the distal aspect of the internal auditory canal, the facial nerve turns anteriorly into the labyrinthine segment. This segment is approximately 4 mm long and ends at the geniculate ganglion. Here the nerve takes a 180-degree turn and gives off the greater superficial petrosal nerve. The canal housing the facial nerve as it travels through the temporal bone is the Fallopian canal, the narrowest portion of which is the labyrinthine segment. At only 0.7 mm in diameter, the labyrinthine segment is where the facial nerve is particularly susceptible to impingement from bony fractures or intraneural edema.

Leaving the Fallopian canal, the nerve courses posteriorly for 9 to 10 mm through the middle ear, running superior to the stapes footplate. This "tympanic" or "horizontal" segment of the facial nerve is at risk for injury due to middle ear pathologies, such as infection, cholesteatoma, or barotrauma, particularly if the bone of the Fallopian canal is dehiscent. As the nerve passes into the mastoid cavity, it turns 90º inferiorly; this is the "mastoid" or "vertical" segment, which is 11-12 mm long. Within the mastoid, the approximate 6000 facial nerve axons begin to organize somatotopically as the fascicles prepare to separate within the parotid gland at the pes anserinus. Leaving the pes anserinus, branches of the facial nerve will control the mimetic muscles in the upper face, midface, lower face, and superficial neck.

Extratemporally, the facial nerve travels for approximately 14 mm before dividing into what is classically described as five main branches: frontal, zygomatic, buccal, marginal mandibular, and cervical. The anatomy is variable, however, with six branching patterns characterized by Davis et al in 1956.

- Type I (13%): The main trunk branches into upper and lower divisions, with the buccal branch leaving the upper division proximally while the frontal and zygomatic branches separate slightly more distally; the marginal mandibular and cervical branches form the lower division.

- Type II (20%): The main trunk branches into upper and lower divisions, with the frontal and zygomatic branches, as well as an upper buccal branch, forming a common upper facial trunk. The upper buccal branch anastomoses distally with the zygomatic branch, but there is also a separate lower buccal branch. The marginal mandibular and cervical branches form the lower division.

- Type III (28%): The main trunk branches into upper and lower divisions, with the frontal and zygomatic branches running together in the upper division until the zygomatic branch separates distally and anastomoses with the buccal branch, which runs with but leaves the lower division proximally. The marginal mandibular and cervical branches form the remainder of the lower division.

- Type IV (24%): The main trunk branches simultaneously into frontal and zygomatic branches and a lower division. The zygomatic branch splits into upper and lower branches proximally, with the frontal and upper zygomatic branches anastomosing proximally. The buccal branch leaves the lower division proximally and anastomoses with the lower zygomatic branch distally. The marginal mandibular and cervical branches form the lower division.

- Type V (9%): The main trunk branches into upper and lower divisions, with the frontal and the upper and lower zygomatic branches constituting the upper division. The upper and lower buccal branches and the marginal mandibular and cervical branches comprise the lower division. The upper buccal branch anastomoses proximally with the lower zygomatic branch and the lower buccal branch anastomoses distally with the upper zygomatic branch and the combined lower-zygomatic-upper-buccal complex.

- Type VI (6%): The main trunk branches into upper and lower divisions, with significant early ramification and anastomosis between frontal and zygomatic branches within the upper division. Within the lower division, an upper buccal branch leaves proximally and anastomoses proximally with the lower aspect of the frontozygomatic complex. The cervical branch separates proximally from a common trunk, giving off a lower buccal branch and the marginal mandibular branch more distally—the lower buccal branch then anastomoses with the zygomatic-upper buccal complex distally.

Despite this substantial anatomic variability among individuals, several surface landmarks facilitate reliable identification of the main extratemporal facial nerve branches. The line of Pitanguy, which runs from a point 5 mm inferior to the tragus to a point 15 mm superior to the lateral brow, approximates the course of the frontal branch (see image).

The extratemporal facial nerve branches course through the parotid gland, separating its superficial and deep lobes. These branches exit the gland at its anterior border and run deep to the superficial musculoaponeurotic system (SMAS) of the face, ultimately innervating the mimetic muscles from their deep surfaces, except for the levator anguli oris, buccinator, and mentalis muscles, which are innervated superficially due to their deep location within the face. The SMAS is a fibrofatty layer superficial to the parotid gland that extends superiorly to the zygomatic arch, beyond which it is contiguous with the temporoparietal fascia (see image).

The frontal branch of the facial nerve innervates the muscles of the forehead and upper eyelid: the frontalis, corrugator supercilii, and procerus muscles, and the superior aspect of the orbicularis oculi. The zygomatic branch of the facial nerve also controls the orbicularis oculi and some of the upper midface muscles, while the buccal branch innervates the remaining midface muscles and the orbicularis oris. The marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve primarily controls the depressor anguli oris and mentalis muscles, while the cervical branch controls the largest mimetic muscle, the platysma, as well as the mentalis. Innervation of individual muscles may differ among patients, but this general scheme informs the physical examination, which should separately and systematically evaluate the function of each facial nerve branch.

**Physical Examination**

Assessment of facial nerve function aims to identify abnormalities in any of the main extratemporal branches discussed above. The preferred assessment method begins in the upper face and examines the function of each branch in a descending fashion (see video). The initial examination should be performed with the patient at rest to identify any gross or subtle asymmetries in muscle tone; these are frequently manifested as brow ptosis, lower eyelid laxity, nasolabial fold effacement, deviation of the upper lip philtrum, or inferior malposition of the oral commissure. Older patients may also demonstrate effacement of platysmal banding on the affected side.

A dynamic physical examination should be performed once the static assessment is complete. Raising the eyebrows, closing the eyes gently and again with full effort, smiling, puckering the lips, and depressing the lower lip successively test the functions of the frontal, zygomatic, buccal, marginal mandibular, and cervical branches of the facial nerve. Determining the level of baseline asymmetry and the amount of effort required to close the affected eye, if complete eye closure is even possible, permits grading the severity of the facial paralysis on the House-Brackmann scale, a simple and universally-accepted method of assessing facial nerve function.

- Grade I: Symmetric at rest and with movement, with no abnormalities

- Grade II: Mild weakness, symmetric at rest, minimal asymmetry with movement, complete eye closure with gentle effort, possible mild synkinesis

- Grade III: Moderate weakness, symmetric at rest, moderate asymmetry with movement, complete eye closure only with full effort, possible moderate synkinesis

- Grade IV: Moderate-to-severe weakness, symmetric at rest, moderate asymmetry with movement, incomplete eye closure

- Grade V: Severe weakness, grossly asymmetric at rest, significant asymmetry with movement, incomplete eye closure

- Grade VI: No visible movement, grossly asymmetric at rest ("facial droop")

The House-Brackmann scale offers a convenient means of quantifying overall hemifacial paralysis. Still, it is not designed to provide a detailed description of severe synkinesis or segmental facial paralysis, such as that with distal facial nerve injury. Synkinesis is the involuntary movement of some muscles accompanying the voluntary movement of others, such as eye closure with smiling or cheek and neck twitching with eye closure or brow elevation. Synkinesis is often characterized by an increased resting tone in the affected side of the face, which may manifest as a deepened nasolabial fold or face and neck cramping that progresses throughout the day.

To characterize a broader range of facial paralysis presentations, including not only flaccid hemifacial palsy but also segmental and synkinetic paralysis, several more detailed facial function grading systems have emerged. Systems in regular use are the Sunnybrook scale, developed by Ross et al in Toronto in 1994, and the eFACE scale (see image),  developed by Banks et al at Harvard in 2015.

**Physiology**

The variable clinical presentation of facial paralysis is a result of the complex anatomy of the facial nerve and its behavior when injured. The extent of flaccid paralysis in the acute posttraumatic period is dependent upon the severity of the injury and its location. Similarly, the occurrence and degree of synkinesis also depend on the degree and site of injury. The severity of motor nerve injury is commonly described using two similar scales, described by Sunderland and Seddon, that relate the degree of dysfunction to the microanatomy of the injury (see table).

Sunderland Classification

- Class I: Temporary conduction block due to focal demyelination with axonal integrity. Prognosis: complete recovery.

- Class II: Axonal disruption with intact endoneurium. Prognosis: complete recovery.

- Class III: Axonal disruption with endoneurial violation; the perineurium remains intact. Prognosis: mild to moderate synkinesis.

- Class IV: Axonal disruption with endoneurial and perineurial violation; only the epineurium remains intact. Prognosis: severe synkinesis.

- Class V: Disruption of all nerve components, including the epineurium; a transection injury. Prognosis: persistent flaccid paralysis.

Seddon Classification

- Neurapraxia: Equivalent to Sunderland Class I injury. Prognosis: complete recovery.

- Axonotmesis: Axonal injury without nerve transection, equivalent to Sunderland Classes II through IV injuries. Prognosis: variable degree of synkinesis.

- Neuronotmesis: Nerve transection, equivalent to Sunderland Class V injury. Prognosis: persistent flaccid paralysis.

These classification systems illustrate the relationship between injury severity and the development of synkinesis. While all traumatic facial nerve injuries present with weakness, only the most severe injuries characterized by anatomical discontinuity of the nerve result in permanent flaccid paralysis; this emphasizes the importance of nerve repair for improving outcomes.

An axonal disruption that leaves some amount of internal neural architecture intact may result in synkinesis; the degree of synkinesis is dictated by which membranes are violated. Endoneurial disruption with intact perineurium portends a better prognosis than an injury to both layers. Axonal disruption also results in Wallerian degeneration, the disintegration of the injured axon between the node of Ranvier just proximal to the site of injury and the neuromuscular junction, following which the immune system clears the debris. Wallerian degeneration occurs approximately 72 hours after a neural transection injury but may persist for days or weeks after a neural crush injury, such as a temporal bone fracture.

This timeline of Wallerian degeneration is clinically significant; facial nerve exploration and repair conducted within 72 hours of injury can be performed with the aid of a nerve stimulator, and later-attempted repairs may not. Similarly, the electrophysiological consequences of Wallerian degeneration, a decreased compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude, may provide prognostic information to the patient and care team. Electroneuronography (ENoG) is a form of evoked electromyography (EMG) in which a transcutaneous electrical stimulator is placed at the mastoid tip, and surface electrodes are placed over the facial muscles to record the CMAP, allowing for comparison between the injured and unaffected sides.

If there is a significant decrease in CMAP amplitude on the injured side, Wallerian degeneration has occurred; the injury is at least a Sunderland class II, and synkinesis may occur, particularly if the decrease in CMAP amplitude is substantial. If the CMAP on the affected side is entirely absent, the injury is very likely a Sunderland Class V, which may be confirmed with an ENoG. During the ENoG, action potentials are recorded in the facial muscles by needle electrodes during voluntary movements. A lack of voluntary motor unit potentials indicates nerve transection and corroborates the need for nerve repair.

ENoG testing should not be performed before 72 hours post-injury; if Wallerian degeneration has not had time to occur, the test will not accurately indicate the extent of axonal injury. Ultimately, facial nerve repair aims to convert a Sunderland Class V injury to a Class IV injury or a completely transected nerve to one with intact epineurium to improve the prognosis from persistent flaccidity to synkinesis.