Some common adverse effects associated with pravastatin therapy include nausea and vomiting, dizziness, arthralgia, myalgia, headache, constipation, diarrhea, abdominal pain, flushing, dyspepsia, insomnia, increased creatine phosphokinase, and urinary tract infection. In addition, fatigue, pruritus, rash, cough, heartburn, and flu-like symptoms may also present in patients taking pravastatin. Some potentially serious adverse effects that require adjustment of dose or frequency of administration may include chest pain, edema, hepatitis, jaundice, renal impairment, blurred vision, and confusion.

**Drug Interactions**

**Bile acid-binding resins:**Pravastatin may be used concomitantly with bile acid resins like cholestyramine colestipol. When administering pravastatin and resins, pravastatin should be given either 1 hour before or at least 4 hours after the bile-acid-binding resin.

**Cyclosporin:**In patients taking immunosuppressive medicines such as cyclosporine concomitantly with pravastatin, therapy should begin with 10 mg of pravastatin daily at bedtime. Exercise caution when titrating to higher doses as there is an increased risk of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis. Most patients treated concomitantly receive a maximum of 20 mg of pravastatin.

**Clarithromycin:**The risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis is higher with concomitant administration of pravastatin and clarithromycin. In patients taking clarithromycin, the pravastatin dose should not be more than 40 mg daily. Other macrolides (e.g., erythromycin and azithromycin) can increase statin exposures while used with pravastatin. Therefore, exercise caution when macrolide antibiotics are used with pravastatin.

**Colchicine:**There is an increased risk of myopathy and/or rhabdomyolysis with concomitant administration of colchicine and pravastatin.

**Gemfibrozil:**There is an increased risk of myopathy and/or rhabdomyolysis when gemfibrozil is coadministered with statins. Therefore, concomitant administration of pravastatin and gemfibrozil is contraindicated.

**Fibrates:**There is a known risk of myopathy during treatment with statins, and it is increased with concurrent administration of other fibrates. Use pravastatin with caution when other fibrates are concomitantly administered.

**Niacin:**There is an enhanced risk of skeletal muscle adverse reactions when niacin is used in combination with pravastatin; a reduction in pravastatin dosage should be considered in this scenario.