The blood supply of each of the four compartments of the lower limb originates at the common femoral artery, a branch of the external iliac artery, which eventually splits into deep and superficial branches. The deep branch (profunda femoris artery) continues to supply the posterior structures of the thigh through the medial circumflex femoral artery and lateral circumflex femoral artery. The superficial femoral artery continues inferiorly passing through the adductor hiatus into the popliteal fossa to become the popliteal artery posterior to the knee. The popliteal artery divides toward the distal end of the popliteal fossa to give rise to the tibioperoneal trunk and the anterior tibial artery. The tibioperoneal trunk then divides approximately 2.5 cm from its origin, into the peroneal and posterior tibial arteries.

The posterior tibial artery is the largest of the terminal branches of the popliteal artery. It travels with the tibial nerve in the deep posterior compartment of the leg along its fascial border with the superficial compartment.  At the level of the ankle, its path is more superficial, and it is palpable posterior to the medial malleolus as it courses through the tarsal tunnel. It then gives off the distinct branches of the posterior medial malleolar artery and the artery of the tarsal canal, which is the dominant blood supply to the talar body. In the foot, the posterior tibial artery bifurcates into the medial and lateral plantar arteries after crossing the sustentaculum tali.