**Nonopioid analgesic agents**

- **Acetaminophen (paracetamol)**: The precise mechanism of action for this drug remains unclear to date. Although it is considered for some as a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), acetaminophen lacks anti-inflammatory properties and does not bind to the active site of either cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes (COX-1 or COX-2). However, there is a hypothesis that acetaminophen inhibits a different variant of COX-1, also known as COX-3, but this event remains unconfirmed in human studies. Nonetheless, the diminished activity of the COX pathway leads to decreased prostaglandin synthesis in the central nervous system, thus inducinganalgesia (serotonergic inhibitory pathways) and antipyresis (hypothalamic heat-regulating center).

- **Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)**: The primary mechanism of action is the inhibition of the cyclooxygenase enzyme, thereby inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis. Drugs in this group are categorized according to chemical structure and selectivity: acetylated salicylates (aspirin), non-acetylated salicylates (diflunisal), propionic acids (ibuprofen, naproxen), acetic acids (indomethacin, diclofenac), anthranilic acids (meclofenamate, mefenamic acid), enolic acids (meloxicam, piroxicam), naphthylalanine (nabumetone), and selective COX-2 inhibitors (celecoxib, etoricoxib). Most NSAIDs inhibit both COX isoforms (COX-1 and COX-2) with little selectivity. However, those that do bind with higher affinity to one or another (eg., aspirin, and the coxibs) will exert anti-inflammatory, analgesic, and antipyretic effects at different degrees. For this reason, low doses of aspirin manifest an antiplatelet effect, while high doses exhibit an analgesic effect.

- **Antidepressant medications**: Both tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and selective serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) inhibit the reuptake of two important neurotransmitters: serotonin and noradrenaline. This inhibition increases the descending inhibitory pathways of the central nervous system related to pain. Additionally, TCAs also act on cholinergic, histamine, beta2 adrenergic, opioid, and N-methyl-D- aspartate (NMDA) receptors, and sodium channels.

- **Antiepileptic medications**: Both gabapentin and pregabalin are ligands to the αδ subunit of the voltage-dependent calcium channels, which overexpress in patients with neuropathic pain. By reducing this calcium-dependent release of excitatory neurotransmitters, these drugs decrease neuronal excitability.

- **Local anesthetics**: As with other local anesthetics, lidocaine stabilizes the neuronal membrane by inhibiting sodium ion channels on the internal surface of nerve cell membranes. Thus, pain conduction through nerve impulses becomes impaired at the site of action, which contributes to the absence of systemic effects.

**Opioid agents**

The majority of the clinically relevant opioids act primarily at the “mu receptors” and thus are considered “mu agonists.”kappa, delta, and sigma (all of them, including mu, are G protein-coupled receptors). Depending on which receptor is activated, different physiologic effects occur (i.e., spinal and supraspinal analgesia). Opioids exert their effects on both presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons. Presynaptically, opioids block calcium channels on nociceptive afferent nerves, thus inhibiting the release of neurotransmitters such as substance P and glutamate. Postsynaptically, opioids enhance the activity of potassium channels, thus hyperpolarizing cell membranes and increasing the required action potential to generate nociceptive neurotransmission.