Prevention is critical in the management of childhood depression and suicide. Depression is a common mental health disorder in children and adolescents. The prevalence is around 3% in younger children and about 8% in adolescents.

Like other mental health conditions, depression is often underreported and underdiagnosed in children. There is a wide range of clinical severity and presentations for childhood depression. Major depressive disorder (MDD) is associated with functional impairment in the crucial phase of childhood development.

Suicidal deaths have surpassed the deaths due to motor vehicle accidents. In 2019, almost one in ten high school students reported at least one suicide attempt.

The American Psychiatry Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental disorders (DSM 5) has a set of clinical criteria for the diagnosis of MDD to be met over a period of at least two weeks.

Children with depression can have concomitant mental disorders like anxiety, conduct or oppositional defiant disorder, substance use somatic disorders. Early diagnosis and treatment of depression in children are paramount. Management includes counseling, antidepressant medications, psychotherapy (cognitive behavioral therapy and interpersonal therapy), and electro convulsant therapy. The treatment should involve shared decision-making with the patient and family. Educating primary care providers about brief cognitive behavioral therapy and family therapy skills improves the treatment outcome, and as a result, more families will seek mental health treatment for their children.