An epidural abscess is an infection within the epidural space anywhere in the brain or spinal cord.

Dura mater forms the inner lining of the bony skull, and under normal conditions, there is no space between the skull and the dura. Intracranial pressure (ICP) elevation related to infections, inflammation, or tumors opens up the epidural space and separates bone from the tissue. This newly formed epidural space may contain blood, pus, or an abscess. Below the foramen magnum, the epidural space extends the length of the spine. It has 2 compartments: (1) a true space posterior and lateral to the spinal cord containing a cushioning layer of fat embedded with penetrating arteries and an extensive venous plexus, and (2) a potential anterior space where the dura adheres to the posterior surface of the vertebral body.

Epidural abscesses occur as a result of infections involving the spinal or cranial epidural space. Intracranial epidural abscesses (IEA) are complications of cranial surgery or trauma; they may also complicate otorhinolaryngological infections or other neck and thoracic procedures. Spinal epidural abscess (SEA) can have an acute and chronic presentation. This simple categorization correlates with certain clinical and laboratory manifestations, bacteriological and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) formulae, anatomic details, and pathology.

Acute SEA is usually less than 2 weeks in duration with fever and signs of systemic inflammation from a hematogenous source. This is in contrast with subtle, afebrile, and long-standing chronic SEA that has resulted from a direct extension of vertebral osteomyelitis. Both present with back and radicular pain, but leukocytosis (in serum and CSF) is more likely in the acute form and not so much in the chronic form. Acute forms are posterior to the spinal cord, but chronic forms are commonly anterior to the cord. Gross pathology is purulent and exudative in acute, but with granulation tissue in chronic.