# Continuing Education Activity

Mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms (MCPN) are rare tumors of the pancreas, which mostly occur in middle-aged females. The survival rate for this disease is far better than pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas. The tumors frequently are confused with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN). According to the World Health Organization (WHO), intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms differ from mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms because ovarian stroma is observed in the latter. This activity reviews the cause, the pathophysiology of mucinous pancreatic cancer, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of mucinous melanoma.
- Review the presentation of mucinous melanoma.
- Summarize the treatment options for mucinous melanoma.
-  Review the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by mucinous melanoma.

# Introduction

Mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms (MCPN) are rare tumors of the pancreas, which mostly occur in middle-aged females. The survival rate for this disease is far better than pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas. The tumors frequently are confused with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN). According to the World Health Organization (WHO), intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms differ from mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms because ovarian stroma is observed in the latter.

# Etiology

The etiology of mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms is unclear. Professionals hypothesize that these tumors are related to female hormones due to the preponderance of these tumors in women. This is believed to be the case because ovarian mucinous cystic neoplasms share the same histology and characteristics as mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms. These shared characteristics include the mucinous secreting columnar epithelium and the surrounding ovarian stroma that are seen in both ovarian and pancreatic mucinous cystic lesions. Also, the presence of estrogen receptors in mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms is another feature alluding to a hormonal cause. Finally, another common feature is the benign nature of the ovarian mucinous cystic tumors, which rarely metastasize to other organs or involve lymph nodes akin to mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms. However, due to the rarity of these tumors, other etiologies are unknown. A benign mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasm can potentially evolve into aggressive cancer, and hence, surgical resection is recommended in younger patients

# Epidemiology

Few studies have investigated the true prevalence and incidence of mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms. Mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms mostly affect females, particularly middle-aged women [48 +/- 15 years (84% < 60 y)], as shown in a retrospective study that identified the disease in 95% of women. A recently published study indicated an incidence rate of 2.4% and a prevalence rate of 2.6%, although other retrospective trials reported a prevalence rate as high as 17.5%. Mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms are mostly (93%) located in the body or tail of the pancreas. Median size was 5 cm (61% > or = 5 cm)

# Pathophysiology

Mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms have two distinct histologic components, which are the inner epithelial layer composed of tall mucin-secreting cells and dense cellular ovarian stroma. The latter was described in 1978 by Compagno and Oertel, and the disease was distinguished from other serous cystic tumors and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms

Conversely, most mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms lesions are benign and rarely metastasizes to lymph nodes or other organs.  It is believed that benign lesions can transform into malignant mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms due to the older age of presentation in patients with invasive cancer

# History and Physical

Patients with mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms present with abdominal pain (62.2%), weight loss (11%), abdominal mass (11%), acute pancreatitis (9.6%), fatigue (8.9%), and 16% were asymptomatic. Large mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms can compress surrounding organs and structures, leading to abdominal pain and a sensation of fullness. Conversely, many patients are asymptomatic, and lesions are found incidentally on imaging. Patients occasionally (16.5%) have elevated levels of CA 19-9 (> 37 U/L). On physical examination, patients can have abdominal tenderness and distention, and occasionally an epigastric mass can be palpated if it is significantly large. These lesions are often located in the body and tail of the pancreas and, thus, rarely cause obstructive jaundice. If patients present with a pancreatic head mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasm, then jaundice may be evident

# Evaluation

Providers should follow an essential physical examination and laboratory studies, including a complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), and a CA 19-9. They should also order a computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) scans

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms mainly involves surgical resection

Hence, the patients mentioned above can be followed with serial imaging. Conversely, middle-aged women with a long life expectancy presenting with mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms, surgical resection is recommended as many of the benign lesions can progress to invasive carcinoma. Since we still cannot distinguish lesions that progress from those that can remain benign, it is recommended to resect all mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms regardless of size in patients who are a fit candidate for surgery. No patient with noninvasive disease had a recurrence after resection

# Differential Diagnosis

- Acute pancreatitis

- Bile duct tumours

- Cholangitis

- Cholecystitis

- Choledochal cysts

- Chronic pancreatitis

- Gallstones

- Gastric cancer

- Peptic ulcer disease

# Pearls and Other Issues

It is imperative to distinguish intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm from mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms. Surgical resection of mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms is recommended in fit patients, given the potential for malignant transformation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Mucinous cystic pancreatic neoplasms (MCPN) are very difficult to diagnose and successfully treat rare tumors of the pancreas which mostly occur in middle-aged females. The tumors frequently are confused with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN). The interprofessional healthcare team must work together to make the diagnose and successfully treat patients with MCPN. Care should be coordinated by nurses and physicians and pharmacists should provide assistance to the team in managing chemotherapeutic agents. Operative and perianesthesia nurses are involved in patient care and monitoring. Oncology nurses administer treatment, provide patient education, and keep the team updated on patient status. Oncologic pharmacists evaluate prescribed chemotherapy, check for drug-drug interactions, and participate in patient education. Outcomes can be improved by team coordination. [Level V]