# Continuing Education Activity

For patients with atrial fibrillation, percutaneous left atrial appendage closure (LAAC) emerged as a valid alternative to oral anticoagulation. This activity reviews the evaluation, indications/contraindications, pre/post-procedural management of percutaneous LAAC and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify indications and contraindications for percutaneous left atrial appendage closure.
- Describe pre-procedural planning and preparation to perform successful percutaneous left atrial appendage closure.
- Summarize the complications of percutaneous left atrial appendage closure.
- Explain the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to ensure the appropriate selection of candidates for percutaneous left atrial appendage closure and to enhance post-procedural management.

# Introduction

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common type of heart arrhythmia affecting 33.5 million people worldwide.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The left atrial appendage (LAA) is a trabeculated long tubular structure connected to the venous portion of the left atrium (LA) through a narrow junction. The size and shape vary widely, but in about 70% of the patients, the appendage has a bent or spiral axis.

During the sinus rhythm, the contraction of LAA causes vigorous blood flow in and out of the appendage cavity. When there is a contractile dysfunction in the LAA, as in AF, it can predispose to local stasis, thrombosis, and systemic embolization. Changes in the left ventricular function (which may be impaired in AF) influence the extent of LAA filling and emptying more than the LAA function.

# Indications

The majority of the institutions consider LAAC when AF patients are at high thromboembolic risk (with a CHADS2DS2-Vasc score of greater than or equal to 3 or CHADS2 score of greater than or equal to 2) with contraindication for long term oral anticoagulants (OACs), as well as patients with thromboembolic events despite adequate use of OACs. It is also indicated when there is a high probability of therapeutic non-compliance to OACs and patients with OAC intolerance. The 2019 American College of Cardiology (ACC) and the American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines on the management of atrial fibrillation gave a class IIb recommendation for percutaneous LAAC in patients with an increased risk of stroke who cannot tolerate long term anticoagulation.

The depth of the left atrial appendage must be at least longer than the width of the ostium of the LAA for optimal device deployment and closure of LAA. The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved only one device for stroke and systemic embolism reduction in 2015, the Watchman (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA). However, its use is limited to patients at increased stroke risk and can tolerate short-term anticoagulation. Another device used off-label for LAAC is the Lariat (SentreHeart Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA), which is FDA-approved for facilitating percutaneous ligation of LAA. Percutaneous LAAC is performed off-label for patients intolerant to OACs and at high risk of stroke. However, there is a lack of strong evidence supporting its use in these patients. In AF patients undergoing cardiac surgery, concomitant surgical ligation of the left atrial appendage is a class IIb indication.

# Contraindications

Patients with a low risk for stroke with CHADS2DS2-Vasc score less than 3 or a CHADS2 score of less than 2 are not recommended to have LAAC. Valvular heart disease, such as mitral stenosis, is another contraindication for the intervention. Patients with left atrial thrombus or tumor, active infection, the presence of atrial septal defect (ASD), or a prior patent foramen ovale (PFO) closure device are not recommended for trans-septal catheterization. Patients who have other indications for long-term or lifelong OACs, such as patients with a prosthetic valve, pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis, and thrombi in the left atrium or ventricle, should not undergo left atrial appendage closure.

# Equipment

**PLAATO**

In 2001, Sievert achieved the first-in-human percutaneous LAAC using the PLAATO device (Appriva Medical, Sunnyvale, CA).

**Watchman and Watchman FLX**

Watchman device (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) is the only device that has been evaluated in randomized clinical trials.

The WATCHMAN FLX (Boston Scientific) is a second-generation device fully covered by the polyethylene terephthalate membrane cap to minimize peri-device leaks.

**AMPLATZER Cardiac Plug and Amulet**

The AMPLATZER Cardiac Plug (ACP; Abbot Vascular, Santa Clara, CA) is a self-expanding nitinol mesh with a proximal polyester fabric disk and distal lobe connected by an articulated waist.

The Amulet device (Abbot Vascular) is based on ACP device design but with improvements facilitating implantation and reducing procedural complications.

**WaveCrest**

The WaveCrest device (Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, CA) is a single-lobe nitinol device with polyurethane foam facing the LAA and an expanded polytetrafluoroethylene cover on the left atrial side and has 20 anchoring points.

**Occlutech LAA Occluder**

The Occlutech LAA Occluder (Occlutech International AB, Helsingborg, Sweden) is a self-expanding conical-shaped nitinol wire mesh and is anchored at the distal margin through the closed loops.

**LAmbre LAA Closure System**

The LAmbre LAA Closure System (Lifetech Scientific Co, Ltd, Shenzhen, China) is another nitinol device with a left atrial cover and a distal self-expanding umbrella, protected by a double polyethylene terephthalate membrane and attached with a central articulating waist.

**Ultraseal LAA Closure Device**

Another self-expanding device is an Ultraseal LAA closure device (Cardia Inc, Eagan, MN), which is comprised of two sections: a soft distal bulb for anchoring the device and a 3-leaflet proximal sail for occlusion of LAA. Both are connected with a dual articulating joint, enabling multidirectional mobility and optimum adjustment of various ostium angles and shapes.

**Pfm Device**

The Pfm device (Pfm Medical, Köln, Germany) is a nitinol frame device consisting of three parts: a primary distal anchor, a middle connector, and a proximal disk with a secondary anchor.

**Epicardial Devices**

**Lariat**

The Lariat (SentreHeart, Redwood City, CA) device enables the percutaneous delivery of pretied surgical sutures to litigate the LAA. It is cleared by the FDA for the approximation of soft tissue.

**Sierra Litigation System**

The Sierra Ligation System (Aegis Medical Innovations, Vancouver, Canada) is an epicardial device having single access through subxiphoid through electrographic navigation.

# Personnel

The procedure is performed in a standard cardiac catheterization laboratory. An anesthesiologist, an imager, and the implanter are the main participants in the procedure. The patient is given general sedation to protect the airway during extended TEE imaging and prevent potential sudden movements by the patient, which may cause cardiac perforation while manipulating LAA. The C-arm fluoroscopy is positioned just to the left of the operator, allowing more freedom of movement for the echocardiographer, who sits at the head of the table. Echocardiographers and anesthesiologists are provided with appropriate radiation shielding. The operator can see TEE images in real-time with the ultrasound machine slaved to the boom.

# Preparation

A pre-procedural transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) is used for evaluating suitable candidates and determining the LAA morphology and dimensions. Important elements to be determined are the shape and size of the ostium, the width of the landing zone, the LAA length, and the number, shape, and location of the lobes, if possible.

Also, the LAA size depends on LA pressure and the presence of sinus rhythm or AF. Hence, certain operators prefer measuring LAA dimensions during the procedure after saline infusion establishes an LA pressure of greater than 10 mm Hg. To rule out post-procedural pericardial effusion and device embolization, many institutions and centers perform a chest radiograph and a TTE. To verify the complete sealing of the LAA and the absence of a thrombus, a TEE is recommended after 45 days. Post LAA closure, various antithrombotic/anticoagulation regimens have been used, including warfarin, dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT), direct oral anticoagulants (DOAC), aspirin monotherapy, and no therapy. Therapy with either DAPT or DOAC does not significantly increase the incidence of device thrombus, stroke, or bleeding compared with standard warfarin therapy.

# Technique or Treatment

**Implantation of the device**

Percutaneous LAA closure is generally performed with general anesthesia guided by TEE and fluoroscopy. Prior to the procedure, antibiotic prophylaxis is usually given. Vascular access is achieved via a femoral vein, and transseptal puncture using a standard transseptal needle and sheath is done for the delivery system. The puncture site in the fossa is preferably inferior and posterior to have a good alignment with the LAA axis. Furthermore, there are different curves of sheaths available for accessing LAA. A bolus of unfractionated heparin should be provided after the puncture to obtain an activated clotting time (ACT) of more than 250 s. The size of the device is chosen based on LAA dimensions (ostium, neck width, depth) with the help of TEE and contrast angiography (right anterior oblique 30°/ cranial 30°). The desired implantation angulation of the C-arm may vary greatly from patient to patient. TEE and fluoroscopy ensure the location of the device in the LAA. The sheath over the device reduces the risk of perforation, and the device is subsequently deployed. A ‘tug test’ is performed once the device is in position to confirm device stability. Color Doppler imaging verifies complete sealing. The device is finally released from the delivery cable, and potential complications (e.g., pericardial effusion) are ruled out. The individual steps differ from one device to another and are described below.

**Watchman**

The device is selected by determining LAA size by the combination of TEE and fluoroscopic measurements. TEE excludes the presence of LAA thrombus before the procedure. However, cardiac CT can also be used for pre-procedural planning.

**Amplatzer Cardiac Plug and Amulet**

The landing zone is estimated between 12 mm to 15 mm from the LAA orifice both for ACP and Amulet.

**Lariat**

Cardiac CT determines the anatomic eligibility for the procedure. A second-generation device is larger and allows appendages up to 45 mm in diameter. The procedure requires an intact pericardium; hence it cannot be performed in patients with prior cardiac surgery. It is also discouraged in patients with prior pericarditis as the pericardial adhesions may prevent manipulation in the pericardial space and impede procedural success. Using an epidural or micropuncture needle under fluoroscopic guidance, a 14-Fr, slightly curved, and the soft-tipped sheath is advanced into the anterior pericardial space. Using the standard technique, after pericardial access is achieved, a transseptal sheath of 8.5-Fr is inserted into the LA from the right femoral vein; an inferoposterior location is usually favored in the interatrial septum. Through the transseptal sheath, a magnet-tipped guidewire is progressed into the anterior portion of the LAA, and a complementary magnet-tipped guidewire is progressed through the pericardial sheath and attached to the magnet-tipped wire in the LAA, forming a rail upon which the snare is delivered.

TEE and fluoroscopy guide the snare advancement into the pericardial sheath and over LAA, and LAA ostium is closed later. The snare is composed of a preloaded and tied surgical suture. Using a suture-tensioning device, the operator releases the suture with a proximal actuator and then tightens the prettied knot, after which the snare is withdrawn, and the suture is cut using a suture cutter. The pericardial sheath is substituted for a drain and remains in place for 4 to 6 hours, at least. The procedure can be summarized into four steps: Pericardial and transseptal puncture, endocardial magnet-tipped wire advancement into LAA apex, endocardial and epicardial magnet-tipped guidewires connection over which the Lariat snare is advanced, and the snare positioning and LAA ostium capture with the help of TEE-guided placement of inflated EndoCATH balloon catheter, and subsequently LAA suture ligation.

**WaveCrest**

The WaveCrest is positioned to occlude the LAA, and its position is tested to confirm adequate seal and lack of a peri-device leak. The anchors are subsequently deployed to the distal edge of the device in a separate step. The "tug test" is subsequently performed to confirm the stability of the device before the device is released. Advantages include more flexibility while closing the LAA regardless of its depth and less traumatic deployment.

# Complications

The most common complications are pericardial effusion or cardiac tamponade requiring intervention, device-related thrombus, device embolization, persistent atrial septal defect (ASD), cardiac perforation, and procedure-related stroke. The incidence of pericardial effusion/tamponade is about 1.2% to 5% and, in the majority of cases, is managed with pericardiocentesis.

Device-related thrombus can be encountered in up to 14% of patients and is managed with a longer course of anticoagulation with a success rate approaching 95% (median treatment duration of 45 days).

# Clinical Significance

Clinical outcomes have been tested in various studies. Clinical efficacy and safety of the Watchman device have been evaluated in two randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and various large registries, demonstrating consistent improvements in procedural successes and complication rates. The PROTECT-AF trial and PREVAIL compared the WATCHMAN device and anticoagulation in patients with AF. The PROTECT-AF trial showed a procedural failure rate of 9%, with procedural-related complications of 8.7%, mostly secondary to pericardial effusion (4.8%).

Subsequently, the PREVAIL trial conducted on 407 patients showed a significant drop in procedure-related complications, even though it contained higher-risk patients, and about 40% of operators were novices.

ACP was first studied in 2011, demonstrating procedural success rates of 96% and serious adverse effects of 7%, of which 3.5% were pericardial effusion.

In patients with LAA anatomies unsuitable for endocardial devices, Lariat is a great option, although the procedure's safety is still a concern. There are many studies with the use of a Lariat device.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

For AF patients, percutaneous LAAC has emerged as a valid alternative to OAC. Although randomized control trials have mostly been restricted to patients who can tolerate short-term OAC, registries have shown some benefit in patients at high risk of stroke and intolerance and/or contraindications to OAC, with consistent safety improvements as long-term efficacy of the procedure. Current recommendations from professional societies support the use of percutaneous LAAC in AF patients with high stroke risk and contraindication for long-term anticoagulation.[Level 1] Guidelines recommend 6 weeks of oral anticoagulation plus aspirin followed by aspirin plus clopidogrel up to 6 months post-procedure. Aspirin will subsequently be continued for the lifetime of the patient.

However, the post-procedural antithrombotic regimens are sometimes modified in select patients(especially in patients with recurrent bleeding after LAAC) to balance the risk of bleeding and device-associated thrombus. Patients undergo a transesophageal echocardiogram at 6 weeks to confirm adequate sealing of LAA and rule out device-related thrombus, as this might change the duration of oral anticoagulation. An interprofessional team including an interventional cardiologist, non-invasive cardiologist specialized in multimodality imaging, cardiac anesthesiologist, nurses, and catheterization laboratory technologists work together to provide an integrated and holistic approach to pre-procedural planning, intra-procedural support, and post-procedural care to ensure an optimal outcome for the patient. Communication, shared decision-making, and collaboration between the interprofessional team members are key elements for excellent outcomes. Interprofessional care also helps identify early and late complications of percutaneous LAAC and, therefore, improves patients' prognosis and improves patient outcomes while reducing adverse events. [Level 5]