The EAC and the outer layer of the tympanic membrane arise from the first branchial cleft. The medial two-thirds of the EAC is comprised of bone covered with stratified squamous epithelial skin, while cartilage makes up the skeleton of the outer third. The skin lining the cartilaginous portion of the EAC has hairs and modified sweat glands that secrete cerumen (earwax). Innervation of the EAC is mainly supplied by cranial nerves V3 (mandibular branch) and X, the latter via a small branch known as Arnold's nerve. Arnold's nerve is the pathway that results in coughing or gagging in some patients with instrumentation of the EAC. Cranial nerves VII and IX also contribute, but to a lesser extent; skull base lesions that involve the facial nerve may cause numbness of a portion of the EAC, and this phenomenon is known as the Hitzelberger sign.

The external auditory canal is nearly straight in children, becoming adult-sized - approximately 2.5 cm long - at about nine years of age. The EAC assumes a gentle sigmoid contour in adults, with the cartilaginous portion angling posteriorly and superiorly and the bony portion coursing anteroinferiorly. As a result, in adults, pulling the helix posterior and superior straightens the EAC and allows for better visualization of the tympanic membrane. Of significant importance for foreign body management, the EAC has two natural narrowings: the first narrowing is at the bony-cartilaginous junction, and the second is just lateral to the tympanic membrane.