Ultrasound-guided brachial plexus blocks can provide dense analgesia and anesthesia to the upper extremity from the shoulder to the fingers, depending on the indication and approach. Ultrasound has made these blocks more accessible and safer to perform. In addition, evidence suggests that ultrasound reduces the total volume of anesthetic required, decreases complications such as pneumothorax and vascular injury, and increases block success.

Interscalene brachial plexus blockade can be used to manage acute pain in proximal humerus and clavicular fractures and manage glenohumeral dislocations. It is effective as postoperative pain control and reduces opiate use in patients recovering from shoulder surgeries; this approach has been used as the sole anesthetic in shoulder arthroscopy.

When performing an interscalene block for analgesia to the shoulder, there is a high risk of causing ipsilateral hemi-diaphragmatic paralysis via phrenic nerve palsy. Other approaches, such as a superior trunk block or a combined suprascapular and axillary nerve block, should be considered if phrenic nerve palsy is a concern. The superior trunk block potentially spares the diaphragm, but further research is needed to determine its efficacy.

There are multiple approaches to block the brachial plexus distal to the interscalene groove, all of which result in anesthesia to the entire upper extremity from the mid humerus to the fingertips. The chosen approach depends on many factors, including the ability to position the patient appropriately, infection over the intended injection site, coagulopathy, operator experience, and variation in adjacent structures.

The combined suprascapular and axillary nerve block is an intriguing alternative to regional anesthesia for shoulder surgery.

Among the supraclavicular, infraclavicular, and axillary blocks, a recent meta-analysis and systematic review found that all three have an equal likelihood of anesthetic success.