Patient history should focus on the timeline of pain, radiation of pain, and inciting events. Careful attention to prior episodes of trauma should be noted. Classically, patients complain of pain radiating down both buttocks and lower extremities. It is helpful to determine if the pain is localized to the lower back or if there is radiation into the leg(s). A presentation of radiating pain correlates with canal stenosis. Radiating pain as the main issue has a much more predictable surgical outcome compared to a presentation of non-specific lower back pain that likely is related to muscle fatigue and strain. A mechanical component to the back pain (i.e., the pain only with certain movements) may indicate instability or a degenerative pars fracture. It also is important in any evaluation of extremity issues to inspect circulation, as vascular claudication may mirror or mimic the neurogenic issues.

An evaluation of the patient's walking is critical to better assess the daily impact the pain/deficit is causing. Having the patient arise from the chair, walk on his or her heels and toes, and then sit on the examination table for testing strength, reflex, and straight leg testing is one systematic order.  The gait assessment should include ruling out a Trendelenburg gait, which can reveal an underlying weakness in the gluteus medius, innervated by the L5 nerve root.

All physical examinations will include the evaluation of the neurologic function of the arms, legs, bladder, and bowels. The keys to a thorough exam are organization and patience. One should evaluate not only strength but also sensation and reflexes. It is also important to inspect the skin along the back and document the presence of tenderness to compression or any prior surgical scars.

The straight leg raise (SLR) test consists of a supine patient having his/her fully extended leg passively stretched from 0 to about 80 degrees. The onset of radiating back pain in either leg supports a diagnosis of a stenotic canal. A herniation compressing the L5 nerve root will present as a weakness of ankle dorsiflexion and an extension of the great toe. This deficit also may diminish the Achilles tendon reflex. L4 radiculopathy may present with weakness in the quadriceps and a decreased patellar tendon reflex.

Documentation is paramount, as these initial findings likely will be used as a baseline for all future evaluations.

**Wadell Signs**

A comprehensive examination should also include ruling out non-organic causes of low back pain/symptoms.  When the clinician suspects potential psychological causes, consideration should be given to the following:

- Nonspecific description of symptoms or inconsistency, including superficial/non-anatomic sites of tenderness on exam

- Pain with axial load/rotational movements

- Negative SLR with patient distraction (one approach includes having the patient sit in a chair and reproducing the SLR "environment")

- Non-dermatomal patterns of distribution of symptoms

- Pain out of proportion on the exam