Body mass index (BMI) can be calculated by a person's weight in kilograms divided by the square of height in meters and can help conveniently categorize one's body mass into different weight categories. BMI has been shown to be moderately correlated with direct measures of body fat and has been shown to be strongly correlated with different metabolic risk factors and disease outcomes.

In adults, BMI of 18.5 to 24.9 is defined as normal, while BMI of 25.0 to 29.9 is categorized as overweight, and BMI greater than 30.0 pertains to the obese category.

The USA Institute of Medicine (IOM) has issued recommendations regarding optimal gestational weight gain (GWG) in pregnancy to optimize the mother and infant outcomes. IOM suggests a total GWG of 11 to 20 lb (5 to 9 kg) for women who are obese and 15 to 25 lb (6.8 to 11.3 kg) for women who are in the overweight category.

However, the IOM recommendations were derived from observational studies that predominantly consisted of women of European origin, and its generalization to other racial and ethnic groups and other low-middle income groups may not be appropriate. Outside the U.S., the adoption of the IOM recommendation varies; for instance, the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) does not endorse the IOM recommendations as the evidence is considered insufficient to guide clinical practice. Despite its limitations, IOM gestational weight gain guidelines can provide clinicians with a basis for practice in managing obesity in pregnancy.