Management of dysbaric osteonecrosis is complex as it varies significantly depending on the location and specific characteristics of the lesion. After being first identified, osteonecrotic lesions are typically observed radiologically to monitor for any changes or potentially self-resolution. Once any bony lesion is identified, the patient should be referred to an orthopedic surgeon. Special attention should be paid to large lesions in the diaphysis of the femur or tibia that are accompanied by a significant amount of pain with ambulating. The patient should be provided with crutches or another form of assistive device and be made non-weight bearing until they have received a prompt evaluation by an orthopedic surgeon due to the concern of pathologic fracture. Significant lesions of the long bones such as the humerus, femur, and tibia may receive prophylactic intra-medullary nailing to prevent this from occurring. Symptomatic lesions in other anatomic reasons can sometimes be treated with curettage and bone grafting. In regards to the proximal femur, treatment can become increasingly complex depending on the stage of the disease. Necrosis of the proximal femur in Ficat stage 0-II can potentially benefit from oral bisphosphonate treatment to prevent femoral head collapse. Small, early lesions have multiple surgical options including core decompression with or without bone graft (alleviating intraosseous hypertension and stimulating angiogenesis), rotational osteotomy away from the weight-bearing surface, and vascularized, free-fibular, strut grafting in young patients. Total hip arthroplasty is indicated in patients over 40 with significant hip joint arthrosis or in younger patient's with more advanced femoral head collapse or at minimum a present crescent sign (Ficat stage 3).