Complications directly attributed to ERCP are as high as 6.8%. A quarter of these are severe and most commonly require intervention, blood transfusion more than 4 units, or hospitalization over 10 days. Mortality rates are about 0.3%. The incidence of post-ERCP pancreatitis (PEP) is 3.5%, making it the most frequent complication following the procedure. In 90% of cases, pancreatitis is mild-to-moderate in severity. Infections, as cholangitis and cholecystitis, occur at a rate of 1.4%. Gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding happens 1.3% of the time. Although duodenal and biliary perforations occur at a lower rate of 0.6%, mostly related to sphincterotomy, they carry the highest mortality rates among ERCP complications.

Other complications account for 1.3% of total complications. These include cardiovascular and analgesia-related events, pneumothorax, retroperitoneal, mediastinal and subcutaneous emphysema, hepatic hematoma, portal venous air embolism, splenic injury, post-sphincterotomy papillary or ampullary restenosis, duodenal obstruction, and impaction of the basket catheter while removing biliary stones.

Definite risk factors that increase the incidence of PEP include increased cannulation attempts duration (more than 10 minutes and possibly more than 5 minutes), pancreatic guidewire passage more than once, pancreatic injection of high-osmolality contrast material, previous pancreatitis, suspected sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, and female gender. Likely risk factors include intraductal ultrasound, failure to remove bile duct stones, endoscopic papillary balloon dilation, and pancreatic sphincterotomy. Precut sphincterotomy is not a certain risk factor as increased PEP risk may be related to increased cannulation attempts associated with this procedure. Needle-knife fistulotomy is recommended to other precut techniques, as it carries fewer complications, including PEP. Other likely risk factors that are patient-related include previous PEP, younger age, absence of chronic pancreatitis, and normal serum bilirubin levels. Serum amylase levels obtained 2-6 hours post-ERCP are considered normal if less than 1.5 times the upper limit of normal. Similarly, serum lipase levels obtained at the same time are considered normal if less than 4 times the upper limit of normal. When indicated, endoscopic papillary balloon dilation should be longer than 1 minute.

Nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) decrease the incidence of PEP. Hence it is recommended that patients undergoing ERCP get routine rectal diclofenac or indomethacin immediately before or after the procedure. Aggressive hydration using lactated Ringer's solution help decrease the incidence of PEP. Sublingual nitroglycerin or bolus injection of 250 micrograms of somatostatin should be considered an alternative in high-risk patients, if NSAIDs are contraindicated and if prophylactic pancreatic stenting is not feasible. Topical epinephrine should not be used routinely. Other possibly effective drugs include somatostatin, octreotide, ceftazidime, and anti-protease drugs as nafamostat, gabexate, and ulinastatin. They are still not recommended for PEP. Drugs proven ineffective include drugs reducing sphincter of Oddi pressure other than nitroglycerin (lidocaine, nifedipine, and botulinum toxin), glucocorticoids and other anti-inflammatory drugs (recombinant platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase, pentoxifylline, and semapimod), heparin, interleukin-10, and antioxidant drugs (N-acetylcysteine, natural beta-carotene, and allopurinol). Routine use of low-osmolality contrast materials is not recommended. The number of cannulation attempts and volume of contrast material injected should be as low as possible. Patient positioning does not affect the incidence of PEP. The use of carbon dioxide for insufflation decreases post-procedure abdominal pain and is therefore recommended. The wire-guided technique used for cannulation is recommended. European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) recommends the use of short 5-Fr pancreatic stents rather than 3-Fr stents in high-risk patients, which would decrease the risk of severe PEP to almost nil. Retained stents should be removed within 10 days of placement. It is recommended that manometry for sphincter of Oddi be done using a modified triple-lumen perfusion catheter with immediate aspiration or a non-water-perfused micro transducer catheter.