Pseudohypoparathyroidism presents with hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, elevated PTH levels, normal 25 hydroxyvitamin D, and normal kidney function. Additionally, many patients express the phenotype of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, but not always. Although no other diseases present identically, many conditions share similar characteristics providing the following differential diagnoses.

- True hypoparathyroidism

- It presents with hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia, but the PTH levels are low. True hypoparathyroidism typically classifies as either surgical or non-surgical. The most frequent cause of hypoparathyroidism is surgical, post-parathyroidectomy for treatment of hyperparathyroidism or accidental removal of parathyroid glands during other neck surgeries such as thyroidectomy. Non-surgical hypoparathyroidism can result from a variety of inherited and acquired disorders. Examples include hemochromatosis or other infiltrative diseases and mutations in the PTH gene, CaSR gene, and autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1), which presents with the triad of hypoparathyroidism, primary adrenal insufficiency, and mucocutaneous candidiasis.

- Vitamin D deficiency

- This condition presents with hypocalcemia and elevated PTH levels (secondary hyperparathyroidism) but obviously low 25 OH vitamin D levels.

- Worsening chronic kidney disease (CKD)

- Patients with impaired glomerular filtration rate (GFR) present with similar findings. The kidney is the primary site for 1-alpha-hydroxylation of 25 OH vitamin D which produces the active form of the hormone 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D. The impaired conversion to active vitamin D leads to its low levels in patients with CKD. In addition to low active vitamin D levels, higher than normal phosphate frequently accumulates in the blood due to declining GFR. The low active vitamin D levels and high phosphate levels lead to increased parathyroid hormone release.