Hydromorphone is contraindicated in patients reporting allergies to the drug itself, sulfites, or any other component of the formulation used.

Clinicians should not administer this drug to patients with bronchial asthma, or any other form of respiratory disease with clinical respiratory compromise; this can induce respiratory arrest. In terminal cancer patients, clinicians should not restrain opioid therapy even when signs of respiratory depression are evident.

Hydromorphone is to be avoided in any gastrointestinal obstruction or hypomotility, including ileus. Postoperative ileum should prompt careful administration of hydromorphone, to prevent prolonged ileus.

Hydromorphone should also to be avoided in genitourinary obstructions, central nervous system (CNS) depression, hypotension, and hypovolemia. It requires careful administration in cases of concomitant psychiatric illness.

**United States Black Box Warning**

Addiction, abuse, and misuse are all potential risks affecting hydromorphone users. Chronic users require regular monitoring with a clear plan for the duration of treatment. Patients who no longer need chronic treatment should be weaned off the medication gradually, to avoid withdrawal symptoms.

Overdose and life-threatening respiratory depression can happen in cases of accidental ingestion or intended abuse. Concerning signs include confusion, dizziness, bluish lips and fingernails, cold skin, constricted pupils, and weak blood pressure. In cases of a suspected overdose, naloxone is the immediate therapeutic response in the intravenous, intramuscular, or subcutaneous form. The required dose is 0.4 mg to 2 mg every 2 to 3 minutes when needed, and not to exceed 0.001 mg/kg or 10 mg.

Neonatal withdrawal syndrome occurs in the neonates of women with chronic hydromorphone usage. For this purpose, prolonged treatment of hydromorphone is to be avoided during pregnancy. Whenever neonatal withdrawal syndrome is a possibility, adequate management should be available, which includes proper administration of morphine to the neonate.

The risk of medication error is another potential harm, where the medical staff (doctor or nurse) provides the patient with a wrong formulation or the wrong dose. Proper medication check with institutional regulations is mandatory before opioid administration.