Acute pain often follows trauma or surgery and constitutes a signal to the brain regarding the presence of noxious stimuli or ongoing tissue damage.

Whereas acute pain symptoms dissipate with the removal of the painful stimulus, chronic pain persists beyond the useful period of the pain signal. It often continues after the initial tissue damage has resolved. Chronic pain may not be directly related to the initial tissue injury or disease condition. Instead, it may result secondarily from changes in the pain detection system, either as neuropathic pain (e.g., post-traumatic neuropathy, CRPS type II) or nocicplastic pain (e.g., CRPS type I).

Experiencing acute or chronic pains are co-morbidities and complications, respectively, after nerve or tissue injury. As a result of this and a host of overlapping pain mechanisms at multiple sites (e.g., periphery, spinal cord, brain, and descending modulatory systems), the etiology of pain remains complex. The four most common causes of pain are cancer, osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, surgeries and non-iatrogenic trauma, and spinal problems.

**Ketamine Pharmacology**

Ketamine is a phencyclidine derivative.

It is important to consider the peripheral vascular effects of ketamine, especially in patients with ischemic heart disease or pulmonary hypertension, when increased sympathetic tone and increased vascular resistance may not be desirable.

Intravenous ketamine has a rapid onset of less than or equal to 1 minute with a duration of action of around 10 to 20 minutes.