The treatment options divide according to those that are supportive and those that are specific. The basis for the decision of which measures to implement is largely on disease severity.

Supportive measures are necessary for all patients. They include ensuring adequate ocular lubrication with lubricating eye drops, eye patches, and prism correction that may help with diplopia and finally elevating the head of the bed that may assist with swelling.

Selenium has been described in some studies to be of benefit in mild disease, but these studies took place in areas with a relative selenium deficiency; thus, the benefit is not certain in selenium-rich environments.

Additional considerations in management include smoking cessation and rendering the patient euthyroid. Such treatment includes thionamides, radioiodine, or surgery. Those with moderate to severe Graves' orbitopathy have a contraindication to radioiodine, and thus, thionamides or surgery would be the preferred option in most patients. Total thyroidectomy is preferred over subtotal thyroidectomy as more thyroid autoantigens get removed.

Other treatment options include glucocorticoids. These should be options in patients with clinically active disease (CAS 3 or above) and those classified as having moderate-to-severe disease (EUGOGO classification). Oral prednisone or intravenous methylprednisolone can be considerations for moderate disease, but those with severe disease should start on IV therapy. In terms of IV dosing, various studies have quoted different regimens. Due to reduced adverse events and better outcomes, generally preferred is a weekly infusion of 500 mg of methylprednisolone for 6 weeks, followed by 250 mg infused weekly for another 6 weeks (a total dose of 4.5 g).

Second-line agents that are options if there is an intolerance or insufficient response to glucocorticoids include other immunomodulators such as rituximab and mycophenolate, external orbital radiation, or orbital decompression surgery.

Teprotumumab is an insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) receptor antagonist. It was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2020 for the use in active moderate-to-severe Graves orbitopathy. This was based on 2 studies each of which lasted 24 weeks. Teprotumumab was compared to a placebo in a combined total of 171 patients between the two studies with active moderate-to-severe Graves eye disease. Both studies demonstrated that Teprotumumab was superior to placebo in the reduction of proptosis and clinical activity score.

Sight-threatening Graves orbitopathy is a medical emergency. Patients should be immediately hospitalized and receive intravenous glucocorticoids, and they may also need urgent orbital decompression surgery.

Orbital decompression surgery has been shown to be best performed after steroids, when the eye disease is quiescent or emergently if the orbitopathy is sight-threatening. Indications for surgery include the development of optic neuropathy, excessive proptosis resulting in corneal complications, aesthetic indications, relief of pain, and severe inflammation or progressive eye disease that does not respond to other measures.

Regarding external beam radiation, its role is generally limited to those patients who do not respond to other treatment modalities. Side effects such as chronically dry eyes and a theoretical risk of tumor induction restrict its use. Its proposed mechanism of action is on modulating the immune system. The most common regimen is a 2-week course of 10 sessions with a cumulative dose of 20Gy.

The management of Graves orbitopathy in children is largely similar to that of adults. Firstly one needs to render the child euthyroid, with antithyroid drugs being the first-line treatment. For the orbitopathy, clinical monitoring is often acceptable. Steroids can be used in select cases when no improvement or worsening of eye manifestations occurs despite being euthyroid. Surgery is rarely indicated, and orbital radiation has no role in juvenile Graves orbitopathy, given the potential risk for inducing tumor formation.

In the pregnant patient, management is reasonably similar to the non-pregnant patient. Antithyroid drugs are the mainstay, radioactive iodine is contraindicated, and thyroidectomy is a consideration should the Graves disease be uncontrolled with maximal dosing of antithyroid medication. Propylthiouracil (PTU) is the preferred agent during the first trimester of pregnancy. Should the Graves orbitopathy be severe, there is a role for steroids and orbital decompression surgery, especially if sight-threatening.