Adventitious sounds reflect the pathology that produces them, so the specific clinical context is critical for accurate interpretation.  For example, crackles, the sound of airways snapping open, frequently occur in interstitial lung disease, pulmonary edema from heart failure, and infection.  Later and higher pitched crackles often represent interstitial lung disease whereas earlier and lower pitched crackles tend more towards chronic obstructive lung disease.    Wheezing, the sound of air movement through narrowed airways, occurs in conditions such as asthma, chronic obstructive lung disease, and focal masses. Without a specific clinical context, these sounds are fairly nonspecific. The duration, rather than pitch, of wheezing throughout the respiratory cycle is most predictive of the degree of pathology.

Breath sound intensity can be graded on a 0-4 scale (zero being none, one is barely appreciated, two is diminished, three is normal, and four is louder than normal), although the clinical utility of grading intensity has been questioned.

If bronchial breath sounds are outside their normal geographic territory on the chest, this is a sign of underlying pathology, usually pulmonary consolidation or collapse, this can be a tricky concept because normal breath sounds in one area of the lung could be pathological if heard elsewhere in the lung so the examiner should be conscientious when examining the chest.

The ease of transmission of certain frequency sounds can change with pathology, so we will discuss two specific examples as an illustration.  In patients with lobar pneumonia, the normal, air-filled lung instead contains fluid.  As fluid transmits sounds better than air, vocal resonance is increased such that bronchophony, egophony, and whispered pectoriloquy might be present. Contrast this with pleural effusions which may transmit lower frequency sounds less, but higher frequencies better.