A thorough history and physical examination are essential for suspected pseudohyponatremia. A comprehensive review of systems should be obtained, in addition to a careful review of the patient’s past medical history to search for a potential etiology. Symptoms that suggest true hyponatremia, such as fatigue, muscle cramps, altered mentation, headaches, and seizure, should be excluded before considering the spurious elevation of serum sodium. Comprehensive medication reconciliation is necessary at the initial encounter to exclude exogenous factors that may alter normal sodium homeostasis.

A false interpretation of laboratory technology identifies the diagnosis of pseudohyponatremia; thus, there are no direct physical examination findings attributable to pseudohyponatremia. However, a focused physical examination is necessary to help rule out pathologic hyponatremia, potentially leading to severe morbidity and mortality if not recognized promptly. The clinician should evaluate for neuropsychiatric abnormalities with a complete neurological examination and psychiatric screening at the initial encounter. The initial neurocognitive and psychiatric evaluation also helps to establish a baseline to reference at subsequent encounters. Additionally, a cardiovascular and respiratory examination is a requirement to evaluate for any abnormalities that require attention.

While there are no specific physical examination findings that are caused by pseudohyponatremia, evidence of the underlying disorder may be present that can help to direct further workup:

- Hypercholesterolemia: obesity, peripheral arterial disease, presence of cardiovascular disease, xanthomas.

- Hyperproteinemia/hypergammaglobulinemia: a history of malignancy, evidence of metastasis, bone lesions, abnormal electrolyte or hematology studies, pain, evidence of immunodeficiency.

- Accumulation of lipoprotein X: abdominal pain, pancreatitis, pruritis, jaundice, xanthomas.