Asthma is considered the most common chronic disease seen in children. It is a significant cause for missing school as well as frequent emergency department and urgent care visits. The use of inhaled corticosteroids has been shown to improve asthma control but adherence is low amongst all populations. In a study performed in Massachusettes between 2012 and 2015, the impact of the school nurse-supervised asthma therapy program on healthcare utilization was reviewed. The children who participated in this study were identified as high risk and had persistent asthma. The study recognized poor adherence to medications by this group of children as well. These children were given their inhaled corticosteroid monitored by the school nurse daily to twice daily. This was a retrospective study where data was analyzed and electronic health records were reviewed to follow asthma-related emergency department and hospital visits both before the study and after the study. Refills of albuterol and prednisone through pharmacy records and medical records were obtained. Lastly, the research assistants reviewed school absenteeism reports from school nurses.  [Level III Cohort Case-Control studies] The study showed a reduction in both emergency department and hospital visits as well as decreased refills in albuterol in the post-intervention group versus pre-intervention. This small study showed that collaboration with a school nurse to provide supervised asthma medication can reduce health care utilization in school-aged children and provide better asthma control overall.

In 2013, 1.6 million emergency department visits were due to uncontrolled asthma. Many studies have shown that asthma education is essential to help promote patient self-management and adherence. A retrospective study was done in the South Bronx asthma clinic to show that combining pharmacy expertise with asthma education also improves medication adherence and asthma control, as well as decreasing hospital utilization. The role of the asthma educator is to teach patients about asthma medications, their proper use, and to provide better understanding of the disease. Chart reviews were performed to identify improvement of asthma control after education based on the asthma control test scores. Conclusions from this study show that the addition of a pharmacist lead asthma education program was associated with improved medication adherence, decreased hospital utilization, and increased asthma control.

Of utmost importance in the treatment and prevention of asthma-associated morbidity and mortality is communication between an interprofessional team of clinicians, pharmacists, and specialized nurses. Communication of medication noncompliance between the pharmacists and clinician can help identifies those patients who are at highest risk of asthma exacerbations. Specialty nurses can help educate the patient on the proper administration of the inhalers and their use. Nurses can help clinicians identify the most appropriate prescription for each patient to ensure proper compliance. Only by working together as an integrated interprofessional unit in the treatment of asthma can we achieve improved patient outcomes. [Level V]