It can be challenging to distinguish pseudopapilledema from true papilledema or disc edema based on the fundoscopic appearance of the optic nerve alone. A careful history of symptoms of raised intracranial pressure or other neurological symptoms, including positional headaches, nausea, pulsatile tinnitus, transient visual obscurations (TVOs), and diplopia is necessary. However, these features are non-specific and there is considerable overlap of headache symptoms between young females with idiopathic intracranial hypertension and those with ODD. Other signs of neurologic dysfunction on examination would not meet the modified Dandy criteria for IIH and, in the context of suspicious optic nerves, should raise the index of suspicion for acquired disc edema or papilledema.

On fundus examination, optic nerves with pseudopapilledema will have an elevated appearance. In cases of ODD, the drusen may be superficial and easily visible on examination as refractile bodies or yellow drusen. The refractile appearance of drusen should not be confused with pseudodrusen that is present in longstanding papilledema. The diagnostic dilemma in ODD occurs when the drusen are deep in the nerve and obscured by the overlying retinal nerve fiber layer so that direct visualization is not possible. There may be blurred disc margins with nodular borders, but in optic nerves with buried drusen, there should not be any obscuration of the blood vessels, nor should there be any microvascular changes such as hemorrhages or exudates. The optic nerves will also tend to be small and cupless, with anomalous branching of the retinal vessels.