Reducing tension on the wound with good surgical technique is an important aspect of prevention of hypertrophic scars during surgery. Patients who are known to form hypertrophic scars or keloids should avoid elective surgical procedures.

Once the hypertrophic scar or keloid scar has formed there are a variety of treatment modalities that may be used. Corticosteroid injection is a mainstay of therapy for hypertrophic scars. Surgical excision may be used to treat hypertrophic scars or keloid scars. However, in the case of keloid scars, surgical excision should not be used alone but rather in combination with another modality such as corticosteroid injection or radiotherapy. Radiotherapy has been shown to treat and prevent keloid scars. Laser therapy including long-pulsed Nd:YAG laser or pulsed dye laser have proven benefit in treating hypertrophic scars. These lasers target blood vessels and therefore are very helpful in reducing the color changes seen in hypertrophic scars. Cryotherapy may be used to treat hypertrophic or keloid scars. Although one would assume that a destructive treatment such as cryotherapy would induce scars, experts believe that a different collection of inflammatory mediators are released in response to cold injury compared to other types of injury such as burn injury. 5-Fluorouracil has successfully treated and prevented keloids.

The treatment of burn wounds and the prevention of hypertrophic and keloid scars after burn injury represents a daunting challenge for clinicians. As mentioned above, burn wounds can be divided into superficial (partial thickness) and deep (full thickness). The majority of partial-thickness burn wounds heal without hypertrophic scarring. Most experts opt to manage deep wounds by excising the burned area and placing a split-thickness autograft. Laser therapy is often used to treat hypertrophic scars caused by burns. Laser therapy not only improves the color of the hypertrophic scar but can reduce the height of the scar and tension on the scar. Laser therapy can also relieve symptoms such as pain and pruritus. Traditionally, compression therapy was used in the management of burn wounds, but a meta-analysis found that compression therapy did not show efficacy in altering the progression of hypertrophic scars. In addition, good nutrition and vitamin supplementation are recommended for burn patients or those with chronic wounds. Like many other disorders in dermatology and medicine, the future of burn wound management may lie in targeting specific molecular pathways. These include therapies directed at WNT/beta-catenin pathway, the TGF-beta pathway, the Notch pathway, the Sonic hedgehog pathway and the RAS/MEK/ERK pathway.