Diagnosing inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) requires a combination of clinical findings, inflammatory laboratory markers, imaging findings, and endoscopic biopsies. Hematologic findings include microcytic anemia, leukocytosis, and thrombocytosis, inflammatory markers such as the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) are commonly elevated.

In some patients, the diagnosis may require ruling out parasitic diseases like giardia, amebiasis, strongyloides, and also tuberculosis.

A complete blood count will identify anemia, leukocytosis, and albumin levels.

Fecal calprotectin levels can be used as a marker for intestinal inflammation. Levels of perinuclear antineutrophilic cytoplasmic and anti-saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies may be elevated in Crohn disease. Finally, stool studies must be done to rule out ova and parasitic organisms.

The abdominal x-ray can assess for the presence of free air, bowel obstruction, or toxic megacolon.

Barium studies are done to characterize the bowel disease; a lead pipe appearance indicates ulcerative colitis; sparing of the rectum is indicative of Crohn disease and thumb printing is indicative of mucosal inflammation. Further, the barium studies may reveal skip lesions and stricture formation in the ileum, which are indicative of Crohn disease.

Ultrasound (US), computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have all been used in the diagnosis of IBD or to assess for complications. US usage in trained individuals can evaluate the right lower quadrant for ileal disease. MRI can evaluate for rectal fistulas. Most commonly, CT is employed to evaluate for perforation or bowel obstruction. CT enterography can be helpful in assessing for strictures or in operative planning.

Endoscopy evaluation with either esophagogastroduodenoscopy, colonoscopy, or both is essential to obtaining biopsies to confirm a diagnosis of IBD.