The first step in FVD management is determining the correct diagnosis, and treatment may require multiple modalities depending on the cause, type, and severity of the disorder. Most problems can be managed simply by identifying the etiology and modifying patient behavior to avoid it.

As a general rule, there are three primary treatment strategies:

- 
**Medical Treatment**

- 
**Surgical Treatment**

- 
**Voice Therapy**

Speech-language pathologists employ a holistic approach to treatment, striving to balance respiration, phonation, and resonance instead of directly addressing the symptoms of voice problems. Multiple rehabilitative strategies, such as auditory masking, the accent method, conversation training therapy (CTT), Lax Vox speech therapy, expiratory muscle strength training, phonation resistance training, chant speech, and confidential voice are used to manage FVDs. Multiple facilitative techniques are leveraged by SLPs to restore a normal voice, depending on the type of voice disorder, while also trying to determine the underlying causality.

In some cases, vocal fold nodules are successfully treated with voice therapy alone. However, many other types of lesions (laryngeal webs, polyps, contact ulcers, and papilloma) require surgical management. Identification of the cause of the dysfunction is the key to a successful treatment. Voice therapy is the standard of care for many of the nearly 140 million people in the United States who suffer from voice disorders; unfortunately, current therapies are not always effective for a number of reasons: incorrect diagnosis, patient noncompliance, and severity of the pathology being chief among them.