Polypharmacy could result from the patient and system-related factors. Patients related factors include multiple co-morbid conditions requiring multiple medicines and being managed by multiple specialists, lack of designated primary provider, residing in long-term facilities, and mental health issues. Elderly patients residing in long-term facilities have multiple medical issues and require multiple medical regimens.

Patients with mental health issues are on antipsychotic medications and may require more medications to mitigate their side effects. System-related factors include automatic medicine refills, improper medication reconciliations, poor transition of care, and the use of medications only to meet quality metrics for the specified disease state. Another common reason is primary care providers may not have ample time to counsel patients and feel obliged to address multiple issues in the short visit, which may further lead to polypharmacy.

It is imperative to understand the consequences of polypharmacy as it serves as an indicator for adverse clinical outcomes. Polypharmacy can lead to a delayed return to work, add drug costs, drug-drug interactions. Clinical guidelines recommend using multiple drugs in combination for a single disease. The elderly population will have multiple comorbid conditions requiring multiple medications. The prevalence of polypharmacy in the elderly age group is high in all health care settings across all the countries. Also, approximately over 50% of the elderly population are taking ≥1 medication that is not clinically indicated.

Polypharmacy significantly impacts the elderly age group, leading to poor compliance, drug interactions, medication errors, and avoidable adverse drug events (ADE) leading to various complications. An ADE is a harm caused by usual drug doses leading to increased morbidity and mortality. It also has very high financial implications. This is recognized as an expensive practice costing Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) around 50 billion dollars annually.

The metabolism and drug clearance are affected as age increases, and the risk is further compounded with an increased number of drugs used. The elderly population can be very sensitive to medications, and these medications can pose excessive side effects. The side effects can further be compounded with the use of other medications producing similar physical responses. There can be dangerous drug-drug interactions, which may produce new side effects that may not be typically associated with single medication use. These can also lead to prescribing cascade. The prescribing cascade happens when the adverse drug events are identified as a problem due to a lack of pharmacological knowledge, and the new medication is prescribed. Also, over-the-counter medications and herbal medications may interact with the prescribed medications and lead to adverse events.