Procedural technique varies between centers. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy before EBUS is often performed to perform a full assessment of the bronchial tree and accurately deliver topical anesthetic to the vocal cords, trachea, carina, and main bronchi. Once anesthetized, the EBUS scope can be introduced.

Convex EBUS scopes have a larger outer diameter than traditional fibreoptic bronchoscopes, necessitating the scope to be passed per-orally with a protective mouthguard.

Anatomical landmarks using the ultrasound transducer, including the aorta, pulmonary arteries, and lymph node stations, orientate the operator. The endobronchial view is also useful in combination with the ultrasound view, using structures such as the carina, second-order carina, and trachealis muscle to orientate the operator. The balloon is inflated to improve the ultrasound image by increasing contact with the bronchial mucosa.

Once the target nodes are identified, the EBUS-TBNA takes place. The sampling needle is attached to the scope, passing through the working port until the tip of the sheath is visualized. Once the scope position is adequate, the needle sheath tip is identified in the endoscopic view, and the needle is advanced across the bronchial wall and into the target area under real-time ultrasound guidance.

The needle stylet is removed, and a suction collection system consisting of a vacuum syringe or similar is attached. The operator then agitates the needle so that the needle tip traverses the full length of the node a number of times to obtain a tissue sample (between 7-10 times, but this is variable). Suction should be turned off before removing the needle. This process constitutes a single ‘pass.’ Most operators will perform a total of 3 passes as this has been correlated with good sample sensitivity. ROSE can be used to inform the operator whether further passes are required whilst the procedure is still being performed. Systematic review and meta-analysis data suggest that although ROSE does not increase diagnostic yield, it has a utility to reduce both the number of needle passes and bronchoscopic procedures required for the patient.

Once each pass is complete, the sampling kit is removed from the working port, and the stylet is re-introduced. This pushes the sample material out and onto a collecting slide. The slide is then stained and prepared for ROSE, with the remainder of the sample being placed in RPMI solution and sent for cell block preparation and formal cytological examination.

Once all target areas have been adequately sampled, the scope is removed, and a formal ‘sign-out’ is performed, and samples are inspected. Labeling is checked prior to sending it to the laboratory.