# Continuing Education Activity

Antisialagogues are medications often used to manage and treat patients with noisy breathing near the end of life. These medications are members of the antimuscarinic class. This educational activity reviews the indications, actions, and contraindications for antisialagogues as agents in the management of noisy breathing near the end of life; use in other applicable disorders will also be discussed. This activity highlights the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, and relevant interactions pertinent for interprofessional team members in the management of patients with noisy breathing near the end of life and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Review the monitoring requirements for patients receiving antisialagogues.
- Describe the pathophysiology of antisialagogue toxicity.
- Identify the indications for administration of antisialagogues in the management of noisy breathing near the end of life.
- Explain the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to enhance care coordination for patients affected by noisy breathing near the end of life receiving antisialagogues.

# Indications

At the extreme end of life, patients often develop noisy respiration that is secondary to salivary or bronchial secretions that accumulate in the oropharynx. It is most commonly observed in terminal patients who are too weak to expectorate.  Type 1 death rattle is sometimes defined as noisy breathing caused by loss of swallowing reflex in patients near death. Type 1 noisy breathing, sometimes referred to as "true death rattle," is thought to result from the unpredictable accumulation of salivary secretions during the last few hours of the patient's life.

While not FDA labeled specifically for use in death rattle and with limited evidence to support their use, antimuscarinic drugs are often used to mitigate the disturbing symptoms.

The injectable forms of glycopyrrolate and atropine bear an FDA-approved indication for use in peri-operative secretion reduction, though neither has explicit approval for the reduction of noisy breathing near death. Scopolamine hydrobromide injection is available for use outside of the United States and is dosed at 0.3 to 0.6 g to reduce secretions.

A small study performed in thirteen patients demonstrated greater efficacy of glycopyrronium over scopolamine for death rattle.

A randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial comparing 1 mg sublingual atropine to placebo found no difference in death rattle, as evidenced by the death rattle scoring system previously used by Back et al.

The timing of pharmacologic intervention may be an important factor that impacts the outcomes. An open-label randomized study performed in 132 patients at the end of life found that hyoscine bromide administered as prophylaxis significantly reduce death rattle, compared to hyoscine bromide administered after the onset of a death rattle.

# Mechanism of Action

Anti-muscarinic drugs are a class of antisialagogue that works by competitively antagonizing acetylcholine at muscarinic receptors with minimal impact on nicotinic receptors.

If conditions such as infection cause dysfunction of the M2 receptors, severe hyperreactivity of the M3 receptors may ensue, which then causes increased secretion and bronchoconstriction. M3 receptors are exquisitely sensitive to any cholinergic stimulation, while M2 receptors are much less sensitive.

# Administration

Drug administration of glycopyrronium is possible via oral, intramuscular (IM), intravenous (IV) routes.

# Adverse Effects

Glycopyrronium is known to have little effect on visual accommodation and heart rate at lower doses, but at higher doses (400 mcg) can result in bradycardia 6 hours post-dose administration (approximately 20% reduction in pulse rate.)

Hyoscine butyl bromide affects heart rate causing tachycardia in a dose-dependent fashion (20% increase at 20 mg and 50% increase at 56 mg) while at higher doses of approximately 200 mcg is known to cause bradycardia.

Both hyoscine and atropine cross the blood-brain barrier and are known to cause confusion, and all of the antimuscarinic agents are generally known to cause dryness of the oral mucosa and may precipitate urinary retention.

# Contraindications

Antisialogogues, including atropine, scopolamine, hyoscyamine, methantheline, propantheline, and glycopyrrolate, are contraindicated in several conditions.

# Monitoring

Depending on the clinical symptom (e.g., drooling), various dosages of the antisialogogues may be used.

# Toxicity

Administration of neostigmine methylsulfate, which does not cross the blood-brain "barrier," can be administered as an antidote in incremental intravenous dosages of 0.25 mg in adults and can be repeated every 5 to 10 minutes until anticholinergic activity noted is reversed up to a maximum of 2.5 mg.

If CNS symptoms including restlessness, excitement, convulsions, or psychotic behavior are to occur, physostigmine which does cross the blood-brain "barrier" should be used and slowly administered in dosages of 0.5 to 2 mg administered IV and is repeatable as indicated up to a total of 5 mg in adults.

Supportive care generally is undertaken to reverse hypotension, including pressors with supportive care as needed.

In acute overdose, a curare-like action may occur in which neuromuscular blockade leading to muscular weakness, including paralysis, where artificial respiration and mechanical ventilation in patients whose code status/advanced directive/POLST allows will need to be instituted and maintained until effective respiratory action returns.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Few randomized clinical trials to effectively compare the antisialogogues exist, and therefore, an interprofessional effort necessary to coordinate the highest level of care for each patient. Individualizing each patient and prioritizing symptom relief to provide supportive care at the end of life must be discussed to improve patient safety and enhance patient-centered care. Coordinating end-of-life care with antisialogogues may at times appear to be a clinically challenging pathophysiological endeavor, and as such, requires the efforts of an interprofessional team, including a clinician who specializes in end-of-life medicine. Nursing interventions alone have demonstrated significant improvement in death rattle therapy; nurses can monitor the patient's response as well as check for adverse events and report to the prescriber.