Most of the ifosfamide toxicity is due to its active metabolites. Acrolein plays a significant role in causing major renal and bladder-related toxicity. As the kidneys filter these metabolites, they generate ROS and nitrogen compounds, damaging the renal and urothelial cells. The etiology behind neurotoxicity is similar to that of renal toxicity but is not fully understood. As with other anti-neoplastic drugs, ifosfamide is toxic to bone marrow. Other toxicities include the following:

**Hemorrhagic Cystitis**

Before the availability of mesna, the main adverse effect was hemorrhagic cystitis. This is due to hepatic metabolism producing acrolein, which is excreted by the kidneys and accumulates in the bladder.

**Neurotoxicity**

Central nervous system toxicity appears as encephalopathy with varying severity (confusion, hallucinations, drowsiness, coma). It presents in about 30% of the cases, and the symptoms occur when administering high doses of the drug either orally or intravenously but more with oral administration.

**Hematologic Toxicity**

Myelosuppression is a dose-limiting toxicity. The blood counts reach a nadir in about 8 to 13 days of the treatment cycle. Recovery generally occurs around day 17 of the treatment cycle, starting the next cycle in around three weeks after the first treatment. This effect is dose-related. The incidence of myelosuppression is low when fractionated doses are used rather than higher doses.

**Nephrotoxicity**

Most commonly noted in children and is seen when co-administered with cisplatin. It can lead to Fanconi syndrome, in which there is impairment of proximal tubule function resulting in irreversible damage. This manifests clinically as metabolic acidosis, polyuria, and renal phosphate wasting and is seen in about 5% of cases.

**Miscellaneous Toxicities**

There are reports of arrhythmias, heart failure, and pulmonary toxicity in the form of pneumonitis.

**Malignancy of Ureter and Bladder**

There has been a reported case of multifocal urothelial carcinoma in a patient treated with ifosfamide many years ago.