The management of gastric outlet obstruction depends on the cause and extent of the obstruction.

**Benign Mechanical Obstruction**

In benign GOO caused by PUD, conservative management should be tried first, including acid suppression, NSAID avoidance, testing for and treating H. pylori. If conservative management fails, dilation via endoscopy or surgery should be attempted.

Endoscopic balloon dilation (EBD) was introduced in the 1980s, and prior to this, GOO was managed with a surgical approach.

Stent placement with self-expandable metal stents (SEMSs) has been used as an alternative to surgery. However, there is limited literature evidence in the efficacy of using SEMSs in benign GOO. Nevertheless, they should be considered when EBD has failed.

Surgical management is also an option for treating benign GOO if the pylorus cannot safely be dilated due to obstruction or if the obstruction remains in spite of endoscopic and medical management.

**Malignant Obstruction**

For malignant obstruction, resection, decompressive gastrostomy, bypass surgery, endoscopic stenting, and endoscopic ultrasound-guided gastroenterostomy include some of the treatment options. Surgery is the optimal choice when resection is potentially curative.

Diagnostic laparoscopy or exploratory laparotomy can be done to evaluate the degree of disease before a surgical bypass is performed, which is usually done as a palliative measure. If there is no obstruction distal to the site a stent would be placed, an endoscopic stent should be used. Those with several areas of obstruction should undergo decompressive gastrostomy, and enteral or parenteral feeding options should be considered.

SEMS can be done as a palliative measure for malignant GOO to provide relief from obstructive symptoms and to improve patients’ quality of life. Patients with a life expectancy of fewer than six months should be considered for this intervention. It is common for these patients to have a concomitant biliary obstruction, and a biliary SEMS should be placed before placing one in the duodenum because it could be difficult to assess the biliary tract once a duodenal stent has been placed. Surgery, including gastrojejunostomy, can also be considered for GOO. When malignant GOO is not amenable to surgery or SEMS placement, a percutaneous decompressive gastrostomy (PDG) can be used. A PDG with jejunal extension allows for decompression and access for enteral nutrition.

Another treatment modality is endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) guided gastrojejunostomy using lumen-apposing metal stents (LAMS) where a bypass is created by inserting a stent from the stomach to the small bowel distal to the obstruction under EUS and fluoroscopic guidance. This approach is useful for both malignant and benign GOO.