Cardiogenic shock is an emergency requiring immediate resuscitative therapy before the irreversible damage of vital organs. Rapid diagnosis with prompt initiation of pharmacological therapy to maintain blood pressure and to maintain respiratory support along with a reversal of underlying cause plays a vital role in the prognosis of patients with cardiogenic shock.

Early restoration of coronary blood is the most important intervention and is the standard therapy for patients with cardiogenic shock due to myocardial infarction.

The management of cardiogenic shock involves the following:

**Medical Management**

The goal of medical management is to restore cardiac output and prevent irreversible end-organ damage rapidly.

- The optimal choice of a vasoactive agent in cardiogenic shock is unclear.

- Norepinephrine is preferred over dopamine in patients with severe hypotension (systolic blood pressure less than 70 mm Hg) or hypotension unresponsive to other medications as dopamine has been associated with higher rates of arrhythmias and a higher risk of mortality in this patient population. However, norepinephrine should be used with caution as it can cause tachycardia and increased myocardial oxygen demand in patients with recent myocardial infarctions.

- Dobutamine is widely used, has beta-1 and beta-2 agonist properties, which can improve myocardial contractility, lower left ventricular end-diastolic pressure, and increased cardiac output.

- Milrinone, also a widely used inotrope, has been shown to reduce left ventricular filling pressures.

- Saline or lactated ringer solution greater than 200 ml per 15 to 30 minutes is indicated in patients with no signs of fluid overload.

- Fibrinolytic therapy should be administered to patients who are unsuitable candidates for either percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass graft if there are no contraindications.

- Patients with myocardial infarction or acute coronary syndrome are given aspirin and heparin. They have been shown to be effective in reducing mortality.

- Diuretics such as furosemide play a role in decreasing plasma volume and edema and thereby decreasing cardiac output and blood pressure. This is associated with a compensatory increase in peripheral vascular resistance. With continuous therapy, extracellular fluid and plasma volumes return almost to pretreatment levels.

- Therapeutic hypothermia is established for out-of-hospital cardiac arrest patients with shockable rhythm to prevent brain injury and improve survival.

**Procedures**

- Central line placement plays a role in fluid resuscitation, access for multiple infusions, and allows invasive monitoring of central venous pressure.

- Arterial line placement is useful in providing continuous blood pressure monitoring, especially in patients requiring inotropic agents.

- Mechanical ventilation is indicated in patients with cardiogenic shock for oxygenation and airway protection.

**Percutaneous Coronary Intervention and Coronary Artery Bypass**

- Primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) should be performed, irrespective of time delay from the onset of myocardial infarction

- Urgent coronary artery bypass grafting is indicated in patients with coronary anatomy not amenable to PCI.

SHOCK (Should We Emergently Revascularize Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock) trial data confirmed an approach that combines early revascularization with medical management in patients with cardiogenic shock is optimal.

**Mechanical Circulatory Support**

Due to the poor prognosis associated with cardiogenic shock, medical therapy is often inadequate, and mechanical circulatory support (MCS) therapy to improve end-organ perfusion may be required. An experienced interprofessional team should evaluate MCS.

- Percutaneous circulatory assist devices provide superior hemodynamic support compared with pharmacologic therapy.

- Intra-aortic balloon pumps can be considered but are less likely to provide a benefit compared to other MCS devices and should not be routinely used but may still play an important role in patients with acute severe mitral regurgitation, ventricular septal defects, or when other MCS devices cannot be placed.

- Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is indicated in patients with poor oxygenation not expected to improve with alternative temporary mechanical support devices rapidly.

- In properly selected patients not likely to recover from cardiogenic shock without long-term MCS support, a ventricular assist device can be implanted as a bridge to recovery, bridge to bridge, bridge to transplant, or destination therapy.

- Cardiac transplantation may be performed in suitable candidates not expected to recover after MCS device implantation may be the only hope for meaningful long-term recovery. However, it remains a very limited option owing to the low number of available hearts.

Short-term mechanical circulatory assist

- IABP (Intra-aortic balloon pump)

- Non-IABP percutaneous mechanical devices

- ECMO

**IABP- Intra-aortic balloon pump**

- Most commonly used and least expensive of all mechanical support devices.

- Easy and rapid insertion.

- It is the device with which interventional cardiologists are most familiar.

Some of the other indications apart from cardiogenic shock include intractable angina, adjunctive therapy in high risk or complicated angioplasty, refractory heart failure as a bridge to future therapy, intractable ventricular arrhythmias as a bridge to therapy.

Mechanism: Blood is displaced into the proximal aorta by inflation during diastole, during systolic, rapid balloon deflation occurs, creating a vacuum effect and reducing the afterload.

Contraindications include severe aortic regurgitation, aortic dissection, uncontrolled sepsis, uncontrolled bleeding disorders.

The patient needs to be on therapeutic anticoagulation to avoid thrombosis, and heparin is the most common anticoagulation used.  Daily labs, including creatinine, platelet count, and hemoglobin, need to be checked.  Uncommon events like cholesterol embolization and balloon rupture are rare occurrences.

Limitations of IABP include variable effect on total coronary blood flow, no mortality benefit, modest hemodynamic support.

**Non-IABP percutaneous mechanical devices**

Left ventricular assist devices

1. Left ventricle to aorta- percutaneous transvalvular left ventricular assistance device (LVAD)

2. Left-atrium-to-aorta assist device-

3. Percutaneous cardiopulmonary bypass support with the use of an extracorporeal membrane oxygenator (ECMO).

Right ventricular assist device

-The LVAD system is available in 2 different versions (2.5 and 5.0). The larger version needs surgical implantation, whereas the smaller motion could be placed percutaneously.-This has an axial flow pump that revolves at a high speed displacing blood from the left ventricle to the proximal ascending aorta and works on the principle of Archimedes screw.

-Protective to trial compared to a 30-day incidence of major adverse events between intractable on the pump and the 2.5 LVAD.  It showed no difference between the 2 groups; trends for improved outcomes were observed for the 2.5 supported patients at 90 days.

-Placement of the LVAD system takes a longer time compared to IABP and needs more experience.  However, it provides a better improvement in cardiac index.

Left-atrium-to-aorta assist device

With a percutaneous left atrium to aortic assistive device, blood is pumped from the left atrium to the iliofemoral system.  It is approved by the US FDA for 6 hours of support. A randomized control trial comparing this device with an IABP in 41 patients with cardiogenic shock after acute myocardial infarction.  Hemodynamic and metabolic parameters were more effectively reversed with the left atrium to aorta assist device.  Complications such as severe bleeding and acute limb ischemia are more common with this device, and there is no difference in 30-day mortality (VAT 43% versus balloon pump 45%).

ECMO-venoarterial bypass configuration

Pulmonary circulation is bypassed, and oxygenated blood returns to the patient via an arterial or venous route. The extracorporeal pump is employed to support systemic perfusion. Cannulas are placed into the central vein and central artery. Blood from the venous catheter is pumped through a heat exchanger and oxygenator. Blood is returned to the systemic arterial circulation via arterial cannula. This is used in patients with circulatory and respiratory failure.

**Palliative Care in Cardiogenic shock**

- Early referral to a palliative care specialist is recommended as a strategy to reduce physical and emotional distress, optimize symptom control, and improve quality of life.

Current Management Guidelines

- Immediate transfer for PCI

- Consider open heart surgery if PCI not available

- Start fibrinolytic therapy if PCI and open surgery not available

- Do not start beta-blockers

- May use an IABP to stabilize the patient

- Consider LV assist device if no contraindications