There is no effective antiviral therapy for St. Louis encephalitis. Management is limited to supportive care with intravenous (IV) fluids and antipyretics. SIADH, if present is usually mild and most patients will respond to fluid restriction alone. There are no effective antiviral drugs, and there is currently no vaccine available to prevent infection. Since there is no adequate treatment or vaccine, prevention is critical. Prevention is best accomplished by avoiding mosquito bites entirely. Even very short periods of outdoor exposure can result in bites; therefore, proper protective clothing like long sleeves, long pants, socks, and closed-toe shoes should be worn. Pant legs can be tucked into socks to prevent bites to exposed ankles. Transmission is common during the warmer months and mosquitoes may bite through very thin clothing so treating clothing with repellents containing permethrin, DEET, oil of lemon eucalyptus, or other EPA-registered insect repellants will reduce this risk. Permethrin should not be applied to the skin directly, but when applied to clothes, it provides protection even after the clothing is washed. Transmission is most frequent when mosquitoes feed, between dawn and dusk, so outdoor activities during this period should be avoided. Travelers should sleep in air-conditioned spaces or use mosquito nets or screens to prevent bites during sleep. Standing water is a breeding ground for mosquitoes so flower pots, buckets, and other containers should be drained. Wading pools should be drained and stored, and tire swings should have holes drilled into the bottom to allow trapped water to drain.