The assessment of cardiovascular disease has, for the last several decades, had its basis in the findings of the Framingham Heart Study cohorts with emphasis on total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C).

ApoB containing lipoproteins play a crucial role in atherogenesis, including promoting plaque formation within arteries.  Many studies in the recent past have demonstrated that increased levels of apoB are a better predictor of risk for cardiovascular disease (CVD)  than the aforementioned traditional markers.  Measurement of ApoB serves as a direct indicator of the number of circulating atherogenic particles. Importantly, there is one Apo B molecule per hepatic derived lipoprotein particle. Additionally,  in some studies, ApoB measurement improves CVD risk prediction in diabetes patients and those with metabolic syndrome.

ApoB also acts as a ligand for LDL receptor-mediated clearance.  Mutations affecting ApoB, such as in familial defective apoB, result in familial hypercholesterolemia.  On the other hand, familial hypobetalipoproteinemia is an inherited disorder associated with low LDL levels and results from mutations in the Apo B gene. There are no apparent clinical sequelae with this disorder, but Vitamin E deficiency could develop, and hence supplementation is the usual recommendation.

A promising new area in lipid-lowering therapies is that of antisense oligonucleotides to target mRNA of proteins that are involved in cholesterol metabolism. Initial trials of apoB antisense oligos have shown promise with a 50% reduction in Apo B levels, a 30% reduction in LDL levels, and decreased cardiovascular risk.  However, they cause liver dysfunction. A new goal of the 2018 NCEP guidelines is the inclusion of apoB, stating that an apoB greater than 130 mg/dL is a risk-enhancing factor and requires measurement in primary prevention treatment protocols, and this is an essential step towards the analysis of apoB for cardiovascular risk.