Treatment is primarily aimed at reducing inflammation and pain and preventing complications. First-line treatment involves topical cycloplegics (dilate the pupil, prevent the ciliary body and pupillary spasm) and topical steroids (decrease inflammation). The patient should be referred to an ophthalmologist within 24 to 48 hours. The review frequency is decided based on the clinical presentation and degree of inflammatory activity. Those with severe inflammation need review within a day or two, and those with mild AAU may be seen after a week or so.

- Sustained-release corticosteroid vitreous implants (fluocinolone acetonide, dexamethasone) are available to treat inflammation-induced cases of panuveitis, intermediate uveitis, and posterior uveitis.

- Corticosteroids should be initiated only in conjunction with the approval of an ophthalmologist because uveitis is a diagnosis of exclusion.

- Steroids can have adverse effects, such as causing intraocular pressure, cataract formation, steroid-induced glaucoma, and the development of herpes keratitis.

- Potassium-sparing drugs should be used when chronic steroid use is required to control inflammation. Approximately half of the patients with uveitis need treatment beyond corticosteroid treatment to prevent vision loss.

**Topical Steroids**

Corticosteroids decrease inflammation. Treatment should only be initiated after consultation with an ophthalmologist. Prednisolone 1% or dexamethasone 0.1% are potent steroids and are the first treatment choice for uveitis. They work by decreasing inflammation by reversing increased capillary permeability and suppressing the migration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes.

The other drugs used for iritis management are difluprednate 0.05% (lower frequency), prednisolone 0.5%, loteprednol etabonate 0.5% and 0.2%, betamethasone, fluorometholone, and rimexolone (moderate to low potency). Steroid regimen can be altered based on the response and intraocular pressure elevation. Betamethasone ointment can be used at bedtime. The steroid regimen varies according to the degree of inflammation, starting from an hourly regimen for three days to every two hours for three days, then 6/5/4/3/2/1 times one week each. The treatment is usually stopped after 6 to 8 weeks. Timely and regular follow-up is mandated in each case. In CAU cases, the target is the full resolution of inflammation. Low-grade persistent inflammation can result in a higher incidence of complications which can be reduced with regular and timely steroids instillation. Steroids can act as a bilateral sword, resulting in elevated IOP (steroid response), cataract, glaucoma, keratitis, and corneal melt.

**Cycloplegics**

Cycloplegics block nerve impulses to the ciliary muscles and pupillary sphincter to decrease photophobia and pain. They are implicated in AAU and CAU exacerbations. These help to break down the already formed posterior synechiae prevent the formation of new synechiae.

**Homatropine**

- Induces cycloplegia in 30 to 90 minutes.

- Induces mydriasis in 10 to 30 minutes.

- Effects last 10 to 48 hours for cycloplegia and 6 to 96 hours for mydriasis, but the duration may be less if severe anterior chamber reaction.

- Homatropine is an agent of choice for uveitis.

**Cyclopentolate 0.5% to 2%**

- Induces cycloplegia in 25 to 75 minutes.

- Induces mydriasis in 30 to 60 minutes.

- Effects usually last one day.

- Less attractive for treating uveitis than homatropine.

The other cycloplegics available are atropine which has a long duration of action of 7-10 days. In AAU, 2.5% or 10% phenylephrine can also break posterior synechiae. Bedtime administration of the drug should be promoted to avoid difficulties with accommodation during the daytime. Atropine has been known to cause toxic side effects like seizures amblyopia in children, and extra precautions should be taken while administering drugs to children.

**Mydricaine**

Mydricaine is a preparation of 0.3 ml containing 0.12 mg adrenaline, 1mg atropine, and 6 mg procaine. Adrenaline and atropine break the posterior synechiae and procaine to improve comfort. The drug combination is given as a subconjunctival injection. Another installation method is cotton pledget dipped in Mydricaine and kept for 5 minutes in the superior and inferior fornices for 5 minutes. Mydricaine number 1 is used pediatric version, and mydricaine number 2 is used in adults. The side effect reported with Mydricaine is transient sinus tachycardia.

**Tissue Plasminogen Activator**

In severe fibrinous anterior uveitis cases, 12.5 to 25 ug of tissue plasminogen activator is injected in the anterior chamber in 0.1 ml solution with a 30 G needle under topical anesthesia. This will dissolve the fibrin membrane and break down the posterior synechiae.

**Subconjunctival Steroids**

Betamethasone sodium phosphate and acetate combination can be given for severe A.U. and patients with poor compliance subconjunctivally.

**Subtenons Injection of Steroids**

Posterior sub tenons injection of methylprednisolone or triamcinolone acetonide can be given in cases with aggressive posterior segment inflammation and in patients with anterior uveitis having cystoid macular edema a complication. They can be instilled as an OPD procedure or given during the surgery to supplement the systemic steroids. The onset of action is four weeks, and the maximum duration is around three months. Varied complications have been reported like secondary glaucoma, globe perforation, subconjunctival hemorrhage, cataract, retrobulbar hemorrhage, and ptosis.

**Intravitreal Steroids**

Intravitreal triamcinolone acetonide (4 mg in 0.1 ml) is also implicated in cystoid macular edema after anterior uveitis, which is not responding to other therapy. The complications are similar to sub tenons administration except pseudohypopyon, exclusive to intravitreal steroids.

**Systemic Steroids**

When the inflammation is severe and response to topical treatment is inadequate, oral prednisolone is indicated. They are given in tapering doses, and each case should monitor side effects.

**Non- Steroidal Anti- Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)**

Naproxen and tolmetin are implicated in CAU cases and can be used for the long term under physician observation.

**Antimetabolites**

Methotrexate is implicated in CAU secondary to juvenile idiopathic arthritic in children when steroids fail to control the inflammation.

**Tumor Necrosis Factor Blockers**

Infliximab or adalimumab may be used as second-line treatment for patients with vision-threatening chronic uveitis caused by seronegative spondyloarthropathy.