The American Society of Hematology treatment recommendations for VITT is similar to that of severe HIT in patients presenting with thrombocytopenia, documented evidence or suspicion of thrombosis, and positive or pending PF4-heparin ELISA. Management is based on the treatment guidelines from the British Society of Haematology (BSH), the Society of Thrombosis and Haemostasis Research (GTH), and the American Society of Hematology (ASH).

- Urgent administration of **high dose intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG)**1 gram/kg (ideal body weight) daily for two days

- Evaluation for HIT/VITT should be performed before administering IVIG to prevent false-negative test results due to potential interference of IVIG with ELISA and platelet activation assays.

- Given its close resemblance to HIT, the use of heparin may be harmful, and **non-heparin anticoagulants**should be considered, such as:

- **Direct thrombin inhibitors**: Argatroban or bivalirudin

- **Direct oral anti-Xa inhibitors without heparin bridge**: Edoxaban, apixaban, dabigatran, or rivaroxaban

- **Low molecular weight heparinoid devoid of heparin**: Danaparoid

- **Selective factor Xa inhibitor**: Fondaparinux

**Other Treatment Recommendations**

- Hematology specialist consultation must be sought as early as possible.

- IVIG and non-heparin-based anticoagulation should be initiated if there is a high suspicion for the diagnosis of VITT and PF4-ELISA results are pending.

- Platelet transfusions should be avoided and should be considered only if clinically indicated and at the advice of a hematologist.

- Fibrinogen must be corrected with fibrinogen concentrate or cryoprecipitate to maintain a fibrinogen level of >1.5 g/L.

- All forms of heparin that include heparin-based flushes must be avoided until VITT is ruled out.

- Patients should be transferred to a tertiary care center once the diagnosis of VITT is confirmed.

- Both the BSH and ASH recommend continuing systemic anticoagulation for a minimum of three months in patients with documented thrombosis.