There are multiple adverse effects related to the use of EDTA. These side effects are dependent on various factors, including dosage, renal function, and frequency of administration. The most commonly recognized adverse effect is renal toxicity. The toxic effects can manifest as acute tubular necrosis, renal failure, anuria, and proteinuria. Both intramuscular and intravenous routes of administration were shown to increase blood urea nitrogen in more than 25% of patients.

Additionally, calcium EDTA has a strong affinity for zinc, which can lead to a zinc deficiency. The amount of zinc lost from the body was shown to be negatively correlated with weight. A study assessing the efficacy of calcium disodium edetate found that smaller children were losing a larger proportion of zinc than larger children. The study further reinforced the need to monitor levels of zinc during chelation therapy.

Other side effects include fever, nausea, vomiting, chills, fatigue, arthralgia, hypotension, arrhythmias, acute tubular necrosis, proteinuria, tremors, headache, cheilosis, bone marrow depression, anemia, and hypercalcemia. Pain at the injection site is a common adverse drug reaction of intramuscular administration.

Administration of edetate calcium disodium must be carefully distinguished from the administration of edetate disodium. Edetate disodium is similar in structure to edetate calcium disodium; however, it is not complexed with calcium. This minor difference protects serum levels of calcium and avoids life-threatening hypocalcemia. Cases have been reported where patients who were incorrectly given edetate disodium had seizures and cardiac arrest.