**Complications of Surgery**

**Radical Nephrectomy**

Common complications reported with radical nephrectomy include hemorrhage, wound infection, seroma, wound disruption, seroma, pneumothorax, sepsis, ileus, cardiac failure, renal events, peritonitis, perihepatic collection.

**Complications According to the Site of Metastasis**

Metastatic bone disease may present with skeletal-related events such as pathological fractures, hypercalcemia, metastatic extradural spinal cord compression.

Intracranial metastases may present with altered sensorium, signs of raised intracranial tension such as headache, blurring of vision, early morning nausea, and vomiting. Physical examination may demonstrate papilledema (on Ophthalmoscopy)

**Specific Side Effects of VEGF Targeted Therapy**

The median time to onset of hypertension in a study of 1120 patients treated with multitargeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors was 29 days after the initiation of therapy. Pre-existing hypertension, a body mass index above 25 and age more than 60 years, were identified as potential risk factors in developing hypertension.

**Renal Disease with Multitargeted RTK Therapy**

Proteinuria was shown to occur with 18.7 percent. In contrast, high-grade proteinuria was shown to have an incidence of 2.4 percent, in an analysis of 33 trials of patients with solid tumors treated with TKI’s. An analysis of biopsy specimens revealed podocytopathies such as minimal change disease and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Tyrosine phosphorylation of nephrin has been postulated as the mechanism underlying the development of glomerular disease.