Evaluation should include a thorough patient history with a focused physical exam and laboratory workup with appropriate imaging. There are no specific laboratory tests for diagnosing Wernicke encephalopathy as it is a clinical diagnosis with the above mentioned classic signs and symptoms.

The clinical diagnosis of WE is present if the patient has two of the following features:

- Eye signs

- Dietary deficiency of thiamine

- Altered mental status

- Cerebellar dysfunction

However, a complete blood count and the comprehensive metabolic panel can be completed to exclude other causes of central nervous system abnormalities. Moreover, normal brain imaging cannot rule out Wernicke encephalopathy and therefore not very beneficial either. Caine et al. criteria were established in 1997 which is now 85% sensitive if patients have two or more of the classic features that include: ataxia, confusion, and ophthalmoplegia. Also, looking for risk factors helps in evaluating the patient as Wernicke encephalopathy was classically thought of as a disease exclusively due to alcoholism. However, in recent years Wernicke encephalopathy is also seen in patients that are chronically malnourished, post-bariatric surgery, hyperemesis gravidarum, liver disease, hyperthyroidism, and severe anorexia nervosa.

MRI may reveal hyperintense signaling in the periventricular thalamus, mammillary bodies and the periaqueductal gray matter.

Erythrocyte transketolase levels can detect thiamine deficiency. Levels of lactate and pyruvate are often measured since thiamine is a cofactor for pyruvate dehydrogenase enzyme.