The overall interpretation of the study is based on normal data obtained from healthy volunteers, which serve to establish reference values.

The symptom index and symptom association probability are two indices that help assess the association of a patient’s symptoms with gastroesophageal reflux episodes (acid and non-acid).

**Symptom index (SI)**: number of symptoms associated with reflux occurring in the preceding 5-minute interval divided by the total number of symptoms recorded by the patient during the monitoring period.

- SI greater than 50% is considered a positive test (i.e., more than half of the total number of reflux events was symptomatic). In this case, patients are considered to have symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux on PPI therapy.
- SI less than 50% is considered to be a negative test. In this case, patients are considered to have persistent symptoms while on PPI therapy due to causes other than gastroesophageal reflux.

**Symptom association probability (SAP)**: the total measuring time divides into two-minute intervals. A contingency table with four fields listed below assesses correlation with the Fisher exact test.

- Number of intervals with GER and symptoms
- Number of intervals with GER without symptoms
- Number of intervals without GER and with symptoms
- Number of intervals without both GER and symptoms

A positive SAP (greater than 95%) is considered statistically significant and is interpreted as an adequate temporal association between GER and the recorded symptom.