As with any surgical procedure, there is a risk of bleeding, infection, and damage to surrounding structures. High-risk patients may be at increased risk for complications that may result in significant morbidity or even mortality. Tobacco use, preoperative malnutrition, total gastrectomy, non-malignant indication for resection, and blood transfusions have been linked to increased risk for morbidity.

Complications can be divided into early (days to weeks) or late (after 6 weeks):

**Early Complications**

- Anastomotic Leak

- Bowel obstruction or post-operative Ileus

- Duodenal stump blowout

- Delayed gastric emptying

**Late Complications**

- Bile reflux gastritis

- Dumping syndrome

- Afferent and efferent limb syndrome

- Malnutrition and nutritional deficiencies

- Internal hernia or Peterson hernia

- Anastomotic stricture

- Marginal ulcer

- Cancer recurrence

The most common post-gastrectomy complications following gastric resection include nutritional deficiencies, dumping syndrome, small gastric remnant, post-vagotomy diarrhea, delayed gastric emptying, afferent or efferent loop syndrome, roux stasis, and bile reflux gastritis.

- **Internal Hernias**are a known cause of acute abdominal pain in patients with gastric resection and Roux-en-Y reconstruction. Three types of trans-mesenteric hernias commonly occur in these patients. Transmesocolic hernias involve herniation through the surgical defect in the transverse mesocolon through which the alimentary limb descends. Peterson’s hernia is a herniation through the potential space between the Roux limb mesentery and the mesocolon, which occurs behind the alimentary limb. Lastly, the bowel can herniate through the small bowel mesentery, particularly at the jejunostomy site.

- **Dumping Syndrome**is characterized by a constellation of gastrointestinal and vasomotor symptoms in response to the rapid gastric emptying of hyperosmolar contents into the proximal intestine. Early dumping begins within 30 minutes of food consumption and manifests with both gastrointestinal and vasomotor symptoms, including abdominal pain, diarrhea, bloating, nausea, flushing, palpitations, diaphoresis, tachycardia, syncope, and hypertension. Late dumping occurs 2 to 4 hours after a meal and consists primarily of vasomotor symptoms associated with hypoglycemia. Dumping syndrome is treated primarily by diet modification, medical treatment with somatostatin analogs, or surgical intervention for refractory cases.

- **Bile Reflux Gastritis**is the result of chronic exposure of the gastric remnant to biliopancreatic secretions caused by the loss of the pylorus. Symptoms include epigastric pain, nausea with vomiting, and pain that is only partially associated with meals. Diagnosis can be made by endoscopy findings of bile and inflammation in the distal stomach or HIDA scan showing pooling of bile in the stomach or esophagus in severe cases. Surgical correction is the mainstay of treatment and consists of conversion to Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy with at least a 60 cm Roux limb to divert biliopancreatic contents away from the gastric remnant.

- **Afferent and Efferent Loop Syndromes**are well-established complications of gastric resection. Afferent loop syndrome is an uncommon obstruction that may result from the internal hernia, marginal ulceration, adhesions, recurrent cancer, or intussusception in patients with Billroth II gastrectomy. Symptoms include immediate postprandial pain and cramping, followed by vomiting that completely relieves symptoms. Acute afferent loop syndrome that occurs 1 to 2 weeks postoperatively is critical to detect as it can lead to a duodenal stump leak. Efferent loop syndrome is a mechanical obstruction at the gastrojejunostomy that may result from anastomotic stricture, marginal ulceration, recurrent cancer, or adhesions. Symptoms include bilious emesis or delayed gastric emptying.