The therapeutic range for primidone is between 5 and 10 mg/L. Suicidal ideation and activity have occurred in many cases of patients treated with antiepileptic agents. All patients treated with antiepileptic medications, regardless of indication, should be monitored for signs of suicidal ideation and behavior, and consideration should be given to appropriate treatment. Patients (and patient caregivers) should be encouraged to seek medical advice should there be signs of suicidal ideation or behavior.

The deficiency of folic acid is known to occur during pregnancy and can lead to an increased occurrence of congenital disabilities in the offspring of women with treated epilepsy. As with many other antiepileptic medications, primidone may lead to or aggravate the deficiency of folic acid. Supplementation with folic acid is advisable before and during pregnancy.

Metabolism of primidone occurs slowly within the liver to produce phenobarbital and PEMA. Phenobarbital induces UGT enzymes CYP2C and CYP3A; therefore, the efficacy of some drugs such as anticoagulants, adrenal steroids, antibiotics, oral contraceptives, and anticonvulsants such as phenytoin can be reduced by the metabolic acceleration. Immediate withdrawal of the drug may cause status epilepticus; reduce dosage slowly. Again, barbiturates hinder the ability to perform mental-conscious activities such as driving.

Finally, a complete blood count and liver function test are necessary every six months, and primidone therapy can be monitored by phenobarbital concentration if required.