The majority of patients first present with symptoms of abnormal uterine bleeding. The change in the menstrual bleeding pattern alarms the woman to seek medical help early. This is the reason that most of the cases of endometrial cancer (more than 70%) are diagnosed early in stage I as opposed to other cancer where the symptoms are indolent for many years allowing cancer to spread to regional and distant sites.  The importance of a detailed history and physical examination is of utmost importance in the evaluation.

The clinical documentation should include the history of present illness, menstrual history, and symptoms (duration of the cycle, flow, the passage of clots, intermenstrual bleeding, postmenopausal bleeding, unscheduled bleeding if the woman is on HRT). The age of menarche, transition through perimenopause,  age of menopause should also be recorded. It is important to note the obstetric history and whether the patient wishes to conceive in the future. This is necessary as it can change the course of treatment options for the patient. It is ethical to consider medical treatment options for a woman who is keen on conception in the future without compromising the prognosis. A smear and contraceptive history should be taken. Medical and surgical history should be taken in detail as it may reveal several factors that may play a role in the management. The drug history should be taken meticulously and specifically asked for the intake of HRT, over the counter drugs, tamoxifen, etc. A family and social history should also be taken.

The examination should include a general physical examination, including vitals assessment. As most of the patients present with menorrhagia, pallor should be looked for. If the patient looks clinically pale, she should be advised iron prescription and iron-rich diet. A breast examination should be performed to rule out any suspicious lesion. Per-abdomen examination to look for any previous scars and abdominal lump (coexisting fibroid, ovarian cyst, and other intraperitoneal pathology). Careful local examination of the genitalia should be performed to rule out vulval, cervical, uterine, and/or ovarian pathology. It is important to perform a bimanual exam to ascertain the size of the uterus, ovaries, and to rule out any findings in the pouch of Douglas. A diagnostic procedure like an endometrial biopsy is then performed to confirm the diagnosis.