Colchicine

Colchicine has been the treatment of choice for FMF since the 1970s. The aim of the treatment is to prevent attacks, normalize inflammation between the attacks, and prevent the development of amyloidosis. It can also halt the progression of amyloidosis.

Colchicine works by inhibiting neutrophil chemotaxis, which is necessary for the inflammatory events in FMF.

The treatment with colchicine is usually lifelong. Dosing varies according to age and severity of symptoms. Children under five years can be given 0.03-0.07mg/kg/day of colchicine.

The most common side effects of the treatment are diarrhea and vomiting. These side effects are dose-dependent and more common at higher doses. Other uncommon side effects are myelosuppression, hepatotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, myopathy, neuropathy, and hypersensitivity reaction. Colchicine is considered safe during pregnancy and breastfeeding.

Compliance with the treatment must be addressed strongly to the patients since it is a common cause of lack of response to the therapy. Serial monitoring of acute-phase reactants in the blood can help to monitor the response and adherence to the treatment. Consideration can also be given to split the daily dose of colchicine into two or three divided doses if the patients stop taking colchicine due to its side effects - most commonly, diarrhea.

If patients are still not responding to the treatment, then the dose of colchicine should be increased. If a maximum tolerated dose of colchicine (up to 3mg in adults) does not improve the frequency and severity of the attacks despite adherence to the treatment, and if acute phase reactant levels in the blood continue to stay high in between the attacks, then colchicine resistance should be suspected.

Interleukin-1 (IL-1) inhibitors

IL-1 inhibitors are the second-line drugs for the patients who have colchicine resistant FMF or who have an intolerance to colchicine. It is not entirely proven if IL-1 inhibitors help prevent the development of amyloidosis in FMF, and sometimes low dose colchicine is still continued to prevent amyloidosis.

Anakinra****- It is a recombinant Il-1 antagonist.

Canakinumab – It is a human immunoglobulin G (IgG) against IL-1 beta.

Other drugs

There are some reports describing the use of prazosin, reserpine, and azelastine in FMF patients in Japan.

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha inhibitors thalidomide, infliximab, and etanercept (a biologic TNF inhibitor that binds both TNF-alpha and TNF-beta) have also been described in some cases, but the real efficacy is still not established.

A study by Onat et al. demonstrated that the use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors can reduce the frequency of attacks in FMF, indicating that stress and depression could also be contributing to the development of attacks in these patients.