Basic skincare measures are important to prevent excessive dryness and to encourage exfoliation. Those remedies include soaps with skin-specific pH, soap-free cleansers, and avoidance of hot baths. Emollients and topical keratolytic agents (lactic acid, salicylic acid, urea) should be advised to be applied over affected areas at the appropriate times.

Sharp debridement is helpful in benign hyperkeratoses such as callus and corns to reduce the pressure and the amount of hyperkeratotic tissue. A chisel blade may be used to remove the keratin plug, providing relief to the area.

Surgical procedures have limited relevance in the treatment of hyperkeratosis. In cases of untreatable plantar keratosis with significant daily limitation, skin grafts with rotation skin flap have been demonstrated effective.

Corticosteroids are the treatment of choice for inflammation-driven diseases such as lichen planus or psoriasis. Topical application is the best choice for localized disease. Topical applications should last one to two weeks.

Immunosuppressant or immunomodulators (cyclosporin, hydroxychloroquine, mycophenolate mofetil, sulfasalazine, alefacept, efalizumab) can be used in severe recurrent cases.

Topical calcineurin inhibitors (tacrolimus or pimecrolimus) can also be used.

Retinoids, topical or oral-based, are used in disorders of keratinization such as ichthyoses, keratosis folliculitis, and psoriasis. Topical administration is variable and must be evaluated in the appropriate clinical context; treatment usually lasts 8 to 12 weeks.

Combination treatments with lasers (e.g., pulsed-dye laser, 755-nm alexandrite laser, 810-nm diode laser, 1064-nm Nd:YAG laser) and microdermabrasion are noninvasive techniques currently under approval for different hyperkeratotic diseases.