Good patient outcomes depend on a collective understanding of these toxicities and the ability to diagnose and treat them. Frontline providers, i.e., emergency and primary care physicians, midlevel practitioners, and nurses, may access information quickly via computer products such as POISINDEX. These databases provide information on known entities and a frame of reference for understanding potential exposures.

In cases of severe toxicities, intensive care professionals likewise become involved and must be able to access resources to manage complex patients quickly. The rigorously trained and certified poison specialists represent the most skilled and specialized in matters toxicologic, the experts in providing insight into unclear scenarios commanding long and complex differential diagnoses. A pharmacist with toxicology training may help in dosing antidotes or other medications.

Medical toxicologists are invaluable consultants who serve as the best source for essential new information and who can provide something databases cannot: a thoughtful human analysis. Early consultation with a toxicologist or poison control center is frequently useful in decision-making regarding decontamination and therapeutic interventions. Upon identification of toxic exposure and harmful effect, physicians order medical treatments verified and adjusted as appropriate by our vital pharmacologic experts. Psychiatric consultation is required for all self-harm-related ingestions. Contact with the patient's primary care provider is prudent for all hospital admissions or cases of serious illness.

The interprofessional healthcare team model is necessary for these toxicities to achieve optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]