DKA is definitively diagnosed by serology showing metabolic acidosis and hyperglycemia. Ketone testing can be helpful but is not necessary.

Several point-of-care and laboratory tests aid in the diagnosis of DKA.

- **Anion gap:**The anion gap is calculated as follows: (Na+K)-(Cl+HCO3). Ketoacids (primarily BHB) are unmeasured ions, leading to the “gap” in anions. The AG is normally between 6 mEq/L to 12 mEq/L, with levels above 15 typically present in DKA.

- **Blood glucose:**It is usually above 200 mg/dL (11 mmol/l) and may be above 1000 mg/dL. Pediatric patients have DKA with relatively mild elevations in blood glucose.

- **Serum BHB concentration:**BHB is usually above 31 mg/dL in these patients.

- 
**Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine**

- 
****Serum electrolytes****

- **Venous pH and partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2):**A pH below 7.2 portends a worse prognosis and often indicates the need for intensive care unit admission.

- **Urinary ketone:**Nitroprusside test strip reacts with acetoacetate and acetone but not BHB. Though less accurate and precise, many health centers use urine test strips for diagnosis.

- **Blood lactate concentration:**The presence of lactate can help rule out lactic acidosis. It is also an important prognostic marker in the presence of sepsis, which may be a precipitating cause in many DKA patients.

- **Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c):**This is helpful in patients with known diabetes to evaluate the degree of glucose control.

- **Diabetes-associated antibodies:**Glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies, insulin autoantibodies, islet cell antibodies, and zinc transporter 8 antibodies are not useful for managing DKA. However, their presence confirms the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes mellitus in 80 to 85% of new patients.

- **C-peptide levels:**It is a useful marker of beta-cell function, allowing discrimination between insulin-sufficient and insulin-deficient individuals with diabetes. A value of less than 0.2 nmol/l is associated with a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM).

DKA can be categorized as mild, moderate, and severe based on the following criteria:

Table 1. The severity of diabetic ketoacidosis in children

Higher thresholds for bicarbonate may be used for vulnerable patients such as those in resource-limited settings or in young children, e.g., bicarbonate <7 mEq/L for severe DKA and <18 mEq/L for mild DKA.