The temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is a diarthrosis, better defined as a ginglymoarthrodial joint. TMJ is composed of a synovial cavity, articular cartilage and a capsule that covers the same joint. We find the synovial fluid and several ligaments. The joint is the union of the temporal bone cavity with the mandibular condyle.

**Anatomy**

The cranial surface of TMJ consists of the squamous area of the temporal bone; it takes the name of glenoid fossa and welcomes the condyle of the jaw. The posterior area of the fossa is known as posterior articular ridge; sideways to the latter, we find a bone portion called postglenoid process. The postglenoid process area contributes to forming the upper wall of the external acoustic meatus.

The anterior limit of the glenoid fossa of the temporal bone constitutes the articular eminence, which forms a medial bone prominence at the posterior border of the zygomatic bone. The preglenoid plane is slightly inclined, which leads into the articular eminence; the latter is anterior to the fossa, along with the base of the skull. The preglenoid plane is slightly inclined, which leads into the articular eminence; the latter is anterior to the pit, along with the base of the skull. This area allows and facilitates the movements of the articular disk and the condyle. On the lateral surface of the articular eminence, there is a bone ridge, known as the articular tubercle, near the root of the zygomatic process.

The glenoid fossa is wider in its mediolateral portion, compared to the anteroposterior area. The inferior articular surface of the glenoid fossa represents the superior area of the mandible.

The articular disc that covers the condyle and interposes below the glenoid fossa has a biconcave or oval shape; the cartilaginous disc has an anterior (about 2 mm) and posterior (about 3 mm) portion, with a thinner diameter in the middle. The anterior portion of the disk consists of a layer of fibroelastic fascia (above) and a fibrous layer (inferiorly). The upper portion is in contact with the postglenoid process, with the function of preventing the disc from slipping during the opening of the mouth. The lower portion of the disk has the task of avoiding excessive rotational movements of the disk relative to the mandibular condyle.

The anterior portion of the articular disk is in contact with: the joint capsule; articular eminence; condyle; the upper area of the lateral pterygoid muscle.

The posterior portion of the articular disk relates to: bilateral retro-disc tissue (behind the condyle), glenoid fossa; condyle; temporal bone.

The medial and lateral aspect of the cartilaginous disc is attached to the condylar formation of the mandible. The edges of the disc partly fuse with the fibrous capsule surrounding the joint.

Several ligaments manage the TMJ forces and send multiple proprioceptive afferents. The proprioception of the joint is provided by various components, such as the capsule, masticatory muscles, skin receptors and receptors within the periodontal ligaments. The tension perceived by the articular ligaments plays an important role in the function of TMJ.

- Sphenomandibular ligament. The sphenomandibular ligament (SML) is a Meckel cartilage residue. It originates from the sphenoid spine (from which also originates the pterygospinous ligament) and in its path towards the jaw, is inserted in the medial wall of the TMJ joint capsule. Through the petrotympanic fissure, it involves the malleus and forms some fibers of the anterior ligament of the malleus. It continues its descent to attach itself to the lingula of the mandible (sphenoid, middle ear, jaw). The mylohyoid nerve and several vessels cross the ligament; has contacts with the pterygomandibular fascia. It is in a superior and lateral relationship with the lateral pterygoid muscle, the internal maxillary artery and the auriculotemporal nerve, the inferior alveolar nerve, and the medial meningeal artery. Its main task is to protect the TMJ from an excessive translation of the condyle, after 10 degrees of opening of the mouth.

- Stylomandibular ligament. The stylomandibular ligament (STML) arises from the styloid process of the temporal bone up to the posterior margin of the jaw or the jaw angle. It is considered a thickening of the deep cervical fascia (in particular of the parotid fascia). It serves to limit excessive protrusion of the jaw. Its embryological derivation concerns the first and second branchial arch, from which the middle ear stapes will derive (through the Reichert cartilage). In its path, it covers the inner portion of the medial pterygoid muscle.

- Pterygomandibular ligament. The pterygomandibular ligament or raphe (PTML) is a thickening of the buccopharyngeal fascia. It arises from the apex of the hamulus of the internal pterygoid plane of the skull up to the posterior area of the retromolar trigone of the mandibular bone. Some muscles are in contact with PTML: the buccinator muscle (anterior) and the pharyngeal constrictor muscle (posteriorly). Embryologically, the ligament derives from the mesenchymal connection of two branchial arches (first and second). PTML limits excessive jaw movements.

- Pinto or malleolomandibular or discomalleolar ligament. From an embryological point of view, it derives from the tympanic portion. The ligament has two portions. The first concerns the middle ear involves the malleus relative to the anterior ligament of the malleus; the second involves the extra-tympanic area, that is, the portion of the TMJ joint capsule, posterosuperior, in contact with the retro-discal tissues (passing through the petro-tympanic fissure). The functions are twofold. For TMJ protects the synovial membrane with respect to the tensions of surrounding structures. For the middle ear, it would seem to manage or influence adequate pressure for this area of the ear.

- The collateral ligament consists of 2 bundles of symmetrical fibers that originate at the level of the intermediate fascia of the articular disk and insert at the medial and lateral poles of the mandibular condyle. It serves to anchor the disk to the condyle.

TMJ is related to different muscles that have the function to move and protect the joint itself. The muscles that function to close the jaw are masseter, temporal, lateral or external pterygoid. The muscles that open the jaw are medial or internal pterygoid, geniohyoideus, mylohyoideus; digastric.

**Function**

When the mouth opens there is a combination of rotational movement of the discomandibular space and action of the translational discotemporal space; the rotation occurs before the translation. The condyle can move laterally through a rotation and then an anterior sliding of the same condylar structure, and an anterior translation/rotation in the medial direction of the opposite condyle. The condyle can move backward, while the opposite condyle slides forward. The bilateral or ipsilateral TMJ protrusion occurs by anterior sliding

The complex movements of TMJ allow multiple functions:

- Chewing

- Sucking

- Swallowing

- Phonation

- Facial expressions

- Breathing

- Protrusion, retrusion, lateralization of the jaw

- Opening the mouth

- Maintain the correct pressure of the middle ear