While multiple risk factors for the development of ACPO have been established, a specific underlying mechanism has yet to be identified. Almost all investigators agree that there is impairment of the colonic motor system, with dysfunction or imbalance of the autonomic nervous system being the most likely cause. It is suspected that there is reduced activity of stimulatory neurotransmitters, chiefly acetylcholine, relative to that of the inhibitory neurotransmitters, nitrous oxide, and vasoactive intestinal peptide. Independent dysfunction of the enteric nervous system, as well as the intrinsic enteric reflex arcs and pacemaker activity, also contribute but to what degree is unknown.  Interestingly in ACPO, pathologic distension of the colon usually ends at, or just proximal to, the splenic flexure, which is also where autonomic parasympathetic efferent innervation transitions from the Vagus nerve to the sacral, S2-S4, nerve roots.

As the cecum and ascending colon dilate and the luminal diameter increases, wall tension in the colonic mucosa increases proportionately. This increased wall tension leads to colonic ischemia, fluid, and bacterial translocation, and eventually colonic perforation. Both the duration and absolute diameter of colonic dilation influence the risk of bowel ischemia or perforation. Very few cases of perforation have been reported when the cecal diameter is less than 12 cm. However, there is evidence of a direct correlation between an increasing diameter of more than 12 cm and the risk of complications. Duration of ACPO appears to be the greatest factor for perforation or ischemia, with dilation lasting more than 5 or 6 days conferring the highest risk and having a direct impact on mortality.