Managing pediatric obesity requires multidisciplinary efforts from health professionals at different levels, including physicians, school nurses, and diabetes educators.

**Primary Care**

Family medicine physicians and pediatricians should educate pediatric patients and their parents regarding the importance of maintaining a healthy balance between diet and physical activity. They should help the patients and their family members to gradually reduce the amount of fast food and sweetened beverages they consume and increase nutritious snacks, fruits, and vegetables. Providers should perform appropriate screenings to manage obesity effectively and efficiently.

Some of the recommendations for pediatric obesity screening appear below:

- Obtain a fasting lipid profile for overweight children and adolescents with BMI 85-95 percentile

- Obtain a hemoglobin A1c or fasting blood glucose panel and AST and ALT blood tests if overweight children are over ten years old and have one or more risk factors (elevated blood pressure or lipid levels, smoker, or have a family member with obesity-related diseases)

- Obtain a fasting lipid panel when children have no risk factors but are with BMI ≥95th percentile, regardless of their age.

- Obtain a fasting blood glucose or HbA1C test and liver function tests when children aged over ten years have no risk factors but present with BMI ≥95th percentile.

- If lipids levels are normal, screening should be repeated every two years. If the levels are borderline, repeat in 1 year. If the levels are abnormal, repeat in 2 weeks to 3 months.

**School Nurses**

School nurses may play a crucial role in pediatric obesity management since they work closely with children at school. School nurses who are experts in motivational interviewing and weight management can counsel students about their diet and exercise and encourage them to maintain a healthy lifestyle. They can continue to monitor children as they move from grade to grade, and thus can ensure the children in obesity management programs follow the program regimen for longer durations. School nurses may also have regular telephone consultations or in-person counseling sessions with parents and discuss nutrition and physical activity that are necessary at home.

**Diabetes Educators**

Diabetes educators can serve as an essential link between school nurses and pediatric endocrinologists. School nurses often reach out to diabetes educators to discuss suspected pediatric diabetes cases who triage patients before referring them to endocrinologists. They help primary care providers and school nurses select children who need a referral to a pediatric endocrinologist for T2DM treatment or children who require assistance with lifestyle management.