# Introduction

Running along the sternocleidomastoid muscle, the internal jugular vein (IJV) provides deoxygenated blood directly to the right atrium (RA). Although there is a functional valve bordering the superior vena cava (SVC) and RA, this valve does not appear to hinder the phasic flow of blood to the RA. Therefore, the pulsations that can be observed at the level of the IJV can provide valuable insight into the hemodynamics of blood at the level of the RA.

# Issues of Concern

The examination of the JVP is a frequently overlooked physical examination technique due to the plethora of advancing technologies.

# Function

The JVP tracing is a measurement of the right atrial pressure (RAP) that can provide the status of a patient’s intravascular volume. The JVP tracing can be obtained from inserting a central line into the superior vena cava or, less invasively, can be observed from the bedside.

# Mechanism

The tracings of the jugular venous pulse wave, which can be observed using cardiac catheterization, are said to be biphasic due to the presence of alternating peaks and troughs.**c**uspid valve to bulge towards the right atrium during RV isovolumetric contraction. Following the “C” wave there is an "X" (X prime) descent result of the right ventricle pulling the tricuspid valve downward during ventricular systole.

# Pathophysiology

The first peak observed in a normal jugular venous pulse wave tracing, the "A" wave, represents the contraction of the atria (atrial systole). Therefore, in patients with atrial fibrillation, the "A" wave is often attenuated due to the absence of atrial contraction.

The chronological sequence of the atria contracting before the ventricles is important for the shuttling of blood through the circulatory system. When this sequence becomes asynchronous, such as what is seen with third-degree atrioventricular heart block, this can cause the atria and ventricles to contract at the same time.

Tricuspid regurgitation occurs during systole, as a portion of blood is inadvertently sent back to the atrium through an incompetent tricuspid valve, rather than through the pulmonary arteries.

The "Y" descent can also be significantly attenuated because of the inability of the right atrium to relax during ventricular diastole.

# Clinical Significance

Critical bedside examination of the jugular venous pulse (JVP) provides an invaluable amount of information relating to both disease process and medication management. Using the method above to examine the height of the JVP, clinicians are able to interpret the volume status of patients. Simply stated, an elevated JVP of greater than 9 cm H2O (venous hypertension) along with other symptoms can help distinguish between left and right heart failure, suggest pericardial disease, and suggest some specific types of arrhythmias.