**Technical Notions**

The main type of VEPs used in studying neurological pathologies affecting the visual pathways is VEP structured with a stimulation model (pattern-VEP or P-VEP). Generally, it is a "reversal" pattern (reversal-P-VEP), in which the light and dark elements of the model are organized to form a chessboard or bars. The stimuli are reversed, allowing contrast variations with constant average luminance. Another type of VEP with an "onset-offset" pattern (onset-offset-P-VEP) is based on a visual stimulus that appears and disappears in a sequence always characterized by a constant average luminance.

VEPs that use a diffuse flash stimulus (flash-VEP or F-VEP) characterized by a variation in brightness, however, have a rather limited field of application in the field of neurological pathologies affecting the visual pathways considering that this testing method offers extremely variable responses in the normal individuals and are less sensitive than P-VEP. Furthermore, P-VEPs allow for the selection of characteristics for the most suitable stimulus in the clinical analysis of the different components of the visual system, which can be activated differently according to the spatial, temporal, chromatic, and contrast properties of the image.

The spatial frequency (SF) of a pattern stimulus measures how many times the contrast of an image changes from the minimum to the maximum value in a degree of visual angle, which is then measured in cycles per degree (c / d), where 1 c / g corresponds to the complete alternation from a light element to a dark one in a degree of visual angle.

The size of the bar (w) can be calculated by the formula: w = 60/2f, where w is expressed in arc minutes and f is the SF expressed in c/d. If instead of bars, the model used is a chessboard, the dimensions of the chessboards are measured in arc minutes of the degree of visual angle. The different SFs permit the exploration of the different sectors of the visual field by stimulating the different neuronal systems of the visual pathway physiologically.

The electrophysiological response obtained with a potential depends on the luminance of the stimulus, the contrast between the two stimuli (luminance difference), and the temporal frequency. P-VEP amplitude increases linearly with increasing contrast and disappears for contrasts equal to or less than 10% when the difference between light and dark elements is no longer recognizable. If VEPs are recorded according to an offset/onset stimulus, the background luminance of the offset stimulus must be identical to that of the structured stimulus (onset stimulus).

The contrast (C) between the elements of the pattern corresponds to the difference in luminance between the light and dark elements and is expressed in percentage values. The electrophysiological response obtained with a P-VEP depends on the temporal frequency, that is, on the speed with which the pattern appears or disappears (onset-off-set-P-VEP) or with which the elements of the model reverse their position (reversal-P-VEP). The variation of the temporal frequency with which the elements reverse each other at low frequencies (<4 Hz) is considered a "transient" type response, while at high frequencies (>4 Hz), the response type is defined as a "steady state."

In the reversal-P-VEP,  low stimulation FTs (between 1 Hz and 4 Hz) are currently used, allowing precise recording from the occipital cortex. This electrophysiological response is known as "transient" response. The "transient" potential of the reversal-P-VEP consists of three deflections of the electrical signal with an alternating polarity of reproducible latency and morphology, in which it is possible to recognize a positive main component with a latency of about 100 ms (potential P 100), preceded and followed by two negative components, with a latency of about 70 to 75 ms (potential N 75) and 130 to 145 ms (potential N 140) respectively. The positive component P100 represents the most stable and repeatable response of this P-potential, recordable on all scalp regions that correspond to the occipital cortex, with its maximum amplitude along the midline, at the inion.

Numerous studies have identified P100 as the electrical correlate of the activity of the primary visual cortex. For lesions of the optic pathways with cortical saving, it is still possible to record an intact P100. The other two negative components of the potential (N140 and N70) could instead have generators at the level of the striatal cortex (N70) and extra-striatal (N140), which tend not to be useful in clinical practice.

**Applications**

In a routine clinical setting, the P-VEP stimulation pattern is obtained through the simultaneous stimulation of the two visual hemifields on the sides of the fixation center (whole-field stimulation) while the recording electrodes are positioned on the occipital scalp at Oz (International Electroencephalographic System 10-20) and on two symmetrical points placed laterally 5 to 7 cm away from the central one.

The potentials recorded by the laterally placed electrodes are generally variable and less represented; therefore, amplitude and latency parameters are regularly acquired considering the central electrode. The evaluations of the morphology, amplitude, and above all, the latency (retino-cortical conduction time) of the P100 potential represent the fundamental element for the electrophysiological study of the integrity of the optical pathways, especially at the pre-chiasmatic level.

The reduction of the sensitivity of the visual field due to damage to the retro-orbital nerve structures (optic nerve) determines alterations of the P-PEV that are reflected as a decrease in amplitude and/or in a lengthening of the latency time of the different components that make up the potential. The variations in amplitude and latency of PEVs represent precisely the electrophysiological correlate of different pathological phenomena that affect the optical pathways.

The topographic position, size, and degree of the campimetric deficit strictly condition any anomalies detected in the analysis of the P-PEV. Lesions of the optic nerve associated with relative scotomas in the macular area can cause significant alterations of the P-VEP recorded by the scalp, while an absolute scotoma, even if extensive but localized in the peripheral region of the visual field, can modify the P-VEP in a minimal or even null way.