Esophageal embryogenesis involves complex signaling pathways. The first step of the organogenesis of the esophagus from the foregut is the specification of the foregut cells into respiratory lineages or esophageal lineage.

Dose-dependent signaling of Noggin from the notochord as well as specific timed signaling from the surrounding mesoderm via Wingless-related Integration site proteins (Wnt) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) allows for the progression of the dorsal aspect of the foregut to begin differentiation into the esophagus while the ventral aspect of the foregut. Also, expressing NKx2-1 in conjunction with a lower dose of Noggin begins the specification into the future trachea and lungs.

Another crucial event in the development of the foregut into the esophagus is the separation of the trachea from the esophagus. While the precise mechanisms of separation have not yet been elucidated, signaling from lateral mesoderm to the ventral foregut allows for differentiation into the two final structures, which, once separated, both experience a rapid elongation. Wnt signaling, specifically, Wnt5a and Ror2 (a receptor tyrosine kinase) signaling appears to play an important role in this elongation.

Another important development is the differentiation of the esophagus from the structures that are continuous with the esophagus, namely the pharynx and the stomach. Many cell signaling molecules regulate esophageal differentiation and transition from the pharynx and into the stomach.  Several mediators that have identifiable roles in esophageal and respiratory differentiation also play a part in the differentiation of the pharynx and the stomach from the esophagus, serving to highlight the numerous roles these factors play.