Cholinesterase inhibitors also have the following names: acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors or anticholinesterases. They are a group of drugs that block the normal breakdown of acetylcholine (ACh) into acetate and choline and increase both the levels and duration of actions of acetylcholine found in the central and peripheral nervous system. The acetylcholinesterase inhibitors have a variety of indications. Most commonly, their use is in treating neurogenerative diseases such as Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, and Lewy body dementia. Different physiological processes in these degenerative disorders destroy cells that produce ACh and reduce cholinergic transmission in different regions of the brain. The cholinesterase inhibitor drugs inhibit AChE activity and maintain the ACh level by decreasing its breakdown rate.

Also, cholinesterase inhibitors have frequent use in patients with myasthenia gravis. The raised level of acetylcholine in the neuromuscular junction leads to increased activation of ACh receptors found on post-synaptic membranes resulting in improved muscle activation, contraction, and strength.

At the end of surgeries, cholinesterase inhibitors, most commonly neostigmine, are administered to reverse the effects of nondepolarizing muscle agents such as rocuronium.

Cholinesterase inhibitors are also necessary to administer when anticholinergic poisoning is suspected. Symptoms of anticholinergic poisoning include vasodilation, anhidrosis, mydriasis, delirium, and urinary retention.

Other less common indications of cholinesterase inhibitors include treating patients diagnosed with certain psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and treatment of glaucoma by relieving aqueous humor pressure.