The diagnosis of CHARGE syndrome is initially based on temporal bone imaging and clinical findings. The only gene associated with CHARGE syndrome is CHD7, encrypting the chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein. This sequencing detects pathogenic variants in maximum individuals with typical CHARGE syndrome with the following criteria of having the three primary characteristics or four major and three minor characteristics. The major criteria are the 4 C's: coloboma, cranial nerve abnormalities, choanal atresia, and typical CHARGE ear. The minor criteria are heart defects, cleft lip or palate, genital abnormalities, hypotonia, kidney abnormalities, esophageal atresia, poor growth, typical CHARGE face, and typical CHARGE hand.

In general, CHD7 analysis in individuals with either fewer major components or typical CHARGE syndrome detects pathogenic variants in around 65%-70% of cases.

- Clinical diagnosis: It is a combination of major and minor diagnostic characteristics, having the three primary features or four major and three minor characteristics.

- Laboratory analysis: It includes having the blood workup done, such as complete blood count (CBC), serum electrolytes, renal function test, luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone, Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, growth hormone levels, and immunologic studies.

- Genetic analysis: Prenatal screening for CHD7 variants is restricted to familial cases, via amniocentesis chorionic or villus sampling at 10–12 and 18–20 weeks’ gestation.

- Imaging studies: Involves a skeletal survey, abdominal ultrasound, barium swallow, echocardiography, chest x-ray, cranial ultrasound in neonates, and head computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).