**Screening**

It is estimated that the onset of DM occurs 4 to 7 years before its clinical diagnosis. Screening for hyperglycemia can identify individuals who are at risk for preventable diabetes complications. Persons more than 40 years of age should be screened annually. More frequent screening is recommended in individuals with additional risk factors for diabetes. These include:

- Certain races/ethnicities (Native American, African American, Hispanics or Asian American, Pacific Islander)

- Overweight or obese persons: BMI greater than or equal to 25 kg/m2 or 23 kg/m2 in Asian Americans

- First-degree relative with diabetes

- History of CVD, hypertension, low HDL-cholesterol or hypertriglyceridemia

- Women with polycystic ovarian syndrome

- Physical inactivity

- Conditions associated with insulin resistance such as acanthosis nigricans

Women who are diagnosed with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) should have life-long testing at least every 3 years. For all other patients, testing should begin at age 45 years, and if results are normal, testing should be repeated at a minimum of 3-year intervals.

FPG and A1C are recommended screening tests. The 75-gm GTT can be used and needed for the diagnosis of IGT but has poor reproducibility and needs adequate preparation.

**Diagnosis**

Three 3 types of blood tests can diagnose GI.

**Fasting plasma glucose (FPG)
**

The blood sample is taken after an 8 hour overnight fast. As per ADA, FPG levels between 100 and 125 mg/dL (5.6 to 6.9 mmol/L) are diagnostic of IFG. Several organizations, including World Health Organization (WHO), diagnose IFG at FPG between 110 and 125 mg/dl (6.1 and 6.9 mmol/L).The diagnosis of diabetes requires FPG greater than or equal to 126 mg/dl. FPG is fast and easy to perform and an established standard but has a high day to day variability.

**Two-Hour Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (GTT)**

In this test, plasma glucose level is measured before and 2 hours after ingestion of 75 gm of glucose. IGT is diagnosed if plasma glucose (PG) level in the 2-hour sample is between 140 to 199 mg/dL (7.8 to 11.0 mmol/L). DM is diagnosed if the PG is greater than or equal to 200 mg/dl. It is also a standard test but is inconvenient and more costly than FPG and has major variability issues. Patients need to consume a diet with at least 150 g per day of carbohydrates for 3 to 5 days and not take any medications that can impact glucose tolerance such as steroids and thiazide diuretics.

**Glycated Hemoglobin (A1C)**

This test gives an average of blood glucose over last two to three months. Patients with A1C between 5.7% to 6.4% (39 to 47 mmol/mol) are diagnosed as having increased risk of diabetes or prediabetes, the latter has stigmatization and should be avoided where possible. For a diagnosis of diabetes, the A1C levels should be greater than or equal to 6.5% (48 mmol/mol). A1C is a convenient, standardized test but is costly and has many issues as discussed below including lower sensitivity.

For all of the above tests, if the person is asymptomatic testing should be repeated on another occasion to make a diagnosis of diabetes.

The disadvantage with GTT is that it requires patient preparation and is poorly reproducible. Measuring A1C is convenient as fasting is not required. Also, it shows less variation due to pre-analytical variables and is not much affected by acute illness or stress. However, A1C should be measured using National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program (NGSP) certified method which has been standardized for Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) assay. In cases where there is a significant difference in plasma glucose values and A1C levels, interference due to hemoglobin variants is possible, and other glucose assays should be considered. In conditions such as sickle cell disease, pregnancy, hemodialysis, blood loss or transfusion, or erythropoietin therapy, which are known to be associated with increased red cell turnover, only plasma glucose should be used. Also, A1C is costly and may not be available everywhere. It has not been well validated in non-Caucasian populations.

Anemia due to deficiency of iron or vitamin B12 leads to spurious elevation of A1C, limiting its use in countries with high prevalence of anemia. Also, in children and elderly, the relation between A1C and FPG is suboptimal

FPG, 2-hour PG during 75-g GTT, and A1C are equally appropriate for diagnosis of glucose intolerance. There is no concordance between the results of these tests. An individual with increased FPG may have normal postprandial glucose or A1C measurements. While all 3 tests can be used, given how cumbersome the GTT is, it appears that FPG and A1C will be most practical globally bearing in mind the caveats of the tests