According to the American Joint Committee on Cancers (AJCC), the Staging of NSGCT is:

**AJCC Stage**

**Stage grouping**

**Stage description***

**0**

**pTis N0 M0 S0**

- The cancer is only in the seminiferous tubules (small tubes inside each testicle).

- It has not grown into other parts of the testicle (pTis).

- It hasn't spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or distant parts of the body (M0).

- All tumor marker levels are within normal limits (S0).

**I**

**pT1-pT4 N0 M0 SX**

- The tumor has grown beyond the seminiferous tubules and might have grown outside the testicle and into nearby structures (pT1-pT4).

- Cancer has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or distant parts of the body (M0).

- Tumor marker test results aren’t available, or the tests haven’t been done (SX).

**IA**

**pT1 N0 M0 S0**

- The tumor has grown beyond the seminiferous tubules but is still within the testicle, and it hasn't grown into nearby blood vessels or lymph nodes (pT1).

- Cancer hasn't spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or distant parts of the body (M0).

- All tumor marker levels are within normal limits (S0).

**IB**

**pT2-pT4 N0 M0 S0**

- The tumor has grown outside of the testicle and into nearby structures (pT2-pT4).

- Cancer has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or distant parts of the body (M0).

- All tumor marker levels are within normal limits (S0).

**IS**

**Any pT (or TX) N0 M0 S1-S3**

- The tumor might or might not have grown outside the testicle (any pT), or the extent of the tumor can’t be assessed for some reason (TX).

- Cancer has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or distant parts of the body (M0).

- At least one tumor marker level is higher than normal (S1-S3).

**II**

**Any pT (or TX) N1-N3 M0 SX**

- The tumor might or might not have grown outside the testicle (any pT), or the extent of the tumor can’t be assessed for some reason (TX).

- Cancer has spread to 1 or more nearby lymph nodes (N1-N3), but it hasn't spread to distant parts of the body (M0).

- Tumor marker test results aren’t available, or the tests haven’t been done (SX).

**IIA**

**Any pT (or TX) N1 M0 S0 or S1**

- The tumor might or might not have grown outside the testicle (any pT), or the extent of the tumor cannot be assessed for some reason (TX).

- Cancer has spread to at least 1 nearby lymph node (but no more than 5, if checked by surgery), and none of the lymph nodes are larger than 2 centimeters (cm) across (N1).

- Cancer has not spread to distant parts of the body (M0).

- All tumor marker levels are within normal limits (S0), or at least 1 tumor marker level is slightly higher than normal (S1).

**IIB**

**Any pT (or TX) N2 M0 S0 or S1**

- The tumor might or might not have grown outside the testicle (any pT), or the extent of the tumor can’t be assessed for some reason (TX).

- Cancer has spread to at least 1 nearby lymph node that's larger than 2 cm but no larger than 5 cm, OR it has grown outside of a lymph node, OR more than 5 nodes contain cancer (found during surgery) (N2).

- Cancer has not spread to distant parts of the body (M0).

- All tumor marker levels are within normal limits (S0), or at least 1 tumor marker level is slightly higher than normal (S1).

**IIC**

**Any pT (or TX) N3 M0 S0 or S1**

- The tumor might or might not have grown outside the testicle (any pT), or the extent of the tumor can’t be assessed for some reason (TX).

- Cancer has spread to at least 1 nearby lymph node that's larger than 5 cm across (N3).

- Cancer has not spread to distant parts of the body (M0). All tumor marker levels are within normal limits (S0), or at least 1 tumor marker level is slightly higher than normal (S1).

**III**

**Any pT (or TX) Any N M1 SX**

The tumor might or might not have grown outside the testicle (any pT), or the extent of the tumor can’t be assessed for some reason (TX). Cancer might or might not have spread to nearby lymph nodes (any N). It has spread to distant parts of the body (M1). Tumor marker test results aren’t available, or the tests haven’t been done (SX).

**IIIA**

**Any pT (or TX) Any N M1a S0 or S1**

The tumor might or might not have grown outside the testicle (any pT), or the extent of the tumor can’t be assessed for some reason (TX). Cancer might or might not have spread to nearby lymph nodes (any N). It has spread to distant lymph nodes or the lungs (M1a). All tumor marker levels are within normal limits (S0), or at least 1 tumor marker level is slightly higher than normal (S1).

**IIIB**

**Any pT (or TX) N1-N3 M0 S2**

The tumor might or might not have grown outside the testicle (any pT), or the extent of the tumor can’t be assessed for some reason (TX). Cancer has spread to 1 or more nearby lymph nodes (N1-N3), but it hasn't spread to distant parts of the body (M0). At least 1 tumor marker level is much higher than normal (S2).

**OR**

**Any pT (or TX) Any N M1a S2**

The tumor might or might not have grown outside the testicle (any pT), or the extent of the tumor can’t be assessed for some reason (TX). Cancer might or might not have spread to nearby lymph nodes (any N). It has spread to distant lymph nodes or the lungs (M1a). At least 1 tumor marker level is much higher than normal (S2).

**IIIC**

**Any pT (or TX) N1-N3 M0 S3**

The tumor might or might not have grown outside the testicle (any pT), or the extent of the tumor can’t be assessed for some reason (TX). Cancer has spread to 1 or more nearby lymph nodes (N1-N3), but it hasn't spread to distant parts of the body (M0). At least 1 tumor marker level is very high (S3).

**OR**

**Any pT (or TX) Any N M1a S3**

The tumor might or might not have grown outside the testicle (any pT), or the extent of the tumor can’t be assessed for some reason (TX). Cancer might or might not have spread to nearby lymph nodes (any N). It has spread to distant lymph nodes or the lungs (M1a). At least 1 tumor marker level is very high (S3).

**OR**

**Any pT (or TX) Any N M1b Any S**

The tumor might or might not have grown outside the testicle (any pT), or the extent of the tumor can’t be assessed for some reason (TX). Cancer might or might not have spread to nearby lymph nodes (any N). It has spread to distant parts of the body other than the lymph nodes or the lungs (M1b). Tumor marker levels might or might not be higher than normal (any S).