Nitrous oxide is a colorless gas with a rapid onset and a wide safety margin. Many describe it as odorless or sweet swelling. As the technique suggests, it is inhaled and distributed from the lungs into the bloodstream via diffusion through the alveoli. It is removed from the system rapidly as levels are diminished during expiration.

Unlike many drugs used in conscious sedation, nitrous oxide gives a slight analgesic effect and is both anxiolytic and analgesic. There are several theories as to why this is the case. Regarding analgesia, the most accepted is that the gas stimulates the release of enkephalins, which bind to opioid receptors, stimulating noradrenergic routes. For anxiolysis, nitrous oxide is suggested to utilize the benzodiazepine binding site to trigger the GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) receptor.

Benzodiazepines are a group of drugs with many uses within the medical field. They can treat insomnia, alcohol withdrawal, anxiety, and seizures and are used as sedative agents by dentists and in critical care or end-of-life units.

Diazepam has an onset of between 15 to 60 minutes when given orally. This, coupled with its anxiolytic properties, means it can be a useful drug to give patients in the hours before a procedure, reducing their apprehension and increasing the likelihood of them attending or proceeding with their appointment.

Benzodiazepines are widely regarded as safe to use. Firstly, this is due to the high toxic-to-therapeutic ratio. Secondly, one of the significant benefits is that they have a reversal agent, flumazenil, that can counter or reverse their pharmacological effects and is therefore indicated for use in over-sedation or respiratory depression.

Flumazenil acts as a competitive antagonist of benzodiazepines due to its high affinity to the GABA receptor binding site, displacing the benzodiazepine and subsequently reversing the drug's sedative effects.