Interruptions in the HMP shunt can have drastic effects on an individual. A pathology that can arise is the deficiency of the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, the enzyme required to produce NADPH in the initial step of the HMP shunt. The consequences are mostly seen in red blood cells as the cells can no longer defend against the constant introduction of oxidizing agents. This condition of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency is an X-linked recessive disorder, most commonly seen in African Americans. The deficiency leads to hemolytic anemia in response to any of the offending agents such as fava beans, medications like nitrofurantoin, or anti-malarial drugs. Infections are the most likely offending agents to exacerbate this condition as the inflammation introduces free radicals into red blood cells that cannot detoxify those radicals, and oxidative damage ensues. The damage occurs as the injury causes protein and globin chains to denature within the red blood cells. The globin chains aggregate and form the characteristic Heinz bodies seen in G6PD deficient patients. Consequently, the spleen phagocytoses the aggregated portion of the RBC and leaves the remnant bite cells in circulation to create degmacytes, or bite cells, as seen in a peripheral smear of these patients. Although detrimental to the health, this condition does confer a degree of resistance to malaria as the parasites require the reduced form of glutathione to proliferate while these patients only have the oxidized form in the red blood cells. Thus, the evolutionary advantage maintains a deficiency in the African American population.