Restoration of the extensor mechanism is the primary treatment goal for patellar fractures. Nonoperative management is indicated for minimally displaced fractures (less than 2 to 3 mm of step-off and less than 1 to 4 mm fracture gap) with the extensor mechanism in continuity.

Open reduction and internal fixation are indicated for open fractures, substantially displaced fractures, and fractures with a loss of extensor function. Urgent irrigation, debridement, and antibiotic treatment are indicated for open fractures. The Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Osteosynthesefragen (AO)/Association for the Study of Internal Fixation (ASIF) developed the technique of tension band wire fixation as the standard of care for patellar fractures.

Every attempt should be made to preserve the patella; however, resection of all (total patellectomy) or part of the patella (partial patellectomy) may be indicated in certain situations. Biomechanical studies have demonstrated that removal of the patella decreases the quadriceps strength by 50%.

Postoperatively, similar to nonoperative treatment, patients are placed in a hinged knee brace locked in extension and are allowed to weight-bear as tolerated after surgical fixation. Early knee motion is usually begun at the first follow-up visit to prevent stiffness. As the pain diminishes, knee motion is progressed, and isometric strengthening of the quadriceps is initiated. The rehabilitation protocol may vary after a partial patellectomy or a tenuous fixation by delaying knee motion to ensure adequate healing.

Treatment of periprosthetic patellar fractures are complicated and should be reserved for the skillful surgeon familiar with the various operative and nonoperative options. Of utmost importance for the success of total knee arthroplasty is the competence of the extensor mechanism.