In a neonate presenting with shock, stabilization should occur first with cardiorespiratory support. Prostaglandin E1 infusion occasionally can open the ductus arteriosus but also seems to relax the tissue of the coarctation segment. Often medical support alone will allow some recovery of ventricular function. The treatment for coarctation of the aorta is to eliminate the narrowed segment. This can be accomplished surgically or via transcatheter techniques. Surgery requires removal of the coarctation segment and direct anastomosis of the normal aorta. The transcatheter technique utilizes balloon and stent angioplasty. Most institutions perform surgery for neonates and small children. Many institutions will perform cardiac catheterization and primary stent angioplasty in adolescents and adults. Balloon angioplasty has been performed in neonates and children. No surgical or interventional technique is a cure for coarctation. In neonates, the risk of recoarctation following surgical intervention is approximately 10%. When recoarctation occurs, balloon angioplasty is advised. There is a lifelong risk of developing an aortic aneurysm, which seems to increase when the treatment is balloon angioplasty alone. Furthermore, even after an intervention, there is an increased risk of developing essential hypertension. There also is an increased risk of cerebral aneurysms in patients with coarctation of the aorta (treated or untreated). For these reasons, patients diagnosed with coarctation of the aorta should seek lifelong follow-up with a congenital heart disease specialist.