A vitrectomy can be considered for a variety of clinical scenarios since it enables the operating surgeon to access both the vitreous and retina. Below we list when PPV is indicated based on the type of pathology affecting the vitreous and/or the retina.

One of the most common indications for a PPV is when there is pathology that opacifies the vitreous and thus reduces vision. One example is a non-clearing vitreous hemorrhage. Many diseases can cause vitreous hemorrhage, such as proliferative diabetic retinopathy, trauma, posterior vitreous detachment, retinal detachment (RD), intraocular tumors, and retinal vascular diseases. Vitreous hemorrhage due to diabetic retinopathy can be treated with intravitreal anti-VEGF injections in some circumstances, and only in the absence of traction as well. In many cases, vitreoretinal surgeons will proceed with PPV without an injection if it is dense and unlikely to resolve with conservative therapy. If the vitreous hemorrhage does not clear despite conservative measures, then a vitrectomy is needed.

Vitrectomy is also performed for rhegmatogenous RD, which occurs when a prior retinal break or tear allows vitreous fluid to access the subretinal space. The fluid causes a separation of the layers of the neurosensory retina, which is how an RD is defined. The fluid can then propagate to involve the macula and cause sudden central vision loss. Patients who develop this pathology typically report a curtain coming down from their vision and can have visual field loss on an exam. If present for long enough to involve the macula, visual acuity will be compromised. If the macula is still attached, known as ‘mac-on,’ the surgery is more emergent to restore good visual acuity. If the detachment also involves the macula, it is known as a ‘mac-off’ RD. The surgery will be less emergent, and the visual prognosis is worse. When performing PPV for rhegmatogenous RDs, the subretinal fluid can be drained. A crucial part of the PPV is to remove any traction on the retinal breaks, which occurs through cryotherapy or laser to create a chorioretinal adhesion. This approach leads to a scar that prevents future access of intraocular fluid to the subretinal space. Intraocular tamponade can be achieved with air, gas, or silicone oil to prevent re-detachment until the chorioretinal adhesion becomes established around the breaks.

PPV can also help relieve tractional forces on the retina that distort vision. A variety of pathologies can cause this, with the main principle being that PPV will relieve the mechanical traction that causes dysfunction of the neurosensory retina and thus vision impairment. Epiretinal membranes can be idiopathic in origin or occur secondarily to a variety of conditions such as retinal vascular disease, uveitis, laser therapy, or retinal breaks.

If the traction from diseases like sickle cell or diabetic retinopathy progresses, patients can develop tractional RDs. In this case, the severe traction causes a separation of the neurosensory retina. The signs and symptoms of a tractional RD can be somewhat similar to a rhegmatogenous RD. PPV is done to relieve the traction, causing the detachment, which will also prevent the recurrence of tractional RD. If the traction causes a retinal break or tear, a tractional RD may be associated with a rhegmatogenous RD, as well. In these cases, PPV is even more critical and more urgent to prevent permanent vision loss. The retinal break or hole that formed secondary to traction must also be sealed to avoid recurrent rhegmatogenous RDs.

PPV can also be done to remove a submacular hemorrhage that affects vision. Submacular hemorrhages can occur due to choroidal neovascularization secondary to diseases that affect the outer retinal layers and the RPE, such as age-related macular degeneration. Surgical intervention is appropriate for a thick submacular hemorrhage. The hemorrhage itself can cause photoreceptor dysfunction through chemicals in the blood and/or mechanical forces on the photoreceptors that can even disrupt connections between them. If left untreated, retinal scarring with irreversible vision loss can occur. Initial surgical approaches included removal of subretinal hemorrhages, but this was associated with significant complications. Since then, approaches have focused on displacement rather than removal, which is achievable through an outpatient procedure without PPV.

PPV is needed when there is significant ocular trauma affecting the vitreous or retina. As stated before, PPV will be needed if trauma causes vitreous hemorrhage. PPV is most certainly necessary when there is an intraocular foreign body. Other traumatic pathology repaired by PPV includes retinal detachments, retinal breaks or tears, and even later post-traumatic endophthalmitis. Ocular trauma requires a thorough evaluation of other injuries since many of them constitute ophthalmic emergencies. These can include but aren’t limited to lid lacerations, corneal perforation, spikes in intraocular pressure that can cause irreversible optic neuropathy, lens or iris dislocation or subluxation, perforated globe, or a large retroorbital hemorrhage. These complications are even more likely when there is penetrating trauma. These emergencies may require additional surgical intervention from ophthalmic specialists. Therefore, the authors highly recommend an interprofessional approach to ocular trauma associated with multiple ocular injuries.

PPV is an option for diseases that cause intraocular inflammation. The most common type of pathology is endophthalmitis, a serious intraocular infection that can rapidly progress to blindness. Typically, systemic and intravitreal antibiotics are the treatment for bacterial endophthalmitis. A similar approach with antifungal therapy is the initial therapy for fungal endophthalmitis. However, if these measures fail or patients present with poor visual acuity at baseline, then PPV must be done for source control of the infection. PPV can also serve as a diagnostic procedure, such as in cases of unknown or persistent intraocular inflammation after appropriate laboratory testing. The surgery can sometimes be useful for implantation of intraocular agents such as ganciclovir or fluocinolone implants. Ganciclovir implants have been used in cases of cytomegalovirus infection in HIV patients. Fluocinolone implants are used for idiopathic posterior uveitis or some refractory uveitis following the exclusion of infections.

Other less common but possible indications of PPV include the retrieval of retained lens fragments after phacoemulsification, endoresection of intraocular tumors, and tumor biopsies. Although gene therapy is currently a newer indication for PPV, the pars plana direct subretinal approach without vitrectomy has been recently developed. This technique has also gained popularity for stem cell injections, displacement of submacular hemorrhages, biopsies, and many other indications that require access to the subretinal space. This approach allows surgeons to avoid the severe complications associated with pars plana vitrectomy.