**Short Term Complications**

Common complications in the immediate postoperative period are residual ventricular septal defects, as well as the persistence of right ventricular outflow obstruction. Arrhythmias can follow tetralogy repair, with a risk of ventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation/flutter, and intra-atrial reentrant tachycardia. ECG will usually appear with a right bundle branch block or left bundle branch block pattern associated with wide complex tachycardia. Sudden cardiac death can present with post-repaired patients. Risk factors for tachyarrhythmias and sudden cardiac death include older age at repair, male gender, transient complete heart block beyond postoperative day three, and QRS duration greater than 180 milliseconds.

**Long-Term Complications**

Adult patients with congenital heart disease are increasing in prevalence by an approximate estimate of 5% per year, surpassing the pediatric population. Long-term consequences seen with these patients include right ventricular volume overload from pulmonary insufficiency, right ventricular aneurysm from outflow patch or from ventriculotomy, distal pulmonary artery obstruction, ventricular hypertrophy, chamber enlargement, biventricular dysfunction, and aortic root dilation and insufficiency. The three leading causes of mortality in patients with repaired tetralogy of Fallot are arrhythmia, heart failure, and complications from reoperations. The risk of sudden death increases after 30 years of procedure to 6% to 9%; some of the factors associated with this risk are QRS duration greater than 180 milliseconds, older age at repair (greater than 3 years), significant pulmonary valve or tricuspid valve regurgitation, history of syncope, multifocal premature ventricular contractions, and ventricular tachycardia. The most common indication for reoperation is pulmonary insufficiency, and criteria for pulmonary valve replacement have been based on the severity measured by the regurgitant fraction on magnetic resonance or CT scan. Parameters seen with these studies are right and left ventricular end-systolic and end-diastolic volume indices, ejection fractions, and the presence of aneurysm causing obstructive outflow. Patients can have exercise intolerance, signs and symptoms of heart failure, syncope, and sustained ventricular tachycardia. Pulmonary valve replacement also can be obtained by transcatheter pulmonary valve approach.

**Pregnancy Complications**

Women who had complete repair of tetralogy of Fallot have similar outcomes in comparison with the general obstetric population. Increased pregnancy complications are related to the level of pulmonary hypertension and the severity of the pulmonary regurgitation with right or left ventricular dysfunction. Females with moderate right ventricle hypertension or those who have had a palliative shunt have an increased risk for fetal demise. Offspring of women with tetralogy carry a risk of congenital heart disease in 3% to 5% in comparison with 0.8% of the general population. If 22q11 deletion is present, the chance of transmitting the affected chromosome is 50%, with a high risk of having an associated congenital heart defect.