As an extrinsic muscle of the tongue, the styloglossus muscle is innervated by the hypoglossal (XII) nerve. Thus, it is possible to assess the function of the hypoglossal nerve by testing the movements of the tongue. On examination, patients are instructed to protrude the tongue. Damage of the hypoglossal nerve causes ipsilateral deviation of the tongue, i.e., the tongue will deviate to the side of the lesion or injury.

The course of the styloglossus muscle connects the pharyngeal and submandibular spaces, forming the buccopharyngeal gap between the middle and superior constrictor muscles of the pharynx. This explains why a soft tissue infection of the submandibular space may spread to the pharyngeal space and surrounding structures. This spread may lead to extension into the adjacent retropharyngeal spaces; further spread into the thoracic cavity may result in mediastinitis, which is rare but has a high mortality rate.

Ludwig’s angina, a potentially fatal spreading cellulitis of the submandibular, sublingual, and submental spaces, can cause significant swelling of the tongue and retropulsion of the tongue base, threatening the airway.

In many ways, the tongue is essential for quality of life and for participating in human society. Without a functional tongue, verbal speech is next to impossible and oral feeding is prohibitively difficult. As an extrinsic muscle, the styloglossus plays an integral role in tongue movement and may improve oral and pharyngeal cancer management.