Fluoxetine should be administered once a day, either in the morning or evening, and started at 20 mg daily. It is only available in an oral formulation available in oral solution (20 mg/5 ml), tablet (10 mg, 20 mg, 60 mg), capsule (10 mg, 20 mg, 40 mg), and delayed-release capsule (90 mg). Keeping in mind that the medication can be efficacious at doses of 5 milligrams and weighing in on the side effect profile, it is essential to note that the drug can be administered in smaller doses. For an individual with poorly tolerated side effects, the drug may be dosed in 10 mg tablets instead of 20 mg tablets to help minimize any side effects. Generally, 20 mg to 40 mg daily dosing is required to be effective for most individuals. Some individuals may require dosing of 60 to 80 mg daily. When treating bulimia, an efficacious dose is generally 60 mg to 80 mg daily.

It also comes in a delayed-release capsule formulation with dosing at 90 mg per week. Evidence suggests that the efficacy of the delayed-release formulation (90 mg once weekly) is similar to that of individuals receiving fluoxetine 20 mg daily. Compared to other SSRIs, fluoxetine is not associated with the emergence of abrupt withdrawal symptoms (sleep disturbances, dysphoria, fever, nausea) seen with other antidepressants.

As always, drug-drug interactions require careful monitoring. For example, suppose one is starting a monoamine oxidase inhibitor for treatment-resistant depression. In that case, fluoxetine should be discontinued five weeks before initiating monoamine oxidase inhibitor therapy to avoid precipitating serotonin syndrome. Non-steroid inflammatory agents (e.g., ibuprofen) may impair the effectiveness of fluoxetine.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

It is categorized as Pregnancy Category C medicine. In the late third trimester, neonates exposed to SSRIs, including fluoxetine, have developed complications requiring prolonged hospitalization, tube feeding, and respiratory support. Complications of temperature instability, feeding difficulty, vomiting, respiratory distress, apnea, cyanosis, hypoglycemia, hypotonia, hypertonia, constant crying, hyperreflexia, tremor, jitteriness, irritability, and seizures are reported. These symptoms could precipitate right at delivery and are consistent with either a drug discontinuation syndrome or a direct toxic effect of SSRIs.The clinician may consider tapering fluoxetine in the third trimester.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

As fluoxetine is excreted in human milk, nursing while on fluoxetine is not recommended.

**Pediatric Considerations**

Fluoxetine is FDA-approved for administration in pediatric patients with MDD and OCD. As with other SSRIs, decreased weight gain is associated with the administration of fluoxetine in children and adolescent patients. There are no studies that evaluate the longer-term effects of fluoxetine on the development, growth, and maturation of children and/or adolescent patients.

**Hepatic Impairment**

In patients with liver cirrhosis, the clearance of fluoxetine and its active metabolite (norfluoxetine) decreases, thus increasing the elimination half-lives of these substances. Therefore, a lower/less frequent dose of fluoxetine should be used in patients with cirrhosis. In addition, caution is warranted when using fluoxetine in patients with diseases or conditions that could affect its metabolism.