After pre-oxygenation with cricoid pressure and in-line cervical stabilization, rapid-sequence induction, followed by direct laryngoscopy (DL), is the safest and most effective approach.

**The four D’s of the Difficult Airway**

- Distortion

- Disproportion

- Dysmobility

- Dentition

The location of the vallecula is vital for all healthcare workers who perform intubation. It is an important anatomical landmark during oral intubation of the trachea. To visualize the posterior pharynx, one can utilize the Macintosh blade or the Miller blade. To visualize the vallecula using the curved Macintosh laryngoscope, place it over the tongue, moving towards the vallecula and depressing to see the glottis following the tongue. Subsequently, pull the glottis upwards to visualize the vocal cords, allowing placement of the endotracheal tube. Non-visualization of the vallecula during intubation increases the risk of esophageal intubation. If the clinician utilizes the Miller laryngoscope, which is a straight blade instead of curved, they place this straight blade past the vallecula directly over the epiglottis to visualize the vocal cords and place the endotracheal tube. Introduce the ET tube only after visualization of the glottis, followed by visualization of the vocal cords. Additionally, there is a frequently utilized alternative to the direct laryngoscopes for intubation, which includes a camera. This is utilized similarly to the straight or curved blade but uses a camera attached to a curved blade placed near the vallecular space allowing visualization of the vocal cords and place the ET tube. Regardless of the instrument used, if the clinician cannot identify any laryngeal structures on the initial attempt at visualization, slowly withdraw the blade until the larynx or epiglottis drops into view, then reassess the clinician position.

**Required Equipment**

- Laryngoscope

- Carbon dioxide detectors

- Continuous waveform capnography

- Medications: Sedatives and Paralytic agents for rapid sequence intubation (RSI)

- Material to fix the tube in place

- Chest X-ray

Following are the dosages of RSI medications:

**Sedatives Used for Induction**

- Etomidate: 0.3 to 0.4 mg/kg

- Fentanyl: 2 to 10 mcg/kg

- Midazolam: 0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg

- Propofol: 1 to 2.5 mg/kg

- Thiopental 3 to 5 mg/kg

**Paralytic Agents**

- Succinylcholine: 1 to 2 mg/kg

- Rocuronium 0.6 to 1.2 mg/kg

- Vecuronium 0.15 to 0.25 mg/kg