# Continuing Education Activity

According to Center for Disease Control data, the incidence of diabetes mellitus in the United States in 2015 was 30.3 million and predicted to increase yearly with an already prediabetic population of 84 million. Prevalence of diabetes is highest in the Alaska Native and Native American populations, followed by African Americans, Hispanics, Asians, and Whites. This activity reviews the intraoperative management of diabetes and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of patients with diabetes mellitus.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for intraoperative management of diabetes.
- Describe the complications of unregulated hyperglycemia during surgery.
- Review the clinical benefits of regulating blood glucose during surgery.
- Discuss the role of the interprofessional team in improving care coordination to enhance the intraoperative management of diabetes and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

According to Center for Disease Control data, the incidence of diabetes mellitus in the United States in 2015 was 30.3 million and predicted to increase yearly with an already prediabetic population of 84 million.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Surgery and acute illness are stressors that alter homeostasis and lead to hyperglycemia. Stress conditions raise counter-regulatory hormones such as glucagon, epinephrine, cortisol, and growth hormones. This process leads to insulin resistance, increased hepatic glucose production, impaired peripheral glucose utilization, and relative insulin deficiency.

# Indications

Diagnosis of diabetes is when a patient meets one of the following criteria:

- A glucose level equal to or greater than 126 mg/dL after fasting for 8 hours

- Random venous plasma glucose equal to or greater than 200 mg/dL in a patient with classic symptoms of hyperglycemia

- Plasma glucose equal to or greater than 200 mg/dL measured two hours after a glucose load of 75 g in an oral glucose tolerance test

- Hemoglobin A1C equal to or greater than 6.5 percent

# Equipment

- Alaris pump and tubing

- 100 cc bag of normal saline

- Insulin

- POC glucose testing strips (alternative arterial line or venous blood gas analysis)

- 50% dextrose

# Technique or Treatment

There are no strict guidelines to canceling a surgical case due to hyperglycemia. The Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia (SAMBA) recommends canceling a case if a patient is experiencing diabetic ketoacidosis, hyperosmolar non-ketotic state, or severe dehydration.

# Complications

Control of hyperglycemia intraoperatively is of great importance because there is a 50% increase in morbidity and mortality in patients with diabetes mellitus compared to patients without diabetes mellitus.

# Clinical Significance

There is no agreement among the anesthesiology community exactly what the standard of care for blood glucose levels should be, but there is consensus to aim for blood glucose levels below 180 mg/dL; more aggressive goals may cause hypoglycemia. Recent metanalysis revealed there is no difference in mortality in patients treated with very tight glucose control (BG less than 110 mg/dL), tight glucose control (111 to 150 mg/dL), and liberal blood glucose control (BG less than 220 mg/dL).

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Each institution should develop its own standardized protocol for hyperglycemia for use in the pre-op area, intraoperative, and post-anesthesia care unit to ensure perioperative glucose control. Communication amongst an interprofessional group is necessary as surgeons, anesthesiologists, intensivists, internal medicine providers, pharmacists, and nurses are closely involved in patient care. Most patients will be coming either from the main floor or ICU, so there should be a good handoff.