Glycolysis occurs in the cytosol of the cell. It is a metabolic pathway that creates ATP without the use of oxygen but can occur in the presence of oxygen. In cells that use aerobic respiration as the primary energy source, the pyruvate formed from the pathway can be used in the citric acid cycle and go through oxidative phosphorylation to undergo oxidation into carbon dioxide and water. Even if cells primarily use oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis can serve as an emergency backup for energy or as the preparation step before oxidative phosphorylation. In highly oxidative tissue, such as the heart, pyruvate production is essential for acetyl-CoA synthesis and L-malate synthesis. It serves as a precursor to many molecules, such as lactate, alanine, and oxaloacetate.

Glycolysis precedes lactic acid fermentation; the pyruvate made in the former process serves as the prerequisite for the lactate made in the latter process. Lactic acid fermentation is the primary source of ATP in animal tissues with low metabolic requirements and little to no mitochondria. In erythrocytes, lactic acid fermentation is the sole source of ATP, as they lack mitochondria and mature red blood cells have little demand for ATP. Another part of the body that relies entirely or almost entirely on anaerobic glycolysis is the eye's lens, which is devoid of mitochondria, as their presence would lead to light scattering.

Though skeletal muscles prefer to catalyze glucose into carbon dioxide and water during heavy exercise where oxygen is inadequate, the muscles simultaneously undergo anaerobic glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation.

**Regulation**

**Glucose**

The amount of glucose available for the process regulates glycolysis, which becomes available primarily in two ways: regulation of glucose reuptake or regulation of the breakdown of glycogen. Glucose transporters (GLUT) transport glucose from the outside of the cell to the inside. Cells containing GLUT can increase the number of GLUT in the cell's plasma membrane from the intracellular matrix, therefore increasing the uptake of glucose and the supply of glucose available for glycolysis. There are five types of GLUTs. GLUT1 is present in RBCs, the blood-brain barrier, and the blood-placental barrier. GLUT2 is in the liver, beta-cells of the pancreas, kidney, and gastrointestinal (GI) tract. GLUT3 is present in neurons. GLUT4 is in adipocytes, heart, and skeletal muscle. GLUT5 specifically transports fructose into cells. Another form of regulation is the breakdown of glycogen. Cells can store extra glucose as glycogen when glucose levels are high in the cell plasma. Conversely, when levels are low, glycogen can be converted back into glucose. Two enzymes control the breakdown of glycogen: glycogen phosphorylase and glycogen synthase. The enzymes can be regulated through feedback loops of glucose or glucose 1-phosphate, or via allosteric regulation by metabolites, or from phosphorylation/dephosphorylation control.

**Allosteric Regulators and Oxygen**

As described before, many enzymes are involved in the glycolytic pathway by converting one intermediate to another. Control of these enzymes, such as hexokinase, phosphofructokinase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and pyruvate kinase, can regulate glycolysis. The amount of oxygen available can also regulate glycolysis. The “Pasteur effect” describes how the availability of oxygen diminishes the effect of glycolysis, and decreased availability leads to an acceleration of glycolysis, at least initially. The mechanisms responsible for this effect include allosteric regulators of glycolysis (enzymes such as hexokinase). The “Pasteur effect” appears to mostly occur in tissue with high mitochondrial capacities, such as myocytes or hepatocytes. Still, this effect is not universal in oxidative tissue, such as pancreatic cells.

**Enzyme Induction**

Another mechanism for controlling glycolytic rates is transcriptional control of glycolytic enzymes. Altering the concentration of key enzymes allows the cell to change and adapt to alterations in hormonal status. For example, increasing glucose and insulin levels can increase hexokinase and pyruvate kinase activity, therefore increasing the production of pyruvate.

**PFK-1**

Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate is an allosteric regulator of PFK-1. High levels of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate increase the activity of PFK-1. Its production occurs through the action of phosphofructokinase-2 (PFK-2). PFK-2 has both kinase and phosphorylase activity and can transform fructose 6 phosphates to fructose 2,6-bisphosphate and vice versa. Insulin dephosphorylates PFK-2, activating its kinase activity, which increases fructose 2,6-bisphosphate and subsequently activates PFK-1. Glucagon can also phosphorylate PFK-2, which activates phosphatase, transforming fructose 2,6-bisphosphate back to fructose 6-phosphate. This reaction decreases fructose 2,6-bisphosphate levels and decreases PFK-1 activity.