With the continuous advancement of medical technology, electronic machines have assumed a more significant role in the clinical care of patients. Electronic blood pressure machines are seen in almost every clinic, hospital, and pharmacy. However, while these machines remove the risk of human error in blood pressure measurement, extensive data analyses have demonstrated that they risk overestimating hypotensive blood pressure and underestimating hypertensive blood pressure. These same analyses have shown that they are accurate and reliable at reading blood pressures in the normal ranges.

**Kortkoff Sounds in Pregnancy**

There is some controversy regarding which Korotkoff phase should be used to indicate the diastolic blood pressure of a pregnant woman, with some studies recommending phase V and others recommending phase IV. Those studies suggesting phase IV as the diastolic blood pressure point out that in some pregnant women, phase V is unmeasurable. However, additional studies examining this finding have proven that phase V can be determined in approximately 90% or more pregnant patients, making it the desired endpoint for diastolic blood pressure readings. There also seems to be more significant variability in the observation of phase IV compared to phase V.

All of these findings have led to the conclusion that phase V is the preferred phase for diastolic blood pressure readings in pregnant patients. Of course, in those select patients with an indeterminant phase V, phase IV should be recorded as the diastolic blood pressure. It may also be suggested that one should obtain both phase IV and phase V pressure readings at the first prenatal visit. This will give a baseline phase IV value if phase V becomes indeterminate throughout the pregnancy.

**Quiet or Weak Korotkoff Sounds**

In thin, elderly, or extremely ill patients, Korotkoff sounds may be challenging to auscultate. The same may be true when trying to auscultate in a noisy environment. Elevating the patient's arm above their head for approximately 30 seconds before inflating the cuff while they open and close the hand five to ten times has been shown to enhance Korotkoff sounds. Once the cuff is inflated, the arm can be brought to the usual position, and standard blood pressure measurement techniques can be resumed. This maneuver has been shown to enhance systolic Korotkoff sounds without affecting the measured blood pressure.

**Confounders of auscultatory blood pressure**

When treating a hypertensive patient, several points should be kept in mind. As with any clinical test, there are limitations that the clinician must address. Understanding the potential confounders of an auscultatory blood pressure assessment can minimize the likelihood of executing therapeutic decisions based on inaccurate data.

A measurement showing severe hypertension in a patient without additional signs or symptoms of hypertension should raise concern for a white-coat response (pseudohypertension). It is essential to have these patients keep a log of blood pressure readings performed at home and away from the medical office to confirm or reject the suspicion of pseudohypertension. Additionally, if a patient with a history of severe hypertension readings is found to have a normal or near-normal systolic blood pressure, this should be further investigated, and the examiner should look for an unrecognized auscultatory gap.

If different operators obtain significantly different blood pressure measurements, this should raise concern for human error, such as underinflating the cuff, placing excessive pressure on the stethoscope diaphragm, and rapidly deflating the cuff, or using different arms. It is also important to use the correct cuff size to minimize the chance of inaccurate readings.

Furthermore, when a blood pressure reading is determined with the patient in any position other than the standard back, and arm supported, feet flat on the ground, it should be acknowledged that the patient's non-standardized position may alter their blood pressure reading.

Finally, the diagnosis and management of hypertension require multiple blood pressure measurements. Measurements on different days or other times should be taken, with examination conditions as identical as possible so that differences seen result from therapeutic interventions and not methodologic differences.

**Noncompliant****Arteries**

Depending on the stiffness and thickness of the arterial wall, auscultatory readings may be subject to error. Studies have shown that errors as significant as 30 to 50 mmHg are not uncommon in the elderly or those with advanced arteriosclerosis. Increased arterial stiffness has shown to underestimate the systolic blood pressure compared to those patients with more compliant arteries.