The clinical presentation of acute myocarditis is highly variable, ranging from asymptomatic or mild febrile illness to cardiogenic shock and sudden cardiac death. The presentation is acute or insidious in onset and progression. There are no pathognomonic clinical features.

Patients may present with fever, malaise, fatigue, chest pain, palpitations, dyspnea, orthopnea, presyncope, or syncope. The chest pain of acute myocarditis can mimic the pain of pericarditis (due to myopericarditis in at least 35% of patients) or occasionally be severe central pain mimicking the pain of acute coronary syndrome. In at least 60% of patients, a preceding history of a recent acute febrile illness, including respiratory tract infection, can be elucidated.

The classic presentation of fulminant acute myocarditis is the same as acute decompensated heart failure of any etiology and includes respiratory distress, orthopnea, chest pain, palpitations, or syncope. There can be a hemodynamic compromise and lethal ventricular arrhythmias. In one study of clinically suspected cases, about a quarter of patients had reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), sustained ventricular arrhythmias, or symptoms of low cardiac output.

Physical examination is remarkable in patients with decompensated heart failure and includes S3 gallop, pulmonary rales, and peripheral edema. A frictional pericardial rub may be audible on auscultation in patients with pericardial involvement. Patients with ventricular dilatation may have a pansystolic murmur of mitral regurgitation.

Patients may also have signs and symptoms of the systemic illnesses causing the myocarditis, such as lymphadenopathy in sarcoidosis, maculopapular rash in eosinophilic myocarditis, or erythema margenatum, chorea, polyarthralgia and subcutaneous nodules in acute rheumatic fever. Patients with Chagas disease (caused by Trypanosoma cruzi) may have associated dysphagia. Neurological symptoms can be found in patients infected with diphtheria.