Struvite and triple phosphate renal calculi are strongly associated with urinary tract infections, unlike calcium-based and uric acid calculi, formed as a result of underlying metabolic derangements. Proper identification of the chemical nature of these stones is important to provide the appropriate treatment. This might be difficult for general practitioners, Emergency Room personnel, and primary care providers. Timely referral to a urologist is important to prevent short and long-term complications. Definitive diagnosis and treatment often require close coordination and communication between radiologists, laboratory personal, nephrologists, Emergency Room personnel, infectious disease specialists, and urologists.

All staghorn calculus should be considered infected, and the patient should be started on broad-spectrum antibiotics after sending out urine cultures. Further management, including either a stone removal procedure or conservative management, is determined by the urologist based on the patient's comorbidities, BMI, stone size and shape, renal function, symptom status, and exact anatomical location of the calculus.

The laboratory performs analysis and culture of the extracted or spontaneously passed the stone. Repeat imaging and urine cultures are needed 3 months after definitive treatment to confirm stone-free status versus recurrence or residual fragments. Based on the culture and sensitivity report, low-dose long-term antibiotics can be considered for chronic suppression or prophylaxis. Acetohydroxamic acid (AHA) can be used as a urease inhibitor to help prevent stone growth and recurrence, especially in patients with anatomical abnormalities of the urinary tract.[Level 1]