Comorbid dementia and other neurocognitive disorder pose ethical challenges in the treatment of depressed elderly. It affects their ability to make informed consent, and detailed evaluation must take place for testing decisional capacity in the elderly before we begin treatment.

Psychotherapy in the form of cognitive behavior therapy and interpersonal therapy is the first-line treatment of mild depression.

Pharmacotherapy: Many brain systems malfunction in major depression, and no single cause has been identified. However, the treatment of malfunctioning biogenic amine systems in the brain, especially the serotonergic systems, relieves symptoms in many individuals. In the elderly population, we need to ’start low and go slow’ with the drug dosage and titration, keeping in mind the metabolic changes with aging pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics in old age. There occurs alteration in the enzymes and neurotransmitters—Increased monoamine-oxidase, decreased acetylcholine, decreased dopamine, receptors decrease in number, increased resistance to drug diffusion along with declining hepatic function, absorption, renal excretion and distribution with age, which makes pharmacotherapy even more challenging in the elderly. The following class of drugs has shown promising results in treating depression:

- 
**Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor (SSRI):**

In adults with depressive disorder, SSRI is considered the first line and is safe in the elderly, due to better tolerability and easy to use. SSRI typically takes four to six weeks to have full effect. It can take longer than six weeks as well. Special mention of side effects in the elderly includes hyponatremia, akathisia, anorexia, and sinus bradycardia.

-  **Serotonin-norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors (SNRI):**

These are considered as the second-line treatment and include venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, and duloxetine. This group of medication is thought to be safe in the elderly population. This class of the drug has a dual-action and found to be useful in patients with comorbid pain. The SNRI includes the risk of diastolic hypertension based on dose. Both SNRI and SSRI can cause the typical triad of altered mentation, autonomic changes, and neuromuscular excitation causing serotonin syndrome.

- 
**Atypical Antidepressants:**

These include bupropion and mirtazapine. Mirtazapine is also a second-line agent. Besides antidepressant action, it is also useful in patients with insomnia, anorexia, and restlessness. When comparing mirtazapine with paroxetine, the tolerability profile was similar. Common side effects include sedation, increased appetite causing weight gain, dry mouth, and constipation. Noradrenergic effects are more pronounced over the anti-histaminergic effects at higher dosages and thus lower sedative effects. In patients with symptoms of lethargy or fatigue, bupropion is thought to be an activating agent. Bupropion tends to lower the seizure threshold and is contraindicated in patients with a seizure disorder, concurrent use with CNS depressants, alcohol detoxification, and diagnosis of bulimia nervosa.

-  **Tricyclic Antidepressants (TCA):**

This class of drugs is efficacious, though no longer considered first or second-line agents. These agents may be useful for treatment failure with other antidepressants. Secondary to their action on multiple receptors, TCAs are believed to have various side effects. When compared with in the same class, secondary amines (desipramine and nortriptyline) over tertiary amine (imipramine and amitriptyline) are safer regarding the side effect profile. Given the increased risk of suicide in the elderly population, TCA can cause a lethal overdose. These are the only drugs that are seen to reduce the risk of relapse after Electroconvulsive therapy and possibly have superior efficacy in patients with melancholic depression. Side effects include weight gain and sedation due to histamine receptor effects. Alpha-adrenergic receptor action leads to orthostatic hypotension and tachycardia, while the muscarinic receptor effect causes dry mouth, dizziness, and visual problems that include narrow-angle glaucoma, urinary retention, and constipation.

- 
**Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs):**

MOAI’s are rarely used owing to their special dietary restrictions to prevent adrenergic crisis and serotonin syndrome. This drug class has limited studies in the elderly population, though they are proven to be beneficial in atypical depression. Common side effects include orthostatic hypotension, activation, and insomnia.

-  **Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT):**

Enormous data supports the fact that ECT is the treatment for depression resistant to psychotherapy and/pharmacotherapy. ECT is of two kinds, unilateral and bilateral. The two methods do not have any difference in efficacy, though, for long term treatment (greater than or equal to 3 weeks), bilateral is the chosen option, and for short term, (less than or equal to 5 weeks) treatment unilateral is preferable. Hypertension and tachycardia are the cardiovascular side effects that may occur, though these are transient. Other common side effects are amnesia and headache.

-  **Other Brain Stimulation Techniques**

These include repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), deep brain stimulation (DBS), and vagus nerve stimulation (VNS). However, these techniques do not have randomized studies in the elderly population.

- 
**Other Treatment Modalities**

Research has demonstrated that a healthy diet, exercise, and meditation helps with the prevention and treatment of mild depression in the elderly. Diet rich in omega-3 fatty acids and fish oil have been found to improve depression.