The key feature of intestinal pseudo-obstruction is abdominal distension. As the differential for a distended abdomen is broad, imaging is useful in establishing a diagnosis. X-rays of the abdomen will demonstrate air-fluid levels with dilated loops of bowel. The pathognomonic finding for ACPO is a dilated colon from the cecum to the splenic flexure or even the rectum. Findings of a dilated colon are nonspecific, and thus further investigation beyond x-ray is required to confirm the diagnosis.

Abdominal CT scans are much more specific than abdominal x-rays. CT will also demonstrate dilated loops of bowel, air-fluid levels, or specifically proximal colonic dilatation from the cecum to the splenic flexure or even the rectum. No mechanical obstruction must be identified, such as closed-loop obstructions, hernias, strictures, or masses. In the acute setting, contrast enemas and small bowel follow-throughs can be essential adjuncts to rule out these obstructions.

Although no specific labs will suggest intestinal pseudo-obstruction, a liver profile and lipase should be obtained to rule out other causes of abdominal pain. A complete blood count and serum lactate should also be obtained as leukocytosis, and elevated serum lactate can be increased in cases of bowel ischemia and perforation. In patients with chronic symptoms, vitamin B12, folate, TSH, and celiac serology should be ordered to assess for metabolic and autoimmune abnormalities. Additionally, serologic testing for herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein-Barr virus can assist in the diagnosis as viruses may cause inflammation of the enteric nervous system causing CIPO.  Finally, antineuronal antibodies (ANNA-1/anti-Hu) can also be analyzed to assess for paraneoplastic immune-mediated pseudo-obstruction.

Patients with a dilated colon and rectum raise suspicion for toxic megacolon. Stool cultures and stool evaluation for Clostridioides difficile toxin should be obtained, especially in patients with diarrhea. As metabolic abnormalities, including hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, and hypocalcemia, have been associated with intestinal pseudo-obstruction, a metabolic panel should be obtained so that these may be repleted.

Patients with chronic symptoms may undergo further testing to identify the cause of symptoms. An upper endoscopy and colonoscopy should be performed to identify and locate any pathology or areas of obstruction. If an endoscopy demonstrates no abnormalities, scintigraphy, which assesses the motility of the gastrointestinal tract, may be employed. With scintigraphy, patients ingest resin pellets and undergo a series of imaging to assess the transit time. If an abnormality is seen on scintigraphy, a manometry study of the esophagus, stomach, and small intestine can delineate an underlying diagnosis and differentiate between myopathic and neuropathic disorders based on the pattern and amplitude of contraction.

As many neurological disorders are known to cause gastrointestinal dysmotility, autonomic function testing can differentiate peripheral neuropathy from central lesions.