An international committee known as the INSPPIRE group published updated clinical practice guidelines in 2017 for the diagnostic evaluation of children with recurrent acute pancreatitis and chronic pancreatitis.

Initial laboratory testing should include hepatic function screens with aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT), total bilirubin, fasting lipid profile, and serum calcium. The transaminases help diagnose obstructive and chronic metabolic hepatobiliary processes. Hypertriglyceridemia (greater than 1000 mg/dL) is classically associated with pancreatitis. Hypercalcemia can trigger pancreatitis as well and should undergo an evaluation to rule out primary hyperparathyroidism.

The index presentation merits advanced imaging in children. The INSPPIRE group advocates for magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) over computed tomography (CT) imaging. MCRP poses no risk of radiation exposure to the child, provides a finer spatial definition, and can digitally reconstruct the pancreaticobiliary ductal system. Some institutions can conduct secretin-enhanced MRCP, which can help evaluate the acinar ducts. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) are useful imaging modalities but should be secondary to MRCP for initial diagnosis. The techniques for ERCP and EUS are technically more invasive. ERCP also utilizes fluoroscopy which uses ionizing radiation with X-ray.

Ruling out cystic fibrosis (CF) and other genetic causes is crucial in the workup of recurrent pediatric pancreatitis.PRSS1 (serine protease 1, trypsinogen), SPINK1 (serine peptidase inhibitor, Kazal type 1), and CTRC (chymotrypsin C) genes. Molecular assays are available to test for mutations in these genes and correlate with the clinical picture.