For the spinal cord stimulator leads to be introduced into the spinal cord, the epidural space needs to be accessed using an epidural needle. Therefore, there is relevant anatomy that merits consideration during this procedure.

- Vertebrae: Each vertebra is composed of a vertebral body (anterior) and a vertebral arch (posterior). The arch further divides into two lateral pedicles connected to two posterior laminae, a single spinous process, and two transverse spinous processes that extend laterally at the point where the pedicles are connected to the laminae. The connection between two adjacent vertebrae at the level of the pedicles forms the foramina. There are 7 cervical, 12 thoracic, and 5 lumbar vertebrae, followed by 5 false or fixed vertebrae forming the bony sacrum and coccyx.

- Ligaments: After going through the skin and subcutaneous tissue, the first ligament encountered by the epidural needle is the supraspinous ligament, which connects one spinous process to another in adjacent vertebrae. The interspinous ligament then follows. The ligamentum flavum is much thicker and connects the lamina of adjacent vertebrae. Two other ligaments found on the anterior aspect of the spinal cord are the anterior and posterior spinal ligaments, which connect adjacent vertebral bodies.

- Spinal cord: The spinal cord is surrounded by the dura mater (outermost layer), arachnoid mater, and pia mater (innermost layer, directly overlying the spinal cord). It extends from the medulla to the level of L1 in adults. At this level, one finds the conus medullaris. Below the conus, the spinal nerve roots become elongated and parallel, forming the cauda equina, which allows nerves to move freely within the CSF and makes this location preferable for the insertion of an epidural needle.

- Arterial supply: The arteries supplying the spinal cord derive from the vertebral arteries in the cervical spine and the intercostal and lumbar arteries in the thoracic and lumbar spine. These arteries anastomose with other spinal cord vessels, forming the pial plexus. There are anterior and posterior branches, which supply the ventral and dorsal roots of the spinal cord. In the dorsal (sensory spinal cord), the posterior spinal arteries anastomose, protecting this area of the spinal cord from ischemia. On the other hand, a single anterior spinal artery supplies the ventral (motor) spinal cord. One of the largest arteries supplying the anterior spinal cord is known as the artery of Adamkiewicz, which most commonly enters the vertebral canal through the L1 foramen. It supplies the lower two-thirds of the spinal cord. Damage to this artery from an improperly done epidural may lead to bilateral lower extremity paralysis.

- Venous supply: There is a vertebral venous plexus that drains into the vertebral canal. These veins empty into the azygos vein that ultimately empties into the superior vena cava (SVC). This plexus is of particular importance in patients with masses or increased intraabdominal pressure compressing the SVC. When this occurs, there is a backup of blood into the epidural space, which increased the risk of cannulating the veins with the epidural needle.