The best equipment to use for the treatment of tension pneumothorax with needle thoracostomy has been hotly debated. Various prehospital providers use commercial devices and traditional angiocatheters. Considerations for cost and efficacy of these various modalities have yet to yield one definitive national standard. One of the biggest concerns that have been studied has been the success rate of needle thoracostomy and which approach yields the highest success rate. Due to the evergrowing body mass index of patient populations, an increasing number of EMS systems are adopting larger bore and longer devices to combat the distance needed to penetrate the pleural space. Additional studies also have advocated for different areas of needle placement which will be discussed below.  The prehospital provider should be familiar with the available equipment and its use.

Classically three-sided occlusive dressings were placed to relieve communicating pneumothorax. Concerns about the time required to place the dressing and difficulty with properly taping it to the chest have led to the development of other techniques and commercially available devices. Other devices that have been developed include occlusive devices with valves, suction ports, and ventilated tracts. To date, no randomized control trials on humans have been done to compare these devices, but multiple studies have been done in porcine models. Of the devices tested the most effective were linear ventilated occlusive dressings as they were less likely to be clogged with blood clots and were better at adhering to the patient than traditional methods of tape. The cost of these engineered ventilated dressings is substantial compared to simple occlusive dressing with tape, and the prehospital provider should be familiar with the available equipment and its use within their system.