The evaluation of the biological characteristics of the active ingredients in cosmeceuticals, especially for organic sources like marine extracts, depends on the selection of an appropriate EXTRACTION process.

The extraction techniques divide into conventional or classical, and the novel or modern approaches.

**CONVENTIONAL EXTRACTION METHODS**

(1) Hydro-distillation

(2) Soxhlet extraction

(3) Maceration

(4) Percolation

(5) Infusion

(6) Decoction

(7) Hot continuous extraction

Of the above, Soxhlet extraction has been the conventional methodology, especially for plant/marine-derived sources. However, the need for pre-digestion by acids with consequent time consumption is a major limiting factor. Other limitations of the above-mentioned conventional extraction techniques include the requirement of high purity solvents, low extraction yield, decomposition of thermolabile ingredients, and long extraction periods.  The novel non-conventional (modern) extraction techniques were developed to overcome some/most of these limitations. Further, since modern technologies comply with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) standards, they are considered eco-friendly or 'green.'   A detailed discussion of each of the modern technologies and evaluation methodologies for individual cosmeceuticals is beyond the scope of this CME chapter. Thus interested readers are advised to refer to comprehensive articles authored on this subject.

**MODERN EXTRACTION METHODS**

(1) Superficial-fluid extraction (SFE)

(2) Pressurized-liquid extraction (PLE)

(3) Enzyme-assisted extraction (EAE)

(4) Microwave-assisted  extraction (MAE)

**EVALUATION OF COSMECEUTICALS**

The father of 'cosmeceuticals,' Dr. Albert Kligman, suggested three crucial questions to be answered to ascertain the claimed physiological/biological/therapeutic effect of a cosmeceutical product

- Is the active ingredient able to penetrate the stratum corneum (SC) and be deliverable in sufficient concentrations to its intended skin target over a time course consistent with its mechanism of action?

- Does the active ingredient possess a known specific biochemical mechanism of action in the target cell or tissue in human skin?

- Are there published, double-blind, peer-reviewed, placebo-controlled, statistically significant, clinical trials to substantiate the efficacy claims?

**PENETRATION ACROSS STRATUM CORNEUM(SC):**

Penetration of ingredients across the SC, a robust barrier to prevent transepidermal water loss (TEWL), is the first hurdle to be overcome. Proteins, peptides, sugars, and nucleic acids with molecular weights >1000kDa and highly charged molecules find it difficult to penetrate an intact SC. The penetrating behavior of an active ingredient can undergo evaluation:

(1) in vitro

(2) ex vivo, and

(3) in vivo

Basic Principle - The published human stratum corneum permeability coefficient (Kp, often expressed as log Kp) has been used for ages by investigators to develop models to predict skin permeability.in vitro diffusion and for determining penetration through skin consists of the Franz-type diffusion cell or its modifications.in vitro studies, this barrier can consist of an artificial skin construct (ASC). Ex vivo studies employ either animal skin, human cadaver skin, or bovine udder skin (BUS) as the barrier.

For human in vivo penetration studies, tape stripping, or advanced spectroscopic methods, e.g., ATR (attenuated total reflection) spectroscopy is an option. A more advanced in vivo technique is microdialysis.

**BIOENGINEERING TESTS FOR DRUG TARGET IDENTIFICATION**

Various bioengineering techniques have been employed to determine the specific drug target within the skin. Some of these include

(1) Evaporimetry - for measurement of cosmeceutical impact on reducing TEWL

(2) Corneometry - conductivity of skin to a low electric current to evaluate skin water content

(3) Profilometry - to evaluate skin texture and improvement in skin elasticity and fine wrinkles

(4) Laser Doppler flowmetry - to evaluate erythema indices using the Doppler effect to measure the cutaneous blood flow

(5) A-scan ultrasound imaging - to ascertain the 'skin thickening' claims of cosmeceuticals

**CLINICAL TRIALS FOR SUBSTANTIATION OF CLAIMS**

This is perhaps the most important aspect of evaluation, but it is not an entity in isolation, rather an amalgamation of basic, translational, and clinical trial data on a cosmeceutical. Ideally, clinical trials should prefer noninvasive instruments to measure parameters such as TEWL, corneometry, skin elasticity, colorimetry, profilometry, and other techniques to approve or disprove efficacy claims. Pre-treatment and post-treatment photography is essential but not adequate in isolation owing to pitfalls in standardized clinical photography. Further, the study design should include a large cohort as feasible, be controllable through a placebo, or another entity with well-established effects. Randomization, statistical analyses, and well-defined objective outcome measures are also criteria.

The traditional way of histology to demonstrate the effects of a product is ideal but suffers from logistic issues. In contrast, dermoscopy and/or confocal microscopy are novel and validated tools for better assessment than gross photography and are preferred over histology by study subjects and/or volunteers owing to their non-invasive trait.