Vascular injury results in the exposure of subendothelial collagen and von Willebrand factor (vWF). vWF is a glycoprotein that serves as the initial stationary foundation on which a clot forms. Subendothelial vWF, which is also present in the vasculature and acts to increase the half-life of XIII, binds to glycoprotein Ib (GpIb) on platelets. This causes a conformational change on the platelet surface that results in the exposure of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa (GpIIb/IIIa). Due to the conformational change, circulating fibrinogen attaches to GpIIb/IIIa. At this point in hemostasis, a soft platelet plug has formed, and the importance of biochemical interactions of clotting factors arises.

**Membrane Binding**

In addition to the exposure of GpIIb/IIIa as a result of conformational change occurring on the platelet, phosphatidylserine also emerges on the platelet surface. Phosphatidylserine is a membrane phospholipid whose polar end has a negative charge and, as a result, provides an excellent surface for a calcium ion to bind. The interaction between negatively charged phosphatidylserine and calcium does not completely negate calcium’s positive charge. This allows for serine proteases to bind to the surface of the platelet membrane. This binding is possible due to the carboxylation of clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X. These clotting factors have a region called gamma-carboxyglutamic acid that undergoes vitamin-K dependent carboxylation via gamma-glutamyl carboxylase. The enzyme adds a negatively charged carboxyl group to glutamic acid residues, which calcium easily binds to. As a result, the clotting factors can adhere to the platelet surface as serine proteases.

**Intrinsic Pathway Proteases**

Factor XII activation is the first step of the intrinsic pathway. Its activation is induced via contact with subendothelial collagen in the presence of high molecular weight kininogen. Graphically, zymogen to enzyme activation was denoted with the letter a, for example, XIIa. XIIa, in turn, activates XI into XIa, which leads to the activation of IXa. At this point, our previous discussion of gamma-carboxylation and platelet membrane interaction becomes important. Clotting factor IX plays its role as a serine protease within the intrinsic pathway. Although IXa is in its active form, IXa enzyme efficiency is abysmal without its essential cofactor, factor XIII. Once XIII and IXa are bound together (XIII-IXa) on the platelet membrane, proteolysis ensues. Specifically, the serine protease cleaves certain C-terminal arginine residues in the zymogen, which results in its subsequent activation. From here, we can understand how VIII-IXa activates factor X into Xa and leads to the common pathway.

**Extrinsic Pathway P****rotease**

Although the extrinsic pathway involves fewer steps than the common pathway, the role of serine proteases is just as important. When external insult occurs, clotting factor VII, along with its cofactor tissue thromboplastin, becomes an active protease and catalyzes X into Xa, which leads to the common pathway.