As a stone moves from the renal collecting system, it can significantly affect the genitourinary tract. It can cause constant or intermittent obstruction and hydronephrosis of the ureter, causing urine to back up into the kidney. Intermittent obstruction often causes longer-lasting discomfort and pain than a constant blockage where compensatory mechanisms can offset the increased ureteral intraluminal pressure to some degree. An acute ureteral obstruction causes a decrease in the glomerular filtration rate of the affected kidney and increases urine excretion by the unaffected renal unit as well as very severe, excruciating pain. Complete obstruction of the ureter can lead to the eventual loss of renal function, with damage becoming irreversible, possibly starting at just one to two weeks. Additionally, there is a risk of rupture of a renal calyx with the development of a urinoma. Of even more concern is the possibility that an obstructed renal unit might become infected, causing obstructive pyelonephritis or pyonephrosis. This condition can be life-threatening and requires immediate surgical drainage as antibiotics alone will be ineffective.

Renal calculi can become impacted, most commonly at one of three locations: 1) at the ureteropelvic junction, as the renal pelvis narrows abruptly to meet the ureter, 2) near the pelvic brim, where the ureter takes a posterior turn, or 3) at the ureterovesical junction which is the narrowest portion of the ureter.

Pain is the result of a combination of ureteral muscle spasms, increased proximal peristalsis from activation of intrinsic ureteral pacemakers, stone-induced localized inflammatory changes, renal swelling with capsular stretching, edema, and irritation. These processes stimulate submucosal stretch receptors in the ureter, renal pelvis, and capsule which are a direct cause of pain. Of all the various factors that can contribute to flank pain and renal colic, stimulation of the renal pelvis, peripelvic renal capsule, and calices from stretching most closely mimics typical renal colic.

Unfortunately, the severity of the pain does not reliably predict stone size or likelihood of spontaneous expulsion.

Various parameters have been looked at to help predict which patients are more likely to fail conservative management of their acute renal colic and require surgery.  A previous history of renal colic weakly correlated with a failure of conservative treatment, but neither gender, degree of hydronephrosis, initial degree of pain, stone size, shape or location could reliably predict which patients would ultimately require surgical intervention.

The immediate effect of a newly obstructing ureteral stone is to increase proximal intraluminal pressure which initially distends the renal pelvis and increases ureteral peristalsis.  Peak renal pelvic pressure from a high-grade obstruction is usually obtained within two to five hours of a complete ureteric obstruction. Other changes in the kidneys after a complete ureteral blockage include pyelolymphatic and pyelovenous backflow. Interstitial renal edema develops which significantly increases lymphatic drainage from the affected kidney and stretches the renal capsule leading directly to painful stimuli from capsular stretch receptors.

Often, a state of equilibrium will be achieved as the increasing proximal ureteral dilation allows some urine to pass around the obstruction which is enough, along with the other compensatory measures, to relieve the pain and achieve stability.

Pain fibers are primarily through the preganglionic sympathetic nerves and the ascending spinothalamic tracts.  When the stone approaches the intramural ureter, the nervi erigentes can become involved which can cause various bladder symptoms including frequency, urgency, dysuria, hesitancy and difficulty in voiding.

Renal blood flow increases for the first 90 minutes after initial ureteral blockage before diminishing. This is caused by vasodilation of the afferent preglomerular arterial blood supply. By five hours after the ureteral obstruction, renal blood flow and ureteral intraluminal pressures have decreased back to normal or below.  Over time, renal blood flow tends to slowly diminish.  After three days, renal blood flow has dropped to about half from the normal baseline and this continues to slowly diminish over time. By eight weeks, renal blood flow is only 12% of its prior, normal baseline value. Even then, the dilation and hydroureteronephrosis usually remains but ureteral peristalsis has almost disappeared. Renal blood flow in teh contralateral kidney has increased at this point.

Nausea and vomiting is associated with classic renal colic in about half or more of patients with acute obstructing calculi. This is due to a common innervation pathway between the kidneys and the GI tract embryologically through afferents of the vagus nerve and celiac axis. This effect can be exacerbated by NSAIDs and opioid medications that have GI side effects.