Initial management includes immobilization and pain control in the acute setting. Goals of management can then be determined whether non-operative versus operative.

**Nonoperative management**

Sling immobilization followed by gentle progressive rehabilitation is advocated in minimally displaced surgical and anatomic neck fractures.  The acceptable amount of displacement with respect to an isolated greater tuberosity fracture remains debated.  Recent literature has advocated for earlier surgical management in these isolated, two-part fracture pattern injuries.

Progressive physical therapy and rehabilitation protocols include early, gentle, shoulder pendulum exercises starting as early as 10 to 14 days following injury as dictated by the patient's symptoms.

In general, nonoperative management alone has demonstrated an approximately 80% to 85% success rate when analyzing all types of PHFs.  Nonoperative management is most successful in the following:

- minimally displaced surgical neck fractures (Neer’s one, two, and three-part)

- greater tuberosity fracture which is displaced less than 3-5 mm

- patients who are otherwise not ideal surgical candidates

**Operative management**

Operative management consists of several different options including closed reduction and percutaneous pinning (CRPP), open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), intramedullary nailing (IMN), hemiarthroplasty and total shoulder arthroplasty (reverse TSA or standard/anatomic TSA).

CRPP

- indicated in two-part, three-part surgical neck fractures and valgus-impacted four-part fractures in patients with good bone quality, minimal metaphyseal comminution, and intact medial calcar

ORIF

- Indicated for:

- greater tuberosity displaced greater than 3-5 mm
- two-, three-, and four-part fractures in younger patients
- head-splitting fractures in younger patients

IMN

- indicated in surgical neck fractures or three-part greater tuberosity fractures in younger patients, combined proximal humerus, and humeral shaft fractures

Shoulder reconstruction/arthroplasty

- general indications in the elderly may include anatomic neck fractures and other injuries comprised of significantly displaced/comminuted fracture patterns in any of the aforementioned injury types that are not amenable to nonoperative management.  The latter also includes chronic malunions/nonunions with documented dysfunctional status and disability in patients managed nonoperatively.

- other indications that can, in general, be applicable to younger patients (i.e. patients 40 to 65 years of age) include:

- four-part fractures and fracture-dislocations (three-part if stable internal fixation unachievable)
- rotator cuff compromise
- head-splitting fracture patterns
- humeral head impression defects of greater than 40% of articular surface and detachment of articular blood supply (most three-part and four-part fractures)

- Total shoulder arthroplasty: Performed when the rotator cuff is intact with a compromised glenoid surface (arthritis, trauma).

- Reverse shoulder arthroplasty: Indicated in elderly individuals with non-reconstructible tuberosities or with prior evidence of rotator cuff compromise that can include varying degrees of rotator cuff tear arthropathy