A detailed history is vital to a timely and successful diagnosis of a V. parahaemolyticus infection. Patients will typically present with gastroenteritis-type symptoms such as abdominal cramping, nausea, vomiting, and fever. Because these are general symptoms common to many other illnesses, the line of questioning should include any recent travel to or near the ocean or any consumption of shellfish or seafood, especially raw oysters. This condition is more common in coastal cities, but there are several cases of V.
parahaemolyticus in areas distant from the sea. This is a result of patients developing symptoms after returning home from recent travel. The average time from consumption of contaminated food to the onset of symptoms is 17 hours.

In addition to asking about specific V. parahaemolyticus risk factors, information regarding relevant comorbidities should be elicited. Patients who develop an infection with concomitant liver disease, diabetes, or alcoholism have a poorer prognosis and are more likely to develop septicemia.

Physical findings are also generalized. On exam, patients may present with signs of dehydration, non-specific abdominal pain, and occasional bloody stool (approximately 7%). Be alert for signs of cellulitis, especially on body areas exposed to the water such as feet and lower legs. The examination should include a careful review of vital signs for assessment of sepsis. Due to its non-specific findings, the diagnosis is difficult to make on physical exam alone. A detailed and thorough history is essential to raising suspicion and ultimately making a diagnosis of V. parahaemolyticus.