Carrying a baby with hydrops fetalis can be extremely stressful and challenging for the pregnant woman and her family. A close collaboration between the obstetric providers, maternal-fetal medicine specialists, radiologists, neonatologists, nursing staff, pharmacists, and social support workers is paramount to enhancing the outcome for both the mother and her baby. The wellbeing of both mother and the fetus(s) is considered a priority at all times. When hydrops fetalis is diagnosed in-utero, the interprofessional team should be well prepared to detect the symptoms and signs of fetal hydrops.

Careful evaluation and monitoring are required to look for the development of complications for early detection and subsequent management to prevent perinatal morbidity and mortality. Additionally, pharmacists play a vital role in educating patients and monitoring their compliance with their prescribed medications. The nurse plays a vital role in educating the woman and her family and providing them with the necessary information. Pregnant women carrying a fetus with hydrops fetalis should be treated in a very respectful and sensitive manner. They should be given adequate time to express their views, wishes, and concerns. Their opinions and beliefs should be respected at all times.

Patient awareness helps in the early identification and timely reporting of symptoms. The nurse should ensure proper follow-up and notify the medical team about any untoward change or deterioration of the condition of the mother or the newborn. The social workers should also ensure that pregnant women are getting adequate emotional and financial support to deal with their condition. The members of the interprofessional team should collaborate and discuss with the woman and her family that the etiology of fetal hydrops can not always be determined; therefore, genetic consultation can be useful in estimating their risks and discussing their future pregnancy plans. The coordinated collaboration among the members of the interprofessional team will not only help improve the clinical outcome of the pregnant women but will also help to maximize the emotional, the psychological, as well as the mental wellbeing of women with carrying fetuses with hydrops fetalis. [Level 5]