The differential diagnosis for pediatric corneal opacities is broad, and a classification system can aid the organization of the diseases. One method is via the mnemonic **STUMPED**:**S**clerocornea,**T**ears in Descemet's membrane,**U**lcers,**M**etabolic,**P**eters anomaly,**E**ndothelial dystrophy,**D**ermoid.

**Sclerocornea**

A congenital disorder resulting in poor development of the anterior chamber presents with peripheral corneal opacity resembling sclera. The central cornea is often spared.

**Tears in Descemet's Membrane**

This most commonly is caused by birth trauma associated with forceps assisted delivery and presents with clouding and edema due to the rupture of Descemet's membrane. Linear and vertical Haab striae (breaks in the Descemet's membrane) may be identified.

Congenital glaucoma can present at birth as corneal clouding with elevated IOP. It is essential to identify markers for congenital glaucoma such as buphthalmos, optic disk cupping, curvilinear Haab's striae oriented horizontally, and concentric to the limbus, and enlarged corneal diameter.

**Ulcers**

The presence of corneal ulceration should increase suspicion for an infectious cause. Common infections include herpes simplex keratitis and bacterial keratitis.

**Metabolic**

Mucopolysaccharidoses, cystinosis, and mucolipidosis IV should be considered. Mucopolysaccharidosis is a lysosomal storage disorder that can result in corneal clouding within the first year of life due to the accumulation of glycosaminoglycans.

**Peters Anomaly**

This is identified by centralized vascular corneal opacity due to the failure of the cornea to separate from the iris and lens.

**Endothelial Dystrophy**

CHED is distinguished from other corneal opacities as diffuse, nonbullous edema with corneal opacification ranging from blue-gray to complete opacity. Opacification remains consistent over time. Due to thickened corneas, intraocular pressure measurements may be artifactually elevated.

Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD) is autosomal dominant and widely variable in presentation.

Congenital hereditary stromal dystrophy (CHSD) in an autosomal dominant disorder that presents as diffuse corneal opacity with a central flaky appearance in the stroma and is nonprogressive from birth.

**Dermoid**

Dermoids are choriostomas that present near the limbus and may obstruct the visual axis. Size can vary, but large dermoids often affect vision and require surgery to prevent amblyopia.