**Laboratory**

The test begins with serum prolactin level. If the prolactin level is high, a comprehensive metabolic panel, TSH, and a pregnancy test (for women of childbearing age) should be obtained. Assessment of other pituitary hormones, including cortisol, ACTH, IGF-1, LH, FSH, and testosterone/estradiol, should be done based on age and gender to exclude any hypopituitarism or other co-secreting tumors.

Patients can have very high prolactin levels; however, when measured, they can be reported as falsely low due to a phenomenon called the “Hook effect.” When there is a suspicion, serial dilution of the serum sample and re-measuring the prolactin levels will be helpful.

Another condition where measured prolactin can be high, although true prolactin level is low, is when patients have higher molecular weight prolactin called macroprolactin. Macroprolactin levels should be obtained in asymptomatic hyperprolactinemia. The laboratory can pretreat the serum with polyethylene glycol to precipitate the macroprolactin before the immunoassay for prolactin.

**Imaging**

CT scan may demonstrate the mass, but MRI with gadolinium is the preferred imaging modality for evaluation of hyperprolactinemia as it best describes the anatomy of the hypothalamic-pituitary area. All patients with tumors adjacent to or compressing to optic chiasm should be referred for formal visual field testing****.****

**Treatment/Management**

Macroprolactinomas incidentally discovered without symptoms can be observed with periodic monitoring of the labs and imaging.

Macroprolactinoma or symptomatic microadenoma should be treated with dopamine agonist therapy. The goals of treatment would be tumor shrinkage, restoration of visual fields if any defect, reversal of galactorrhea, and restoration of fertility or abnormal sexual function. Cabergoline is preferred due to a higher frequency in normalizing the prolactin level and tumor shrinkage. Amenorrhea caused by macroprolactinoma can be treated with oral contraceptives if fertility is not desired without dopamine agonists.

Most prolactinomas are managed with medical therapy only with surgery and radiotherapy reserved for refractory cases.

**Medical Therapy**

Unlike other pituitary tumors, the preferred treatment for prolactinomas is medical therapy. Oral contraceptives alone can be given if the only symptoms are amenorrhea and or osteoporosis. Specific treatment for prolactinomas is one of the dopamine agonists.

Cabergoline and bromocriptine are two commonly used dopamine agonists. Pergolide is withdrawn from the market due to concerns about valvular heart disease, and quinagolide is not available in the United States. Dopamine agonists suppress the synthesis and release of prolactin and lactotroph cellular proliferation, causing shrinkage of the tumor. They can cause nausea and dizziness.

Bromocriptine is preferred during pregnancy if needed due to more available data than cabergoline. It is also cheaper but has more side effects than cabergoline, like nausea, vomiting, nasal stuffiness, and postural hypotension. It is started at 1.25 mg at bedtime or after dinner daily for one week, then increased to 1.25 mg 2 times a day (after breakfast and dinner). The dose should be increased every 4 weeks if the prolactin level is not normalized up to a maximum dose of 5 mg two times a day.  If bromocriptine is unsuccessful, cabergoline should be started.

Treatment with dopamine agonist should be tapered and stopped if prolactin level is normal and the tumor is not visible in MRI after at least two years of treatment.

Estrogen replacement is an option for a woman with inadequate response to treatment and not desiring fertility. For a man with inadequate treatment response, testosterone therapy (if no fertility is desired) or human chorionic gonadotropin (if fertility is desired) should be started.

**Surgery**

Transsphenoidal surgery is the preferred surgical option if surgery is indicated for the following reasons:

- Unsuccessful medical therapy to lower prolactin level and decrease tumor size after several months of maximum dose.

- A woman with large prolactinoma (more than 3 cm) wishes to become pregnant as it can get larger during pregnancy.

- Radiation therapy should be considered for residual tumors after surgery and resistance to cabergoline therapy.