The adverse drug reaction profile of fosphenytoin is similar to that of phenytoin. Moreover, it is essential to note that adverse effects are more associated with IV administration than IM administration.

- The most common adverse effects are nystagmus, dizziness, pruritus, drowsiness, and ataxia. Additional adverse drug reactions include pelvic pain, tachycardia, tongue disorder, paresthesia,  dysarthria, vertigo, diplopia, and deafness.

- Cardiovascular reactions: There are reports of severe hypotension and cardiac arrhythmias associated with fosphenytoin use.

- Dermatologic reactions: As discussed above, there is a risk of toxic epidermal necrolysis(TEN) and stevens-johnson syndrome (SJS) associated with fosphenytoin use.

- Purple glove syndrome: The mechanism behind purple glove syndrome is microvascular thrombosis and subclinical extravasation. Avoiding small hand veins, adhering to recommended IV administration guidelines, and monitoring the infusion site for reactions decrease this complication.

- Hematopoietic reactions: Hematopoietic complications include thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, agranulocytosis, and pancytopenia.

- Bleeding disorder in neonates- A potentially life-threatening bleeding disorder related to decreased levels of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors may occur in newborns exposed to phenytoin in utero. This drug-induced condition can be prevented with vitamin K administration to the mother before delivery and the neonate after birth.

- Hyperphosphatemia: Hyperphosphatemia may occur in patients with end-stage renal disease.

- Exacerbation of Porphyria: There is a risk of worsening porphyria with fosphenytoin. Hence exercise caution when using fosphenytoin in patients suffering from porphyria.

- Fetal hydantoin syndrome: There is an increased frequency of significant malformations (such as orofacial clefts and cardiac defects), dysmorphic skull and facial features, nail and digit hypoplasia, growth abnormalities, and cognitive deficits among children born to epileptic women who took phenytoin alone or in combination with other antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy.

- Hyperglycemia- Phenytoin may raise the serum glucose concentrations in diabetic patients. Hyperglycemia, resulting from the inhibitory effect of phenytoin (the active metabolite of fosphenytoin) on insulin release, has been reported.

- Angioedema- Postmarketing surveillance reports suggest cases of fosphenytoin-induced angioedema. Clinicians should discontinue fosphenytoin immediately in case of angioedema.

- Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS) - Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS), also known as Multiorgan hypersensitivity, has been reported in patients taking antiepileptic drugs, including phenytoin and fosphenytoin.

- Hepatotoxicity- In patients treated with fosphenytoin, case reports identified typical immunoallergic hepatitis and drug rash with eosinophilia and systematic symptoms(DRESS) syndrome.

- US Boxed Warning(severe hypotension and cardiac arrhythmia): The rate of fosphenytoin intravenous (IV) administrations should not exceed 150 mg phenytoin sodium equivalent (PE)/minute due to the risk of severe hypotension and cardiac arrhythmias. Continuous cardiac monitoring is required while administering IV fosphenytoin.