Acute bronchitis is a very common disorder that frequently presents to emergency departments and primary care offices. It is a very common cause of absenteeism from work and school. The condition is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a primary care provider, a nurse, a pharmacist, and a pulmonologist. The key is coordinating patient education. The nursing staff should be tasked to work with patients to stop smoking and avoid exposure to secondhand smoke. The nurses should encourage individuals to get influenza and pneumococcal vaccines to reduce morbidity. The nurses should monitor patients for compliance and report back to the clinical team leader patients that are non-compliant with smoking cessation. In addition, the nurse and pharmacist should encourage hand washing to limit the spread of micro-organisms.

For those patients whose cough persists, the nurses should monitor for the possibility of atypical pneumonia or pneumonia that requires antibiotic therapy. In these cases, the nurse should arrange a follow-up visit with the clinical team for re-assessment. If an antibiotic is deemed necessary, the pharmacist should evaluate for drug-drug interaction and allergy prior to filling the prescription. If there are any concerns, the pharmacist should make the clinical team aware of potential problems before the drug is dispensed.

The outcomes of patients with acute bronchitis are good; however, it is a common reason for absenteeism from work. In some patients with underlying COPD and other lung problems, acute bronchitis can have high morbidity. Patients whose symptoms persist for more than six weeks need to be re-evaluated to ensure that the diagnosis is correct. [Level 5]