The sphenopalatine ganglion (SPG) is an extracranial parasympathetic ganglion located within the pterygopalatine fossa. The borders of the pterygopalatine fossa are as follows: (1) anterior border - posterior wall of the maxillary sinus, (2) posterior border - medial pterygoid plate, (3) superior border - sphenoid sinus, (4) medial border - a perpendicular plate of the palatine bone, and (5) lateral border - communicates with the infratemporal fossa. It lies posterior to the middle nasal turbinate and maxillary sinus, forming multiple autonomic, sensory, and motor neural connections.

**Sensory Innervation**

The maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve passes through the foramen rotundum, which is located along the superolateral aspect of the pterygopalatine fossa. The SPG is “suspended” from the maxillary nerve via the pterygopalatine nerves. Sensory fibers arising from the maxillary nerve travel through the SPG, providing sensory innervation to the nasal membranes, soft palate, and parts of the pharynx.

**Autonomic Innervation**

Sympathetic innervation through the SPG originates from preganglionic sympathetic fibers in the upper thoracic spine, which course through the sympathetic chain and synapse with postganglionic fibers in the superior cervical sympathetic ganglion. Postganglionic fibers join the carotid nerves, then branch off and travel through the deep petrosal and vidian nerves. These postganglionic fibers course through the SPG to the lacrimal gland, nasal mucosa, and palatine mucosa. Parasympathetic innervation through the SPG originates in the superior salivatory nucleus in the pons. Parasympathetic fibers run in the nervus intermedius, which is a branch of the facial nerve, through the geniculate ganglion to form the greater petrosal nerve (GPN). Parasympathetic fibers synapse in the SPG. Second-order neurons then provide a secretomotor function to the nasal, oral, and pharyngeal mucous membranes, the lacrimal glands, and branches to the meningeal and cerebral blood vessels.

The postganglionic sympathetic fibers projecting from the superior cervical ganglion give rise to the deep petrosal nerve. The vidian nerve is formed when the deep petrosal nerve joins the GPN before passing through the pterygoid canal located near the inferomedial portion of the fossa.

The SPG itself gives off efferent branches to form the superior posterior lateral nasal and pharyngeal nerves. The SPG has direct connections with the greater and lesser palatine nerves.