Rapid developments characterize the early stages of neurogenic pulmonary edema. The common patients are usually children or young adults, who must have suffered an intracranial injury recently. In cases of blunt head injuries, neurogenic pulmonary edema may develop in a matter of minutes. There is no specific symptomatology of neurogenic pulmonary edema. It is most often concomitant of the trigger phase of the neurological pathology. The clinical signs boil down to classic signs of pulmonary edema with the absence of signs of left ventricular failure usually found in cardiogenic edema. For classic neurogenic pulmonary edema, the manifestation is immediate, and it could be detected clinically within 2 to 12 hours post-injury.

The symptomatology is that of any pulmonary edema with initially ventilation disorders often accompanied by systolic hypertension probably also testifying to intracranial hypertension. In patients with spontaneous ventilation, dyspnea, tachypnea, cough and rales with auscultation and tachycardia would be early signs, sometimes accompanied by pink foamy sputum or hemoptysis. More discrete symptoms of sympathetic stimulation, such as insomnia, sweating, paralytic ileus, and transient hypertension are also described. Ventilation/perfusion disorders, hypoxemia, and carbon dioxide retention will occur shortly after that.

The natural evolution leads to respiratory failure followed by cardiovascular collapse and has a high mortality, estimated at more than 60%. It is impossible to assess whether the direct cause of this mortality is pulmonary or neurological or even cardiovascular. In contrast to older descriptions, more recent publications seem to attribute mortality rather to brain causes. However, in pediatric encephalomyelitis cases, the cause of death would be mainly pulmonary and cardiovascular.