Although there is a defined clinical distinction between hypertrophic scars and keloid scars, these two disorders may lie within a spectrum of the same pathophysiologic process. The precise mechanisms distinguishing the two remain elusive. Wound healing is divided into three phases (inflammatory, proliferative, remodeling). The scar is formed in the last phase (remodeling phase).

There are increased numbers of myofibroblasts in hypertrophic scars. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) stimulates differentiation of both local and bone fibroblasts into myofibroblasts, which then creates tension on the wound. It is hypothesized that existing tension on a wound may exacerbate this pathway, creating a vicious cycle. Certain pro-inflammatory mediators are unregulated in keloid scars. These include tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-1 alpha, interleukin-1 beta, and interleukin-6. Some experts believe that these mediators are more prominent in response to trauma in patients predisposed to hypertrophic and keloid scarring.

Burn wounds can be divided into superficial (partial thickness) and deep (full thickness). The majority of partial-thickness burn wounds heal without hypertrophic scarring. Deep wounds stimulate dermal fibroblasts to produce collagen and inflammatory mediators like transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-beta1). TGF-beta1 further stimulates fibroblasts to deposit elastin and collagen, potentially leading to increased deposition in wounds predisposed to hypertrophic scarring. Over-expression of TGF-beta has been implicated in keloid scarring also, though the expression levels in hypertrophic scars and keloid scars remains a matter of ongoing investigation.