There are three main approaches to total hip arthroplasty: the anterior approach, the anterolateral approach, and the posterior approach. During the posterior approach, the short external rotators, such as the obturator internus, often have to be dissected so that the surgeon can access the hip joint. Before dissection occurs, the sciatic nerve should be identified since it is in close proximity to the short external rotators. The piriformis muscle is used most reliably to locate the sciatic nerve since it typically exits near the inferior edge of the piriformis muscle belly.

After identification of the nerve, the short external rotators can be detached and reflected medially. Medial reflection protects the sciatic nerve from injury during the operation; however, if there are variations in the course of the sciatic nerve or variations in the musculotendinous confluence of the piriformis and obturator internus then a false sense of security can be created.

Once dissection is complete, the short external rotators are tagged with a suture and repaired at the end of the operation. The literature shows that by performing a soft tissue repair of the short external rotators during closure, postoperative posterior dislocation rates dropped from 4.5% to 0.5%.

Another surgical consideration related to the obturator externus is the damage to the nerve. Due to its location within the pelvis, the obturator nerve has the potential to become damaged during gynecological surgery, specifically lymphadenectomy for gynecological malignancies.

This could potentially weaken the obturator externus since this muscle is innervated by the posterior branch of the obturator nerve. The obturator internus would not be affected by this surgical complication since it is innervated by the nerve to the obturator internus.