There is considerable overlap between "red flag" causes of back pain and risk for spinal cord compression. General red flags that should prompt consideration of spinal imaging include age more than 65, new-onset gait instability, sphincter incontinence, corticosteroid use, midline pain, and presence of spinal contusion on exam (for traumatic pathology). Red flags for specific causes of spinal cord compression will be discussed below:

Cervical spondylotic myelopathy variably results in weakness affecting the arms, legs, or both. Patients may also complain of sensory loss at the cervical or thoracic level. Spastic urinary and rectal sphincter dysfunction can be seen. On exam, lower motor neuron findings, including hyporeflexia, dermatomal sensory loss, and diminished fine motor control, may be present in the upper extremities. Upper motor neuron findings, including hyperreflexia and abnormal Babinski response, can be seen in the lower extremities. Gait disturbance is often an early finding associated with cervical myelopathy.

Based on a 2013 systematic review by Downie and colleagues, the only well-validated red flag for MSCC is a history of malignancy.

The classic tried of fever, back pain, and localized neurologic deficits for SEA are rare in clinical practice and more likely to be observed in late presentations. Fever is apparent in a wide range (30% to 75%) of cases. The combination of fever and localized back pain, particularly when worse with percussion, should prompt further diagnostic evaluation for SEA, discitis, and osteomyelitis. The absence of fever does not preclude a diagnosis of SEA; accordingly, most patients undergo more than one healthcare visit before the diagnosis is made.

Presenting symptoms and exam findings for SEH include acute-onset back pain, motor weakness, and bowel/bladder dysfunction. Interestingly, radicular pain is an uncommon complaint among patients with SEH.