Preparation before the surgery involves a detailed history, clinical examination, preoperative photography, blood workup, an anesthetic assessment, and other investigations as indicated by the patient's medical history. Clinical assessment of the signs of facial aging must include the following:

- Amount of skin excess/laxity

- Thickness and elasticity of the skin

- Signs of photoaging and solar actinosis

- Assessment of rhytids at rest and on animation. Skin pinch tests should be performed to assess the quality, thickness, and amount of fat below the skin, at rest and with animation.

It is essential to look for excess skin along the SCM and chin and thyroid cartilage area. The submental and neck fat must be evaluated, including the relative amounts of subcutaneous and sub-platysmal fat; the two fat compartments can be differentiated by pinching the skin at rest and with contraction of the platysma. When there is a reduced skin pinch size with animation, it signifies excess subplatysmal fat and vice versa. It is also vital to assess the amount of excess skin in the neck and the depth of the platysma bands both at rest and with animation. The submandibular glands and digastric muscle should also be examined by looking for a bulge below the inferior mandibular border and on neck flexion.

Patients areadvised to discontinue aspirin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, other anticoagulants, and herbal supplements other than Arnica montana two weeks before surgery. Arnica in the perioperative period may be helpful to limit postoperative bruising.

The skin markings are made with the patient upright before surgery, using the patient's ability to smile, contract the platysma, and flex the neck to allow an accurate assessment and to mark the important structures. These include the submental incision line, jowl lines, mandibular borders, subcutaneous fat prominences in the neck, platysmal neck bands, anterior borders of the SCMs, external jugular veins, and markings for the face-lift incisions, if this is planned concomitantly with plastymaplasty. The estimated course of the greater auricular nerve is also marked on the neck. After induction of general anesthesia, the patient is scrubbed and draped in a sterile fashion. Tumescent local anesthetic solution (0.1% lidocaine with 1 in 1,000,000 adrenaline) is injected into the skin markings, and the subcutaneous neck is infiltrated with at least 100 ml of this solution.