Felty syndrome is a rare disease, therefore a high degree of suspicion is required to make the diagnosis early and minimize its complications. The management of Felty syndrome should involve an interprofessional team. Apart from the involvement of a rheumatologist, a hematologist's input is valuable to rule out hematological malignancies as the cause of neutropenia. An infectious disease specialist should be involved earlier in the care to decrease the risk of infections.

The clinical pharmacist can assist the providers in monitoring hematologic parameters for the patient with RA, with or without therapy, to help in early detection of the disease and for the alteration of therapy when needed. The pharmacist should also assist the medical team by providing patient education on the different drugs used to treat Felty syndrome, their benefits, and adverse effects. Pharmacists need to verify dosing (particularly with MTX), check for drug interactions in the patient's medication regimen, and inform the clinician should they encounter any concerns.

The primary care nurse can help the providers make the diagnosis in patients with RA by obtaining a detailed interval history for possible recurrent infections, gastrointestinal bleeding, and splenic pain. Nurses can also assist the team in monitoring, verifying patient compliance, and helping assess treatment effectiveness.

Instituting a collaborative interprofessional team can help in the early detection and treatment of FS. Open communication between interprofessional team members across disciplines is vital to improving outcomes. [Level V]