Febrile seizures are not uncommon in the pediatric population. They only occur when there is a rise in body temperature. These seizures are benign and generally have no long-term complications in most children. The diagnosis and management of these children should be done in a systemic fashion in collaboration with an interprofessional team that consists of the pediatrician and neurologist.

The key is patient education. The nurse and clinician should educate the family that even though dramatic in appearance, these seizures do not lead to neurological disease or dysfunction. The more parents are aware of this disorder, the less likely it is that they will rush to the emergency room or seek alternative unproven remedies. However, the parents should also be educated on when to bring the child with a seizure to the emergency department because in some cases the cause may be a virus or a bacterial infection of the brain. The pharmacist should educate the family on managing the fever with acetaminophen and not aspirin. However, the family should also be educated that antipyretics do not prevent future febrile seizures.

Finally, patients need to be told that a febrile seizure does not lead to any adverse neurological or psychological problems. An interprofessional team approach to the care of febrile seizures will lead to the best outcomes. [Level 5]

**Outcomes**

The prognosis for most children with a febrile seizure is excellent. About 30% of children who have one febrile seizure will experience another seizure later on. The risk of epilepsy in the future is slightly increased compared to the general population. However, a simple febrile seizure does not affect cognition, intellect or induce neurological dysfunction.