In addition to a full cardiac and respiratory history and physical exam, certain non-invasive and invasive tests can be performed based on the severity of symptoms. All patients should have a baseline lipid profile, Doppler waveform pulse assessment, and ankle-brachial indices (ABI). An ABI is a ratio of blood pressure at the ankle compared to the arm. An ABI between 0.9-1.3 is normal. Claudication is common in patients with an ABI between 0.4 and 0.9. ABI less and 0.4 suggests more severe peripheral arterial disease, while an ABI greater than 1.3 is associated with non-compressible calcified arteries. In patients with calcified arteries, commonly patients with diabetes, a toe-brachial pressure index (TBI) can be used. The TBI in a healthy patient should be 0.70-0.80. If a symptomatic patient has a normal ABI or TBI, standardized exercise testing can be helpful.

In normal patients, the ABI will increase during exercise. In patients with post-exercise ABI drop of greater than 20%, diagnostic imaging and referral to a vascular specialist are warranted. There are three major classification systems for patients with peripheral arterial disease: Wound/Ischemia/Foot Infection (Wifi), Rutherford, and Fontaine. The older Rutherford and Fontaine systems incorporate intermittent claudication as part of their classification.

Common imaging modalities include non-invasive duplex vascular ultrasound, minimally invasive computed tomography angiography and magnetic resonance angiography, and formal peripheral angiography. Imagining modalities determine the location of the diseased vasculature. Aortoiliac disease is referred to as inflow disease and typically produces symptoms in the thigh or gluteal musculature. Meanwhile, disease below the inguinal ligament commonly produces claudication affecting the calf muscles.