Death is a part of natural life; however, society is notorious for being uncomfortable with death and dying as a topic on the whole. Many caregivers experience a level of burden from their duties during end-of-life care. This burden is multi-faceted and may include performing medical tasks, communicating with providers, decision-making and possibly anticipating the grief of impending loss. Similarly, many healthcare providers across the spectrum of care feel unprepared to provide end-of-life care or communicate with patients and families about the complex topics related to death and dying. They can attribute this to the fact that during formal education these topics were not discussed or only briefly talked about. It is imperative that patients and families have access to the care and support they require when entering a terminal phase of life. This phase is different for each patient, and the needs may differ for each patient and family, but it is vital for healthcare providers to provide care and support in a way that respects the patient's dignity and autonomous wishes. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of death and dying and the role of interprofessional team members in collaborating to provide well-coordinated care and enhance patient outcomes.

**Objectives:**
- Review the common causes of death in the USA.
- Describe the process/stages of death.
- Summarize what is hospice and palliative care
- Outline the evaluation and management of death and dying and the role of interprofessional team members in collaborating to provide well-coordinated care and enhance patient outcomes.