The standard diagnostic procedure and most sensitive imaging study for evaluating a patient with suspected Dressler syndrome is an echocardiogram (echo). An echo will allow for evaluation of the pericardial fluid, if present, and help discern the exact cause of reduced cardiac output (i.e., determine whether truly DS or another condition such as congestive heart failure). An echo will further allow for the evaluation of ventricular contractility, in addition to the assessment of the potential risk of cardiac tamponade (i.e., if cardiac chambers appear compressed by pericardial fluid). The more pericardial fluid that accumulates, the easier it is to detect its presence by echocardiography.

While definitive evaluation with an echocardiogram is the gold standard, bedside cardiac ultrasound by a skilled emergency physician may be necessary. These patients are at risk for cardiac tamponade, and care should NOT be delayed while awaiting formal echocardiography.

If it is difficult to assess the posterior pericardium with an echo, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be employed to determine whether there is any effusion. In some instances, fluid collections may also become loculated. This is also more readily visualized with cardiac MRI than with echo.

Chest radiography (X-ray) may be employed if echocardiography is not available. A chest X-ray will reveal flattening of the costophrenic angles and enlargement of the cardiac silhouette as a result of both pleural and pericardial effusions.

An electrocardiograph (ECG) in a patient with Dressler syndrome will initially demonstrate global ST-segment elevation and T-wave inversion, such as with pericarditis. Further inflammation of the myocardium will also result in ST-segment elevations. Both electrical alternans (variation in amplitude or directionality of QRS from beat to beat) and/or a low voltage QRS may also be observed if there is a large volume of pericardial effusion.

Blood cultures should be obtained early in the workup of Dressler syndrome as this will help differentiate between inflammatory versus infectious causes of the patient’s condition. In the case of true Dressler syndrome, blood cultures should be negative.

Laboratory studies that may help point toward a diagnosis of Dressler syndrome include an elevated white blood cell count (with a leftward shift) and elevated acute phase reactants (e.g., erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein). Additionally, a high titer of anti-heart antibodies may present in serology.

If possible, pericardial fluid (e.g., through a pericardial drain) should be examined for cell count, differential, cultures, Gram stain, cytology, total protein, and triglyceride levels.