Testing the most disturbing or salient features of autonomic dysfunction is often necessary to confirm a diagnosis and give objective evidence supporting pharmacologic treatment.

Bedside evaluation of the ANS consists primarily of observing cardiovascular reflexes, casual sweating patterns, and pupillary changes.

Sympathetic skin responses can add objective information, and a thermoregulatory sweat test might be a good option if the symptoms of altered sweating predominate.

Vesical ultrasonography and urodynamic studies help diagnose and choose the best pharmacologic approach for urinary dysfunction in autonomic dysfunction.

Other tests are not as useful in changing the management but may play a role in supporting an explanation for the patient's symptoms or as adjunctive for syndromic diagnosis. Blocking eyedrop tests and pupillometry for pupillary abnormalities are examples of such tests.

Some tests do help in management. For example, positive testing for autoantibodies, antibodies against alfa-3-acetylcholine receptors helps support immunosuppressive therapy.

Indications of Tilt Table Test

- High suspicion of orthostatic hypotension despite an initial negative evaluation (for example, Parkinson disease).

- Patients who have a significant motor impairment that precludes them from having standing vital signs obtained.

- Monitor the span of an autonomic disorder and its response to therapy.

Responses to Head-Up Tilt-Table testing

Heart rate increases by 10 to 15 beats per minute

Diastolic blood pressure increases by 10 mm Hg or more

Immediate and continuing drop in systolic and diastolic blood pressure

No compensatory increase in heart rate

Symptomatic, sudden drop in blood pressure

Simultaneous bradycardia

Occurs after 10 minutes or more of testing

Systolic blood pressure decreases by 20 mm Hg or more

or

Diastolic blood pressure decreases by 10 mm Hg or more

Heart rate increases by at least 30 beats per minute

or

Persistent tachycardia of more than 120 beats per minute