Clubbing is the physical sign that alerts the clinician to the possibility of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, and this should be distinguished from pseudo-clubbing (seen in secondary hyperparathyroidism associated with chronic kidney disease, scleroderma, sarcoidosis). The angle between and is the nail plate, and the proximal nail-fold (Lovibond angle) is less than 180 degrees in pseudoclubbing, while this angle is greater than 180 degrees in true clubbing. Pseudoclubbing may be asymmetrical, while clubbing tends to be symmetrical. Acro-osteolysis is the classic radiological finding in pseudoclubbing, while an overgrowth of phalangeal tufts presents in clubbing. However, there may be an overlap in these findings between clubbing and pseudoclubbing.

The dermal changes of coarse, thickened skin may raise the question of acromegaly and should merit consideration in the differential diagnosis of HOA, and one should look for prognathism, radiological changes of enlarged sella turcica, and elevated growth hormone levels.

Thyroid acropachy may also present with digital clubbing and swelling with periosteal proliferation. It is usually associated with thyroid dermopathy, which may be easily confused with HOA.

Patients with POEMS syndrome may also display clubbing, hyperhidrosis, and skin thickening. Interestingly, both POEMS syndrome and HOA usually have high levels of circulating VEGF. A periostotic reaction may present in trauma, multifocal osteomyelitis, hypervitaminosis A, fluorosis, leukemia, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, polyostotic bone tumors, sickle cell dactylitis.

The diagnosis of PHO is a diagnosis of exclusion, and a thorough workup for secondary causes, particularly lung malignancy, should be considered in all patients with HOA.