Approximately half of all pregnancies in the United States are unintended. Tubal ligation offers patients a safe and effective contraceptive option that has a low failure rate, has no risk of user-related failure, and does not require replacement. Barriers do exist concerning access to postpartum sterilization. Unfortunately, only 50% of patients who request postpartum tubal ligation ultimately undergo the procedure. A patient must be 21 years old to be eligible for Medicaid coverage of a sterilization procedure, and consent documents must be signed at least 30 days before the procedure. Operating rooms or anesthesia may not be available, or the institution may be religiously affiliated. Physicians, nurses, anesthesiologists, office staff, and other patient advocates can work together to ensure proper patient education and access to services such as postpartum tubal ligation. Hospital systems and medical providers can develop policies and procedures to ensure consent forms are obtained in the antenatal period and are available at the time of delivery. Providers, including nurses, can emphasize that postpartum tubal ligations are urgent and advocate for these procedures to be scheduled and done. Women receiving care at religiously-affiliated institutions should still be counseled regarding all their options and be offered referrals to other institutions if they desire.

Ethically, providers who counsel patients regarding tubal ligation or who participate in these patients’ care may be better able to ensure patient satisfaction and outcomes if they also understand the CREST study and potential pitfalls such as regret and failure. [Level II]

One study looking at written informed consent for tubal ligation found wide variations in the complications discussed, both among providers with the same level of training and between levels of training. This data leaves providers at risk legally. The authors concluded by recommending standardized patient education that can aid in obtaining consistently valid informed consent. This standardized education could be helpful for all members of each patient's healthcare team.