Cells that harbor a mutation in BCL-2 where it increases quantity or remains to inhibit Bak/Bax despite death signals can become cancerous. For example, follicular lymphoma has a quantity mutation that leads to excessively high levels of BCL-2, decreasing the propensity of these cells to release Bak/Bax and enter apoptosis. If there is a lot of BCL-2 protecting the cell, there would need to be a greater increase in Bim/Bad/Bid to counter, which does not happen in this cancerous state.

P53 is a tumor suppressor gene that can work in this same Bax/Bak pathway. P53 functions as a regulator within the cell cycle at the G1/S checkpoint. It can arrest the cell cycle at this stage to allow time for DNA repair if P53 senses any mutation. P53 is upregulated when the cell experiences DNA damage or cell cycle abnormalities. The apoptotic pathway of P53 is turned on when the mutations are beyond repair, leading to activation of Bax.

The understanding of cell death and the players involved is a subject of constant research. The better one understands the mechanism of cell death, the more likely it is that knowledge can be integrated into clinical medicine. It is possible to use these pathways to one's advantage, simulating the actions of apoptosis by inhibiting BCL-2 in tumor cells like the chemotherapy drug oblimersen used for chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Chemotherapy treatments with radiation can manipulate these pathways more directly by causing DNA damage that drives the cell to apoptosis.