**Child Abuse and Neglect**

**History**

Depending on the age of the child, historical information is often primarily obtained from the caregiver and the comments provided by the patient (especially in older children and adolescents). Children who suffer from abuse or neglect may present with typical presenting complaints (i.e. vomiting). Therefore, for the provider who sees pediatric patients regularly, it is important to keep child abuse or neglect in the differential diagnosis during every visit to enhance the likelihood of recognition.

The approach to history taking should be structured, systematic, with the flexibility to allow different lines of questions, and thus similar to how a provider obtains a routine history. This will not only ensure rapport with the patient and the caregiver, but it enhances the ability of the provider to quickly investigate any historical and physical features that are concerning for child abuse or neglect.

There are various historical features that should raise the suspicion for abuse.

- Lack of history of trauma in a pediatric patient with severe injuries

- History describing the mechanism of injury inconsistent with the child's developmental level

- Unexplained delay in seeking care before presenting to a medical provider

- History describing injuries attributed to household pets or other young children

- The initial history is vague or changes among different caregiver accounts

- Significant changes in personality or sleeping/eating habits

**Physical Examination**

The physical examination should be routine, systematic, and focus on findings that may indicate an underlying etiology of the child's initial complaint, including the possibility of child abuse or neglect. This begins with the general appearance of the patient and how they interact with their caregiver. This may include but is not limited to lack of interaction between the patient and the caregiver (i.e. patient not seeking comfort or caregiver not offering comfort), not appreciating the severity of the patient's condition, assigning blame to the child for their injuries or illness, treating the patient differently than the other children in the room, and if the patient displays fear towards the caregiver present.

There are various presenting features that should raise the suspicion for abuse. These include:

Physical Abuse

- Bruises in infants less than six months (infants not yet freely mobile), bruises situated away from bony prominences, and bruises with a unique shape (like the shape of an object) are highly suggestive of abuse

- Human bite marks

- Oral injuries (including frenulum tears, lip lacerations, tongue lacerations, fractures; especially in infants)

- Limping (an indication of the possibility of a fracture)

- Unexplained hair loss

- Retinal hemorrhages

- Unexplained loss of a tooth

- Unexplained bruising on the abdomen

- Altered consciousness (possibly indicating head injury)

- Intentional burns (scalds from hot tap water, burns that resemble the shape of burning objects, cigarette burns)

Sexual Abuse

- Nonspecific symptoms (abdominal pain, fecal incontinence, constipation)

- Genital bruising or bleeding

- Behavioral or personality changes

- Inappropriate behavior especially of the sexual nature (for example, an unusual interest in genitals of other children or even adults)

Emotional Abuse and Neglect

- Poor hygiene

- Signs of malnutrition (child may refuse meals)

- The child may appear withdrawn with inadequate social interaction

- Developmental milestone delays (such as speech and motor delays)

**Adult Abuse and Neglect**

**History**

Depending on the patient's underlying health condition, historical information may be obtained from the caregiver and the comments provided by the patient. If possible, it is best to solicit the history from the patient and the caregiver separately.

The approach to history taking should be structured, systematic, and flexible to allow different lines of questions, and thus similar to how a provider routinely obtains a history. This will not only ensure rapport with the patient and the caregiver, but it enhances the ability of the provider to quickly investigate any historical and physical features that are concerning for elder abuse or neglect.

There are various historical features that should raise the suspicion for abuse. These include:

- Mechanism of injury that is implausible based on the patient's condition

- History is inconsistent, vague or different between the patient and caregiver

- Delay in seeking medical attention

- Past history of frequent injuries or unexplained visits to the emergency department

- Caregiver unable to give details regarding the patient's medical history or the medications they are taking

- Caregiver answers questions for the patient

- The patient is reluctant to answer questions

**Physical Examination**

The physical examination should be routine, systematic, and focus on findings that may indicate an underlying etiology of the patient's reason for the visit. This begins with the general appearance of the patient and how they interact with their caregiver. The provider should observe the patient for any signs of fear, anxiety, infantile behavior, poor self-esteem, and mistrust in the presence of the caregiver. Caregivers may be emotionally abusive.

There are various physical features that should raise the suspicion for abuse. These include:

- Unexplained signs of injury: Bruises, burns, scald, fracture, signs of restraints on the hands and feet

- Bedsores (pressure ulcers)

- Poor hygiene

- Signs and symptoms of dehydration, malnutrition, or unexplainable weight loss

- Emotionally withdrawn and showing signs of depression

- Refusal to take routine medications or drug overdose

- Hair loss

- Broken teeth

- Lacerations

- Evidence of trauma on a genitourinary exam or vaginal bleeding