Pain is the most common complaint seen in a primary care office. There are over 50 million Americans, 20% of all patients, that suffer from chronic pain in the United States.

Part of the pain assessment is defining whether a patient's pain is either acute or chronic. When severe pain lasts longer than three months, it is generally considered to be chronic. Determining if the pain is acute or chronic pain is an important distinction because as pain transitions from acute to chronic, pain becomes centralized, or a function of the central nervous system rather than peripheral. Pain becomes maladaptive with hyperalgesia, and allodynia becoming more prevalent. The texture of the tissues becomes hypertonic, ropy, and cold. Pain is often more dull and achy rather than sharp.

How we assess pain has long-term implications for our patient's morbidity and mortality. With over 30% of patients reporting pain lasting longer than six months, providers should have multiple tools at their disposal to define a patient's pain to treat their symptoms better. An estimated 8% of adult patients and 6% of children suffer from chronic pain that causes significant limitations in function and quality of life.

Effective treatment modalities for acute, chronic, centralized, or neuropathic pain are often different. 10% of the United States population complain of neuropathic pain. This population may benefit from a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) such as duloxetine, as compared to ibuprofen for an acute injury.

An important aspect of the pain assessment is in the acknowledgment of the influence of various comorbidities and psychosocial determinants of health that impact pain. Comorbid mood disorders lead to worsening pain, and the treatment of said mood disorder improves a patient's pain. Prior history of opioid dependence, IV drug use, sexual abuse, trauma, old age, chronic diseases, and economic disparity all contribute to a patient's pain. Cultural influences on pain also play a role.