Diagnosis of primary bone cancer requires a tissue biopsy to allow histopathological assessment, with significant heterogeneity seen.

**Osteosarcoma**

The formation of bone or osteoid characterizes osteosarcoma, and this identification is key to diagnosis. Several histological subtypes have been identified, determined by the tumor's location in the bone and the tumor grade.

**Intramedullary:**

- **Conventional ("classic"):**The most prevalent subtype, comprising 80% of all osteosarcomas. Classically high-grade, arising from the intramedullary canal. Spindle to polyhedral cell shape malignant mesenchymal cells is seen. Cell nuclei are pleomorphic with occasional mitotic figures. Extracellular matrix production can be osteoblastic, osteoclastic, or fibroblastic; however, a combination is common.

- **Telangiectatic:**<4% of osteosarcomas. Dilated hemorrhagic sinusoids are seen with small amounts of osteoid. These cavities mimic the appearance of an aneurysmal bone cyst, with the presence of high-grade sarcoma cells distinguishing the tumor.

- **Low-grade:**<2% of osteosarcomas. Well-differentiated cells are embedded in the osseous matrix and fibrous stroma, with small amounts of osteoid.

- **Small cell:**1.5% of osteosarcomas. Numerous small round malignant cells are seen within an osteoid matrix. Small cell sarcoma can resemble Ewing sarcoma; however, the production of osteoid and sporadic spindling of cells are distinguishing features.

**Surface:**

- **Parosteal:**1-6% of osteosarcomas. Slow growing, arising from the outer surface of the metaphysis. Low-grade, with a well-differentiated, mostly cartilaginous matrix with minimal osteoid.

- **Periosteal:**1-2% of osteosarcomas. More aggressive than parosteal osteosarcoma, with intermediate-grade tumors showing increased cell atypia. Mostly cartilaginous matrix with minimal osteoid.

- **High-grade:**<1% of osteosarcomas. Histologically like conventional osteosarcoma, showing high-grade spindle shape cells with nuclear pleomorphism.

**Chondrosarcoma**

Chondrosarcomas are characterized by the production of hyaline cartilage to form a cartilaginous matrix. Lobules of cartilage are seen with significant variation in dimension. Cell nuclei show pleomorphism with chondrocytes varying in size and shape. Conventional chondrosarcoma accounts for over 85% of all chondrosarcomas. It can be further subcategorized into primary central (developing within the medullary canal) or secondary peripheral (developing from the surface of the bone secondary to pre-existing enchondroma or osteochondroma). Histologically both primary central and secondary peripheral are alike. Grading is an essential process to allow the prediction of clinical behavior.

- **Grade I:**Low-grade lesions, lowly cellular, with a predominantly cartilaginous matrix and small dense nuclei. Distinguishing grade I chondrosarcoma and benign enchondroma can be difficult, both radiologically and histologically.

- **Grade II:**Reduced cartilaginous matrix and moderately cellular. Nuclei are enlarged and hyperchromatic, with increased atypia. Mitoses may be seen.

- **Grade III:**High-grade lesions, highly cellular, with increased cellular atypia showing vesicular and enlarged nuclei. Cartilaginous matrix is rare or absent, with myxoid material evident. Mitoses are more readily identified.

Several rare subtypes of chondrosarcoma are also identified. Dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma is characterized by low-grade chondrosarcoma next to a dedifferentiated high-grade lesion, with a sharp transition between the two. The tumor is extremely aggressive. Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma is a high-grade tumor occurring in either bone or soft tissue. Undifferentiated small round cells are seen, with varying amounts of a cartilaginous matrix. Clear cell chondrosarcoma is a low-grade tumor, with cells showing clear, vacuolated cytoplasm. Areas of hemorrhage and cyst formation are seen.

**Ewing Sarcoma**

Ewing sarcoma is a high-grade aggressive sarcoma and belongs to the group of small round cell tumors. Monomorphic small cells are seen in sheets, with round nuclei and finely dispersed chromatin, with nucleoli usually not identifiable. Frequently necrosis is seen, with remaining viable cells arranged perivascularly. Cell membranes express the glycoprotein CD99, with immunohistochemistry showing that >95% of Ewing sarcomas have extensive membranous expression. CD99 expression is not specific to Ewing sarcoma, and other markers are also used for diagnosis.

**Other Types of PBC**

Chordoma, adamantinoma, and giant cell tumors of bone are typically low-grade locally invasive tumors. Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma and fibrosarcoma are aggressive malignant tumors, with a generally poor prognosis.