Treatment of sagittal craniosynostosis is usually surgical to correct head shape and prevent psychological effects on the parents and patient. In most cases, surgery involves the removal of the affected suture. The width of the craniectomy has to be at least 3 cm. The surgery is preferably done within the first 3–6 months of life. If surgery is performed after 12 months of age, more bone removal and remodeling is required. If surgical intervention is not performed early, suboptimal outcomes can result from the thickened skull and slowed brain growth. Control of bleeding is one of the essentials during the surgery. Preoperative prophylactic antibiotics are used. An adequate initial correction of the skull deformity protects the patient from the additional surgical risk by making a reoperation less likely. Surgery can be performed open or endoscopically. Endoscopic surgery has the advantage of reducing blood loss; however, a helmet is usually required for several months. The optimal duration of helmet use is around 7 to 9 months after surgery.

**Endoscopic surgery (strip craniectomy):**Patients are usually placed in a modified prone position with the cervical spine extended. The modified prone position allows access to the frontal and occipital areas. The procedure incorporates two incisions on the midline. The initial incision is done 2-3 cm behind the anterior fontanelle, and the second incision is done anterior to the lambda. The pericranium is preserved. A subgaleal plane from the anterior fontanelle to the lambda of about 3 cm is done bilaterally. A burr hole at the edge of each incision is made. The dura is separated and then cut with Mayo scissors in a triangular shape towards the anterior fontanelle. A second posterior osteotomy is made at the lambda similarly. An endoscope is inserted and advanced posteriorly toward the lambda. Once the dura has been freed from the overlying bone, bone-cutting or Mayo scissors are used to make lateral osteotomies and remove the fused suture. Barrel stave, wedge osteotomies are created with scissors after the dura is freed from the bone directly behind the coronal suture and then directly in front of the lambdoid sutures. No direct cauterization of the dura is performed to allow bone growth from the osteogenic cells.

**Open surgery (cranial vault remodeling):**Milder cases can be successfully treated with the removal of the fused sagittal suture. In more severe cases, a complete reshaping of the skull may be necessary. Patients with complete sagittal synostosis frequently have deformities in the anterior and posterior skull, which need to be addressed. Treatment is directed at the most salient deformity. After the bicoronal zigzag or sawtooth-shaped scalp flap is completed, exposure of the individual sutures is done. Each suture is removed separately. If the sutures are not removed, they will prevent the reshaping process and will maintain the deformity. Removal of the sagittal suture usually results in spontaneous widening of the entire skull as the restraining force is removed. The sagittal bone strip is reduced in length. Several barrel stave lateral osteotomies are made down to the level of the squamosal suture. The removed sutures are floated over the dura. If used, bone grafts are fixed with absorbable plate and screw fixation to fill the bone gaps. If there is significant frontal bossing, the frontal bone is removed and remolded. Radial barrel stave osteotomies are made, and the bone is flattened to correct the abnormal curvature. The frontal bone is then fixed with absorbable plates and screw fixation. If there is posterior bossing, a similar procedure in the occipital bone using radial barrel stave osteotomies is performed.

**Spring-assisted surgery:**Uses a strip craniectomy, and indwelling springs aid in the cranial vault expansion.

Studies have shown that the principal differences between the endoscopic approach and the open approach include shorter surgical time, shorter pediatric intensive care unit length of stay, less intraoperative blood loss, and fewer blood transfusions in the endoscopic approach.