The management of patients with aplastic anemia is an interprofessional team endeavor. The disorder can affect many organ systems and besides the disease itself, many complications can result occur following immunosuppressive therapy and hematopoietic cell transplantation. These patients need close monitoring for infections and bleeding. Because of the neutropenia, the diet has to be tailored made and should exclude dairy products, raw meat and most vegetables and fruits because of colonization by a number of microorganisms. All patients should avoid intense physical activity because they are at a risk for bleeding. Premenopausal women can develop heavy periods and should be advised to be on hormonal therapy. Finally, all patients should be educated on the need to maintain good hand and personal hygiene because they are at a very high risk for infections.

**Outcomes**

Over the past 3 decades, the prognosis for patients with aplastic anemia has markedly improved because of better treatment and supportive measures. Depending on the cause, with treatment 10-year survival of 65-75 have been reported with immunosuppressive and hematopoietic cell transplantation. In fact, for matched siblings, the outcomes of hematopoietic cell transplantations are excellent. With the use of immunosuppressive therapy, there is always a risk of relapse and late clonal disease. Some data show that in patients managed with immunosuppression, telomere length of leucocytes is associated with low survival, clonal evolution, and risk of relapse. The two major causes of death in aplastic anemia include bleeding and infection. Patients who undergo cell transplantation are at risk for graft versus host disease and graft failure.