**Arterial Access**

For radial access, it is better to perform a Brbeau or Allen test to assess collateral circulation's adequacy to the hand.

The ideal site of radial puncture is 2–3 cm above the wrist crease, where the artery is best palpable. The subsequent attempt should be at 1 cm proximal to the initial puncture site.

After injecting local analgesics at the puncture site, the artery is punctured using a 20 G cannula by the Seldinger technique. After the initial blob of blood is seen in the cannula's proximal hub, the needle is advanced to pierce the posterior wall, and the needle is removed. The cannula is withdrawn gradually while holding the straight tipped hydrophilic Terumo wire in the right hand. Once the arterial blood spurts out, the wire is introduced into the radial artery and the cannula removed. An appropriate-sized sheath with a hydrophilic coating is advanced over the wire, and the dilator is removed. Immediately after insertion of the sheath, blood pressures are monitored, and a combination of nitroglycerine (depending on systolic blood pressure) and 5000 IU heparin is injected through the sheath to prevent the radial spasm and minimize access site complications.

It is essential for femoral access to determine the anatomical landmarks to make successful access and minimize access site complications. The femoral artery lies midway between the anterosuperior crest of the iliac bone and the pubic bone, and it runs parallel to the medial aspect of the femoral head. It descends almost vertically down toward the femur's adductor tubercle and ends at the adductor magnus muscle opening in the femoral triangle.

After identifying the landmarks, a local analgesic is injected at the puncture site; then, the femoral artery is punctured with an 18 G cannula by the modified Seldinger method. A curved glide wire is introduced once blood spurts out of the cannula. After introducing a wire, the cannula is removed, and an appropriately sized sheath is advanced over the wire, and the dilator is removed along with the wire. Immediately after insertion, the sheath is flushed with heparinized saline, and blood pressures are monitored.

**Coronary Angiogram**

For diagnostic coronary angiograms, diagnostic catheters are advanced over the wire under fluoroscopy. Once the catheter reaches the ascending aorta, the wire is taken out, and the catheter is connected with the manifold, and pressures are recorded. Left main and right coronary arteries are engaged in plain anteroposterior (AP) and left anterior oblique (LAO) projections, and multiple images are taken from different projections for each artery.

For percutaneous coronary intervention, guide catheters are advanced over the wires. After engaging the appropriate coronary artery, coronary wires are advanced through the catheter, and the stenotic area is crossed. Once the wire is crossed, the lesion is either pre-dilated with a balloon or directly stented with an appropriately sized stent and then post-dilated with an appropriately sized balloon.

**Left Ventriculogram**

The left ventriculogram provides an assessment of left ventricular systolic function, degree of mitral regurgitation, and the presence of wall motion abnormality or a ventricular septal defect. A side hole (pigtail) catheter is advanced over a 0.035-in J-tipped wire to a position in the ascending aorta superior to the aortic valve. The tip is then pointed toward the orifice of the valve and the catheter rotated so that the pigtail loop resembles a figure of "6." In this position, the catheter is gently advanced across the valve orifice into the ventricle. After entering the ventricle, the pigtail's tip is positioned mid-cavity to avoid contact with the papillary muscles and mitral valve.

The image is taken in the right anterior oblique projection to assess the anterior wall, inferior wall, and left ventricular apex. And left anterior oblique (cranial 20) projection is used to assess septum and ventricular septal defects.

**Assessment of Aortic Valve**

With the advent of echocardiography and Doppler techniques, cardiac catheterization is no longer a commonly used diagnostic modality for assessing aortic stenosis. It is recommended when there is a discrepancy between the symptoms and echocardiographic findings. Pressure gradients across the aortic valve are recorded by using a double-lumen fluid-filled catheter.

Measurement of pressure gradients is followed by the measurement of cardiac output by Fick or a thermodilution method.

After the measurement of pressure gradient and cardiac output, and effective orifice area (EOA) is calculated by the Gorlin equation.

The aortic regurgitation severity can be assessed and graded by doing an aortic angiogram. It is reported to overestimate and does not assess aortic regurgitation accurately in the presence of left ventricular systolic dysfunction and other valvular lesions.

Angiographic grading of aortic regurgitation may include:

- Mild (1+) - A little contrast enters the left ventricle during diastole and clears with each systole.

- Moderate AR (2+) - Contrast enters the left ventricle with each diastole, but the left ventricle is less dense than the aorta.

- Moderately severe AR (3+) - The left ventricle has the same density as the ascending aorta.

- Severe AR (4+) - Dense complete, opacification of the left ventricle occurs on the first beat; it is more densely opacified than the ascending aorta.

**Assessment of Mitral Valve**

The gradient across the mitral valve is determined by measuring the left ventricular and left atrial pressures to assess the mitral stenosis. Although the pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP) is usually taken as a surrogate of the left atrial pressure, the most accurate method uses the left atrial and left ventricular pressure, requiring a transseptal catheterization approach.

The mitral regurgitation severity is based on the amount of contrast regurgitate from the left ventricle into the left atrium via an incompetent mitral valve and the opacification of the left atrium used as a guide.

- Grade 1+ (mild) - Regurgitation essentially clears with each beat and never opacifies the entire left atrium.

- Grade 2+ (moderate) - Regurgitation does not clear with one beat and opacifies the entire left atrium after several beats.

- Grade 3+ (moderately severe) - The left atrium is opacified completely and achieves equal opacification to the left ventricle.

- Grade 4+ (severe) - The entire left atrium is opacified within one beat and becomes denser with each beat, with associated refluxing into the pulmonary veins during systole.