# Continuing Education Activity

Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP), defined as "death in a patient with epilepsy that is not due to trauma, drowning, status epilepticus, or other known causes but for which there is often evidence of an associated seizure," represents a leading cause of death in patients with epilepsy. This activity reviews the definition, epidemiology, physiology, risk factors, and treatment of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in stratifying and mitigating the risks of SUDEP in patients with epilepsy.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the definition of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy.
- Identify the modifiable risk factors for sudden unexpected death in epilepsy.
- Summarize the findings leading to a diagnosis of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy.
- Review strategies employed by an interprofessional team to modify sudden unexpected death in epilepsy risk in high-risk patients.

# Introduction

Epilepsy, defined as the tendency for unprovoked seizures, is a common neurologic disease affecting up to 1 in 26 individuals.

Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is defined as “death in a patient with epilepsy that is not due to trauma, drowning, status epilepticus, or other known causes but for which there is often evidence of an associated seizure” and represents a leading cause of death in patients with epilepsy.

- Definite,

- Probable,

- Possible,

- Unlikely SUDEP

These categorizations have allowed for more precise investigation regarding the risks, mechanisms, and preventative strategies. Increasing awareness of SUDEP amongst health professionals and the general public can allow for improved patient counseling and potential modification of risk factors.

# Etiology

Several potential mechanisms have been studied concerning the pathogenesis of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy. Retrospective observational patient data, hospital data from patients with sudden unexpected death in epilepsy in hospital epilepsy monitoring units (EMU), importantly, the MORTEMUS trial (MORTality in Epilepsy Monitoring Unit Study), as well as eyewitness accounts, have identified respiratory abnormalities, cardiac arrhythmia, and attenuation of cerebral function as commonly observed peri-ictal phenomena.

Multiple studies have evaluated respiratory factors that may contribute to SUDEP. In most reported SUDEP cases, the patient was discovered in a prone position, likely during sleep, suggesting suffocation

Although cardiac arrhythmias have also been identified, signs of respiratory abnormalities (apnea, abnormal breathing patterns, hypoxia) are more commonly associated with brain dysfunction and were more commonly observed in witnessed and monitored cases of SUDEP. As the heart rhythm is generated independent of brain function, cardiac arrhythmia present in cases of SUDEP may suggest a secondary mechanism of the disease, such as channelopathy.

# Epidemiology

Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy has been reported in many populations, from young children to the elderly. The highest prevalence of SUDEP is in people between the ages of 20 and 45.

Large-scale studies from the USA and Europe have identified higher rates of SUDEP in populations with socioeconomic barriers to care, including lack of employment, lack of access to medications and other treatments, and increased distance from appropriate healthcare providers.

A study by Sveinsson et al. in Sweden showed that patients with generalized tonic clinic seizures (GTCS) had a tenfold increased risk of SUDEP, and the majority of patients lived alone. A twofold increased risk of SUDEP was seen in individuals with a previous diagnosis of substance abuse or alcohol dependence.

# Pathophysiology

Although the exact mechanisms of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy are unclear, multiple mechanisms have been proposed, including electroencephalographic suppression (arousal dysfunction) after a generalized seizure and secondary cardiac arrhythmias (bradycardia and asystole) postictal apnea.

Various hypotheses have been proposed which implicate postictal dysfunction of arousal centers in the brainstem, leading to secondary hypoventilation. The combination of hypercapnia and hypoxia accompanying postictal hypoventilation would potentially contribute to cardiac dysfunction and death.

# Histopathology

Although the proposed mechanism of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy involves cardiorespiratory failure secondary to a seizure, relatively little is known regarding specific histologic changes occurring in patients who died from SUDEP. Identifying specific histochemical markers and other post-mortem findings may help distinguish SUDEP from death from alternative causes. Physical examinations of patients with SUDEP have revealed oral trauma (secondary to biting of the lip or tongue) and pulmonary edema.

Gross examination of the brain may reveal findings consistent with hypoxia, including mild gyral flattening consistent with brain edema; however, a significant mass effect has not been identified in SUDEP cases.

# History and Physical

A number of historical factors have been associated with an increased or decreased incidence of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy. For example, the presence of generalized tonic-clonic seizures (GTCS), specifically greater than 3 in a year, are associated with 10 and 15-fold risk increases for SUDEP, respectively.

Few factors are strongly associated with a lowered odds ratio for SUDEP. Two such factors include the presence of another individual in the bedroom who could act as an observer, as well as the use of a monitor/listening device in the room of the child or adult at risk for SUDEP.

The American Academy of Neurology (AAN) 2017 Practice Guidelines on SUDEP studied over 20 other risk factors for SUDEP, including sex, age of seizure onset, a specific type, dose and duration of antiepileptic drug usage, type of epilepsy, comorbid medical and psychologic disorders, imaging and EEG characteristics. None of these were strongly associated with an increased or decreased risk for SUDEP.

Additional SUDEP risk factors under investigation include the time of day during which the seizure occurs, as well as physiologic changes that occur during different times of the day and body position (prone vs. supine).

# Evaluation

Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy, by definition, is a sudden and unexpected death in a person with epilepsy for which no apparent alternative cause has been found. Therefore, evaluation for alternative causes of death is mandatory in making a definitive SUDEP diagnosis.

The diagnosis of SUDEP is based mainly upon history and postmortem examination findings, such as the patient being found in a prone position. The multiple potential confounding factors contributing to a patient's death make the diagnosis difficult, and accurate identification of a cause of death has medico-legal and public health implications.

- Definite SUDEP: Sudden, unexpected death in a patient with epilepsy. The death may be witnessed or unwitnessed, and there does not need to be evidence of a recent seizure. Postmortem examination does not reveal an alternative cause of death besides epilepsy.

- Definite SUDEP plus comorbidity: This is the same as definite SUDEP with a comorbid medical condition that could contribute to death (but not a competing cause).

- Probable SUDEP: Unexpected death in a patient with epilepsy for whom an autopsy was not performed.

- Probable SUDEP plus comorbidity: Same as probable SUDEP with comorbidity that could contribute to death (such as a channelopathy).

- Possible SUDEP: Sudden death in a patient with epilepsy for whom there is a likely alternative cause of death (such as a patient found dead in the water, but no forensic confirmation of drowning made).

- Resuscitated SUDEP: A patient with epilepsy who is resuscitated and survives greater than 1 hour after cardiopulmonary arrest. No alternative cause of the arrest is discovered after evaluation.

- Not SUDEP: A clear alternative cause of death was identified.

- Unclassified: There is insufficient information on which to make a diagnosis.

Examination findings supporting a diagnosis of SUDEP include prone position, as well as signs of recent seizures, including oral trauma, ecchymoses, conjunctival hemorrhage, or lacerations to protruding areas of the head or limbs. These findings are non-specific but may support the diagnosis of a recent seizure.

# Treatment / Management

As sudden unexpected death in epilepsy is one of the most feared and catastrophic complications of epilepsy, options for mitigating or modifying the risk are important. Several interventions for decreasing the risk of SUDEP have been explored, including optimizing epilepsy control, detecting seizures through observation and devices, positioning to decrease the risk of airway compromise, and pharmacologic interventions to reduce the possibility of hypoventilation.

A 2012 Cochrane Review, however, has shown that while generalized tonic-clonic seizures (GTCS) may be accurately detected with such methods, there has not been enough data to suggest that they would prevent SUDEP. Similarly, the efficacy of interventions such as “safety pillows” or pharmacologic intervention with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors to reduce central hypoventilation is not supported by data.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for sudden unexpected death in epilepsy includes a number of alternative causes of death and typically includes entities that can be identified with an autopsy.

- Drowning

- Cardiomyopathy

- Cardiac arrhythmia

- Drug overdose

- Pulmonary disease

- Trauma

- Intracranial hemorrhage

# Prognosis

Although sudden unexpected death in epilepsy, by definition, is a fatal condition, the prognosis of patients with epilepsy, in general, can range from poor to excellent. The prognosis regarding developing SUDEP in a patient with epilepsy can be assessed using a variety of tools, including the SUDEP-7 inventory. This determines a patient's risk based on multiple factors, including:

- Three or more tonic-clonic seizures in the past year

- One or more tonic-clonic seizures in the past year

- One or more seizures of any type in the past year

- More than 50 seizures per month in the past year

- Duration of epilepsy greater than or equal to 30 years

- Treatment with three or greater anticonvulsants

- Intellectual disability with a measured IQ of less than 70

The presence of any of the above risk factors increases the risk score (with a maximum score of 12). However, the individual risk score has not been validated as a means to predict SUDEP. In general, the chance of dying from SUDEP is 1 in 1000, and patients with poorly controlled epilepsy have a greater risk.

# Complications

SUDEP is the most catastrophic complication of epilepsy. Other complications include injuries related to seizures, aspiration pneumonitis, drowning, status epilepticus, and anti-seizure medication toxicity. Patients with epilepsy are also at risk for neuropsychiatric disorders, including learning disabilities, and mood disorders, including depression. Furthermore, patients are at risk of decreased physical activity and social stigmatization.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Although sudden unexpected death in epilepsy is a feared complication of epilepsy, identification and modification of risk factors are vital for prevention. Discussion with families of patients at risk for SUDEP is likely to alter patient behavior to lower SUDEP risk. Although discussion may be a source of anxiety for patients and caregivers, studies support the notion that patients prefer information about SUDEP.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy is not always straightforward, and definitive determination requires collaboration between neurologists and pathologists. While the neurologist is primarily responsible for treating epilepsy, the pathologist is critical in ruling out alternative diagnoses. The accurate diagnosis of SUDEP is vital for medicolegal reasons and can provide closure to patients' families.

Collaboration between physicians and patient advocacy groups is also essential to ensure accurate and accessible information is available to the public. There is ample data to inform patients of their overall risk of SUDEP, as well as evidence to suggest that ongoing seizure management in patients with uncontrolled epilepsy can mitigate SUDEP risk.[Level 2] Furthermore, some evidence exists to support nocturnal monitoring for seizure detection and SUDEP prevention. [Level 4]

Lastly, several studies have identified modifiable risk factors in SUDEP.[Level 1] Collaborative efforts between the epilepsy treatment team (including neurologists, neurology nurses, and social workers) along with patient advocacy groups (such as the Danny Did Foundation, Epilepsy Foundation) can help to properly disseminate information amongst the public and create behavioral changes in patients to mitigate risk.