The type of pleurodesis (chemical versus mechanical), sclerosing agent (talc - talc slurry over talc poudrage versus other), chest tube size (large- vs. small-bore) and choice of analgesic agent (opiate versus nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory [NSAID]) varies considerably among centers and experts.  The preferred method is small-bore chest tubes since they are also well tolerated by patients and treatment with opioids or NSAID analgesia.

So other approaches that use thoracoscopic administration of talc by poudrage, talc slurry by large-bore chest tubes, or performance of thoracoscopic mechanical pleural abrasion followed by continued drainage with a large-bore chest tube appear to be effective options.

**Chemical Pleurodesis:**

Chemical pleurodesis refers to the obliteration of the pleural space by the induction of pleural inflammation and fibrosis using a sclerosant (most commonly talc). The sclerosant can be instilled via a small- or large-bore chest tube or indwelling catheter (talc slurry), or it can be administered at the time of thoracoscopy (video-assisted thoracoscopy or pleuroscopy) or thoracotomy (talc insufflation/poudrage). The preferred method usually is chemical pleurodesis via a small-bore chest tube rather than via thoracoscopy because the former is as effective, less invasive, and better tolerated.

- Talc is mostly hydrated magnesium silicate- it contains varying amounts of calcium, aluminum, iron, and lead. Talc is also cheap and readily available. The highest recommended dose is about 10 g. Talc causes an intense inflammatory response leading to the production of cytokines and adhesion molecules such as IL-8, VEGF, TGF beta.

- The tetracycline derivative doxycycline is an alternative sclerosant with reported success rates of about 80 percent.

- Other sclerosing agents, such as bleomycin, silver nitrate, and povidone-iodine, have also been used, however very rarely.

- Choosing among these options usually depends upon the medical circumstances, goals, and preferences of the patient, and institutional practice. Thoracoscopy may be preferred in those with an accompanying indication for thoracoscopy or those in whom the diagnosis of pleural malignancy is made during thoracoscopy. In contrast, administration via a chest tube may be preferred in patients with cardiopulmonary compromise who cannot tolerate thoracoscopy.

**Chest Tube Size and Drainage:**

- No convincing advantages derive from performing chemical pleurodesis via a standard large-bore (e.g., 24 French) as opposed to a small-bore chest tube (e.g., 12 French). Large-bore chest tubes cause more patient discomfort.

- Smaller chest tubes (12 French) were associated with a similar rate of pleurodesis failure at three months when compared with patients in whom large chest tubes were placed.

- However, pain scores were significantly lower among patients with smaller chest tubes.

**Analgesia:**

- The parietal pleural membrane contains a high percentage of pain receptors such that the induction of inflammation by the intrapleural instillation of a sclerosant is often intensely painful. Providers frequently prescribe NSAIDs and opiates for pain control.

- Animal studies had suggested that NSAIDs decrease the efficacy of pleurodesis. In a randomized study of patients with malignant pleural effusion, a similar rate of pleurodesis failure was noted in patients treated with opiates (10 to 20 mg oral morphine four times daily) when compared with patients treated with NSAIDs (ibuprofen 800 mg three times daily) (20 versus 23 percent).

- However, the choice of agent is typically individualized and dependent upon factors including level of pain, known sensitivity to opiates or NSAIDs, history of gastrointestinal bleeding, opiate drug abuse, liver or renal failure, and expected poor survival.

**The procedure of Chemical Pleurodesis**

Wear sterile gloves, clean the chest tube and area around it with povidone or any sterilizing agent. Place sterile dressing under chest drain and three-way stopper. Remove the cap to the three-way stopper and clean. Fill 1% lignocaine in a syringe and attach to the three-way tap and instill lignocaine in the pleural cavity. Turn off three-way stopper remove the syringe. In 50 ml syringe, mix the sclerosing agent like talc in 40 ml of normal saline and shake well. It is challenging to dissolve the talc, and once the slurry is made, so do not stop moving the syringe, or the talc will precipitate out. Instill the slurry into the pleural cavity via a chest tube and flush immediately with 10 ml normal saline. Close the three-way stopper and leave it closed for three hours.

**Post-Pleurodesis**

- Further analgesia may be needed, but NSAIDs should be avoided as these can inhibit the inflammatory response within the pleural cavity which is required for pleurodesis

- The drain should be opened after three hours

- Chest radiograph after 24 hours to ensure that there is no pneumothorax or fluid accumulation

- If chest radiograph is reasonable and there is no further fluid output then the chest tube can be removed

- Follow up is advised after four to six weeks with a chest radiograph

**Mechanical Pleurodesis**

It is mechanical abrasion (also termed dry abrasion) of the parietal pleura during thoracoscopy or thoracotomy or placement of a tunneled pleural catheter, which drains pleural fluid and may induce pleurodesis without instillation of a sclerosing agent.

**Pleurectomy:**

- Radical total or subtotal pleurectomy (resection of visceral and parietal pleura) and decortication (removal of fibrous pleural rind) can control malignant pleural effusions in patients who have failed chemical pleurodesis.

- Pleurectomy/decortication can be used as a primary therapeutic modality for patients with malignant effusions due to mesothelioma, although it does not improve survival and is associated with significant complications.

Patients must be good surgical candidates and have a reasonably long expected survival because total radical pleurectomy/decortication requires a thoracotomy and is a major surgical procedure associated with considerable morbidity and some mortality.