Internal medicine programs are incorporating simulation into their curriculum because it serves the dual functions of training and competency assessment. Residents learn with simulation, and it has been demonstrated to improve patient outcomes. Simulation can also be used to assess core competencies and requisite skills inherent to the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) and ABIM.

Thoughtful planning is critical to executing a successful simulation exercise. Examining learning theory, coordinating resources, and revision is necessary for a successful simulation. Planning meetings and “dry-runs” of the simulation are useful to set the objectives and expected outcomes, determine what equipment, materials, and learning space are required, and to work out initial kinks. Instructors should further consider how many learners will be present, the duration of the simulation and if repeated sessions would be beneficial. In general, smaller group size is preferable because it allows for repeated practice and an optimal balance between learner observation and active participation. “Chunking” parts of the skill, limiting teaching to only essential information needed, and increasing the difficulty only after achieving proficiency avoid cognitive overload. Outcomes from the simulation should be considered in the context of the learner, with novice learners advancing slowly while experienced individuals can be expected to make rapid progress in skill acquisition. Learners should be allowed to struggle and even fail. This promotes self-sufficiency, improved problem-solving, and troubleshooting skills. The duration of medical simulations is best limited to a set amount of time, approximately 75 to 90 minutes. Depending on the complexity of the skill, repeat practice may be beneficial; in some cases, only one practice session may achieve proficiency.

New curricular innovations can be trialed in simulation. One large academic program successfully employed senior medical residents to facilitate simulation training for their first years. Surveyed interns rated the program highly, and senior residents thought the program was educationally valuable for the first-year residents, improved their teaching skills, and translated to improved teaching on the wards. Programs like these are effective educational models and benefit both the resident teacher and learner. This may be a good model for internal medicine residency programs with many learners but few teaching faculty.