The bladder is an organ that provides a muscular reservoir for the safe storage of urine before its controlled release via the urethra. The bladder is a pelvic organ predominantly comprised of detrusor muscle that can distend to accommodate large volumes of urine. It can contract for extended periods of voiding.

Urine is created by a complex filtration process within numerous nephrons within the kidneys. Urine then travels from the upper urinary tract comprising the kidneys and ureters to the bladder and is expelled from the body through the urethra, both of which comprise the lower urinary tract.  An ileal conduit aims to divert urine produced from the upper urinary tracts to a newly formed reservoir created from the terminal ileum.  The ureters are disconnected from the bladder and implanted into the conduit. Ureters arise from the renal pelvis and run inferiorly through the abdomen on the surface of psoas major to cross the pelvic brim at the level of the sacroiliac joints.  They continue to cross the bifurcation of the common iliac arteries into the pelvis, where they travel along the pelvic sidewalls until they reach the level of the ischial spines where they turn anteromedially towards the bladder. Upon reaching the bladder, they insert obliquely, traveling through the detrusor muscle, which creates a one-way valve that closes on the contraction of the detrusor, thus preventing the reflux of urine.

The ureters gain their blood supply from a variety of sources depending on their location within the body. For example, the abdominal portion of the ureter receives its blood supply from the renal artery, gonadal artery, and direct branches from the abdominal aorta. The pelvic portion of the ureters gets their blood supply from the superior and inferior vesical arteries.

The ileum is the most distal section of the small bowel and joins the large bowel at the ileocaecal junction, where the ileum and caecum connect via the ileocaecal valve.  The ileum comprises four layers from the mucosa within the bowel lumen extending outwards through the submucosa, smooth muscle, and finally, the serosa.  The ileum receives its blood supply, nerve innervation, and lymphatic drainage via its mesentery. The ileum's main function is to absorb vitamin B12, bile salts, and other products of digestion. It also has both an exocrine function, secreting important enzymes required for the breakdown of carbohydrates and proteins, and an endocrine function, secreting hormones such as cholecystokinin into the blood.

During the formation of an ileal conduit, the aim is to change the inherent function of the chosen section of the ileum to provide somewhere to facilitate the passage of urine out of the body.  This can cause metabolic problems due to the ileum's highly developed absorptive function. Ammonia and chloride from the urine can be absorbed, causing hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis.