# Continuing Education Activity

To ensure the protection of the heart during cardiopulmonary bypass, administration and even distribution of cardioplegia solution to the myocardium is imperative. To accomplish this, a cardioplegia solution can be given anterograde, retrograde, or both. This activity focuses on the relevant anatomy, applications, and complications of retrograde cardioplegia for cardiac surgery.

**Objectives:**
- Describe how retrograde cardioplegia is administered
- Review the indications for retrograde cardioplegia
- Summarize the clinical relevance of retrograde cardioplegia.
- Describe the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients undergoing open heart surgery and receiving retrograde cardioplegia.

# Introduction

Heart disease represents a significant health problem and a leading cause of death worldwide. In 2016, nearly 300000 patients underwent cardiac surgery in the United States alone.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Originating from ostia in the aortic root, the coronary arteries supply freshly oxygenated blood to the myocardium. After utilization of this nutrient-rich blood, it is returned to the right side of the heart by three major routes.

# Indications

During the early era of surgery requiring cardiopulmonary bypass, cardioplegia was administered for myocardial protection only via the antegrade approach, through the aortic root or the coronary arteries directly. With experience, it became clear that coronary arterial stenoses limited the full spectrum of cardiologic protection desired.

# Contraindications

Before placement of a coronary sinus catheter to deliver retrograde cardioplegia it is important to review any imaging modalities available to ensure that there are no anatomical variants present. Specifically, a persistent left superior vena cava (PLSVC) can cause a significant problem with retrograde cardioplegia delivery.  In PLSVC the left brachiocephalic vein does not develop and therefore the left arm/head/neck venous drainage returns through the PLSVC and into the coronary sinus.  In patients with this anatomic variant, retrograde cardioplegia is not possible because the cardioplegia solution would not be traveling through just the coronary vessels and essentially given systemically.

# Equipment

A retrograde cardioplegia catheter is needed to provide retrograde cardioplegia.  These catheters come in a variety of forms.  They can be placed percutaneously (typically through a right internal jugular sheath) or via a right atriotomy by the surgeon. The catheter has an infusion port for the cardioplegia solution, a manometer to transduce pressures in the coronary sinus, and a balloon to occlude the coronary sinus to ensure that the cardioplegia runs retrograde.

# Complications

The major complication of retrograde cardioplegia delivery is the risk of coronary sinus rupture.  Despite this being a very rare event, it greatly increases the complexity of the original operation and extends a patients exposure to lengthened cardiopulmonary bypass times and increases their chances of poor cardiac protection during the procedure leading to potentially more adverse outcomes.

# Clinical Significance

With growing experience using retrograde cardioplegia, numerous studies have shown that this technique (anterograde with retrograde cardioplegia) provides a superior return of myocardial function in the distribution of the occluded coronary vessels than with antegrade cardioplegia alone.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

In the operating room, retrograde cardioplegia monitoring is often via pressure monitoring.  This pressure is displayed with the vital signs and often visible on a screen to all personnel in the operating room.  All providers, nurses, techs, perfusionists,  etc. should pay attention to this number at any time retrograde cardioplegia is in use. Since coronary sinus rupture being a catastrophic event, it is imperative to avoid such an outcome.  It is essential to discuss the utilization of retrograde cardioplegia preoperatively so that the necessary equipment is available to include a catheter, cardioplegia solution, and monitoring equipment.