A watery eye is a complex symptom to tackle, as the following etiologies may be implicated:

**Conditions Affecting the Eyelids and Peri-ocular Region**

- Skin conditions (such as rosacea, eczema, actinic keratoses, ichthyosis, zoster, scleroderma, lichen planus, or discoid lupus) cause tearing due to stimulating reflex tearing, impairing the tear distribution system or a combination of both.

- Facial akinesia: In this condition, blink dynamics are altered, causing reflex tearing due to corneal exposure and negatively affecting the tear-pumping mechanism.

- Brain disorders (such as Parkinson's disease and progressive supranuclear palsy): These conditions alter the blink neuronal circuit, which causes decreased blink rate and amplitude, resulting in pumping problems and reflex tearing triggered by desiccation of the ocular surface.

- Facial nerve palsy: The facial nerve innervates the orbicularis muscle, so conditions causing facial nerve palsy may result in abnormal lower eyelid position (paralytic ectropion), decreased upper eyelid excursion (causing ocular surface exposure and reflex tearing), and reduced orbicularis contraction affecting the pumping mechanism for tears egress.

- Aberrant seventh nerve regeneration can result in tearing while eating or drinking ("crocodile tears") due to abnormal connections with the lacrimal ducts instead of the salivary glands.

- Space-occupying lesions or drugs (such as cholinergic agents) stimulating parasympathetic lacrimal fibers result in an increased production of tears.

- Lacrimal gland tumors (such as dacryops) can cause primary tear hypersecretion.

- Dacryoadenitis. Inflammation of the lacrimal gland as a result of infection (such as Epstein-Barr, Staphylococcus aureus, or tuberculosis), autoimmune (such as Sjogren disease, Thyroid eye disease, or Immunoglobulin G4-related disease), or idiopathic process (such as non-specific orbital inflammation, or sarcoidosis), can manifest with tearing.

- Botulinum toxin, when applied in the peri-ocular area, can decrease orbicularis muscle function.

- Herniation of orbital fat: This causes a watery eye due to displacing the tear meniscus and altering tear flow along the eyelid margin.

- Lumps in or around the eyelids may irritate the ocular surface causing reflex tearing.

- Eyelid burns and scars may cause lid malposition and alteration of blink dynamics.

- Floppy eyelid syndrome causes tearing by a combination of reflex hypersecretion, deficient distribution of the tear film, and ineffective lacrimal pump.

- Eyelid retraction in exophthalmos (Graves ophthalmopathy): An incomplete blink due to the widened eyelid fissure disrupts proper corneal lubrication. Nocturnal lagophthalmos (incomplete eyelid closure) with an abnormal Bell's phenomenon due to fibrotic inferior recti causes exposure keratopathy and reflex tearing. In addition, associated conjunctival chemosis disrupts tear flow along the lower eyelid.

- Eyelid retraction due to surgery, trauma, or skin conditions may trigger reflex tearing.

- Eyelid imbrication syndrome: The lax upper lid overrides the lower lid during closure. As a result, the disrupted distribution of the tear film on the ocular surface is combined with reflex tearing due to rubbing the tarsal conjunctiva on the surface. In addition, the punctum is in an abnormal position, which impedes tears outflow.

- Eyelid length disparity can result in abnormal eyelid closure and subsequent reflex tearing due to corneal exposure.

- Lower lid laxity causes pump problems due to poor apposition of the eyelids against the eye. It affects the eyelid's position, which creates an abnormal gradient for the tear to flow toward the punctum with each blink.

- Entropion from any cause: In entropion, the eyelashes are directed inward, rubbing the cornea or conjunctiva and causing reflex tearing. In addition, the punctum is in an unfavorable position to receive tears. This condition results from one or a combination of the following causes: horizontal eyelid laxity, posterior lamella scar, dehiscence of lower eyelid retractors, and overriding preseptal orbicularis.

- Ectropion from any cause: The ectropic eyelid displaces the tear lake from the eyelid margin and stops tears from reaching the punctum. One or a combination of the following factors may cause this problem: lower eyelid retractor disinsertion, horizontal eyelid laxity, medial canthal tendon laxity, vertical tightness of the skin, orbicularis paresis, and puncta malposition. Clinical examination will help to determine the presence of each factor.

- Eyelid notches and tumors alter the tear distribution over the eye surface.

- Keratinization of the eyelid margin: The contact between the keratinized margin and the anterior surface causes irritation and reflex tear hypersecretion: This is also called lid-wiper epitheliopathy.

- Malpositioned eyelashes (trichiasis, distichiasis) rub the cornea or conjunctiva and cause reflex tearing.

- Blepharitis/meibomian gland dysfunction: Chronic blepharitis may cause posterior lamellar shortening resulting in lashes rubbing the eye surface and causing reflex tearing. In meibomian gland dysfunction, a decreased tear film lipid layer increases tear evaporation and may result in compensatory tear hypersecretion.

**Conditions Affecting the Ocular Surface**

- A foreign body in the cornea or conjunctiva irritates the ocular surface and causes reflex tearing.

- Conjunctival inflammation causes reflex tearing by stimulating the neurosensory receptors.

- Conjunctivochalasis. The redundant bulbar conjunctiva displaces the normal tear meniscus and impedes the flow toward the punctum.

- Conjunctival symblepharon can cause eyelid malposition, resulting in lagophthalmos and poor blinking.

- Pinguecula and pterygia alter tear distribution over the eye surface.

- Dry eyes have a component of inflammation and tear instability that stimulate corneal and conjunctival neurosensory receptors resulting in reflex tearing.

- Corneal pathology (i.e., keratitis and ulcer) stimulates the afferent corneal nerves of the reflex tearing arc.

- Ocular inflammation (such as iritis) causes reflex tearing.

- Megalocaruncle: An enlarged caruncle may cover the punctum, which prevents tear drainage.

**Conditions Affecting the Lacrimal Drainage System**

- Conjunctivitis: Various conditions (such as allergy or infection) can trigger the inflammatory response that can lead to obstruction of the punctum and canaliculus.

- Rhinitis or sinusitis. The inflammatory process may lead to acute or chronic nasolacrimal duct blockage.

- Punctal apposition syndrome. Apposition of the upper punctum to the lower punctum prevents tear drainage through the puncta.

- Malpositioned punctum: The punctum should be apposed to the eyeball correctly. Even subtle eversion may cause tearing, especially in young patients, due to preventing tears from entering the canaliculi.

- Punctal stenosis: Using drugs (such as glaucoma drops), trauma, or inflammatory diseases may cause punctal stenosis, which makes it difficult to drain tears.

- Absence of puncta: This condition may be congenital or secondary to previous inflammatory disease.

- Accessory punctum: Although most patients with this condition are asymptomatic, some may complain of tearing.

- Dacryocystitis: Dacryocystitis consists of inflammation of the lacrimal sac, typically due to nasolacrimal obstruction. In acute cases, it manifests with erythema, swelling, tenderness at the medial canthus, and purulent discharge through the punctum when the sac is manually expressed.

- Mucocele: This is a lacrimal sac full of mucus due to obstruction above or below the lacrimal sac.

- Absent or fibrotic sac. The sac's absence or fibrosis may result from prior surgery.

- Canaliculitis. The inflammatory process affecting the canaliculus may impede tear drainage, which causes epiphora.

- Sinus and nasal surgery: Surgeries performed in nearby structures can lead to inflammation of the lacrimal drainage system.

- Neoplasms: Neoplasms originate from any part of the lacrimal drainage system and can obstruct it due to primary growth, or secondary, or metastatic spread.

- Trauma: Scars from trauma may cause stenosis or obstruction of the lacrimal drainage system. Trauma can be iatrogenic (after orbital, nasal, paranasal, or craniofacial surgical procedures) or non-iatrogenic.

- Intraluminal foreign bodies (such as dacryoliths) may obstruct lacrimal drainage.

- Radiotherapy on the head and neck: Radiation triggers inflammation which can result in cicatricial nasolacrimal duct obstruction.

- Systemic chemotherapy: Some systemic chemotherapeutic agents have been linked to tearing, such as 5-fluorouracil, docetaxel, and, less commonly, radioactive iodine, S-1, capecitabine, topical mitomycin C, and imatinib, which are responsible for punctum, canalicular, and nasolacrimal duct obstruction.

- Bone marrow transplantation: This procedure can cause graft versus host disease, which causes inflammation, resulting in obstruction of the lacrimal drainage system.

- Eye drops (such as glaucoma drops) may irritate ocular and peri-ocular structures, which results in punctal stenosis or eversion. Chronic irritation may also increase any subtle lubrication, pump, or drainage problem,

- Endogenous (autoimmune) inflammation (such as sarcoidosis, Wegener granulomatosis, Kawasaki disease, cicatricial pemphigoid, Stevens-Johnson, sinus histiocytosis, or scleroderma) - these conditions may lead to obstruction of the lacrimal drainage system.

**Functional epiphora**is a common term used in the literature to report epiphora in the presence of an anatomic patent lacrimal drainage system. However, there is no clear consensus about its diagnostic criteria and management.

Functional epiphora is a multifactorial disease whose management depends upon the suspected underlying cause or combination of causes. The suggested etiologies proposed by some authors include stenosis in the drainage system, lacrimal pump failure, edema at the nasolacrimal duct opening, tear hypersecretion, and nasal inflammation.

In addition, the different tests used in various studies to diagnose this condition were often non-comparable due to the absence of standardization. Consequently, different techniques have been used to tackle the problem with variable results. Examples of these techniques are dacryocystorhinostomy, silicone intubation, insertion of Lester-Jones tube, injection of botulinum toxin A into the lacrimal gland, and lid tightening.