Alcohol counseling has shown benefits to patients as it decreases total hospital admissions for acute pancreatitis. One randomized controlled trial showed that repeated counseling during gastroenterology clinic visits by an interprofessional team of physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, and nurses decreases the risk of hospitalization for recurrent pancreatitis attacks. The team should report back to the team leader concerns or lack of patient compliance. Alcohol intervention strategies employed by clinicians and nurses have also significantly reduced alcohol consumption in men. Smoking cessation and dietary modifications are also recommendations, as these are risk factors when combined with alcohol. Reducing both alcohol and tobacco consumption was shown to reduce the risk of recurrent attacks, the progression to chronic pancreatitis, and the development of secondary pancreatic malignancy. [Level I]

Patients with alcohol-induced pancreatitis usually need attention from many specialists, including pain specialists, dietitians, mental health nurses, and pharmacists. At each refill for medications, the pharmacist should educate the patient about the harms of alcohol and the importance of abstaining from this beverage. If the patient is non-compliant, the pharmacist should inform the clinician of concerns

For patients with uncomplicated chronic pancreatitis, medical management remains the first line of therapy. Behavior modification counseling for the cessation of alcohol consumption and smoking is also in order; therefore, certified therapists play a large role in patient outcomes. [Level 2b]

Since extraneous factors such as diet may play a synergistic role in leading to initial and recurrent episodes of pancreatitis, consultation with a nutritionist would benefit such patients. Patients should adhere to a low-fat diet and eat frequent small meals to decrease the stress on the pancreas. Endoscopic, surgical, or radiology-guided interventions may be required for cases of pancreatic pain refractory to medical therapy and conservative measures or used to treat the complications associated with acute pancreatitis such as pancreatic necrosis