# Continuing Education Activity

Cryptococcus is an invasive fungus, transmitted through the inhalation of spores and causes cryptococcosis, an infection commonly associated with immunosuppressive individuals. Patients present with fever, headache, malaise, photophobia and neck stiffness as cryptococcal meningitis sets in. This activity describes the evaluation and management of cryptococcosis and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the cryptococcal species in the etiology of cryptococcosis.
- Describe the typical patient history and physical exam findings in cryptococcosis.
- Outline the use of cerebrospinal fluid analysis in the evaluation of cryptococcosis.
- Review the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to provide prophylactic treatment for cryptococcal infection to improve outcomes in immunocompromised patients by preventing cryptococcosis.

# Introduction

Cryptococcus is an invasive fungus that causes cryptococcosis an infection commonly associated with immunosuppressive individuals while being rare in healthy individuals.  The two species of Cryptococcus that are commonly associated with infections in humans are Cryptococcus neoformans and Cryptococcus gatti. The organism is widely prevalent in certain regions of the world. However, the most common forms of exposure include a history of exposure to soil, bird droppings.

# Etiology

Cryptococcal species are fungal pathogens which are encapsulated yeasts morphologically. Immune suppression is the major underlying mechanism that is involved in the causation of cryptococcal disease. Diseases like AIDS, diabetes, chronic liver disease, chronic renal disease, prolonged use of steroids and patients who undergo organ transplantation are commonly associated with the development of cryptococcal disease.

# Epidemiology

Globally approximately 1 million cases of cryptococcosis are reported each year resulting in 625,000 deaths approximately.

# Pathophysiology

Cryptococcus fungi are commonly found in soil contaminated by bird droppings and in decaying wood and in tree hollows. The capsule of the fungus comprises polysaccharides glucuronoxylomannan and glucuronoxylomannogalactan which are the major factors contributing to the virulence of pathogen.

# Histopathology

They are facultative intracellular organisms. Cryptococcal fungi exist in asexual forms (yeast) and sexual forms (telomorphs). They produce white mucoid colonies when grown on a wide variety of agars. The two-predominant species of Cryptococcus are differentiated by growth features on canavanine-glycine-bromo methyl blue agar. Histological identification can be performed by methenamine silver stain for yeast forms, mucicarmine stain for yeast and capsule forms and Fontana-Masson stain for the melanin in the yeast.

# History and Physical

Cryptococcus neoformans and Cryptococcus gatti both spread through inhalation and cause a similar spectrum of illness. Despite lung being the common site where the pathogen enters the body meningoencephalitis is the most common clinical manifestation of the infection. Clinical features of cryptococcal meningitis typically manifest with in 1-2 weeks and include fever, malaise, headache, neck stiffness, photophobia, nausea, and vomiting. The disease may rarely progress to coma and death. Symptoms such as a cough, dyspnea, skin rash have been reported to occur rarely in the literature.

# Evaluation

Patients presenting with symptoms of central nervous system are evaluated with radiographic imaging of the brain to rule out the presence of elevated cerebrospinal fluid pressure. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis, culture, staining and immunodiagnostic tests of cerebrospinal fluid are the primary diagnostic tests that are performed to diagnose meningitis caused by Cryptococcus. Analysis of the fluid usually shows low white blood cell count, low glucose, and elevated protein but could also be normal in approximately 25-30% of the cases.

Disseminated Cryptococcus infection is defined by a positive blood culture or a positive culture from at least two different sites. Disseminated infection is commonly associated with HIV infection or several other immunocompromised states.

# Treatment / Management

Pharmacological treatment for cryptococcal infections depends on the site of infection and the severity of symptoms.  Per the 2010 IDSA Guidelines, non-immunosuppressive patients suspected of having a pulmonary cryptococcal infection with mild-to-moderate symptoms can be treated with fluconazole at a dose of 400mg daily for 6-12 months. This is also the treatment recommendation for non-meningeal, non-pulmonary cryptococcosis in patients where CNS disease was ruled out. In non-immunocompromised patients, a lumbar puncture should be considered ruling out asymptomatic CNS involvement, but the guidelines state that an LP can be avoided in asymptomatic, immunocompetent patients with no CNS symptoms.

Management of CNS cryptococcosis and in immune-compromised hosts involves treatment targeting the fungal pathogen, reducing the intracranial pressure, and improvising the immune status of the patient. Antifungal therapy that targets Cryptococcus comprises induction, consolidation, and maintenance phase. Amphotericin B and flucytosine, for a minimum duration of 2 weeks are recommended antifungal therapies that are used for induction phase and fluconazole for a duration of eight weeks is the recommended drug for consolidation phase of the therapy.

Monitoring intracranial pressure and keeping it under check plays an important role in reducing the mortality associated with cryptococcal meningitis.

There has been a steep decline in the mortality rates associated with cryptococcal infections because of advancements in the anti-retroviral therapy. The prognostic predictors of the disease associated with poor outcomes include altered mental status, cerebrospinal fluid antigen titer greater than 1:1024 and cerebrospinal fluid white blood cell count less than 20/microL.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Acanthamoeba infection

- Basal cell carcinoma

- Histoplasmosis

- Lipomas

- Molluscum contagiosum

- Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PJP)

- Syphilis

- Toxoplasmosis

- Tuberculosis

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

**Prevention:**

Prophylactic treatment for cryptococcal infection is recommended in HIV-positive patients with a CD4 count of fewer than 100 cells/microL. Fluconazole and Itraconazole are the recommended drugs for prophylaxis against cryptococcosis.

**Current research:**

Efficacy of sertraline an antidepressant as an adjunct therapy with fluconazole is being studied in preventing cryptococcal infections in asymptomatic patients who test positive for cryptococcal antigen. A long-term prospective study is being performed to have a better understanding of the immunogenetic defects that might play a role in the pathogenesis of cryptococcal infections.