The patient may present with visual loss, dimness of vision, or visual field defect. To reach a proper diagnosis and the cause of CB, proper history should be taken regarding any risk factors like birth history where applicable, addiction, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, palpitation, and fever. Complete physical examination, including neurological and ophthalmological examination, is required. Few important things in the general physical examination must be noted, which include pulse (to rule out arrhythmia), blood pressure, and temperature. A complete neurological examination should be done. An important thing to remember is that pupillary light reflex remains intact in cortical blindness, so do the extraocular movements. There is no relative afferent pupil defect (RAPD) in cortical blindness. The cardiovascular system is another important system to be examined to rule out a cardioembolic stroke.

Ophthalmic examination or referral is needed in such cases. A visual field defect may be noted on confrontation perimetry. The anterior segment and posterior segment findings are usually unremarkable.

The clinical features vary according to the location of the lesion.

Associated damage to the temporal lobe causes acute disturbance in memory, particularly if it affects the dominant lobe. The defect usually reverses because of the bilateral representation of memory. Occlusion of the posterior cerebral artery can produce visual hallucinations of brightly colored scenes and objects (peduncular hallucinosis) due to damage to the thalami brainstem.

Optokinetic nystagmus (OKN) is elicited by a rotating drum with alternating stripes. The eye smoothly follows a line (pursuit), and then it suddenly returns to fix (saccade) on the next line. Pursuit is controlled by the ipsilateral parietal lobe, and the contralateral frontal lobe is involved in the control of the saccade. Thus in parietal lobe disease, ipsilateral pursuit (and OKN during drum rotating to the side of parietal lobe lesion) is affected/asymmetric, but contralateral pursuit (and OKN) is normal.

Cogan dictum states that for homonymous hemianopia with:

- Asymmetric OKN indicates parietal lobe lesion (likely a tumor)

- Symmetric OKN suggests occipital lobe lesion (commonly due to stroke- infarction)

Incomplete cortical blindness is much more common than a complete one. Unilateral V1 damage causes a homonymous visual field defect. The homonymous visual field defect is characterized by a similar visual field defect on the same side (either the left side or right side) in both the eye (e.g., the right eye has a left visual field defect, and the left eye also has a left visual field defect, making it difficult for the patient to see objects on the left side without moving the eye).

The loss of vision varies from a small scotoma to quadrantanopia to full hemianopsia, depending on the extent of the damage to V1. In the majority of cases, the central vision, including the foveal representation, remains intact. This is secondary to the blood supply of the occipital pole. The fovea receives its blood supply from the middle cerebral artery along with the branches of the posterior cerebral artery. It is generally represented in the occipital pole. This dual blood supply protects V1 making stroke causing the complete destruction of V1 is extremely rare. Rehabilitation is often dependent on the preservation of central vision.**blindsight**,' where an individual can perceive coarse flickering movement in the blind field. This is due to preserved unconscious visual processing abilities in the individuals because of the heterogeneity of damage to V1. Other features of visual cortex lesion include Anton syndrome, Riddoch phenomenon, and formed visual hallucinations.

Anton syndrome: It is also known as visual anosognosia when a person cannot see but always denies the blindness, even with clear evidence of blindness. These individuals often try to walk through the closed door or wall, and in the process of denial, they take the help of confabulation. It occurs due to lesions in the V1.

Riddoch phenomenon: This is also known as statokinetic dissociation. Here patients can only perceive moving objects in the blind field, not the static ones.

Benson syndrome: Also known as posterior cortical atrophy, is a form of atypical Alzheimer disease.

Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES): PRES presents with acute onset headache, seizures, altered consciousness, and visual disturbance.

Balint syndrome:  Austro-Hungarian neurologist and psychiatrist R Balint first described it.