A**hydatidiform mole**is a type of gestational trophoblastic disease resulting from abnormal fertilization of an oocyte. This occurs when a sperm fertilizes an egg lacking the female pronucleus, leading to trophoblastic proliferation without any proliferation of the embryoblast or embryo proper. The cells of the trophoblast continue to function normally by secreting human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), which will trigger a positive pregnancy test. A hydatidiform mole is often attributed to maternal gene defects and is more common in women 36 to 44 years of age with a history of gestational viability issues. The clinical presentation is often very vague, including possible uterine enlargement more than expected for the gestational age, vaginal spotting, severe nausea, and vomiting. Hydatidiform moles are detected via ultrasound examination and they present with normal placental development, a mass of tissue with no apparent fetal features, and the absence of heart sounds.

**Ectopic pregnancies**are defined as pregnancies in which implantation occurs outside of the uterus.

- **Ampullary region of the fallopian tube:**Typically, fertilization occurs in the most dilated part of the uterine tube, the ampulla. Once fertilization takes, the zygote will generally travel to the uterine cavity and implant in the wall of the uterus near the fundus. In some cases, the zygote does not travel to the uterine cavity but stays at the site of fertilization, attaches to the wall of the ampulla, and starts growing within it. Attachment to the fallopian tube is the most common abnormal implantation site, approximating almost 70% to 80% of ectopic implantation sites.

- **Tubal implantation**: In this condition, the zygote implants in another part of the uterine tube other than the ampulla. The non-ampullary segment of the uterine tube is the second most common abnormal implantation site, approximating 12% of ectopic pregnancies.

- **Within the abdominal cavity**: In certain rare instances, the zygote travels in the opposite direction within the fallopian tube and ultimately exits the fallopian tube to enter the abdominal cavity. The conceptus may implant at any of a number of sites in the abdomen, including in the pouch of Douglas, on the spleen or liver, in the greater omentum, or retroperitoneally. Approximately 1.3% of ectopic pregnancies implant at a site within the abdominal cavity.

- **Interstitial implantation**: Approximately 4% of ectopic pregnancies implant in the narrowest part of the uterine tube, the interstitial segment within the muscular wall of the uterus. These ectopic pregnancies typically present with excessive maternal hemorrhage. Thus, mortality and morbidity are 7% higher in interstitial implantation than in all other types of ectopic pregnancies.

- **Cervical pregnancy (Internal os)**: In almost 0.2% of ectopic pregnancies, the zygote travels too far and actually implants at the internal os of the cervix. Embryonic growth induces pain as the cervix has minimal capacity to dilate.

- **Ovarian implantation**(0.2%): In ovarian ectopic pregnancies, the zygote travels in the opposite direction from the uterus and implants in the ovary. This occurs in almost 0.2% of ectopic pregnancy cases.

Generally, ectopic pregnancies are identified very early but can be life-threatening if detected too late. Treatment depends on the site of implantation and often requires administration of methotrexate to end the pregnancy or surgical intervention to remove the conceptus.