The flexor retinaculum begins when the longitudinally-oriented fibers of the antebrachial fascial fibers of the forearm abruptly thicken and change direction to a transverse orientation. The flexor retinaculum thickens proximally to distally, ranging in thickness from 1.5 mm to 6.0 mm.

The median nerve is subject to compression as it passes through the carpal tunnel. The median nerve has a number of branches in the wrist and hand. The first and most important branch - the recurrent branch of the median nerve - arises after the median nerve has passed through the carpal tunnel. The recurrent branch of the median nerve innervates the muscles of the thenar eminence. These are the abductor pollicis brevis, the flexor pollicis brevis, and the opponens pollicis. It is worth remembering that the motions of the thumb are different from that of the rest of the body due to 90-degree rotation at the carpometacarpal joint. Thus, one flexes the arm at the shoulder in the sagittal plane, and one flexes the forearm at the elbow in the sagittal plane. The same is true of the fingers. However, one extends the thumb in the coronal plane and flexes it in the same plane. One abducts the thumb in the sagittal plane, and one adducts it in the sagittal plane. Unless one understands the distinction of the actions at the wrist, the names make no sense.

The anterior surface of the flexor retinaculum gives rise to some muscles of the thenar and hypothenar eminences. The tendon of the palmaris longus adheres to it, although it should be noted that this muscle is absent in approximately 14 percent of the population.

Its principal function is to serve as a pulley for the carpal flexor muscles and stabilize the carpal system's morphology.