There is no other section to understand more critically than the etiology of nonunion of bone because this is a major determinant of treatment. If one knows the cause of nonunion, one can give proper treatment. As discussed above, nonunion is a multifactorial pathologic process. Patient, biology, fracture type, surgeon, and clinical factors all merit consideration in treatment. The recommendation is to optimize each of these factors going forward with treatment. The major patient factor in nonunion is the blood supply. When the bone has a decrease in blood supply, it can not heal. This can occur with poor nutrition and smoking from poor living habits. Biologic causes of poor blood flow and poor bone healing include diabetes, peripheral vascular disease, vitamin D deficiency, renal insufficiency, and medications (steroids, NSAIDs, opiates).  Treatment may contribute to inadequate fracture fixation or stabilization. Lastly, fracture patterns contributing to nonunion include bone loss with fracture gaps greater than 3 mm, lack of cortical continuity, highly comminuted, and butterfly fragments. Clinical factors at the time of presentation can severely limit blood supply, including high energy fractures with soft tissue compromise and open fractures.

The study by Steen et al. has shown the most important risk factors involved in the nonunion of bone are smoking and diabetes.

**Classification of Nonunion of Bone Into Four Categories**

**Hypertrophic Nonunion**

- Shown by radiographically abundant callus formation

- Importantly, there is no bridging bone, and the ends are not united

- This finding implies there is adequate blood supply and biology (with the formation of callus), but inadequate stability

**Atrophic Nonunion**

- Evidenced by radiographically absent callus, which indicates poor biology (from one or several of causes above) and a lack of blood supply (see above).

- Inadequate fixation

**Oligotrophic**

- Is a balance and combination of atrophic and hypertrophic in that there is incomplete callus formation

- Inadequate reduction

**Septic Nonunion**

- Reduces blood flow from organisms consuming the nutrition to healthy bone

- Decreases the new bone formation