**Clinical Assessment**

The diagnosis of PFT is mainly based on physical findings and clinical suspicion. The detection of the four Kanavel signs on physical assessment has high sensitivity (91.4 to 97.1%) to diagnose PFT.

The painful passive extension is the earliest sign of PFT, while the flexor sheath tenderness is the last sign to be detected. Fever is present in only 17% of the affected patients. The affected hand should be examined to identify any penetrating wound. The presence of erythema, swelling, and tenderness over the thenar eminence palm raise the suspicion of the proximal spread of infection to the radial bursa. Infected ulnar bursa presents with pain, swelling, and erythema over the hypothenar eminence.

**Diagnostic Imaging**

- The hand anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique view X-rays should be obtained to rule out any retained foreign body. The presence of signs of osteomyelitis in the obtained X-rays suggests chronic infection.

- Hand ultrasonography (US) is a cheap and non-invasive method to confirm the diagnosis of PFT. The US can visualize the flexor tendon and detect the presence of fluid collection within the flexor sheath. However, the US is operator dependant and cannot differentiate pus from blood.

- Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is rarely required to diagnose PFT. MRI can identify the extent of the infection but cannot differentiate PFT from other inflammatory conditions.

**Laboratory Tests**

- Inflammatory markers, including white cell count (WCC), C-reactive protein (CRP) level, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) level, are usually raised in the PFT setting. However, these tests are non-specific to diagnose PFT but can be helpful to monitor infection and response to the given treatment.

- Pus and necrotic tissue cultures are very beneficial to identify the causative organism and direct the antibiotic therapy according to the sensitivity.

- Blood culture should be obtained if there are signs of sepsis or hematogenous spread of the infection to isolate the causative organism.