The diagnosis of alveolar proteinosis may be made based on the bronchoalveolar fluid findings but is frequently made based on tissue samples including open or transbronchial biopsy.

Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid is characteristic when it has a milky appearance. The presence of alveolar macrophages engorged with Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS) positive material, and acellular eosinophilic bodies in a background of eosinophilic granules are key features. The bronchoalveolar lavage formula characteristically presents with a decrease in the number of alveolar macrophages and a slight increase in T lymphocytes (with a tendency toward a high CD4/CD8 ratio). Elevated levels of several tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and carbohydrate antigens sialyl Lewis (CA19-9) have been found in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid form in some patients with alveolar proteinosis. It is possible that these markers may reflect disease activity without a real consensus. Serum or BAL KL-6 has proven useful for the diagnosis of alveolar proteinosis and the estimation of its activity.

Gross features consist of a yellow-tan discolorated parenchyma. The architecture of the lung appears preserved, and the process appears to fill the alveolar spaces. The abnormality primarily affects the right and appears to fill the alveolar spaces.

In tissue specimens, the histologic hallmark consists of an intra-alveolar accumulation of a granular eosinophilic and amorphous material with diffuse and rarely patchy lesions. Within this material, rounded empty spaces, cholesterol clefts, and small dense globular eosinophilic material are distinctive features of the diagnosis. Interstitial fibrosis or inflammation is commonly absent. If observed, the association to an infection or a neoplasm has to be suspected by the pathologist. In case of an association to silicosis, the polarization microscopy may show birefringent needle-like particles. In long-standing cases, observable tissue changes may include interstitial fibrosis.

With electron microscopy, the characteristic features consist of multilamellar structures of trilaminar membranes separated by amorphous material. Electron-dense bodies and membranous vesicles are often found at the center of the multilamellar structures. Even though these features can be helpful, electron microscopy is not routinely done.