**Classic/adult Refsum Disease**

A. Diet:

- Dietary restriction to eliminate phytol-containing foods, such as meat or fats from ruminating animals (lamb, beef, and certain fish), baked goods containing animal fats, and dairy products such as butter and cheese.

- The therapeutic goal is to reduce daily dietary intake of phytanic acid to less than 10 mg and avoiding rapid weight loss or fasting, conditions which stimulate lipolysis since such conditions cause the rapid mobilization of phytanic acid from hepatic lipid and body adipose stores leading to severe clinical relapse.

- A high-calorie diet is essential to avoid the metabolism of stored lipids and phytate, and its dissemination into the plasma.

- Postoperative administration of parenteral nutrition with solutions deficient of phytanic acid such as soybean and egg yolk based formulas.

- As pregnancy induces a catabolic state, levels of phytanic acid must be closely monitored. Pregnant patients will at the highest risk during the third trimester since there is enhanced catabolism leading to increased phytanic acid levels, which may worsen retinitis pigmentosa and reduce visual fields. Transplacental circulation of phytanic acid is seen in animal models; however, no teratogenic effects such as as-defective organogenesis is seen. A homogenous or heterogeneous child born to an affected mother is at risk, which can be reduced by a high calorie-phytate restricted diet.

- Avoid ibuprofen, amiodarone, and other medications that might increase thyroxine levels. Amiodarone can induce hyperthyroidism producing a catabolic state and increasing phytanic acid levels. Ibuprofen can affect the metabolism of phytanic acid as both have it in common.

- Fish based oils are a better source of calories.

B. Plasmapheresis: Therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE)

- Another effective way of reducing phytanic acid concentration is by plasmapheresis, which is used when rapid reduction is required and can be performed serially over weeks as well. TPE (also known as lipapheresis) efficiently filters-out phytanic acid associated with lipoproteins but does not efficiently eradicate phytanic acid in adipose and neural tissue. This approach halts the progression of the disease but does not entirely reverse neurologic abnormalities.

- The decision to initiate TPE should be a clinical one. Usually, patients with rapidly worsening symptoms, especially the ones after a period of rapid lipolysis, should be considered for TPE.

- Plasma phytanic acid concentrations can be reduced by 50% to 70%, typically to about 100 µmol/L.

**Infantile Refsum Disease**

A. Diet:

- Treatment consists of strict dietary restriction of phytanic acid sources and occasional TPE in critical circumstances.

- Since phytanic acid is also seen in components of plasma triglycerides in the VLDL and LDL fractions hence, TPE helps just as much as in CRD.

B. Symptomatic treatment:

- Urea maintains hydration and helps in the removal of excess keratin seen in hyperkeratosis.

- Ammonium lactate: Due to lactic acid, an alpha-hydroxy acid, which has a keratolytic action, thus facilitating the release of comedones. It comes in 12% and 5% strengths.

- For skin manifestations, administer various keratolytic and emollients. Mineral oil provides relief of minor skin irritations and promotes the removal of excess keratin.