The ffERG is proportional to the total area of the functioning retina and has important clinical applications in diagnosing retinal disease since electrophysiological abnormalities often occur early and frequently precede structural findings on retinal imaging.

**Cone Dystrophy**

Cone dystrophies are inherited diseases mainly of the cones. The ffERG characteristically shows a dark-adapted response that has a normal amplitude but prolonged in implicit time. In contrast, the light-adapted flash and 30 Hz flicker responses are reduced or absent. A classic example of cone dystrophy is achromatopsia.

**Cone-rod Dystrophy**

Cone-rod dystrophy, also known as progressive cone dystrophy, presents with cone dysfunction in early disease stages followed by rod dysfunction in later disease stages. Therefore, early disease will show reduced or absent light-adapted flash, and 30 Hz flicker responses, whereas later disease will also be accompanied by a diminished or absent dark-adapted response.

**Rod Dystrophy**

Rod dystrophies are congenital diseases primarily of the rods. ERG testing shows a depressed or an absent dark-adapted response. Examples of rod dystrophy include subtypes of congenital stationary night blindness, namely fundus albipunctatus and Oguchi disease.

**Vitamin A Deficiency**

Vitamin A is an important component of rhodopsin, a photosensitive pigment important for rod function. Patients with deficient levels of vitamin A, whether from malnutrition, malabsorption, or impaired liver metabolism, experience night blindness secondary to rod dysfunction, and the ffERG shows a depressed dark-adapted response.

**Rod-cone Dystrophy**

Rod-cone dystrophy presents with rod dysfunction in early disease stages followed by cone dysfunction in later disease stages. The dark-adapted ERG (rod response) is diminished or absent, while the a- and b-waves are delayed and reduced or absent in dark-adapted response to a bright flash (mixed rod and cone response) given poor phototransduction.

**Retinal Vascular Disease**

Central retinal artery or vein occlusion: Vascular occlusions resulting in ischemic damage of the inner retina. The ffERG shows b-wave depression in the dark-adapted ffERG and prolongation of the light-adapted 30 Hz flicker implicit time.

Ophthalmic artery occlusion: Vascular occlusion resulting in ischemic damage of both the inner and outer retina. The ffERG often shows absent a- and b-waves with no recordable response.

**Inner Retinal Diseases**

Optic neuropathies such as glaucoma, Leber' Hereditary Optic Neuropathy, and papilledema have been shown to decrease the PhNR, with normal a- and b-waves.

**Non-organic Vision Loss**

A normal ffERG is important when trying to distinguish organic from non-organic vision loss.

**Ocular Disease with Normal ffERG**

Despite its diagnostic value, the ffERG is not without limitations. The ffERG provides a general measure of retinal function and is useful in detecting widespread retinal dysfunction. However, the ffERG is typically normal for focal retinal diseases, including age-related macular degeneration and Stargardt's disease. Therefore, the ffERG may not reveal small retinal lesions, and further testing with alternative, focal ERG modalities may be warranted.