Gliomas tend to grow and increase in size. If the decision is only to observe and leave the tumor unresected, the growth can lead to brain herniation and, ultimately, death. Even a smaller increase in the size of the tumor in a closed space like the cranium can cause a massive shift in intracranial pressure and downstream effects.

Several complications are associated with RT, and the severity depends on the duration of the treatment.

**Radiation-induced Effects**

Despite the advances in cranial radiotherapy delivery, the risk of acute and delayed side effects remains. The acute side effects include fatigue, headache, nausea, vomiting, dermatitis of the scalp, and hair loss. These symptoms can start within the first few days of treatment however are rarely severe enough to warrant a treatment break. Typically, these symptoms resolve in the weeks following treatment. Typically, the late toxicities are of more concern, especially in patients that are younger when they receive radiation. These late toxicities can appear anywhere from 3 months to several years after treatment. Potential late toxicities include cognitive decline, radiation necrosis, optic neuropathy, spinal cord myelopathy, hearing loss, cataracts, pituitary insufficiency, and radiation-induced secondary tumors. The ability to mitigate these toxicities varies.

Radiation necrosis (RN) is one of the more feared complications of radiation treatment. While it can occur as soon as three months after radiation treatment, it most commonly occurs 1-2 years post-treatment.

It should be noted that there is no evidence of benefit for doses exceeding 60Gy in low-grade glioma; thus, the risk is still quite small. Twice daily radiotherapy or fraction sizes greater than 2Gy/fraction can increase this risk. It may be difficult to distinguish radiation necrosis from tumor progression or pseudoprogression. MRI of the brain with contrast may be the most useful imaging modality. Although imaging features alone are unreliable, they include rim enhancement, soap bubble appearance on T1 post-contrast imaging, and high signal on T2. These features alone only have a 25% positive predictive value, and additional studies will likely be warranted. MR spectroscopy of brain metabolites has been used to measure the choline-creatinine, or choline-n-acetyl aspartate ratios have a sensitivity and specificity of 94.1% and 100%, respectively when the ratio >1.71.

MR perfusion is another method that examines the relative cerebral blood flow (rCBV) based on dynamic susceptibility-weighted MRI, but published data are inconsistent, and the values used vary by acquisition method.

The first line of therapy for symptomatic radiation necrosis is corticosteroids with a long taper which results in a substantial reduction of inflammation but at the cost of Cushing-like features. In treatment-refractory cases, VEGF inhibitor bevacizumab may be used, and small studies have shown a 97% radiographic response to treatment with a 79% reduction in symptoms.

Spinal cord myelopathy can range from pain, paresthesia, and decreased motor function to outright paralysis. The risk ranges from 1 to 10% with doses of conventionally fractionated RT ranging from 54-60Gy. Brainstem necrosis risk is <5% for patients given doses of 54Gy in 2Gy/fraction but can risk significantly in patients with doses exceeding 64Gy.

Hearing loss may occur in patients, especially if the tumor is near the cochlea, as could be expected with tumors in the temporal lobe. Mean cochlear doses of <45Gy have less than a 30% risk of sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL). Patient factors such as age, post-RT otitis media, and CSF shunts may increase the risk of SNHL.

Radiation-induced optic neuropathy (RION) is characterized by acute monocular vision loss ranging from 3 months to 8 years post-treatment.

Radiation-induced hypopituitarism (RIH) is a common long-term complication of head and neck radiotherapy. Symptoms vary based on the hormone deficiency that is produced. Commonly, pituitary insufficiency follows a specific temporal pattern with Growth hormone (GH) and Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) deficiencies appearing first, followed later by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH) deficiency. Hyperprolactinemia may also develop due to the loss of inhibitory control from the anterior pituitary hormones. Interestingly, central diabetes insipidus is not regularly encountered. It usually presents in the first five years after treatment, but new deficiencies can appear over the patient’s lifetime.

The lens of the eye is relatively radiosensitive with a conventional established threshold dose of 2Gy in a single fraction and 5 to 7Gy in a fractionated course. Recently this has become disputed as an excess risk compared to non-radiated groups persisted with doses lower than 2Gy. The latency period is inversely proportional to the lens dose, with an average of 2 to 3 years.

Radiation-induced tumors can emerge as a result of cranial radiotherapy. It is mainly a concern in the pediatric population, but as cancer therapies improve, a growing cohort of patients may experience radiation-induced tumors. There was a recent large-scale retrospective cohort study of patients that received cranial radiotherapy for pituitary or craniopharyngiomas with over 20 years of follow-up. The patient received a median of 45 to 50.4Gy, similar to what would be prescribed to patients with low-grade gliomas.

**Chemotherapy Induced Effects**

There are various side effects experienced during chemotherapy treatment, as well. These include hair loss, constipation, flu-like symptoms, and CNS toxicity like weakness, loss of balance, headache, unsteadiness, drowsiness, or dizziness. Vincristine is associated with neuropathy. Bone marrow suppression with low blood counts is seen with lomustine.