**Tarsal Tunnel Syndrome**

Tarsal tunnel syndrome is neuropathy resulting from an entrapment that occurs along the posteromedial ankle secondary to the compression of the tibial nerve (or one of its branches). Patients present with pain and paresthesias of the heel, sole, and toes. On physical exam, patients may have a positive Tinel sign which refers to paresthesias resulting from the percussion of the involved nerve. The tarsal tunnel is the space located along the posterior medial ankle between the flexor retinaculum (roof) and the tibia, talus, and calcaneus (floor). The normal structures within the tarsal tunnel include the posterior tibialis, flexor digitorum longus, and flexor hallicus longus muscles, posterior tibial artery and vein, and the tibial nerve. The majority of cases are idiopathic. However other etiologies include compression secondary to ganglion cysts, varicosities, tenosynovitis, tumors, accessory muscles or fracture deformities. A trial of conservative treatment with anti-inflammatory medications, physical therapy, or image-guided therapeutic injections. In patients who fail conservative treatment surgical intervention can be considered depending on the etiology of the syndrome (i.e., excision of the mass, if present, or cutting the flexor retinaculum to alleviate compression of the tibial nerve).

**Os Trigonum Syndrome**

Os trigonum syndrome is also referred to as posterior ankle impingement. Classically, the syndrome is described in ballet dancers but can occur in any patient performing repetitive plantarflexion (also common in soccer players). Usually, it is a unilateral process, but there are reports of bilateral cases. Patients present with posterior ankle pain exacerbated by plantar flexion. Predisposing factors include elongated stieda process, os trigonum, prior fracture of the posterior process of the talus, or posterior tibia. Patients normally respond to conservative treatment (rest, ice, anti-inflammatory medications, or injections).

**Lisfranc Injury**

Lisfranc injuries are fracture-dislocation injuries of the tarsal-metatarsal articulations (Lisfranc joint), the junction of the midfoot and forefoot. Classically, the injury refers to the disruption of the Lisfranc ligament, which is comprised of three bands traversing the space between the medial cuneiform and base of the second metatarsal bone. This a common injury that may result from multiple various traumatic etiologies which if undiagnosed, can lead to chronic disability. Mechanisms include crush injury. However, the classic mechanism is indirect loading on a plantarflexed foot. Subtypes of injury include homolateral, divergent, and isolated. Homolateral refers to lateral displacement of the first through fifth metatarsal bones or lateral displacement of the second through fifth metatarsal bones with the normal alignment of the first. Divergent refers to lateral displacement of the 2nd through fifth metatarsal bones with medial displacement of the 1st. Dislocation of 1 or 2 metatarsal bones dorsally in isolation is referred to as the isolated type. On radiographs look for malalignment of the tarsometatarsal joints on the AP and oblique views of the foot. On the lateral view, dorsal foot soft tissue swelling with or without a step-off at the tarsometatarsal joint in a patient with trauma is highly suspicious. The fractures associated with Lisfranc injury are difficult to appreciate on radiographs due to overlap of osseous structures. CT will often show much more extensive injury than appreciated on initial radiographs. On the AP view of the foot, an avulsion fracture of the Lisfranc ligament may present as the "fleck" sign, a small fracture fragment interposed between the base of the 1st and 2nd metatarsal bones.

**Stress Injury**

Stress injuries of the foot and ankle are common in athletes and military recruits. A stress injury is the result of abnormal (increased) stress on normal bone, a chronic repetitive overuse injury. The pattern and presentation are very similar to insufficiency fractures, which occur in patients with abnormal (weakened) bone exposed to normal stresses. These etiologies include osteoporosis, metabolic bone disease (hyperparathyroidism, hypothyroidism, vitamin deficiency), steroid use, collagen vascular disease, and alcoholism, to name a few. Common locations include the posterior calcaneal tuberosity, cuboid adjacent to the tarsometatarsal joint, anterior talus, navicular, the base of the first through third metatarsal bones, and second through fourth metatarsal necks. These injuries can be difficult to appreciate on radiographs. Radiographic findings include periostitis, linear sclerosis, or less commonly a lucent fracture line. In patients with serious clinical concern for stress injury, further imaging may be necessary with MRI or nuclear medicine bone scan.