Although the definitions of success vary, multiple long-term follow-up studies report TCP as having an effective IOP reduction in 34 to 94% of cases with a mean follow-up of 2 to 5 years. Hypotony is reported in up to 10% of cases, phthisical development in up to 5% of cases, and vision loss is reported in up to 28% of cases.

Rotchford et al. described refractory and non-refractory glaucoma with good vision treated with TCP. They reported an effective IOP reduction in 79.6%, with no cases of hypotony and median visual acuity loss of 2 lines or more in 30.6%, which was similar to the proportion of vision loss associated following trabeculectomy surgery and was predominantly attributed to glaucomatous progression rather than macular edema.

More standardized protocols of lower energy delivery display lower rates of serious complications compared to initial studies. Notably, this treatment can assist in reducing the medical burden of anti-ocular hypertensive treatment on patients, particularly in the cessation of oral acetazolamide.

Various studies reviewing MP-TCP have reported a success rate between 52 to 74% with a final IOP less than 21 mmHg or with a 20% reduction in IOP.  Hypotony has been reported in 5 to 18% of cases, with vision loss of 2 lines or more occurring in 9-19% of cases. Of note, the higher rates of documented complications were associated with longer treatment duration.  MP-TCP has been documented to lower IOP and reduce treatment medication burden effectively but with lower rates of significant complications compared to TCP.

Multiple comparative trials reviewing ECP in cases of adult refractory glaucoma describe a success rate between 74 to 90% with a final IOP of 21 mmHg or less. Hyptony has been reported in up to 8% of cases, phthisis bulbi in 3% of cases, and vision loss in up to 6% cases.

ECP appears to be an emerging treatment modality, with initial studies documenting its success in refractory glaucoma.

Cyclodiode laser is an emerging and growing treatment in managing glaucoma not solely relegated to refractory cases. The expansion of diode laser delivery devices has further led to the development and refinement of cyclodiode laser as a primary procedure in the developing world and even in eyes with less advanced glaucoma and good visual potential.