Parents will understandably be concerned about the outcome of surgery, the immediate postoperative care, the cosmetic outcome, and the future needs and care of children with congenital ptosis. It is vital to guide the parents and the children when they are older. We have found in our practice that as soon as children are in their early teens (and sometimes earlier), they may have questions about the cosmetic outcome of any ptosis repair. This has become more so in this age of the "selfie" and social media presence. We are therefore sharing the information we give to our patients and their parents.

**Will the ptosis surgery need to be repeated?**

As the child ages, it may be necessary to further advance the levator muscle if there is adequate muscle function. In the case of temporary slings performed early to improve the vision, more permanent fascia lata slings will need to be performed when the child’s legs are big enough to donate a necessary strip of fascia lata via a small incision just above the knee.

**What care will I need to give my child after ptosis surgery?**

Whether a direct levator advancement procedure is performed or a frontalis sling is performed, it is normal for the child to sleep with the eyelids somewhat open: this may be dramatic initially, but the degree of opening reduces over time. However, the eyelids may stay open to some degree for a long time or forever. This is normal, and every child will experience this. After surgery, the following instructions should be followed:

- The incision sites will need the application of erythromycin eye ointment three times a day for about a week: this will be prescribed.

- It will be important to keep the incision sites clean: clean hands!

- Any oral antibiotics prescribed (especially important when frontalis slings are performed) must be administered.

- For the first few weeks, applying a small amount of eye lubricating ointment (Refresh pm ointment or any other eye lubricating ointment will do) whenever the child sleeps or takes a nap is important. After a few weeks, most children do not need the continued application of ointment unless they are unwell or have a cold. We will guide you.

- Most children see so much better once the eyelid/eyelids have been lifted that you will notice them being much more physically active! This all to the good!

- If the pediatric ophthalmology team prescribed patching, please continue with the patching until you see the team again: they will reduce or stop the patching once appropriate.

- Most children can return to school within three or four days. There is very little pain after this surgery: children’s Tylenol is usually sufficient.

- We will monitor the eyelid height once every six to nine months; the pediatric ophthalmology team will assess visual development and examine you for any strabismus or need for patching.

**What sort of scars will there be?**

When a direct incision is made to lift the eyelid, the incision is hidden where a natural crease would form. All children heal with a pink scar initially, but this is almost invisible after a few months. After frontalis slings, the incisions become almost invisible within a few months as we make very small incisions. It is normal to feel small bumps under the skin after frontalis slings as the sling material is attached to the frontalis muscle: however, these are rarely visible.

**What sort of results can we expect?**

We will show you many photographs of other children with the type of ptosis of your child. It is important to understand that the photographs show the results after some months or years and that there is healing involved after surgery.

**If my child has one eyelid with a very poor muscle function, should we destroy the opposite good muscle and have bilateral frontalis slings?**

This is a very important question. Crowell Beard MD proposed that a normal muscle can be destroyed surgically so that the child then has bilateral droopy upper eyelids (ptosis). When bilateral frontalis slings are inserted, the lid heights will be more even, although small differences always remain. The biggest advantage is, therefore, the degree of symmetry. There is and should always be a need for serious contemplation when a normally functioning structure is destroyed in medicine and life. One is then creating a problem on the good side that did not exist before. There may be problems with the newly created droopy upper eyelid subsequently after bilateral frontalis surgery. This would, understandably, lead to regret on the part of the parents and the surgeon. Therefore, many surgeons tried to insert frontalis slings bilaterally without destroying the normal muscle. This was therefore called the "chicken Beard" procedure. It is not entirely known if this gives significantly better cosmetic results when compared to unilateral frontalis slings, and, therefore, most surgeons have abandoned this procedure. Some surgeons do not like destroying normal muscles (or any other normal anatomical structures) to create a problem where none existed before. Therefore, they insert unilateral slings with the proviso that there will be a small difference in the eyelid height between the two sides. When the child is older and can make informed consent, the surgeon can present the options to them then: it is perfectly possible to perform the Beard procedure with the destruction of the frontalis muscle and insertion of bilateral frontalis slings at any age.