**Fibular Head Muscle Energy**

- The patient can be placed supine or seated

- Flex the knee to 90 degrees

- Pull the fibular head anterolaterally for a posterior fibular head or posteromedially for an anterior fibular head while dorsiflexing the foot to its restrictive barrier.

- Ask the patient to plantarflex the foot against your equal resistance for 3 to 5 seconds.

- Allow complete relaxation and slowly move the ankle to a new dorsiflexion barrier as you continue pulling the fibular head anterolaterally for a posterior fibular head or posteromedially for an anterior fibular head.

- Repeat this isometric contraction and stretch 3 to 5 times or until the fibular head mobility returns

- Retest fibular head motion

**Anterior Fibular Head Thrust (HVLA)**

- The patient should be placed in a supine position

- Place your thenar eminence on the anterior fibular head and grasp the distal aspect of the tibia with your other hand.

- Push the fibular head posteromedially by leaning into it with a rigid arm as you internally rotate the tibia to engage the restrictive barrier.

- Ask the patient to take a deep breath and, during exhalation, apply a short and quick posteromedial thrust into the fibular head.

- Retest fibular motion

**Posterior Fibular Head Thrust (HVLA)**

- The patient should be placed in a supine position

- Place your first metacarpal phalangeal joint posteromedial to the posterior fibular head and grasp the distal aspect of the tibia with your other hand.

- Externally rotate the tibia to the restrictive barrier and flex the knee until your hand is wedged between the posterior fibular head and thigh.

- Ask the patient to take a deep breath and during exhalation, apply a quick short thrust by flexing the knee.

- Retest fibular head motion