The screening workup of an infant with hypotonia should include:

- A thorough history and clinical examination documenting power at each of the joints and reflexes should be done by a neurologist.

- A creatine kinase level (CK), aldolase, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST), nerve conduction studies and EMG should be considered. However, creatine kinase levels may vary from being completely normal to significantly elevated based on phenotype. An elevated CK, aldolase level, usually signifies a dystrophic process.

- Muscle biopsy, which was earlier done routinely as a part of the evaluation for these disorders is no longer used in all cases with the advent of genomic sequencing. Immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy may help to identify specific diseases based on staining patterns.

- Echocardiography and EKG should be performed to look for cardiomyopathy and abnormal conduction, which can commonly occur in these disorders if the abnormal protein is also expressed in cardiac myocytes.

- Imaging of the brain with MRI should be done when possible, as many of these disorders are associated with specific abnormalities in different areas of the brain on imaging sequences.

- Specific diseases like Fukuyama dystrophy and muscle eye brain disease are associated with eye abnormalities like myopia, strabismus, cataract, and glaucoma in a significant subset of patients.

- Confirmatory testing for most of these disorders requires testing for a specific protein or genetic change or mutation which is based on the underlying disorder and should preferably be conducted in a laboratory specialized to perform genetic testing.