The two basic steps involved in edema formation are alterations in the capillary hemodynamics that favors fluid leakage from the vascular compartment into the interstitium and renal retention of sodium and water by the kidneys via the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system as a compensatory mechanism. Any systemic or local venous obstruction or expansion in plasma volume leads to an increase in the hydrostatic pressure that predisposes to edema. As normal body plasma is only about 3 liters, the diffusion of large amounts of water and electrolytes into the interstitial compartment compels the renal retention of sodium and water to maintain intravascular volume and hemodynamic stability.

Effective intravascular volume depletion in congestive heart failure and liver cirrhosis initiates a neurohumoral cascade to maintain adequate circulating volume. This cascade works via renal vasoconstriction, reducing glomerular filtration, increasing sodium reabsorption proximally mediated by angiotensin II and norepinephrine, and increasing sodium and water reabsorption in the collecting tubules mediated by aldosterone and antidiuretic hormone. Additionally, endothelium-derived factors like nitric oxide and prostaglandins further limit sodium and water excretion, promoting edema.

The major contributor to maintaining intravascular oncotic pressure is impermeant proteins, mainly albumin. Albumin is essential for maintaining plasma oncotic pressure, and a level below 2 g/dl of plasma often results in edema. Hypoproteinemia can occur in many conditions, including nephrotic syndrome, severe nutritional deficiency, and severe liver disease in which hepatic synthetic function is impaired. Some medications, like calcium channel blockers, especially dihydropyridines, are more notorious, causing peripheral edema due to more selective arteriolar vasodilatation. Other uncommon conditions are myxedema, lymphedema, and idiopathic edema.

Myxedema occurs in hypothyroidism, causing more often localized edema of the eyelids, face, and hands. There is an accumulation of mucopolysaccharides and proteins in the interstitium due to an increase in capillary permeability followed by sodium and water, but the exact pathophysiology of myxedema is not fully understood. Lymphedema is caused by impaired lymphatic transport leading to the accumulation of lymphatic fluid in the interstitium, mostly in the extremities.

Idiopathic edema is poorly understood that primarily affects premenopausal women. The key features are periodic episodes of edema in the hands and legs and abdominal bloating that are not clearly related to the menstrual cycle. By definition, it is a diagnosis of exclusion. It is most common in the third and fourth decades of life. Psychologic and emotional disturbances can exacerbate this condition.