Screening for fetal anomalies is performed in the first and second trimester by a nuchal translucency screening, maternal serum cell-free DNA, or serum quad screen testing. When the screening test results are abnormal or suspicious for aneuploidy, diagnostic karyotyping is offered, in addition to a detailed anatomic ultrasound, evaluation to look for structural anomalies, which can be performed in the late first trimester. Findings of cystic hygroma, short femur, coarctation of the aorta, hypoplastic left heart, renal anomalies, cardiac defects, abdominal wall hernias are highly suspicious for aneuploidy, especially when combined and should prompt further diagnostic testing.

Diagnostic testing is outside of the scope of this topic but includes chorionic villus sampling performed between 10 to 13 weeks gestation and amniocentesis, which is optimally performed between 15 to 20 weeks of gestation. Depending on the state law, if a genetic abnormality incompatible with life is diagnosed before the third trimester, patients may have more reproductive options. Diagnosing major fetal abnormalities that will require immediate postnatal surgical intervention decreases morbidity and mortality when a multidisciplinary approach is taken to facilitate proper care and resources.

Abnormalities in screening tests are not always associated with aneuploidy but can be markers of adverse pregnancy outcomes. For example, enlarged NT is associated with miscarriage, intrauterine death, or congenital heart defects. The risk of adverse outcomes is proportional to the degree of NT enlargement. An increased thickness above 3.0 mm (or above 99th percentile for crown-rump length) is directly proportional to an increased risk for aneuploidy (Down syndrome and Turner syndrome) and structural abnormalities unrelated related to aneuploidy. Congenital heart disease is the most commonly associated malformation in fetuses with euploid karyotypes. Genetic counseling, invasive genetic testing, detailed fetal anatomy scan, and fetal echocardiogram are recommended, and they should be cautiously monitored throughout the antenatal period.