In the late sixties the progress of research, the use of zirconium as biomaterials was refined. The first use of zirconium oxide for medical purposes was made in 1969 in orthopedic as a new material for hip head replacement instead of titanium or alumina prostheses.

In dentistry, with the development of computer-aided design (CAD)/computeraided manufacturing (CAM) systems, high strength zirconia can be used for the fabrication of crowns, veneers, fixed partial dentures, posts and cores, implants, and implant abutments. In addition, different auxiliary components such as cutting burs and surgical drills, extra-coronal attachments, and orthodontic brackets manufactured using zirconia are available commercially.

Zirconia powder contains small amounts of radioactive impurities from the uranium-radium (226Ra) and thorium (228Th) actinide series. However, zirconia powders with low radioactivity (less than 100 Gyh-1) can be achieved by purifying following appropriate standards.

Heating zirconia at a low temperature (200 to 300 C) can result in the progressive spontaneous transformation of the metastable tetragonal phase into the monoclinic phase in the presence of water, a phenomenon known as low-temperature degradation (LTD). It is a slow transformation that starts in isolated grains on the zirconia surface, leading to an increase in volume. This stresses the adjacent grains and a microcrack appears, allowing water to penetrate and the process to ultimately progress and resulting in a remarkable decrease in strength. This strength degradation is different for various zirconia ceramics, and the variation is related to factors such as stabilizer concentration and distribution, grain size, and the presence of residual stresses. A recent study showed that ceria-stabilized zirconia (12Ce-TZP) was resistant to simulated hydrothermal aging; its flexural strength remained unaffected at a low level of 500 MPa Y-TZP and suffered from low-temperature aging degradation (LTAD) caused by phase transformation.

Aging decreases the physical properties of the material and increases the risk of failure in zirconia restorations. The presence of mechanical stresses and moisture accelerates zirconia aging. Aging leads to changes in the behavior of the material, weakening it, and subsequently, degrading the material, with microcracks decreasing strength properties.

The grain size influences the mechanical behavior of zirconia, with higher temperatures and longer sintering times producing larger grain sizes. The critical crystal size is approximately 1 micrometer, and zirconia with larger crystals are more prone to spontaneous PTT due to lower stability, whereas a smaller grain size generates favorable properties. It is reported that with grain sizes below 0.2 micrometers, PTT does not increase, and fracture toughness decreases.

The discrepancy of the crown margin adjoined to the pontic was increased by the sintering shrinkage of the bulky pontic in the case of 3-unit and 4-unit frameworks. Therefore, we must beware of the distortion of zirconia-based FDPs with long span units when using partially-sintered blocks or green blocks.

Zirconia does not contain silica and thus hydrofluoric acid etching cannot be used. Therefore, other methods of surface treatments are used for zirconia such as grinding/polishing, surface coating, sandblasting, primer treatment, and laser treatment. Sandblasting with aluminum oxide particles results in irregularities and shallow pits in the surface of zirconia, which improves the micromechanical retention. In addition, coating with a 10-methacryloyloxydecyl dihydrogen phosphate (MDP)-containing silane primer after sandblasting can enhance chemical and micro-mechanical bond strength.

The selective infiltration etching (SIE) technique also can be used to increase the bond strength of zirconia and resin cement. A glass infiltration agent is heated and is allowed to penetrate the void space between the zirconia grains to re-arrange them. Then the glass infiltration agent is removed using hydrofluoric acid, resulting in the development of inter-grain nano-porosity and generating a relatively rough and reactive surface that exhibits enhanced micro-mechanical bond strength with resin cement.

One of the technical complications reported in the YTZ-P reconstructions is chipping or delamination of the veneering porcelain. The core-veneer interface is a critical factor in the success of layered restorations. The contributing factors for the fracture may include weakness of the veneer material or the core/veneer bond, stresses and distortion due to the veneering process, unsupported veneering porcelain and configuration of the core and veneer, residual stresses arising from a coefficient of thermal expansion mismatch, and rapid cooling rates after heat treatment.

The use of high-speed polishing rotary instruments is contraindicated for clinical use because of nickel contamination, phase changes in zirconia, and the resultant surface roughness.