Certain drugs like nitrates are absolutely contraindicated in patients taking PDE5 inhibitors, and therefore ED patients should be advised about not administering the two drugs concomitantly. Co-administration of PDE5 inhibitors and nitrates is contraindicated, but thorough hemodynamic monitoring is necessary if the need arises.  Some medications like alpha-blockers are needed to relieve concomitant symptoms of BPH in patients with ED and, therefore, require caution with frequent monitoring of blood pressure levels and prompt arrangement of an appointment with a physician if hypotensive symptoms present, which may necessitate discontinuation of PDE5 inhibitor. PDE5 inhibitors should only be administered in stable patients taking alpha-blockers. Proper titration and increased dosing in a stepwise fashion if co-administered with alpha-blockers.

Patients should consult a physician if they encounter a sustained erection persisting for more than 4 hours, as prolonged blood engorgement of blood in the penis can compromise the arterial supply and lead to penile necrosis.

If patients experience an inadequate response to treatment with a PDE5 inhibitor, consider direct injections of PGE1, papaverine, phentolamine, or a combination in patients with intact vasculature. If still no response, get duplex Doppler ultrasonography, penile cavernosography, and pudendal arteriography to recognize the cause of refractory ED.

All the PDE5 inhibitors undergo extensive tubular reabsorption in the kidney and get extensively excreted as metabolites in the stool. Nonetheless, in patients with severe renal insufficiency (CrCl less than 30 ml/min), where the presence of concomitant ED is fairly common, with some studies reporting prevalence rates as high as 80% in patients undergoing dialysis,

PDE5 inhibitors undergo rapid metabolism in the liver, most notably through the CYP3A pathway. Similar to the recommendations for using PDE5 inhibitors in renal dysfunction, impairment of hepatic function also warrants starting lower doses and gradual up-titration while monitoring for adverse effects. Regularly scheduled follow-ups and frequent monitoring for side effects should take place.