The membrane is taken out from the refrigerator, left to thaw for 10 minutes, rinsed in BSS, and used.

Amniotic membranes can be glued or sutured to the surface. The use of fibrin glue has made the use of an amniotic membrane simpler. A bandage contact lens may be placed on the ocular surface to prevent the slippage of the membrane.

The membrane disintegrates partially and is adsorbed on to the surface. It is known to reduce surface scarring, angiogenesis, and surface inflammation.

For sealing perforations, multi-layered AMG may be used. For persistent corneal epithelial defect, it is used as an onlay. It may be anchored to the surface by sutures or fibrin glue.

In translational medicine, AMG is used as a substrate in vitro to grow limbal stem cells.

**Results of Amniotic Membrane Grafts**

AMG was done after the excision of primary pterygium in 80 eyes of 71 patients by Ma and colleagues.

Tejwani and coauthors did a retrospective study of 24 acute and 48 chronic cases of chemical and thermal injuries who had undergone amniotic membrane transplantation with an average follow up of 7.8 months.

Gregory published a series of 79 patients with acute SJS who were hospitalized.

When used for pain relief in cases of pseudophakic bullous keratopathy, Pires and colleagues reported freedom from pain in 50 out of 55 patients for 33 weeks after AMG.

The amniotic membrane has also been used to help in sealing small corneal perforations and aid in healing persistent corneal epithelial defects.

Shimazaki et al. used living related donors for allogenic CLET in six patients and cadaveric donors in seven patients.

In a similar study, Daya et al. reported results of ex vivo cultured limbal epithelial cells from corneoscleral rims discarded after taking the donor button for penetrating keratoplasty. There were 10 patients with severe limbal stem cell deficiency in this study, after an average follow-up of 28 months. The parameters of LSCD improved in 7 eyes, and vision improved in 4 eyes.

Cultivated oral mucosal epithelial cells (COMET) and cultured allogenic limbal stem cells were noted to have a similar clinical improvement in bilateral LSCD.

Recently, in vivo cultivation of limbal stem cells in the form of simple limbal epithelial stem cell transplantation (SLET) has been used in unilateral cases of LSCD.