Confluent and reticulated papillomatosis (CRP), also known as Gougerot-Carteaud syndrome, is caused by disordered keratinization. It presents with asymptomatic hyperpigmented papules that can coalesce into plaques and are typically located on the upper trunk and neck of teens and young adults. The cause of confluent and reticulated papillomatosis is controversial. Historically, Malassezia furfur was thought to be the cause of the disease, but studies have since shown that patients with confluent and reticulated papillomatosis are not always colonized with Malassezia furfur. The current theory is infection with Dietzia papillomatosis, a gram-positive aerobic actinomycete. Other proposed causes include diabetes, obesity, ultraviolet light exposure, amyloidosis, and overexpression of keratin-16. First-line treatment is minocycline. Papules can take 12 to 39 months to resolve and have a recurrence rate of 13.8 to 15.4 percent. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of confluent and reticulated papillomatosis and highlights the role of interprofessional team members in collaborating to provide well-coordinated care and enhance outcomes for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the clinical features of confluent and reticulated papillomatosis. 
- Review the treatment options available for confluent and reticulated papillomatosis.
- Describe the natural course of confluent and reticulated papillomatosis.
- Outline a structured interprofessional team approach to provide effective care to and appropriate surveillance of patients with confluent and reticulated papillomatosis.