The mechanisms most commonly described are trauma to the left upper quadrant, left rib cage, or left flank. However, the absence of these types of injuries cannot exclude the possibility of splenic injury.

Inquire about previous operations, including splenectomy. Other questions that doctors should explore are liver or portal venous disease, the use of an anticoagulant agent, bleeding tendency, and the use of aspirin or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents.

The typical presentation includes left upper quadrant pain, abdominal distension, and hypotension. Left shoulder pain may occur due to diaphragmatic irritation.

Evaluate the abdomen for external signs of trauma such as abrasions, lacerations, contusions, and seatbelt sign. The absence of these external findings does not exclude intra-abdominal injury. Up to 10% to 20% of patients with intra-abdominal injury may not have these findings upon examination. An initial examination on arrival may not show tenderness, rigidity, or distention. Therefore, it may not be sufficiently sensitive nor specific enough to identify a splenic injury.

The presentation of splenic injury depends upon associated internal hemorrhage. Patients may present with hypovolemic shock manifesting tachycardia and hypotension. Other findings include tenderness in the upper left quadrant, generalized peritonitis, or referred pain in the left shoulder (Kehr's sign). This is a rare finding, which should increase the suspicion of splenic injury. Some patients may have pleuritic left-sided chest pain. Physical examination may be limited by decreased mental status or distracting injuries. Upon initial evaluation, a splenic injury that is contained may have few symptoms.

One should evaluate splenic injury if lower left rib (below the sixth rib) fractures are identified. In adults, up to 20% of patients with lower left rib fractures may have an associated splenic injury. However, in children, the plasticity of the chest wall can result in a severe underlying injury to the spleen in the absence of any rib fracture. One should suspect a pelvic fracture if the mechanism involves a high-energy blunt trauma. Also, one should consider bowel injuries in patients presenting with blunt splenic trauma, which occurs in less than 5% of patients initially thought to have an isolated organ injury.