The most common clinical manifestation that arises, associated with ketone bodies, is ketoacidosis. Ketosis is usually a normal physiological state. However, if unregulated, it may also drive life-threatening syndromes termed ketoacidosis. The most prevalent subdivisions of ketoacidosis are diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and alcoholic ketoacidosis.

DKA most commonly occurs as a result of a lack of appropriate response to insulin in the body. This lack of insulin response could be due to noncompliance with treatment, undiagnosed type 1 DM, or sub-therapeutic administration of insulin. A lack of insulin response results in an increase of glucagon and a decrease in the uptake of glucose. Decreased insulin also facilitates the increased activity of hormone-sensitive lipase. Hormone-sensitive lipase converts triglycerides to fatty acyl CoA molecules. Fatty acyl CoA molecules overload the Krebs cycle and shunt over to ketone metabolism. An abundance of ketone bodies causes an anion gap acidosis. Patients also usually present with hyperglycemia, lethargy, abdominal pain, polyuria, polydipsia, vomiting, and mental status changes.

Alcoholic ketoacidosis occurs in chronic alcoholics after an abrupt withdraw or acute intoxication. The ethanol metabolizes to acetic acid, and NAD+ is converted to NADH while acting as a coenzyme. Acetic acid is shunted to ketogenesis if insulin and glucagon are at favorable concentrations, such as in hypoglycemia. Additionally, NADH acts to inhibit gluconeogenesis because NAD+ is necessary for multiple steps in gluconeogenesis. Finally, during the acute withdraw of ethanol, the release of epinephrine further drives ketogenesis and, at that point, ketoacidosis.

Some inherited defects in ketone metabolism exist as well. The most common inherited deficiencies include a systemic primary carnitine deficiency and medium-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.

A patient with a systemic primary carnitine deficiency (CDSP) is unable to transport fatty acyl CoA molecules into the mitochondria in the liver. CDSP has an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern and is on the SLC22A5 gene of chromosome 5. Patients can present as infants with hyperammonemia, or they may present as adults with elevated liver enzymes and hypoketotic, hypoglycemic episodes. No matter the onset, the disease may be diagnosed by genetic testing or by checking the carnitine level of the blood. Treatment of these patients includes supplementing carnitine, reducing fats in the diet, and decreasing fasting durations.

Medium-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency occurs in about every 1 in 10,000 White infants. MCAD deficiency screen is a common test included in a standard newborn screening. MCAD is an enzyme that converts 4-12 carbon fatty acyl CoA molecules into acetyl CoA in the mitochondria for utilization. MCAD has an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, most commonly of the ACADM gene on chromosome 1. These patients may experience seizures, comas, hypoketotic hypoglycemia, and failure to thrive if not diagnosed early. The mainstay of treatment for these patients is early diagnosis and avoidance of fasting.