Comprehensive evaluation and diagnostic workup should include a white blood cell count (WBC), C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and hip radiography, and ultrasonography.

A 2017 systematic review and meta-analysis highlighted demographic, clinical, and laboratory variables are seen in pediatric patients presenting with TS, septic arthritis (SA), or Lyme arthritis (LA) of the hip.  The authors noted several key findings that can aid in the clinical differentiation:

- Febrile at presentation

- Over 50% of patients with SA
- 30% of patients with TS
- 23% of patients with LA

- Refusal to bear weight

- Over 60% of patients diagnosed with either TS or SA
- Only 33% of patients diagnosed with LA

- Inflammatory markers

- ESR range for SA patients was 44 - 64 mm/hr
- ESR range for TS patients was 21 - 33 mm/hr
- ESR range for LA patients was 37 - 46 mm/hr

- Synovial fluid aspiration results

- Synovial WBC counts (cells/mm3) demonstrated a similar trend as noted with measured ESR levels at presentation

- TS (5,644 - 15,388)
- LA (47,533 - 64,242)
- SA (105,432 - 260,214)

- Peripheral WBC count was similar between each of the diagnostic groups

TS remains a diagnosis of exclusion, although these studies have highlighted the diagnostic utility of a synovial fluid aspiration and analysis.

Additional laboratory workup includes a CRP greater than 2 mg/dl, which has been shown to be an independent risk factor for septic arthritis.  A urinalysis and culture are typically normal. Because procalcitonin levels remain low during bouts of inflammatory disease, an increase should raise suspicion of septic arthritis. Depending on the history, consider antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, HLA-B27, and tuberculosis skin testing

In a Lyme endemic area, only 5% of children with acute, nontraumatic hip pain had a Lyme infection, so routine serology is not necessary. It should be performed if an alternative diagnosis such as septic/pyogenic arthritis is being considered and in those with an atypical clinical course

Although plain films may be normal for months after the onset of symptoms, the medial joint space is typically slightly wider in the affected hip indicating the presence of fluid. One-half to two-thirds of patients with transient synovitis may have an accentuated pericapsular shadow

Ultrasound is extremely accurate for detecting an intracapsular effusion. Ultrasound-guided hip aspiration not only relieves pain and limitation of movement but often provides a rapid distinction from septic arthritis. Ultrasound-guided hip aspiration should be done in all individuals in whom ultrasonography has exhibited evidence of an effusion, and any of the following predictive criteria are present:

- Temperature greater than 99.5 F

- ESR greater than or equal to 20 mm/hr

- Severe hip pain and spasm with movement

If the aspirate has a positive gram stain, more than 90% polymorphonuclear cells, or a glucose less than 40 mg/dL or markedly different from the serum glucose, the patient is more likely to have septic arthritis and not transient synovitis.

In settings in which routine aspirations of effusions are not performed, a dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI may help differentiate transient synovitis from septic arthritis.

Bone scintigraphy demonstrates mildly elevated uptake; however, it does not help differentiate etiologies.

Multiple algorithms and previously reported step-by-step guidelines are available in the literature

The Kocher criteria remain a helpful set of clinical risk factors differentiating SA and TS in pediatric patients presenting with hip pain.  The criteria include the increasing diagnostic probability in favor of the former, yielding a 99.6% probability favoring SA as a diagnosis when all four criteria are met:

- WBC > 12,000 cells per microliter of serum

- Inability or refusal to bear weight

- Febrile (> 101.3 degrees Fahrenheit or 38.5 degrees celsius)

- ESR > 40 mm/hr

When none of the above risk factors are present upon presentation, the probability of the patient having SA of the hip drops below 0.2%.  A subsequent study incorporated CRP measurements into the clinical workup.  Caird et al. performed a Level I study that concluded that a temperature above 38.5 was the best predictor of septic arthritis followed in decreasing order by CRP (>1mg/dL), ESR, refusal to bear weight, and serum WBC count