**Normal menses**

In the non-pregnant woman of childbearing age, vaginal bleeding occurs cyclically every 28 days or so. This process is tightly regulated by interactions between the hypothalamus, the pituitary, and the ovary. Day 1 of the menstrual cycle is defined as the first day of menstrual bleeding. This marks the beginning of the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, during which estrogen and progesterone levels are low. Through the follicular phase, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) levels increase gradually, as do estrogen levels. Rising estrogen stimulates the endometrium to becomes thicker, with increasing numbers of endometrial glands. Estrogen peaks in the late follicular phase, followed by an LH surge, which marks the beginning of the luteal phase. Estrogen peaks in the late follicular phase, followed by an LH surge, which marks the beginning of the luteal phase. This results in ovulation. The remaining corpus luteum secretes progesterone, while estrogen levels fall. This results in loss of endometrial blood supply, causing sloughing of the endometrial lining and the beginning of a new cycle. This bleeding typically lasts 3 to 7 days, and about 75 cc of blood are lost.

**Abnormal Bleeding in non-pregnant women of childbearing age**

In non-pregnant women of childbearing age, abnormal vaginal bleeding may be cyclical or non-cyclical. Heavy cyclical bleeding, or menorrhagia, implies an intact hypothalamus-pituitary-ovarian axis. Menorrhagia is most commonly secondary to systemic endocrine processes (hypothyroidism), systemic hematological/oncological processes (e.g., Von Willibrand's disease, or other bleeding diathesis), or anatomical disruptions, such as polyps, fibroids, or trauma. The bleeding in menorrhagia can be severe and result in symptomatic anemia. Non-cyclical bleeding, or menometrorrhagia, is irregular bleeding at often prolonged intervals. Menometrorrhagia implies derangement of the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis and typically involves a failure of ovulation to take place, so it is often called anovulatory bleeding. Patients with menometrorrhagia may have the same underlying pathologies as those with menorrhagia, but also may have other systemic endocrine processes such as diabetes, polycystic ovarian syndrome, or hyperprolactinemia, may have anovulation secondary to obesity or an eating disorder, might have ovulatory failure from certain medications such as psychiatric medications, may have underlying malignancies, or may simply be at the extremes of their menstrual ages (adolescence or menopause). Bleeding with menometrorrhagia is typically not very heavy, but the lack of cyclical withdrawal bleeding places these patients at increased lifetime risk for endometrial cancer.

**Bleeding in pregnancy**

Although bleeding in pregnancy is not considered "normal," it is common, affecting about one in three pregnancies. In the first trimester, common causes of bleeding are normal implantation of a fertilized ovum into the endometrial lining, spontaneous miscarriage, ectopic pregnancy, and subchorionic hemorrhage. In the second trimester, bleeding may be related to placenta previa, placenta accreta, placental abruption, or intrauterine fetal demise/spontaneous miscarriage. In the third trimester, bleeding is concerning for placental abruption, placenta previa, or labor. Each of these pathologies has its entry discussing its presentation and pathophysiology.

**Bleeding in premenarchal children**

Bleeding in children is most commonly related to anatomical disruptions. In female neonates, vaginal bleeding sometimes occurs as the pediatric endometrium withdraws from the stimulus of mom's hyperestrogenic state, and in older children, sometimes endocrine processes may lead to precocious puberty and vaginal bleeding. Most commonly, though, vaginal bleeding is related to trauma (for instance, straddle injuries), polyps or tumors (sarcoma botryoides), infection/inflammation/vaginitis, or foreign body (usually toilet paper).

**Bleeding in post-menopausal women**

Although women may have menometrorrhagia as they near menopause, abnormal bleeding may also be secondary to simple atrophy (atrophic vaginitis). Other causes are similar to other groups of women, including anatomical processes (polyps, infections, foreign body), endocrine processes (e.g., thyroid disease), bleeding dyscrasias (including those related to malignancies and medications) and gynecologic malignancies. The most common presentation of endometrial cancer is abnormal vaginal bleeding, and therefore consideration must be given to this entity when evaluating the patient with abnormal vaginal bleeding.