The etiology of premenstrual syndrome is uncertain. Since PMS symptoms occur simultaneously with the hormonal fluctuations of the menstrual cycle, hormonal disproportion like estrogen surplus and progesterone deficiency have been proposed. Symptoms are also associated with serotonin to link as a key etiological factor.

Estrogen comprises of three major hormones: estrone, estradiol, estriol, estradiol being the is the most potent. Estrogen levels that fluctuate during the luteal phase are what is responsible for women’s mood changes. Clinical trials have shown that serotonin precursors significantly increases between days 7 to 11 and 17 to 19 of the menstrual cycle. This indicates that PMS is closely associated with mood disorders through estrogen-serotonin regulation.

According to the molecular biology studies, the decreased estrogen causes the hypothalamus to release norepinephrine, which triggers a decline in acetylcholine, dopamine, and serotonin that leads to insomnia, fatigue, depression, which are common symptoms of PMDD and PMS.

A study from Egypt revealed the positive association between PMS and excess intake of sweet-tasting food items. It also showed that other factors, such as intake of junk food and coffee, were significantly associated with PMS. Thus, making it evident that lifestyle factors have a significant association with PMS and PMDD.et al. did a similar study among women university students for assessing the factors associated with PMS and revealed that dietary factors such as consumption of fast food, drinks containing sugar, deep-fried foods, and lifestyle factors such as less habitual exercise and poor sleep quality is significantly associated with PMS.