**ST Segment**

The ST segment encompasses the region between the end of ventricular depolarization and beginning of ventricular repolarization on the ECG. In other words, it corresponds to the area from the end of the QRS complex to the beginning of the T wave. In clinical terms, the ST segment represents the period in which the myocardium maintains contraction to expel blood from the ventricles.

**Physiology**

The ST segment corresponds to the plateau phase of the ventricular transmembrane action potential. Normally, there are slow and relatively similar transmembrane voltage changes in the ventricular myocardial cells during this phase. These minimal voltage gradients are similar to those found in the period between the end of ventricular repolarization and the beginning of the next cycle of ventricular depolarization. This near absence of voltage gradient is responsible for the normal isoelectric or practically flat ST segment on the ECG. Thus, any significant change in voltage gradients during the plateau phase of the action potential can result in variations in the ST segment. For example, in the presence of acute myocardial ischemia or infarction, ST-segment changes are a consequence of an injury current. An injury current results from current flowing across a gradient of ischemic and non-ischemic zones. This affects the plateau phase of the ventricular transmembrane action potential and, hence, the ST segment. In cases in which myocardial injury has occurred, if ST elevation is present, leads electrically opposite tend to show reciprocal ST depression.

**Junction (J) Point**

The junction (J) point is where the QRS complex and ST segment meet. It marks the beginning of the ST segment. Any displacement of the ST segment above or below baseline is often measured at the J point. However, it is not always easy to discern the J point because of various ST-segment morphologies. For instance, diffuse J points can be seen with early repolarization, pericarditis, left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) with strain, and acute myocardial infarctions (MI). Because it is often difficult to make out the J point and/or the beginning of the T wave, the ST segment is frequently an approximation or evaluated at ST, which is the ST segment at 60 ms after the J point.

**Reference****Point**

The reference point used in determining if the ST segment is elevated or depressed has been an area of dispute. The debate tends to be between using the PQ junction which is the end of the PR segment, or the TP segment. This is because the PQ junction and TP segment may not always be at the same level. While the ventricles depolarize, the atria are repolarizing and can affect the level of the PQ junction. Hence, both the PQ junction and the PR segment cannot be the correct reference point.

The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association joint guidelines recommend that the PQ junction be used as the reference point. Vectorcardiographic analysis suggests that if the QRS-vector loop ends at the point of origin, then the loop is considered closed and there will be no ST-segment deviation. However, if the QRS-vector loop does not end at the onset of ventricular depolarization, then the loop is considered open and there can be ST-segment deviation. Another fact supporting the use of the PQ junction as the reference is that the TP segment may not always be present. For instance, with sinus tachycardia the P wave may be superimposed on the T wave, resulting in the absence of a TP segment. Thus, the PQ junction (end of the PR segment) seems like the better reference point in evaluating for ST segment deviation.