A thorough history and physical exam to assess the status and function of the common peroneal nerve is always required. In patients with a peroneal nerve injury, clinical presentation varies based on the location and severity of the injury and the presence of anatomic variations. The most common presentation of a common peroneal nerve injury is a weakness of ankle dorsiflexion and the classic resultant foot drop or catching the toes while ambulating.

The clinician directs the clinical physical examination by the patient’s reported symptoms and requires an understanding of the relevant anatomy and possible underlying etiology. For example, in cases of suspected chronic peroneal nerve palsy with resultant foot drop, the clinician should consider a primary documented part of the examination focusing on gait assessment as it may provide significant clues to the etiology of the symptoms.

In the setting of traumatic injuries to the knee, including knee dislocations, the initial examination testing is done to rule out an acute neurovascular injury that could potentially compromise the lower extremity. Knee dislocations can notoriously compromise the neurovascular structures passing from the thigh and knee to the lower limb and, if not addressed urgently, can lead to acute compartment syndrome (ACS), which can result in long-term compromise to the lower limb requiring operative amputation.

To test for the motor involvement of the superficial peroneal nerve and deep peroneal nerve, one must assess foot eversion (SPN) and foot/toe dorsiflexion (DPN). A finding of weakness of both foot eversion as well as foot/toe dorsiflexion suggests a lesion involving the common peroneal nerve.

Tinel sign is also a reliable clinical sign to localize the area of nerve irritation or entrapment. The examiner performs the Tinel test by tapping along the course of the nerve – particularly around the fibular neck. If tingling or paresthesia is elicited distally to the point of compression by tapping, it denotes a positive Tinel sign.