It has been estimated that about 234 million major surgical procedures are performed every year worldwide.

Operative risk, or surgical risk, can be defined as a cumulative risk of death, development of a new disease or medical condition, or deterioration of a previously existed medical condition that develops in the early or late postoperative period and can be directly associated with surgical treatment. The essence of the operative risk is usually attributed to a patient’s overall health and simplified to a total number of patient-related unfavorable factors. Patient-related risk factors may be classified as modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors. This classification is of the most clinical value since eliminating or modifying the risk factors can optimize the overall preoperative risk and improve outcomes. Some of the modifiable risk factors are smoking, alcohol intake, obesity, diabetes, hypertension, coronary artery disease, atrial fibrillation, cerebrovascular disease, anemia, malnutrition, mental disorders, and medications. Non-modifiable risk factors are factors like age, gender, genetics, family history, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, history of stroke or myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, or chronic kidney disease. It is important to realize that a universal list of surgical risk factors does not exist, and any patient’s characteristic may or may not be a risk factor, depending on a surgical procedure, type of anesthesia used, and particular complication implied. In addition, "operative risk" is a much more complex term that potentially encompasses all the variety of the disease-related, patient-related, surgery-related, or system-related factors:

- Disease-related factors (e.g., the nature and the severity of a surgical condition)

- Patient-related factors (e.g., anatomical features, past surgical history, comorbidities, functional reserve, social status, lifestyle)

- Surgery-related factors (e.g., surgeon’s knowledge, technical and decision making skills, experience, and operative activity; anesthesia; sterility; operative access and exposure; type of the procedure and its complexity; overall surgical trauma; the level of contamination and antimicrobial prophylaxis)

- System-related factors (e.g., quality of preoperative and postoperative care, follow-up, rehabilitation, lifestyle modification)

- Unpredictable and random factors