The MCL is the primary passive and static stabilizer of the medial knee. It is composed of a superficial medial collateral ligament (sMCL) and a deep medial collateral ligament (dMCL). The sMCL has its proximal insertion at the medial epicondyle of the femur where it blends into the semimembranosus tendon. The distal attachment is at the posteromedial surface of the tibia. The dMCL is composed of 2 ligaments: meniscofemoral and meniscotibial. The meniscofemoral has its proximal insertion at the femur just distal to that of the sMCL; it attaches to the medial meniscus. The meniscotibial ligament is thicker and shorter. It travels from the medial meniscus to the distal edge of the articular cartilage of the medial tibial plateau.

The superficial and deep ligaments each have a unique function, making the MCL the primary responder to valgus stress and a secondary restraint to rotational forces. The sMCL, specifically the proximal division, resists valgus forces through all degrees of knee flexion. The distal division of the sMCL helps stabilize external rotation of the knee at 30-degree flexion. The dMCL helps stabilize internal rotation of the knee from full extension through 90-degree flexion. Despite the relationship of the dMCL with the medial meniscus, there is no influence of the MCL on the stability of the medial meniscus.

Together, the MCL also helps guide the knee joint through its full range of motion when a tensile load is applied. With low load, the ligament is relatively compliant; with increasing load, the ligament responds with increasing stiffness until it is nearly linear. Beyond this, the MCL will continue to absorb energy until failure. The MCL also prevents hyperextension of the joint and posterior translation of the tibia, secondary to the function of the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL). The posterior oblique ligament, a continuum of oblique fibers at the posterior aspect of the MCL, is responsible for this function.

Finally, the ligament plays a role in joint position sense or proprioceptive feedback. When the MCL is stretched beyond its ability or exposed to an excessive load, it evokes neurological feedback signals that then generate a muscle contraction.