# Introduction

Over 50 million Americans are affected by allergic rhinitis, and approximately 20 to 30 million are affected by asthma, which commonly has an allergic component.

As clinicians use more antibiotics, there has been an increase in reported antibiotic allergies. However, fewer than 10% of patients who believe they are allergic to penicillin actually have a true allergy.

# Specimen Collection

**Serum Testing**

Serum IgE testing is obtained by simple blood work; the clinician must specify each specific antibody to be tested and will be run with other similar allergens in panels. These panels are often expensive, and clinicians need to know how many different panels they are testing. Samples are analyzed via ELISA. In the ELISA, the antigen is placed on the plate, then the serum sample is added, and any IgE will bind to the allergen. The sample is then washed with an enzyme-substrate, and specific machines analyze the results. There are approved machines that read the results, and there can be some variations among the machines that physicians need to be aware of. RAST is no longer in use.

The other forms of allergy testing do not require specimen collections.

# Procedures

**Skin Prick Testing**

Concentrations of 1 to 10 or 1 to 20 g/L of each allergen and both a positive and negative control is placed on the skin at least 2 cm apart from each other. A special device is then used to scratch the skin and introduce the allergen below the skin's outer layer. The positive control is typically histamine dichloride 10g/L concentration, and the negative control is typically glycerinated saline histamine at the same concentration. The test is then read at 10 minutes for the controls and 15 to 20 minutes for the allergens.

**Intradermal Testing**

Each allergen is injected intradermally to make a wheel, similar to conducting a tuberculin test. The concentration of allergens is much higher at 1 to 500 to 1 to 1000.

**Patch Testing**

A patch with the allergen is placed on the skin, usually the back, for 48 hours. The test is then read 15 to 60 minutes after the patch is removed.

# Indications

There are multiple indications for allergy testing. The most common causes are persistent asthma, suspected drug allergy, suspected insect allergy, suspected food allergy, seasonal rhinitis, rhinoconjunctivitis, and rhinitis with otitis media.

Serum IgE and skin prick tests are frequently used together for food allergy testing to confirm a true food allergy before eliminating it from the patient’s diet.

If an IgE test is performed and has unexpected results when considering the history, skin prick testing should be done to solidify the diagnosis of an allergy further.

# Normal and Critical Findings

**Skin Prick and Intradermal Testing**

The positive control normally produces a 3 mm wheal; if it does not, any allergen that is 3mm or larger would be considered positive.

**Serum IgE Testing**

High levels of IgE do not necessarily correlate with the severity of the reaction. The serum test results need to be analyzed with the patient’s history and clinical exam context and cannot be strictly diagnosed with just the IgE levels. False positives may occur. It is possible since each allergen is tested specifically that the correct allergen was not tested for.

Similarly, even with low levels, a patient can still be at risk for anaphylaxis because serum testing does not measure the amount of bound IgE to mast cells or in tissues. A big advantage to IgE serum results is there is no subjectivity, potential for operator error, and the results can be compared and reviewed later.

**Patch Testing**

The results need to be read by a trained technician. Wheat is the most common food allergy found by skin patch testing.

# Interfering Factors

**Skin Prick Testing**

Patients should stop taking the following medications; antihistamines 1 week prior, H2 blockers 48 hours prior, tricyclic antidepressants for up to 2 weeks prior, omalizumab 6 months prior because they can decrease or alter the reaction. Patients with an anaphylactic episode within 30 days should not undergo skin prick testing because they can have false-negative results.

**Serum IgE testing**

High levels of antibodies do not always correlate with the severity of the allergies or reactions but do correlate with a higher chance of a reaction.

**Skin Patch Testing**

The results can be hard to differentiate between a true positive allergic reaction and a skin irritant.

# Complications

Anaphylaxis is a potential complication for any allergy testing involving an introduction of an allergen to the patient. This happens when the reaction is severe, and the mast cells cause more than a local reaction. With that in mind, however, intradermal testing has a higher risk of systemic reactions than skin prick testing because of the use of higher concentrations of the allergens.

# Patient Safety and Education

**Skin Prick Testing**

Patients with uncontrolled asthma, reduced lung function, atopic dermatitis, acute or chronic urticaria, dermographism, active angina, cardiac arrhythmias, elderly, pregnant women, and those not in good health are more likely to have adverse effects and/or difficulty with the treatment of any adverse effects. They are not at a higher risk of anaphylaxis.

# Clinical Significance

Allergy testing can help prevent serious medical emergencies for patients by teaching them what triggers their allergies or asthma. Knowing allergies in patients with other confounding medical problems can decrease further medical complications and decrease office and hospital visits. Being able to have some control can help them manage their asthma and allergies more appropriately at home. By doing this, patients can potentially decrease their medications, office visits, hospital visits, and improve their overall health and well-being. Results from the serum IgE and intradermal test help allergists decide the correct allergen dilutions to start with when initiating injection immunotherapy.