The prognosis of patients with MDS varies widely depending upon several characteristics including cytogenetics and severity of cytopenias. Patients with 5q- generally have a much better prognosis compared to MDS with monosomy 7, for example. The International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) and revised IPSS (R-IPSS) are risk stratification system used by clinicians to guide treatment and the potential clinical course. These systems can be used in addition to a clinical assessment of the patient including age and co-morbidities to determine the best therapeutic options. The IPSS includes the percentage of blasts in the bone marrow, karyotype, and the number of cell lineages with cytopenias. Karyotype with a good prognosis includes normal karyotype, -Y, deletion 5q, deletion 20q. Poor risk karyotypes include complex cytogenetics (greater than three abnormalities), or chromosome 7 abnormalities. All other karyotypes are categorized as intermediate risk. Based on these findings, a score is calculated to determine a risk score of either low, intermediate-1 or intermediate-2, or high risk.

There is a Revised International Prognostic Scoring System (R-IPSS) which risk stratifies patients based on cytogenetics, blast percentage, and has separate scores for absolute neutrophil count, hemoglobin value, and platelet value and has been shown to better predict outcome than the older IPSS. For example, patients in a very high-risk category for R-IPSS have a median overall survival of 0.8 years, compared to very low-risk patients with median overall survival of 8.8 years.

Those patients who are classified as high-risk or have an unfavorable prognosis will probably require treatment and may be considered for allogeneic stem cell transplant to maintain their remission. However, even favorable risk patients with MDS may still have considerable morbidity and mortality from their disease. About a third of patients will also have transformation into AML, and these patients often have a very poor prognosis.

Patients with isolated 5q deletion might experience longer survival than other types of MDS, with one study noting 5-year survival of 40% if they did not receive treatment and 54% if they received treatment.