Plaque psoriasis is a complex life long disorder with enormous morbidity. Thus, it is best managed by an interprofessional team.

Insulin resistance and cardiovascular diseases are more common in psoriatic patients as are metabolic comorbidities. Obesity is the most common comorbidity observed in children with psoriasis. Many patients present with reduced quality of life and psychological manifestations and need special attention and counseling. Thus, primary care clinicians should advocate lifestyle modification such as reducing weight, reducing alcohol intake and smoking cessation may help control psoriasis, improve the results of treatment and prevent future complications.

Sudden onset, palmoplantar keratoderma, severe nail dystrophy, the involvement of skin folds should arouse suspicion of associated HIV infection in whom pustular forms are also more common with a higher frequency of arthritis.

Teaching Points

- Patients with psoriasis should be counseled and screened for metabolic comorbidity and arthritis.

- Treatment with systemic drugs and phototherapy should be used when indicated with proper monitoring.

- Early detection of plaque psoriasis, appropriate treatment and follow-up may prevent complications.

- In the future, biomarkers may be used to help predict the progression of disease and response to treatment.

- Alcohol is considered a trigger factor, especially in young people, and should be avoided.

- The pharmacist should educate the patient about the importance of medication compliance, adverse effects of the drugs and the need to follow up with the clinical team

- A mental health nurse should be consulted as many patients develop depression because of the poor aesthetics

- Screening for skin cancer is vital for patients who have been treated with biological agents and light therapy

Outcomes

Psoriasis is an unpredictable disorder with varying response rates to treatment. Relapses are common and what works in one person may not work in another person. Poor prognostic signs include a family history of psoriasis, early onset of disease. In many patients, psychosocial stress seems to affect the outcomes adversely. Non-photosensitive patients with plaque psoriasis are encouraged to seek sunlight and may have less severe disease in a warm weather climate. The use of potent drugs is often required in recalcitrant cases, but in some patients, the adverse effects of these drugs are not well tolerated.