Surgical techniques will vary based on the disease pathologies in the area, anatomical variations and unanticipated complications that may arise during surgery. This discussion will focus on the main approaches and principles used in each type of upper extremity amputation, moving distally to proximal.

**Transcarpal**

Transcarpal amputations are a common type of amputation and occur due to a variety of reasons including trauma, peripheral vascular issues, and infection. It is preferable to more proximal amputations because flexion and extension of the wrist are preserved, improving overall function. In most cases, the initial incision results in a long full thickness palmar flap and a shorter dorsal flap at a 2 to 1 ratio. The finger flexor and extensor tendons are separated from their distal insertions and allowed to retract into the proximal wound. The median and ulnar nerves are sectioned and retract deep into the proximal site where more padding is available to cushion if neuroma formation occurs postoperatively. From a vascular point of view, the radial and ulnar arteries and their branches are ligated just proximal to the surgical site. The bone of the intended carpals is removed. Rough edges are smoothened and closure is done with padding from the finger tendons, when possible. Performing a thumb amputation will cause a patient to lose pinch and grasp and should be done with functional consideration in mind.

**Wrist Disarticulation**

A wrist disarticulation is preferred over any shorter amputations, but it is noted that finger dexterity and wrist flexion/extension are sacrificed. An incision is made circumferentially starting and ending 1.5cm distal to the radial and ulnar styloid processes respectively. The arteries and nerves are ligated similar to a trans-carpal amputation. Louis, Hunter, and Keating describe a technique to decrease the risk of a post-operative neuroma. This involves starting just distal to the cubital fossa and extending an incision proximally. Double ligation of the median, ulnar and superficial radial nerves are done at this level to coax neuroma formation away from the future site of the prosthetic wall.

**Transradial**

Forearm length preservation is essential to allow some degree of pronation and supination as well as a greater arc of motion. The underlying soft tissue of the forearm contains relatively avascular structures such as fascia and tendon creating suboptimal padding of the residual limb. Thus, flaps are generally created at a 1 to 1 ratio and reflected proximally. Vessels, nerves and muscle bellies are transected similar to the methods above. For prosthetic fitting, it is preferable to have at least 4cm of the ulna preserved. In some cases, transposing the biceps tendon to the proximal ulna to help the resting approximation is helpful in preserving elbow flexion.

**Transhumeral and Elbow disarticulations**

For an elbow disarticulation, two incisions for skip flaps are made, starting at the humeral epicondyles and stopping at approximately 3cm distal to the tip of the olecranon posteriorly and just distal to the insertion of the biceps tendon anteriorly. The lacertus fibrosus is divided which exposes the neurovascular bundle underneath and releases all the pronator attachments from the medial epicondyle. The radial nerve is found between the brachialis and brachioradialis and transected. The ulnar nerve is similarly transected, and both nerves are allowed to retract into the proximal wound. The extensor muscles are transected about 7cm distal to the joint. The anterior, radiohumeral and ulnohumeral capsules are then divided, and forearm is disarticulated. The posterior flap is moved medially and sutured to the soft tissues of the medial epicondyle. Of note, the posterior flap made to be longer than the anterior skip flap to provide adequate padding at the humeral end. For patients with smaller muscle mass and subcutaneous tissues, the humerus may be covered with a flap of brachialis, biceps or triceps.

Transhumeral amputations are similar to an elbow disarticulation with a few important considerations. Amputations are typically made 4 cm proximal to the elbow joint to allow for the prosthetic elbow lock mechanisms to appear equal to normal elbow location of the opposite arm. Two incisions creating an anterior and posterior flap are again created. Neurovascular structures are identified and divided similarly to elbow disarticulations. Extensor muscles are resected about 7cm distal to the joint line to again create a posterior flap that is longer than the anterior flap for appropriate padding and closure.

Transhumeral amputations at or above the pec major insertion up to the level of surgical neck of the humerus, function as a shoulder disarticulation because the rotation of the humerus will no longer be possible, but it still may be preferable to complete shoulder disarticulation since the shoulder contour is preserved. The technique for this amputation requires a patient to be in “beach chair” or “sloppy lateral decubitus” position which gives easy access to both anterior and posterior shoulder. The incision starts at the anterior coracoid, which outlines the inferior to the superior curve of the deltoid to its posterior insertion. A second incision is made crossing the axilla to connect the two ends of the first incision. The humeral insertions of the deltoid and pec major are freed. Underlying them is pec minor which remains attached to the coracoid and coracobrachialis which is removed from the origin to expose the neurovascular bundle and branches of the brachial plexus. In specific, the axillary artery, radial, ulnar, median and musculocutaneous nerves are isolated and resected to allow retraction deep to pec minor. The axillary nerve innervation to the deltoid is carefully left intact to help preserve the deltoid muscle bulk for residual limb padding and prosthetic fit. Teres major and latissimus dorsi are divided near their insertions of the bicipital groove. The humerus is then cut and rounded. The final flap covering the head of the humerus consists of the long head of triceps, both heads of biceps and coracobrachialis. Pec major is pulled laterally and attached to the humerus. The deltoid flap covers the rest of the humerus and is attached to the axilla. All flaps are mindfully attached with appropriate tension and to allow for optimal aesthetic healing.

**Shoulder disarticulation**

This amputation is performed similar to a humeral amputation above the level of pec major, with some considerations. Once the incisions are made, muscle insertions are freed appropriately on the humerus and neurovascular bundles are exposed; then the axillary artery is ligated and divided. The acromial branch of the thoracoacromial artery that course towards the acromion is also ligated and retracts. Short external rotator muscles are exposed and subsequently divided by placing the arm in full internal rotation. Conversely, extreme external rotation allows dissection of the anterior capsule and subscapularis. Once the humeral head is disarticulated from the joint, all the exposed muscles are secured in the glenoid cavity to fill the hollow space and flaps are smoothened as needed to obtain desirable shoulder contour

**Forequarter (Interscapulothoracic) amputation**

This amputation involves removing the full upper limb and shoulder joint from the scapula and thoracic wall. This extensive procedure is indicated mostly in patients with malignant tumors that infiltrate the shoulder muscles or severe trauma. There are 2 approaches, anterior and posterior.

The anterior approach starts with an incision from the lateral border of the sternocleidomastoid, extending laterally across the clavicle, crossing the acromioclavicular joint and the superior scapular spine. The incision then goes inferiorly along the vertical border of the scapula to the scapular angle. The lower part of the incision begins at the middle third of the clavicle and progresses along the deltopectoral groove and connects to the upper part of the incision at the angle of the scapula. The clavicular portion of the pectoralis major is reflected to expose the clavicle, and the external jugular vein is retracted from the field. The clavicle is resected at the lateral sternocleidomastoid to preserve the contour of the neck. Disarticulation occurs at the acromioclavicular joint. An incision is made in the medial subclavian muscle to release insertions of the pectoralis major and minor to further expose the subclavian artery and vein, which are subsequently ligated. The brachial plexus is dissected and sectioned to allow retraction superiorly. Further muscles and soft tissue that hold the shoulder joint to the chest wall are separated, and limb is removed. The closure is done by suturing the remaining muscles, including the pectoralis major and trapezius over the lateral chest wall for additional padding.

The more popular posterior approach allows for easy mobilization of the limb and gain of vascular control before the more challenging anterior dissection occurs. First, a posterior cervicoscapular incision is made to expose the underlying muscle groups. The trapezius, latissimus dorsi, and superior scapular attachments are divided. Cauterization of the transverse cervical and scapular arteries is done as they are exposed. The medial subclavian muscle is divided to expose the clavicle which is then resected from the lateral border of the sternocleidomastoid. A second pectoroaxillary incision is made to expose the pectoralis major and minor which are further divided. The brachial plexus is again dissected out, the shoulder joint is disarticulated, and the upper limb is removed. The closure is similar to the anterior approach.

**Target Muscle Reinnervation**

Target muscle reinnervation (TMR) is a surgical technique that applies to all upper extremity amputation patients that are candidates for a myoelectric prosthesis. This technique involves taking motor nerves that are transected during an amputation and attaching them to the motor nerves of muscles remaining in the upper extremity or trunk. This procedure is typically done during the amputation itself but is possible during revision surgeries as well. It allows for reinnervation of new target muscles so that signals may transmit to the prosthesis and the patient can use it intuitively. If the amputation is done in such a way that there are few residual muscles, then TMR may be performed on trunk muscles instead.