In a suspected case of rheumatoid arthritis in addition to proper history taking and clinical examination, it is of utmost importance to confirm the diagnosis and evaluate the patient by laboratory and radiographic investigations.

**Laboratory**

**Markers of Inflammation**

- An abnormally high level of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and/or C reactive protein (CRP) are associated with disease activity and progression.

**Hematologic Changes**

- Anemia of chronic disease is one of the most common extra-articular manifestations of RA. Leukopenia and thrombocytopenia can be seen in RA secondary to the development of Felty syndrome. Mild leukocytosis and/or thrombocytosis may be associated with disease activity.

- Patients with RA are also at a high risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, which may manifest as the presence of lymphocytosis, thrombocytopenia, and atypical lymphocytes.

**Immunologic Parameters**

- Rheumatoid Factor (RF)

RF is an immunoglobulin (Ig) autoantibody directed against the Fcγ chains of IgG. The most commonly tested immunoglobulin subclasses of RF are IgM and IgA, although IgG and rarely, IgD and IgE subclasses of RF can be seen in some cases. In RA, RF is present in approximately 60-90% of patients and can be present several years before the clinical onset of RA.

RF can be seen in other autoimmune connective tissue diseases such as Sjogren syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, mixed connective tissue disease, cryoglobulinemic vasculitis, and polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Chronic inflammatory/infectious conditions such as tuberculosis, chronic osteomyelitis, hepatitis B and C, bacterial endocarditis, fibrosing alveolitis, and silicosis can also be associated with the production of RF. Further, 5% to 8% of healthy individuals can have RF positivity.

- Antibodies to citrullinated protein and peptide antigens (ACPAs)

The process of deimination of arginine residues in the proteins such as fibrin, vimentin, filaggrin by deiminase enzymes produced during inflammation is termed citrullination. Autoantibodies against these citrullinated proteins and peptides (ACPAs) can be detected in RA patients using ELISA and immunoblotting methods. Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptides autoantibodies (anti-CCP) are the most commonly available, although other autoantibodies such as antibodies against citrullinated vimentin and mutated citrullinated vimentin (anti-MCV) can also be present in RA.

Like RF, ACPAs can be present up to 10 years before the clinical onset of RA.

- Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)

ANAs may be present in approximately 40% of patients with RA, although other anti-extractable nuclear antibodies to most nuclear antigen subsets are usually negative. Patients who have secondary Sjogren syndrome associated with RA may have more specific antinuclear antibodies such as Anti-SSA and Anti-SSB.

- Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs)

Up to 25% of patients with RA can have positive ANCA, more commonly P-ANCA.

**Imaging**

**Plain Radiographs**

Plain radiographic findings in the hands of patients with RA may take months to develop. An early finding on x-rays is that of periarticular osteopenia, which may later be followed by more diffuse osteopenia. Soft tissue swelling due to joint effusions and synovitis can be seen early as well. The Hallmark radiographic finding of RA is that of periarticular erosions.Bone erosions typically develop on the radial aspect of the bone surface the so called bare areas of the bone where the synovium directly ovelries the bone surface.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**

MRI provides a more accurate estimate of articular involvement, especially early and may show up to 40% more erosions than conventional radiography. Radiographic diagnosis should apply only in the presence of clinical features of joint inflammation as MRI may reveal erosive changes in 2-9% of healthy individuals with osteoarthritis.****

**Musculoskeletal Ultrasound (MSK US)**

MSK US is recently used as a useful bedside imaging modality for early diagnosis of synovitis and monitoring disease activity in RA. A synovial hypertrophy score ≥ 2 by greyscale (GS) and a power Doppler (PD) score ≥ 1 may be a sign of inflammatory activity. US can help to detect early cortical erosions that are difficult to diagnose early using plain radiography.

**Classification Criteria**

The initial classification criteria for RA were designed by the American College of Rheumatology in 1987, which had a sensitivity of 77% to 95% and a specificity of 85% to 98%.

**2010 ACR/EULAR classification criteria for Rheumatoid Arthritis**

**Target Population**

- Newly presenting patients who have at least one joint with synovitis/swelling, AND there is no other existing explanation of the joint synovitis/swelling.

**Definition Used**

- Joint involved: any swollen or tender joint (excluding the distal interphalangeal joints of hands and feet, the first metatarsophalangeal joints, and the first carpometacarpal joints) on clinical examination; additional evidence from MRI or ultrasonography may be used to identify additional joints.

- Large joints: shoulder, elbow, hip, knee, or ankle.

- Small joints: metacarpophalangeal joint, proximal interphalangeal joint, 2 to 5th metatarsophalangeal joints, interphalangeal joint of the thumb and wrist.

- Other joints: temporomandibular joint, sternoclavicular joint, acromioclavicular joint, and others, as reasonably expected in RA

- Symptom duration: The patient’s self-reported maximum duration of signs and symptoms of synovitis of any joint that is clinically involved at the time of assessment

- Negative serology: Value less than or equal to the upper limit of the normal reference range for the laboratory assay

- Low positive serology: Value more than 1–3 times the upper limit of the normal reference range for the laboratory assay

- High positive serology: Value more than three times the upper limit of the normal reference range for the laboratory assay

- At least one serological assay result is needed for classification.

- Normal/abnormal acute phase reactants: C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) values as determined by the local laboratory reference.

- At least one acute phase reactant result is needed for classification.

**Interpretation**

A score of ≥6 points is required for classification as definite rheumatoid arthritis (RA).

**Joint Involvement and Distribution: 0–5 points**

- 1 large joint: 0 points

- 2–10 large joints: 1 point

- 1–3 small joints (with or without large joints): 2 points

- 4–10 small joints (with or without large joints): 3 points

- >10 joints (of which ≥1 is a small joint, rest can be small/large/other joints): 5 points

**Symptom Duration: 0–1 Points**

- <6 weeks: 0 points

- ≥6 weeks: 1 point

**Serology: 0–3 Points**

- Negative for RF and negative for ACPA: 0 points

- Low-positive for RF or low-positive for ACPA: 2 points

- High-positive for RF or high-positive for ACPA: 3 points

**Acute-phase Reactants: 0–1 Point**

- Normal CRP and ESR levels: 0 points

- Abnormal CRP levels or abnormal ESR: 1 point

**Disease Activity Assessment**

Disease activity and physical function assessment is an important step in the management of RA. Over the past several years, there have been significant advancements in improving disease activity indices.

**Markers of Inflammation**

- **ESR and CRP**are the most commonly used markers of inflammation, and while they add objectivity to disease activity assessment and tend to correlate with swollen joint counts (especially CRP), they lack sensitivity and specificity, and may be abnormal due to non-RA related reasons, or maybe normal despite active RA in some cases.

**Patient-Reported Outcomes**

- **Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ)**: Physical function assessment is one of the most important tools that correlate well with long term prognosis in RA. This includes multiple questions about patients’ ability/inability to perform activities of daily living. Multiple tools have been proposed for physical function assessment, including Arthritis Impact Measurement Scale (AIMS), clinical HAQ (CLINHAQ), Euro-QoL 5-D (EQ-5D), and several modifications have been made to the HAQ tool. The modified HAQ (HAQ-II) is the most widely used tool.

- **Pain**: Pain level assessment can be performed using a horizontal visual analog scale (VAS) ranging from 0 to 100mm or 0 to 10cm.

- **Fatigue**: Similar to pain level, fatigue assessment can be performed using a horizontal VAS ranging from 0 to 100mm or 0 to 10cm.

- **Patient global assessment of disease activity (PGA)**: This is a subjective evaluation of their disease activity by the patient-rated on a horizontal VAS ranging from 0 to 100mm or 0 to 10cm.

- **Routine Assessment of Patient Index Data 3 (Rapid3)**: This is the total of patient-reported HAQ, Pain-VAS, and PGA-VAS. Rapid3 has been validated and has reported correlating well with other RA-composite indices.

**Physician Reported Outcomes**

- **Tender joint count (TJC) and swollen joint count (SJC):**Many joint count assessments have been described in the literature, each with limitations. The 28-joint count assessment for TJC and SJC is the most widely performed and validated. This count is a total number of joints tender (TJC) and swollen (SJC) on examination, and includes the most commonly involved joints by RA including MCPs, PIPs, wrists, elbows, shoulders, and knees. A drawback is the exclusion of feet/ankles, which are frequently involved in RA as well.

- **Physician (MD or evaluator) global assessment of disease activity (MDGA or EGA):**This is an objective evaluation of the disease activity by the physician/evaluator rated on a horizontal VAS ranging from 0 to 100mm or 0 to 10cm.

**Composite Indices**

Keeping in mind the limitations of and disparities between the patient-reported and physician-reported measures, several composite indices have been proposed and validated. These can be rapidly performed in the clinic and can serve as good measures for point of care disease activity assessment, as well as longitudinal disease activity assessment to evaluate improvement or worsening in disease activity.

- Disease Activity Score (DAS)-ESR

- Disease Activity Score (DAS)-CRP

- Disease Activity Score (DAS)28-ESR

- Disease Activity Score (DAS)28-CRP

- Simplified Disease Activity Index (SDAI)

- Clinical Disease Activity Index (CDAI)

- Rapid Assessment of Disease Activity in Rheumatology (RADAR)

- Rheumatoid Arthritis Disease Activity Index (RADAI)