Issues of concern pertaining to MRI revolve around the use of nonionizing radiation when imaging vulnerable patient populations, the use of contrast agents, and logistical concerns for the patients, some of which are addressed earlier in this article. When ordering an MRI, it is important to scrutinize the clinical question, patient’s clinical status, psychological factors, length of time required for the exam, and weigh the risks and benefits.

- There is abundant information published about gadolinium, paramagnetic contrast agents. A glomerular filtration rate of less than 30 is a contraindication to receiving gadolinium contrast. These patients are at increased risk of developing a systemic phenomenon called nephrogenic systemic fibrosis due to impaired clearance of contrast.

- The effect of MRI contrast on pregnancy is largely unknown and therefore avoided. Since gadolinium contrast is excreted quickly, nursing mothers can resume breastfeeding 36 to 48 hours after having an MRI. No deleterious effects have been documented from MRI during pregnancy, and for this reason, a medically-indicated MRI can be performed at any trimester. The risk of harming the pregnancy versus the benefit of the scan should be considered, and the MRI should wait until after pregnancy when appropriate.

- A common patient concern regarding the utilization of MRI imaging is claustrophobia and anxiety during the MRI exam. Anxiety attacks have been found to occur in as many as 2% of MRIs, with as many as 1% resulting in premature cessation of the study.

- Proximity to the magnetic field is a source of risk for the patient, and stepwise measures are in place to ensure that ferromagnetic materials do breach specific zones surrounding the magnet. All patients are screened before MR imaging is approved, but special attention should be paid to those with known exposure to shrapnel, bullets, or other metal fragments. Implanted medical devices are susceptible to the magnetic field with the potential for altered function, positioning of the hardware, and possible temperature changes. Many implanted devices, such as prosthetic heart valves, stents, and artificial joints, are safe for MRI but cause imaging artifacts.