Generally, the most common type (primary congenital milia) manifests at birth, but its onset in premature newborns could manifest weeks later. Milia lesions commonly are asymptomatic and will resolve spontaneously during the first months of life. However, clinical information may change according to the milia subtype.

When acquired (secondary milia), usually affect older children, and a previous history of trauma or bullous skin disease could be present. This type of milia may persist without treatment.

**Classification of Milia**

**Primary Milia**

- Congenital

- Benign primary milia of children and adults

- Milia en plaque

- Nodular grouped milia

- Multiple eruptive milia

- Nevus depigmentosus with milia

- Genodermatosis-associated

**Secondary milia:**

- Disease-associated

- Medication-associated

- Trauma-associated

**Physical Examination**

Typically, congenital milia lesions occur spontaneously. They consist of small white to yellow papules, less than 3 mm in diameter, and have a smooth dome shape. They could be associated with a faint blue hue in darkly pigmented skin. Milia vary from solitary to multiple-grouped lesions. Usually found on the face, characteristically, with the nose being involved most of the time.

Benign acquired milia of children and adults also develop spontaneously. The distribution in children and adults of this type of milia favors the eyelids, cheeks, forehead, and genitalia area.

Lesions of milia en plaque manifest as an erythematous plaque covered with multiple milia. They can reach several centimeters in size.

Another type includes the acquired and widespread multiple eruptive milia, which appears abruptly over weeks to months. Multiple eruptive milia also, in most cases, occur sporadically. Nonetheless, it may be inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion without other evident anomalies or be associated with certain genodermatosis.

Milia-related lesions to genodermatosis have been documented in association with Brooke-Spiegler syndrome, pachyonychia congenita type 2, and basal cell nevus syndrome, among others.

Disease-associated milia may occur with blistering skin diseases, such as porphyria cutanea tarda or epidermolysis bullosa.

Milia also happen secondary to chronic topical steroid use with underlying atrophy and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use.

Secondary traumatic milia most commonly arise after skin burns, skin grafting, dermabrasion, or radiotherapy.