# Continuing Education Activity

Osteoarthritis is a common condition involving articular surfaces that can develop gradually over time into a debilitating condition, which causes pain and restriction of motion. An estimated 80% of Americans have an episode of low back pain during their lifetime. Low back pain is one of the most common causes of healthcare visits in the United States, accounting for over 45 million trips in 2006. Spine osteoarthritis is a primary source of chronic low back pain. While most cases of spine arthritis-related pain are self-limited, requiring only conservative therapy, chronic back pain attributes to the cause of significant healthcare dollars. Twenty-three percent of individuals experiencing chronic low back pain accounts for most healthcare dollars spent on back pain each year in the United States. One hundred to 200 billion dollars are spent annually on back pain alone in the U.S.A. This activity reviews the role of the interprofessional team in the treatment of spinal osteoarthritis. It discusses its prevalence in the United States and other parts of the world and its clinical presentation, differential diagnosis, complications, treatment options, and potential preventative factors.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of spine osteoarthritis medical conditions.
- Review the appropriate evaluation for suspected spine osteoarthritis.
- Review the treatment and management options available for patients with spine osteoarthritis.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance spine osteoarthritis and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Osteoarthritis is a common condition involving articular surfaces that can develop gradually over time into a debilitating condition, which causes pain and restriction of motion. An estimated 80% of Americans have an episode of low back pain during their lifetime.

Low back pain and spine arthritis are among the leading health-related causes of disability and reduction in patient quality of life. The number of back pain cases continues to increase with the current obesity epidemic and increased life expectancy. Furthermore, low back pain accounts for an estimated 149 million lost workdays each year in the United States. These lost wages substantially affect America’s gross domestic product.

Arthritis can affect any articular surface; it is more likely to affect weight-bearing joints, including the joints of the spinal column.

# Etiology

Despite the lack of evidence to delineate a specific etiology and pathogenesis of spine arthritis, several risk factors are critical in its development. Osteoarthritis traditionally was thought to be a disorder directly linked to "wear and tear." Degenerative changes over time were theorized to lead to osteophyte formation and cartilage loss.

Genetically, researchers have linked over 80 gene mutations involved in osteoarthritis. The 143383 nucleotide polymorphism is arguably the most critical, secondary to its role in developing, maintaining, and repairing synovial joints.

The role of epigenetics in osteoarthritis includes more rapid phenotypic variance for cellular microenvironmental changes. For example, the MMP-13 and IL-1 beta promoter play a significant role in the maintenance of cartilage. The MMP-13 enzyme is associated with cartilage matrix destruction in osteoarthritis. Demethylation of the MMP-13 promoter is associated with an increased expression of the MMP-13 protein, which, in turn, increases cartilage matrix degeneration.

The most crucial associated risk factor for osteoarthritis among many studies is age.

Gender and ethnicity also have a role in osteoarthritis. The degree of lumbar lordosis is different between genders. Excessive curvature increases the load on the lumbar facet joints and predisposes the lower spine to degenerative changes. Changes in lumbar lordosis have a significant effect on the development of spine osteoarthritis. This change in lordosis is more pronounced in women and older men.

The contribution of ethnicity to spine osteoarthritis is mostly variable. Joint mobility is more common in whites than African Americans. Yet, there is no association between hypermobility and the development of radiographic arthritis between races. Interestingly, there is a correlation between joint hypermobility and low back pain.

Diet and obesity are also directly related to the development of osteoarthritis. Risk factors for metabolic syndrome are independently associated with the development of osteoarthritis, including central obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure, and hyperlipidemia.

# Epidemiology

Radiographic evidence of spine osteoarthritis is widespread. In patients over the age of sixty, 95% of men and 70% of women have at least one indicator of arthritis. Cervical spine osteoarthritis is present in over 80% of individuals over the age of 55.

# Pathophysiology

As patients age, the functional integrity of their spines deteriorates and predisposes patients to degenerative changes as a result of the alterations in load-bearing forces.

Arthritis becomes advanced due to the decline in viscoelastic properties of synovial fluid, primarily attributable to hyaluronic acid, which serves as a lubricant and shock absorber for the spine.

# Histopathology

As patients age, their cervical spines begin to go through degenerative changes. Splitting and fissuring of the vertebra and osteophyte formation occur. Aging causes calcified cartilage thickness, and the subchondral bone thickness at the osteocartilaginous junction changes to increase.

# History and Physical

The typical presentation of patients with symptomatic osteoarthritis of the spine is pain, stiffness, and motion restriction, which is commonly accompanied by referred pain.

In many cervical spine osteoarthritis cases, patients complain of shoulder, posterior head, and anterior chest pain. If pain persists longer than one to two weeks, or there are neurological symptoms present such as numbness, tinglingly loss of grip strength, or there is fever or crepitus on range of motion, patients may require further evaluation.

Warning signs or red flags should also merit consideration as part of the initial evaluation of osteoarthritis of the spine. Review of systems should include numbness, loss of bowel or bladder continence, fever, chills, or the presence of saddle anesthesia.

Physical exam should include inspection and palpation of the area of reported history. Furthermore, active and passive range of motion testing of the spine should also be complete. Pronounced or reduced lordosis or kyphosis should also be documented, and the patient's gait and posture should also undergo assessment. Point tenderness over the spinous process requires differentiation from paraspinal muscle hypertonicity. Muscle strength, sensation, and deep tendon reflex testing are indicated depending on the location of the patient's pain. If there is a concern for myelopathy, the patient will experience upper motor neuron symptoms such as spasticity, an ataxic gait, hyperreflexia, or a positive Babinsky sign on the exam. Special tests are also necessary if radiculopathy is suspected, such as the Spurling test and straight leg raise.

# Evaluation

History and physical exam are essential in the diagnosis of spine osteoarthritis. However, a broad differential diagnosis is critical to rule out other, more threatening causes of back pain. Labs or imaging are often part of the evaluation of osteoarthritis of the spine. Less common but potentially severe etiology of back pain include infection, neoplasm, inflammatory disease, myelopathy, and aortic aneurysm or dissection.

Plain films in an acute setting should be limited to patients with spinal pain suggestive of systemic disease or trauma — other more advanced imaging modalities, including MRI and CT. When there is high suspicion for a possible infection, neoplasm, or persistent and or severe neurological deficits such as severe lumbar radiculopathy, the patient requires advanced imaging. More severe etiologies of a patient's pain are more common in an elderly population. A herniated nucleus pulposus can occur at all levels of the spine but most often occurs in the lower cervical (C5 to C6 and C6 to C7) and lumbar segments (L4 to L5 and L5 to S1). Early evaluation in an elderly population with advanced imaging is recommended for persistent pain.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of spine osteoarthritis includes conservative management, pharmacological interventions, and invasive procedures. The various treatment modalities get determined by the etiology of the osteoarthritis, duration of the patient's pain, neurological symptoms, and physical exam findings. The American College of Physicians Clinical Guidelines Committee (ACPCGC) guideline helps direct clinicians in managing low back pain. The committee's goal is to avert unnecessary costs associated with non-evidence-based management of low back pain.

One of the most beneficial traditional therapy techniques is exercise therapy.

Additionally, physical therapy improves patient pain and function.

Diet and nutritional supplements also play a role in managing osteoarthritis and should be combined with exercise therapy.

Obesity is a risk factor for osteoarthritis; thus, weight management paramount.

Acetaminophen is a first-line treatment for low back pain.

Patients with chronic low back pain associated with osteoarthritis should be screened for depression and treated appropriately with cognitive behavioral therapy or antidepressants. Statin therapy also lowers the risk of developing osteoarthritis of the spine and prevents disease progression in patients with hyperlipidemia. Statin therapy exerts a chondroprotective effect and decreasing inflammatory cytokines.

Spinal manipulation is a viable treatment option for those with acute and chronic back pain. The clinical significance of the benefits of spinal manipulative therapy has been variable across studies and will require more research.

Invasive techniques in treating spine osteoarthritis include facet joint injections, epidural injections, acupuncture, medial branch nerve ablation, and surgical intervention.

Furthermore, a herniated disc with radicular pain, mild to moderate neurological deficits for greater than four to six weeks may require surgery. Spondylolisthesis with progressive or severe neurological deficits is also an indication for surgery. Back pain resulting in significant functional impairment and has lasted for more than a one-year duration warrants surgical intervention consideration.

Of the five studies that compared surgical treatment versus non-surgical treatment, one study found no difference in pain at the two-year follow-up appointment. The other four studies suggested surgical treatment consistently improved pain but not walking ability over different periods, and five to 18 percent of these patients suffered from unwanted side effects post-surgery. However, the studies were of low-quality evidence, and further research is needed to make clinical recommendations.

Cauda equina syndrome (CES) is a severe condition most commonly caused by a lumbar spine disc herniation in patients 31 to 50 years old. Most often, the disc herniation occurs between L4 and L5. Any space-occupying lesion, including spinal stenosis, cysts, infections, and tumors, can compress the cauda equina and should be on the differential diagnosis. CES is defined as having five characteristic features, including bilateral neurogenic sciatica, saddle anesthesia, bladder dysfunction, decreased anal tone, and sexual dysfunction. It is important to note that symptoms of CES can initially be subtle. Thus, a thorough history is paramount in guiding the diagnosis and treatment of this condition, which can be difficult in the setting of severe pain. However, clinical diagnosis is challenging. Even experienced clinicians have a 43 percent false-positive rate in the diagnosis of CES.

Nonetheless, it is essential to diagnosis this condition early in its course to improve prognosis and prevent residual neurological deficits and potential litigation. Gold standard imaging for diagnosis is MRI. Urgent surgical management is required if CES is present.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of conditions that cause back pain is extensive and varies by region. In the cervical area, possible etiologies include

- Rheumatic diseases: fibromyalgia, polymyalgia rheumatica, rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, degenerative joint disorders, diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis

- Trauma: fractures, dislocations, soft tissue injury

- Regional conditions: myofascial pain, osteomyelitis, septic discitis, septic arthritis, synovial cyst, torticollis syndrome

- Bone conditions: Paget disease, osteomalacia, osteoporosis, metastatic tumor

- Neurological: meningitis, cerebral palsy, paralysis of cervical muscles.

Many of the etiologies of low back pain have similar presentations. A mechanical origin of low back pain is the most common cause, representing 97% of cases of acute back pain. Lumbar strain or sprain is the number one cause of mechanical low back pain accounting for 70% of cases.

While the list is not comprehensive, the etiologies of thoracolumbar back pain include:

- Mechanical: lumbar strain/sprain, degenerative conditions, herniated disc, spinal stenosis, compression fracture, spondylolisthesis, fracture, congenital disease

- Non-mechanical: neoplasia, infection, inflammatory conditions, Scheuermann disease, Paget disease

- Visceral disease: pelvic organ disease, renal disease, aortic aneurysm, gastrointestinal disease

# Prognosis

Approximately 80% of the United States experiences low back pain at least one time during their life.

Neck pain is also widespread and affects greater than one-third of the general population at some point in their lives. As patients age, osteoarthritic change to the cervical spine becomes more common. Most cases of neck pain are self-limited, lasting less than one week, and not necessarily perceived as neck pain.

Osteoarthritis is a chronic, degenerative disease. In most cases, patients are asymptomatic. Arthritis is a product of aging. Prognosis often is a function of the severity of osteoarthritis. For example, severe lumbar radiculopathy caused by arthritic changes and spinal stenosis can require surgical intervention. Patients whose osteoarthritic back pain is so critical they require surgical intervention have a worse prognosis than patients with milder symptoms.

# Complications

The osteoarthritis cascade causes many complications as the disease progresses. Osteoarthritis of the spine can cause pain, functional impairment, and disability. Pathologically osteoarthritis can cause spinal stenosis, herniated nucleus pulposus, myelopathy, radiculopathy, spondyloarthritis, and spondylolisthesis.

Spondylosis is a complication that can cause radiculopathy, myelopathy, and vascular impingement.

Spinal stenosis can lead to two clinical syndromes, including cervical myeloradiculopathy and lumbar neurogenic claudication. Stenosis of the lumbar spine can manifest as persistent or intermittent pain, weakness, dermatomal sensory symptoms exacerbated by standing or walking and relieved by sitting or lying down.

Herniated discs cause persistent low back pain in one to two percent of the population from 35 to 45 years old.

Degeneration in the lumbar spine can eventually lead to degenerative spondylolisthesis, which most commonly occurs at L4 on L5, in which the superior vertebral segment slides forward on the inferior segment as a result of the weakened facet joint.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Low back pain is a widespread condition that affects the majority of patients in their lifetime. Providers need to educate patients on this condition and the various treatment measures to prevent developing chronic back pain. Shared decision-making is a crucial part of an active educative effort between a physician and patient and should be individualized based on patient needs. All education efforts should include key components regarding disease information and emotional support as it pertains to social influences and self-management. Specifically, the diagnosis, prognosis, and management are components of discussion in patients with spondyloarthritis of the spine.

One study identified that patients most often requested consultation for self-management, emotional management, and the disease process. Moreover, the patient should assume an active role in this decision-making process.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Back pain is one of the most common causes of healthcare visits and costs a tremendous amount each year. The etiology of back pain is far-reaching and complicated due to a long differential diagnosis. The diagnosis of osteoarthritis is difficult to correlate with the origin of a patient's back pain. Therefore, it is essential to develop an interprofessional approach that reaches many levels of healthcare to provide optimal treatment for patients suffering from this condition. Primary care providers provide education and preventative strategies for patients with back pain. As the first contact with patients, they help prevent unneeded testing and invasive procedures, ultimately improving patient quality of life. Physical therapy and home strengthening programs prolong the potential need for future surgery in patients with chronic back pain. Orthopedic and neurological surgeons, as well as pain medicine physicians, can facilitate care when the etiology of back pain is uncertain, or there is a more concerning cause for the pain, such as spinal stenosis with neurological deficits or cauda equina. Pharmacists can oversee the pharmaceutical care rendered for this type of pain, ensuring that the clinician prescribes the right agents at the correct dose and ensuring that adverse events remain in check. Less invasive procedures such as facet joint injections and epidural injections provide for symptomatic pain relief. Surgical intervention may be necessary.