Nausea, vomiting, orthostatic hypotension, headache, dizziness, and cardiac arrhythmia are the most common side effect of dopamine agonists.

Long-term use of dopamine agonists may cause choreiform and dystonic movements and psychiatric disturbances. Hallucinations, delusions, confusion, depression, and mania are some of the most common adverse effects related to the long-term use of these medications. Impulse control disorders such as hypersexuality, excessive gambling or shopping, hyperphagia, obsessive hobbying have been reported in patients treated with pramipexole and ropinirole.

Irresistible sleep attacks may occur in patients who are taking pramipexole and ropinirole. Symptoms such as increased sedation, yawning, drowsiness, somnolence, and daytime sleepiness have been observed with dopamine agonist use.

Dopamine agonist use requires caution in patients with a medical history of hypertension, cardiovascular, renal, and hepatic disease. The use of ergot dopamine agonists has correlations with an increased risk of fibrotic disorders. Pulmonary fibrosis, pleural effusion, and pleural thickening can occur in long-term bromocriptine and cabergoline therapy. Cabergoline and pergolide were associated with an increased incidence of cardiac valve regurgitation. Therefore, pergolide has been removed from the US market. Bromocriptine and cabergoline are not recommended for treating Parkinson’s disease as it requires long-term use at a relatively higher dose in Parkinson’s disease than hyperprolactinemia.