Over 1 billion people living on this planet are yearly affected by the parasitic disease. This condition mainly affects poor people, which leads to an enfeebling disability, and frequently ostracism. Healthcare professionals should focus on massive drug administration in the community to tackle this global burden. An interprofessional team approach is necessary to improve the health status of patients suffering from these diseases. Therefore, the healthcare specialist team approach consisting of pharmacists, nurses, and clinicians needs to collaborate for better outcomes. Long term community program needs to be executed in the endemic regions for a favorable outcome. Mebendazole is one of the most commonly used antihelminthic drugs. It is available throughout the globe because of its low price and limited toxicity profile. There is an increasing incidence of treatment failure in treating hookworm infections with mebendazole. So, there is a huge challenge for exploring new treatment modalities in managing neglected tropical diseases.

This drug is tolerated well most of the time with only a few adverse reactions; however, mebendazole must not be used without practitioner monitoring or permission due to the risk of severe adverse reactions like pancytopenia; this work also requires an interprofessional team, coordinating between the prescribing clinician, nursing staff, and the pharmacist. [Level 3]

Pharmacists should be associated with the supervision of a patient taking mebendazole as they help create a proper formulation for the patient. Mebendazole may be confused with metronidazole, so it requires a careful check before dispensing the drug to the patient. The interprofessional coordination of the team will provide the best possible care to the patients while treating with this drug. [Level 5]