# Continuing Education Activity

Mitral stenosis is one of the common valvular diseases encountered in cardiology clinics, and rheumatic heart disease is the most common cause of mitral stenosis, especially in low-middle-income countries. Mitral stenosis, if left untreated results in significant morbidity and mortality and there is no definite medical therapy for severe mitral stenosis. Percutaneous balloon mitral commissurotomy (PMBC) is recommended as the first choice of treatment for mitral stenosis if the valve is pliable and there is no evidence of left atrial appendage thrombus. While the surgical valve repair / replacement is limited to patients not deemed candidates for percutaneous intervention. This activity reviews the role of percutaneous intervention in the management of MS. It will also discuss the indications, contraindications, and the role of the interprofessional team in the management of patients with mitral valve disease.

**Objectives:**
- Review the indications and contraindications of the catheter management of mitral stenosis.
- Explain the importance of perioperative echocardiography for successful catheter management of mitral stenosis.
- Describe the different steps of the catheter management of mitral stenosis.
- .Summarise the most common complications associated with the catheter management of mitral stenosis.

# Introduction

Mitral stenosis (MS) is a progressive valvular disorder that results in left atrial enlargement, atrial fibrillation, and heart failure.

The key physical examination findings in hemodynamically significant mitral stenosis may include irregularly irregular pulse (due to atrial fibrillation), prominent a wave in the jugular venous examination, tapping apex beat, signs of pulmonary hypertension/right-heart failure, an opening snap, and the classic low-pitched, mid-diastolic rumbling murmur with presystolic accentuation.

Medical therapy is used as an initial symptomatic treatment for severe mitral stenosis; however, it does not improve the long-term outcomes of the disease.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The mitral valve is located between the left atrium and the left ventricle. The mitral valve apparatus is a complex anatomical structure consisting of a mitral annulus, mitral valve leaflets, chordae tendineae, and papillary muscles.

Rheumatic mitral stenosis occurs as a result of a chronic inflammatory process. It is characterized by the thickening of the edges of the mitral valve leaflets leading to commissural fusion and reduction in the mitral valve opening in diastole.

# Indications

The contemporary clinical practice guidelines recommend Percutaneous Mitral Balloon Commissurotomy (PMBC) in the following patients with rheumatic mitral stenosis.

- Symptomatic patients with severe rheumatic mitral stenosis having valve morphology suitable for PMBC and do not have left atrial thrombus or moderate to severe mitral regurgitation (MR) qualify for PMBC as class I (Level of Evidence A)

- Severely symptomatic patients with severe mitral stenosis, having valve morphology not suitable for PMBC but are not candidates for mitral valve surgery, qualify for PMBC as class IIb (Level of Evidence B)

- Asymptomatic patients with severe rheumatic mitral stenosis having valve morphology suitable for PMBC and do not have left atrial thrombus or moderate to severe MR qualify for PMBC as class IIa (Level of Evidence B) if pulmonary artery systolic pressure is >50 mmHg.

- Asymptomatic patients with severe rheumatic mitral stenosis having valve morphology suitable for PMBC and do not have left atrial thrombus or moderate to severe MR qualify for PMBC as class IIb (Level of Evidence C) if they developed new-onset atrial fibrillation.

- Severely symptomatic patients with moderate rheumatic mitral stenosis, having valve morphology suitable for PMBC, and do not have left atrial thrombus or moderate to severe MR, qualify for PMBC as class IIb (Level of Evidence C) if found to have hemodynamically significant MS based on pulmonary artery wedge pressure of >25 mm Hg or mean mitral valve gradient of >15 mm Hg on exercise.

- Asymptomatic women with severe rheumatic mitral stenosis, who are considering pregnancy, have valve morphology suitable for PMBC, and do not have left atrial thrombus or moderate to severe MR,  qualify for PMBC before pregnancy as class IIa (Level of Evidence C)

# Contraindications

Percutaneous mitral balloon commissurotomy should not be performed in patients with a left atrial thrombus, the heavily calcified mitral valve having morphology unfavorable for PMBC, and moderate to severe mitral regurgitation (3+ or 4+). Other contraindications may include active infective endocarditis, acute thromboembolic stroke, mitral annular calcification, subvalvular fibrosis, and other valvular abnormalities requiring surgical correction. Mitral valve surgery is recommended in patients with symptomatic severe mitral stenosis with a contraindication to PBMV.

# Equipment

Percutaneous mitral balloon commissurotomy (PMBC) is an invasive procedure performed in the cardiac catheterization laboratory under general anesthesia. The following equipment is required for this procedure.

- Fluoroscopy machine

- Echocardiographic machine with transesophageal probe

- Invasive hemodynamic monitoring system

- Vascular access sheaths

- Supporting sheath for transseptal puncture

- Transseptal puncture needle (BRK)

- Inoue balloon

# Personnel

Percutaneous mitral balloon commissurotomy requires a multidisciplinary team.

# Preparation

**Preprocedural Assessment**

Preprocedural assessment of the mitral valve is the most crucial step of PMBC, and it determines the procedural success and long-term outcomes of the procedures.

Multiple echocardiographic scoring systems have been developed to assess the suitability of mitral valve for PMBC and predict the outcomes of the procedure. Wilkin`s score was one of the first scoring systems proposed to predict the results of PMBC, and it is the most commonly used scoring system in the contemporary era.

A score of 8 or less predicts a more favorable outcome than those with a higher score. However, a score higher than 8 does not exclude a patient from having a balloon mitral commissurotomy. Although commissural calcification or fusion is not included in Wilkin`s scoring system, it is another important predictor for poor outcomes after balloon mitral commissurotomy.

In addition to evaluating valve morphology, a transesophageal echocardiogram is done in every patient before PMBC to assess the degree of mitral regurgitation and left atrial (appendage) thrombus. Left atrial thrombus is most commonly found in the left atrial appendage, and a transesophageal echocardiogram has a higher sensitivity than a transthoracic echocardiogram for evaluating left atrial appendage thrombus.

**Preparation for the Procedure**

On the day of the surgery, patients receive instructions to fast at least 6 to 8 hours before the procedure. Anticoagulation therapy is held prior to the procedure. At least two peripheral venous lines are required to administer drugs, and electrocardiographic leads are placed to monitor rhythm. Patients are selectively intubated, and the procedure is performed under general anesthesia. Before performing the percutaneous transcatheter balloon mitral valvuloplasty, a right heart catheterization is done to assess the pressures inside the invasive cardiac hemodynamics.

# Technique or Treatment

**Percutaneous Mitral Balloon Commissurotomy**

The guidelines recommend performing percutaneous mitral balloon commissurotomy (PMBC) in a comprehensive heart valve center with cardiac surgery backup.

If the measurements meet the criteria to continue the procedure, then a guide wire is advanced into the left atrium. The femoral vein and interatrial septum are both dilated to ease the delivery of the Inoue balloon-tipped catheter. Once dilated, the balloon-tipped catheter is threaded over the guide wire in the left atrium and positioned at the site of the mitral valve. The tip of the balloon is dilated first, then the rest of the balloon is dilated to open the narrowed orifice of the mitral valve. This procedure is usually monitored under transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) and fluoroscopy.

Following commissurotomy, direct measurement of transmitral gradients is done along with an echocardiographic assessment of the transmitral gradients, and the mitral valve area is calculated using planimetry. Mitral valve regurgitation is also assessed with a transesophageal echocardiogram. If there is still significant stenosis with mild-to-moderate mitral regurgitation, the procedure is then repeated 1 mm below the maximal diameter. Once optimal results are obtained, the left atrial hemodynamics are repeated to calculate a new post-procedure residual transmitral gradient, and the post-operative planimetered mitral valve area is measured.

A right heart catheterization is then obtained to assess the right side of the heart hemodynamics, along with a left ventriculogram to evaluate mitral regurgitation severity. Guidelines recommend obtaining an echocardiogram a few days after PMBC as the pressure half-time calculation for the mitral valve area may be inaccurate due to post-procedure compliance changes in both the atrium and ventricle. An assessment of mitral regurgitation and atrial septal defect should be performed as well. A yearly clinic review and echocardiographic assessment are required. Anticoagulation should be continued in patients with paroxysmal or chronic atrial fibrillation. If mitral stenosis recurs, PBMV can be repeated. At that time, if there are significant valvular anatomic abnormalities, surgical mitral valve replacement would be recommended.

# Complications

The complications of PMBC depend on the operator`s expertise and patient selection. Vascular access site complications are the most common complications in PMBC, which are compatible with a right heart catheterization. The common vascular access-related complications include hematoma, retroperitoneal bleeding, arteriovenous fistulae, and pseudoaneurysm.

# Clinical Significance

The main advantages of PMBC are the lower cost and avoidance of a thoracotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass. One study revealed that the pathophysiology of mitral stenosis results in a decrease in coronary flow reserve (CFR). Therapy with PMBC significantly improves CFR and subsequently leads to improved cardiac output from the right and left chambers.

Proper patient selection and appropriate balloon sizing during the procedure can help improve outcomes and prevent PMBC complications.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Percutaneous transcatheter mitral valve procedures are complex procedures requiring multiple specialties evaluation to determine the best procedural approach for the best outcome.

- The specialty-trained cardiology nurse should assist with patient and family education and patient monitoring throughout the procedure providing feedback to the clinician if untoward changes in vital signs or rhythms occur. They should also assist in providing follow-up care to the patient.

- The specialty-trained pharmacist should evaluate the patient's medication use, making sure that drug-drug interactions that could complicate the procedure are avoided and communicating concerns with the clinical team.

- The clinical team should complete the procedure with surgical specialists readily available to assist with complications.

An interprofessional team approach will lead to the best outcomes. [Level 5]