The management of the patient with optic neuritis (ON) requires the close coordination of a variety of healthcare professionals.

The initial treatment is managed by a neuro-ophthalmologist or a neurology team familiar with the guidelines derived by the Optic Neuritis Treatment Trial (ONTT).

The probability of developing multiple sclerosis (MS) within 15 years of the initial ON attack is 50%

For patients with MS or at high risk for developing MS, an array of healthcare specialists come together to provide comprehensive care.

The healthcare team provides a wide range of services, some of which are listed below.

A complete team will include a combination of the following providers:

- Neurology team to manage the diagnosis and treatment.

- Neurologist
- Advanced practice professionals (APP)

- Nurse practitioners and advanced practice nurses (NP)
- Physician assistants (PA)

- Rehabilitation specialists to enhance strength, physical stability, and musculoskeletal function.

- Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PMR) physician management.
- Physical therapists (PT) to facilitate strength, balance, range of motion, and alleviate musculoskeletal pain.
- Occupational therapists (OT) to facilitate activities of daily living skills.

- Medical specialists

- Mental health specialists

- Psychiatrists/psychologists to manage mental health concerns.
- Clinical social workers to provide appropriate resources, advocate for patient rights.


- Neuro-ophthalmologists to manage visual deficiencies related to neurologic disease.
- Low vision specialists present aids to ameliorate the barriers inherent to diminished visual function.
- Urologists/gynecologists

- Pharmacists to provide patient education and monitor the complex medication regimen.

- Primary care providers coordinate overall health status and manage concomitant conditions.

- Well-being professionals provide lifestyle modifications that benefit nutrition, fitness, and resilience.