# Continuing Education Activity

Bowel ischemia can classify as small intestine ischemia, which is commonly known as mesenteric ischemia and large intestine ischemia, which generally referred to as colonic ischemia. Intestinal ischemia occurs when at least a 75% reduction in intestinal blood flow for more than 12 hours. Abdominal pain is the most common symptom in patients with intestinal ischemia. This activity describes the etiology, evaluation, and management of bowel ischemia and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
-  Identify the etiology and risk factors associated with bowel ischemia
- Outline the imaging options available to diagnose ischemic bowel.
- Summarize the treatment options of bowel ischemia.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to treat bowel ischemia and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Bowel ischemia can affect a small or large intestine and can occur by any cause, which leads to intestinal blood flow reduction.****These areas mostly supplied by the marginal artery; however, in 50% of the population, this artery is poorly developed. Watershed areas account for about 70% of ischemic colitis cases. The colon venous drainage is the parallel of arterial supply. The superior mesenteric vein drains the areas supplied by SMA, and an inferior mesenteric vein drains the left side of the colon and the rectum.

# Etiology

Intestinal ischemia occurs when at least a 75% reduction in intestinal blood flow for more than 12 hours.

**Mesenteric Ischemia**

Generally, mesenteric ischemia (MI) can be divided based on the timing of onset into acute and chronic.

1-Mesenteric arterial embolism-Usually, mesenteric arterial embolism is seen in patients with cardiovascular disease. The common cardiac causes are including myocardial infarction, mitral stenosis, cardiac arrhythmias, ventricular aneurysm, and valvular endocarditis. Vascular causes can happen anywhere from the heart to the origin of SMA, which include mycotic aneurysm, atheromatous plaques in the aorta, or vascular aortic prosthetic grafts.

2-Intestinal hypoperfusion or nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia (NOMI) usually involved who presents with a systemic shock, which can be due to cardiac, infection, or hypovolemia.

3-Mesenteric arterial thrombosis-The risk of mesenteric arterial thrombosis is increased in patients with advanced age, peripheral artery disease, traumatic injury, and low cardiac output states.

4-Mesenteric venous thrombosis can happen in patients with acquired and inherited hyper coagulopathy conditions.

**Chronic Mesenteric Ischemia**

In chronic mesenteric ischemia, the diffuse atherosclerotic disease is an account for 95% of cases. Female with age greater than 60,

# Epidemiology

An acute decrease in mesenteric arterial blood flow causes 60% to 70% of patients with mesenteric ischemia. The rest of the causes are related to colonic ischemia and chronic mesenteric ischemia.

# Pathophysiology

The splanchnic circulation varies based on the feeding or fasting state. Despite high intestinal vasculature, oxygen extraction is low from the intestinal arteries. This physiology permits the liver to receive enough oxygen through the portal vein.

# Histopathology

Necrosis of the mucosal villi is the initial change, which usually happens within 3 to 4 hours after intestinal ischemia. Following that, transmural, mural, or mucosa infarction can happen. Splenic flexure and rectosigmoid junction are the common susceptible area to hypoperfusion and hypoxia. Initially, in response to the injury, the intestinal wall becomes congested. It then appears edematous, friable, and hemorrhagic. Without intervention, bowel hemorrhage can occur within 1 to 4 days. Subsequently, enteric bacteria leads to intestinal gangrene and perforation.

# History and Physical

A careful review of the patient's medical conditions and family history is essential for the evaluation of intestinal ischemia. The history of cardiac disease

# Evaluation

Laboratory tests in intestinal ischemia are nonspecific. In the early stage of the disease, complete blood cell count can be normal, but with the progression of the ischemia, leukocytosis with the leftward shift, elevated amylase, and lactate dehydrogenase levels may be observed.

# Treatment / Management

**Acute Mesenteric Ischemia**

Due to high mortality rates in patients with AMI, it is essential for urgent medical treatment. Initial treatments include maintenance of adequate oxygen saturation, hemodynamic stability, and correction of electrolyte abnormalities. Typically, 2 to 4 units of blood products should be made available. Vasopressors should be avoided. Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy with coverage of colonic flora is the recommended intervention to prevent and treat sepsis. Bladder catheterization, nasogastric tube decompression, correction of acid/base abnormalities, and intravenous fluid administration are implemented preoperatively. The patient's pain should be controlled, preferably by using parenteral opioids.

**Endovascular Intervention Versus Surgical**

The data indicate that in patients with acute mesenteric arterial occlusion, an endovascular intervention can be as effective as traditional surgical.

****Endovascular Intervention****

- 
**Pharmacologic or Mechanical Thrombectomy**

(1) Mechanical thrombectomy

Access to SMA can is possible through the femoral or brachial artery (antegrade approach). Despite the antegrade approach, in a retrograde approach, the device exposed SMA distal to the obstruction at the time of laparotomy.

(2) Catheter-directed thrombolysis

Catheter-directed thrombolysis is indicated in patients with distal mesenteric embolization or incomplete aspiration embolectomy.

- 
**Balloon Angioplasty**

Mesenteric artery angioplasty is usually followed by stenting, which may be appropriate in select patients. Based on device insertion, it can be classified in 2 fashions.

**2-Surgical**

- 
**Abdominal Exploration and Damage Control**

Regardless of the etiology of intestinal ischemia, in patients suspected of intestinal infarction or perforation based on clinical, radiographic, or laboratory tests, exploratory laparotomy should not be delayed.

-  **Revascularization**

(1) Embolectomy

Open superior mesenteric artery embolectomy is a good option in patients with indications for open surgical intervention. After midline abdominal incision, the proximal superior mesenteric artery can be visible and palpable. Then with a transverse arteriotomy, the clot can be extracted by a Fogarty embolectomy catheter.

(2) Mesenteric bypass

Although SMA revascularization can be performed in several ways, superior mesenteric artery bypass is the common method in acute mesenteric arterial occlusion. Mesenteric bypass perfuses the blood from inflow vessel (such as an iliac artery, aorta, etc.) to the distal of occlusion lesion.

A second-look laparotomy is needed for most patients after mesenteric revascularization for acute mesenteric arterial occlusion to reevaluate the bowel 24 to 48 hours after the initial operation.

**NOMI or Colonic Ischemia**

Usually, the treatment of NOMI or colonic ischemia focuses on removing insulting factors (vasoconstrictive medications), hemodynamic support and monitoring, treating the underlying cause (sepsis, heart failure), and the administration of intra-arterial vasodilation medications. However, selected patients may require exploratory laparotomy. The colonic ischemia divided into three groups: mild, moderate, and severe ischemia according to the hemodynamic parameters, presence of risk factors, laboratory test results, radiological and colonoscopic findings to guide the treatment.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for bowel ischemia is broad and includes all diseases that can present with abdominal pain. The most common and important diseases can be categorized based on pain localization.

**Upper Abdominal Pain**

- Gallstones

- Acute cholecystitis/cholangitis

- Hepatitis/perihepatitis/liver abscess

- Epigastric pain

- Pancreatitis

- Peptic ulcer disease

- Gastroparesis

**Lower Abdominal Pain**

- Acute appendicitis

- Diverticulitis

- Kidney stone/pyelonephritis

- Infectious colitis

**Diffuse Abdominal Pain**

- Obstruction

- Inflammatory bowel disease

- Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis

- Cancer (colorectal/gastritis/pancreatic)

# Prognosis

The prognosis of intestinal ischemia depends on the underlying mechanism. The mortality rates in acute mesenteric ischemia can exceed 60%.

# Complications

- Bowel infarction and a bowel perforation

- Gangrenous and necrotic bowel

- Sepsis

- Endotoxemia with bacterial translocation

- Toxic megacolon

- Multiple organ failure

- Fibrosis

- Fistula

- Colonic stricture

# Consultations

- The interventional radiologist should be consulted for the infusion of papaverine and thrombolytics medications.

- The surgical team should be ready for possible exploratory laparotomy.

- Vascular surgeon consultation is recommended for possible vascular intervention.

- Gastrointestinal doctors should be consulted for the evaluation and diagnosis of the patient.

- Intensive critical unit doctors should be consulted for patient's admission.

- Pharmacist consultation should be ordered for identifying the offending drugs and choosing the preference for medication therapy.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

There are various ways the patient can be educated about these diseases, which can prove essential for patient care. In the initial phases, the patients should be informed about the possible ways the disease can present. The understanding of the signs and symptoms from the patients promptly can turn out to be the most crucial factor. Early and timely intervention is the cornerstone in the management, and it can be possible if patients seek care very early when they develop the signs.

# Pearls and Other Issues

An interprofessional team member should be aware of the signs and symptoms of intestinal ischemia. Prompt recognition of the disease and early treatment can decrease the morbidity and mortality rate of intestinal ischemia. Severe abdominal pain out of proportion of physical examination should arise acute mesenteric ischemia. In intestinal ischemia, plain x-ray film has limited diagnostic value for the evaluation of AMI.  Laboratory test has limited value for the diagnosis of a patient with intestinal ischemia. CTA should be initial imaging in patients with suspicion of AMI.NOMI should consider in and critically ill patients with abdominal pain who needs pressor support. After the diagnosis of AMI was made, fluid resuscitation, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and anticoagulation medication should be started. Immediate exploratory laparotomy should be performed in patients with peritonitis signs.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Bowel ischemia frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma. These patients may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms such as vomiting, nausea, and leukocytosis. The cause of bowel ischemia can be due to small intestinal ischemia(known as mesenteric ischemia) and large intestinal ischemia(known as colonic ischemia). Mesenteric ischemia is categorized based on the etiology of ischemia, which includes mesenteric arterial embolism, mesenteric arterial thrombosis, NOMI, mesenteric venous thrombosis, and chronic mesenteric ischemia. While the physical exam may reveal that the patient has a surgical abdomen, the cause is difficult to know without proper imaging studies. While the diagnose of bowel ischemia was made, it is essential to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that include a general surgeon, vascular surgeon, gastrointestinal physician, interventional radiologist, and intensive care unit physician. The nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional group as they will monitor the patient's vital signs and assist with the education of the patient and family. In the postoperative period for pain, wound infection, and ileus, the pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the right analgesics, antiemetics, and appropriate antibiotics. Also, Pharmacist consultation should be ordered for identifying the offending drugs and choosing the preference for medication therapy. The radiologist also plays a vital role in determining the cause. Without providing a proper history, the radiologist may not be sure what to look for or what additional radiologic exams may be needed. The American College of Radiology Appropriateness Criteria is evidence-based guidelines for mesenteric ischemia that are reviewed by an interprofessional expert committee. The current guidelines have been developed after an exhaustive review of current medical literature from peer-reviewed journals to determine the appropriateness of radiological imaging and treatment procedures by the committee. The summary of recommendations is as follows. CTA abdomen and pelvis with IV contrast is the recommended initial imaging examination for patients with suspected acute mesenteric ischemia. CTA abdomen and pelvis with IV contrast or MRA abdomen and pelvis without and with IV contrast is recommended as the initial imaging examination in patients with suspected chronic mesenteric ischemia. CTA abdomen and pelvis with IV contrast have been shown to provide the best accuracy and inter-reader agreement for grading mesenteric vessel stenosis compared to MRA and US.