Differential diagnoses of pinguecula are as  follows:

- Pterygium: It gradually progresses to encroach the cornea. When it involves the pupillary area, it affects the visual acuity of the patient, or it may reduce the uncorrected visual acuity due to induced astigmatism even when the pterygium does not involve the pupillary area.

- Conjunctival foreign body: Conjunctival foreign body is recognizable by slit-lamp examination of the eye—the patient complaints of foreign body sensation and watering of the eye surface. The conjunctival foreign body is removable with a sterile disposable needle.

- Phlycten: Can occur anywhere on the conjunctiva. It appears as an elevated summit and stains with fluorescein dye. The phlycten is due to a hypersensitive reaction to an endogenous allergen. It is usually associated with Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

- Nodular Scleritis: Nodular scleritis is associated with severe pain. Scleral inflammation correlates with a distinct nodule in nodular scleritis.

- Limbal dermoid: The limbal dermoid is a pale yellow mass. The common location is the inferior temporal limbus. It may involve the conjunctiva and cornea.

- Conjunctival malignant melanoma: Conjunctival malignant melanoma is a rare malignant tumor of the conjunctiva. It is visible as a raised elevated pigmented lesion associated with a feeder vessel.

- Conjunctival epithelial inclusion cyst: Conjunctival epithelial inclusion cyst is a cystic swelling filled with clear fluid. Patients are usually asymptomatic.

- Ocular surface squamous neoplasia: Ocular surface squamous neoplasia is a common malignancy of the ocular surface. Patients complain of redness and foreign body sensation. They usually present in the interpalpebral conjunctiva. It gradually approaches the limbus. It is usually associated with a sentinel vessel.

- Conjunctival naevus: Conjunctival naevus is a benign lesion of the conjunctiva. They are flat pigmented lesions.