Procaine penicillin is administered via the deep IM route only. As described below, great care must be taken not to inadvertently inject this drug intravenously (IV) as significant adverse effects can result.

The concentration of drug manufactured is typically 600000 units of penicillin per milliliter with a typical range of dosing in adults from 600000 to 2.4 million units per dose given once per day. When given as post-exposure prophylaxis for anthrax in adults, the regimen is more frequent, every 12 hours. For children, 50000 units/kilogram is the usual dose without exceeding the adult maximum for a given indication. Depending on the indication, pediatric dosing usually is administered daily or divided to be given twice daily.

The drug typically comes in a preloaded syringe containing either 1 mL or 2 mL of a suspension ready-mixed for administration. In the adult, the preferred injection site is the upper outer quadrant of the buttock to avoid sciatic nerve toxicity. In infants and small children, the mid-lateral aspect thigh may be preferable to the gluteus. In light of this, the manufacturer recommends avoiding injecting the gluteus altogether in children under two years old. The manufacturer, in all cases, only recommends deep IM injection and varying injection sites with repeat dosing.

With deep IM injection, serum levels of penicillin plateau at four hours and slowly fall over the next 15 to 20 hours, with the highest tissue levels seen in the kidneys and lesser levels in the liver, skin, and intestines. Cerebrospinal fluid penetration represents a very small amount of drug. Approximately 60% of penicillin G is bound to serum protein. It then follows that penicillin G is removable via hemodialysis. Renal tubular excretion accounts for 60% to 90% of the excretion of the parenteral dose over 24 to 36 hours. At this time, no discrete recommendations exist for dose adjustment in the setting of chronic renal insufficiency, acute renal injury, or chronic renal failure. If procaine penicillin is suspected of causing impairment of renal function due to interstitial nephritis, discontinuation of the drug and subsequent alternative therapy and indicated consultation is the recommended course of action.