Euthyroid sick syndrome has been classified as (1) low T4 syndrome, (2) low T3 and low T4 syndrome, (3) high T4 syndrome, and (4) other abnormalities of the thyroid.

Low serum total T3 level is the most common abnormality in euthyroid sick syndrome, and it is seen in about 70% of hospitalized patients. The serum level of reverse T3 (rT3) is increased in euthyroid sick syndrome, except in renal failure. Elevated rT3 level is predominantly due to decreased activity of the type I iodothyronine 5'-monodeiodinase (deiodination of T4 to T3 as well as rT3 to 3,3'-diiodothyronine).

Both low T3 and low T4 syndrome are usually observed in the most critically ill patients admitted to intensive care units. Low serum total T4 correlates with a bad prognosis; thyroid binding globulin level is usually within normal, and the free T4 index is low in those patients. This combination of findings in euthyroid sick syndrome has been explained by the presence in the circulation of a thyroid-binding hormone inhibitor.

The free T4 level is reduced in euthyroid sick syndrome patients who had received treatment with drugs like dopamine and steroids that promote decreased TSH levels. Serum thyroid binding globulin level is increased in patients with acute intermittent porphyria and chronic hepatitis, causing normal free T4 and high serum total T4 levels. Total, as well as free T4 concentrations, are increased in patients who have been treated or exposed to amiodarone and radiocontrast agents such as iopanoic acid. These substances cause a decrease in the hepatic uptake of T4 and 5' monodeiodination of T4 to T3, and they can potentially precipitate hyperthyroidism in patients with an autonomous thyroid nodule by accelerating the Jod Basedow phenomenon.

HIV patients have unusual variations of thyroid function, causing an increase in the T4 and TBG levels, decreases in the reverse T3 and rT3/T4 ratio, and normal T3 and T3/T4 ratio.

No imaging studies or thyroid biopsy are necessary or play any role in evaluating and managing the euthyroid sick syndrome.