Oxytocin is indicated and approved by the FDA for two specific time frames in the obstetric world: antepartum and postpartum. In the antepartum period, exogenous oxytocin is FDA-approved for strengthening uterine contractions with the aim of successful vaginal delivery of the fetus. There are three situations during the antepartum period in which oxytocin is indicated:

- For mothers who have preeclampsia, maternal diabetes, premature rupture of the membranes

- For mothers with inactive uteri that require stimulation to start labor

- For mothers with inevitable or incomplete abortions in their second trimester

In regards to the postpartum period, oxytocin is FDA-approved when it is time to deliver the placenta during the third stage of labor and control postpartum hemorrhage. A former version of oxytocin in the United States included an intranasal formula to encourage postpartum milk ejection. Other non-FDA-approved indications for exogenous oxytocin include treatment of delayed orgasm, inducing sexual arousal, and treatment of autism. Oxytocin has long been known as a hormone that plays a role in social behaviors and bonding. Because women release oxytocin during sexual intercourse, it is thought to play a role in bonding. Autism is not known to be caused by lower levels of oxytocin when compared to non-autistic people; however, previous studies have shown that giving oxytocin to children with autism seems to spark social skills. Further studies and larger sample sizes are needed.