Diagnosis of incontinentia pigmenti is based on clinical findings. Pediatricians and dermatologists are usually the first to diagnose the disease during infancy. Experts have established major and minor criteria to help make the diagnosis. Diagnostic criteria for IP have been suggested by Landy and Donnai.

If the first-degree female relative does not show evidence of IP, the **m****ajor criteria**include

**Typical Neonatal Rash**

- Erythema

- Vesicles

- Eosinophilia

**Typical Hyperpigmentation**

- Mainly trunk

- Blaschko's lines

- Fading in adolescence

**Linear, Atrophic, Hairless Lesions**

**Minor criteria**or 'supportive evidence' in cases not showing evidence of IP in a first-degree female relative include:

- Dental involvement

- Alopecia

- Woolly hair/abnormal nails

- Retinal disease

At least one of the major criteria is necessary to confirm a diagnosis, but minor criteria support the diagnosis of sporadic IP. The absence of all minor criteria makes the diagnosis of IP 'uncertain.' If there is evidence of IP in a first-degree female relative, then the following features are needed either alone or in combination:

**Suggestive History or Evidence of Typical Rash**

**Skin manifestations of IP**

- Hyperpigmentation

- Scarring

- Hairless streaks

- Alopecia at vertex

**Anomalous Dentition**

**Woolly Hair**

**Retinal Disease**

**Multiple Male Miscarriages**

Recently, the diagnostic criteria of IP have been revised to include the four stages of IP skin lesions as significant criteria. The minor criteria or the supportive evidence include 'dental anomalies, ocular anomalies, CNS anomalies, alopecia, abnormal hair (sparse hair, wooly hair, anomalies of eyebrows and eyelashes), abnormal nails, *alate anomalies, nipple and breast anomalies, multiple male miscarriages, and typical skin pathohistological findings.' According to this revised diagnostic criteria by Minic and colleagues, the conditions needed to establish the diagnosis of IP include:

**No evidence of IP in a first-degree female relative:**If lacking genetic IKBKG mutation data, at least two or more major criteria or one major and one or more minor criteria are necessary to make a diagnosis of sporadic IP,

**In the case of confirmed IKBKG mutation typical for IP:**any single major or minor criterion is satisfactory for IP diagnosis,

**Evidence of IP in a first-degree female relative**: Any single major or at least two minor criteria,

**In all cases:**eosinophilia and skewed X-chromosome inactivation support diagnosis.

If clinical features are not evident, molecular genetic testing to identify IKBKG mutation is diagnostic. The most effective molecular genetic testing is single-gene testing. A skin biopsy can also be considered. Histopathologic features will vary based on the stage of clinical findings.

Ocular investigations include fundus photo, fundus fluorescein angiogram (FFA), optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the retina, and OCT-angiography (OCTA). FFA features include abnormal vascular loops, capillary nonperfusion areas, vascular anastomoses, pathologically straightened peripheral retinal vessels, and new vessels.

Neuroimaging plays an important part in the diagnosis of CNS involvement.