The management of FL depends on the disease stage. Options available for the treatment of follicular lymphoma include radiation (RT), immunochemotherapy (Rituximab plus chemotherapy), Bundamustine with immunotherapy, R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone), immunochemotherapy plus RT, CVP (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisolone), single-agent rituximab, and observation until progression. The choice of regimen depends on the stage of the disease, preference of physician, and preference of the patient.

In stage 1 lymphomas, radiation therapy is preferred in grades 1, 2, and 3a lymphomas. In contrast, patients with grade 3b FL are treated with aggressive regimens (such as R-CHOP) used for other aggressive lymphomas (e.g., diffuse large B cell lymphoma).

Treatment of stage II-IV FL is mainly focused on the improvement of life, alleviation of symptoms, and reversal of cytopenias. Asymptomatic patients are mostly observed closely without any intervention. Anti-CD20 antibodies (obinutuzumab, rituximab) are combined with chemotherapy regimens for the treatment of symptomatic advanced follicular lymphomas.

Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is the preferred management for recurrent/relapsed patients or patients who have undergone a transformation to higher grade lymphoma. Patients with advanced, relapsed, or refractory disease are encouraged to take part in clinical trials of new therapies like CAR-T cell therapy (chimeric antigen receptor T cells)