**Cancer Related Differential Diagnoses of Lumbosacral Plexopathy**

It is important for the clinical to consider other differential diagnoses for cancer-related lumbosacral plexopathies.

- Radiation-induced plexopathy is the most common and can be hard to differentiate.

- Intra-arterial chemotherapy with resultant chemotoxicity to the plexus

- Paraneoplastic plexopathy

- Postinfectious plexopathy

- Leptomeningeal involvement or epidural cord compression

- Primary plexus tumors.

**Radiation-induced Lumbosacral Plexopathy**

Patients with pelvic tumors and other tumors with metastasis to the abdominal pelvic region receive regional radiation therapy. For the clinician, the important clinical dilemma faced is distinguishing radiation-induced plexopathy from recurrent tumor. The two conditions may coexist in the same patient adding to the complexity.

Mechanisms of plexus injury related to radiation include direct toxic effect on the axons in the vasa vasorum with secondary microinfarction. The overall frequency of radiation-induced plexopathy (cervical, brachial, lumbosacral) in treated patients is 1.8 to 4.9%. Plexopathy can develop across a wide time range from 3 months to 14 years with a median onset at about 1.5 years post-radiation. Hypofractionated regimens and lower total radiation dose decrease the risk of radiation-induced plexopathy. Chemotherapy may potentiate the development of radiation plexopathy.

Certain distinguishing clinical features help differentiate radiation plexopathy from neoplastic lumbosacral plexopathy.

- Radiation plexopathy often presents with dysesthesias and numbness, and often there is lymphedema.

- Pain, unlike in neoplastic LSP, is usually less frequently encountered (10%), milder in RILSP, and appears later.

- Bilateral plexus involvement is more common with Radiation plexopathy.

- There may be periods of quiescence between periods of exacerbation.

- Progression is generally slower than with neoplastic plexopathy.

- Electromyography (EMG) in RILSP typically shows myokymic discharges, seen in up to 60% of the patients, however, this does not rule out tumor recurrence.

- An increased T 2 signal may be seen on MRI with both, but nerve enhancement is not seen with RILSP (but seen with neoplastic LSP). Local tissue necrosis may be noted with RILSP

- Positron emission tomography (PET) with 2-fluorodeoxyglucose (2-FDG) may be of value in the identification of recurrent tumors. PET scan is usually negative with RILSP.

Management of RILSP is symptomatic, with some data supporting the use of hyperbaric oxygen. Nerve transfers/reconstruction have been tried with minimal success.