The ulnar nerve is a sensorimotor nerve that arises from the lower trunk of the brachial plexus, converts into the medial cord, further diving into fibers of C8 and T1. It provides motor innervation to the intrinsic hand muscles, except the flexor carpi ulnaris, the flexor digitorum profundus medially, the thenar, and lumbrical muscles. The ulnar nerve also provides sensory innervation to the medial aspect of the forearm, wrist, fourth digit, and the entire fifth digit.

In the clinical setting, the typical patient presentation includes pain, numbness, paresthesia, and the fifth digit and medial aspect of the fourth digit. Often, these symptoms can be exacerbated by flexion of the elbow, especially while sleeping. If the neuropathy is more severe, patients may complain of hand weakness and frequent dropping of objects.

Intrinsic hand muscle atrophy, especially of the first dorsal interosseus, may also be seen. Additionally, a weak abductor digiti minimi and positive Froment sign are indicative of ulnar neuropathy. When testing for the Froment sign, the patient is asked to grasp a piece of paper between the first and second digits while the examiner attempts to pull the paper out from the patient's grasp. The Froment sign is considered positive if there is noticeable hyperflexion at the interphalangeal joint of the flexor pollicis longus, which is a compensatory mechanism for a weakened adductor pollicis longus.

Wartenberg's sign is used to assess the motor weakness of the ulnar nerve. In this test, the patient is instructed to hold their fingers fully adducted with the metacarpophalangeal joint, proximal interphalangeal, and distal interphalangeal joints in full extension. If it is found that the small finger drifts away from the others into abduction, this is known as a positive Wartenberg sign.