Correction of chronic academia with alkali administration is warranted to prevent its catabolic effects on bone and muscles. Correction of metabolic acidosis requires Oral bicarbonate replacement at 1-2 meq/kg per day by sodium bicarbonate or potassium citrate

High doses of bicarbonate greater than 10 mmol/kg per day are required to treat type 2 RTA. Raising the serum bicarbonate concentration will increase the filtered bicarbonate load above the proximal tubule's reduced absorptive capacity, resulting in a marked bicarbonate diuresis, so a larger amount of alkali is required to account for these urine loses. Increased bicarbonate concentration in urine induced by alkali therapy also increases urinary potassium losses because increased sodium and water delivery to the distal tubule stimulates potassium secretion. Administration of potassium salts minimizes the degree of hypokalemia associated with alkali therapy. Thiazide diuretics cause volume depletion which will enhance bicarbonate reabsorption in type 2 RTA.

Hypophosphatemia due to decreased proximal phosphate reabsorption and reduced activation of vitamin D also occurs in some patients and may be a major contributor to the development of bone disease. Thus, both phosphate and vitamin D supplementation may be required to normalize the serum phosphate and reverse the metabolic bone disease.

Fludrocortisone 0.1 mg per day is effective in managing hyperkalemia associated with aldosterone deficiency. However, it is not usually used because hypertension, heart failure, and edema may be exacerbated in patients with renal insufficiency. Most patients can be effectively managed with a limitation of dietary potassium to 40 to 60 mEq per day and, if necessary, diuretics, for example, loop or thiazide