Mitral stenosis is evaluated using noninvasive and invasive measures. Noninvasive tests are electrocardiograms (ECG), chest X-rays, echocardiograms, and exercise echocardiograms. An invasive test for mitral stenosis would include a cardiac catheterization.

On the ECG, the P wave changes suggest left atrial enlargement. The presence of right axis deviation and right ventricular hypertrophy suggests severe pulmonary hypertension. ECG frequently detects atrial arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation.

On the chest X-ray, the early stages of mitral stenosis findings are normal heart size, straightening of the left border of the cardiac silhouette, prominent main pulmonary arteries, dilatation of the upper pulmonary veins, and displacement of the esophagus by an enlarged left atrium. During the severe chronic stage of mitral stenosis, the chest X-ray will have enlargement of all the chambers, pulmonary arteries, and pulmonary veins.

An echocardiogram is useful for assessing mitral stenosis etiology, morphology, severity, and treatment intervention. The analysis of the morphology of the mitral valve apparatus includes leaflet mobility and flexibility, leaflet thickness, leaflet calcification, subvalvular fusion, and the appearance of commissures. The Wilkins score grades each of the components of the mitral apparatus from 1 to 4: leaflet mobility, thickness, calcification, and impairment of the subvalvular apparatus. The Padial score grades the leaflet thickening (separately), the commissural calcification, and the subvalvular disease from 1 to 4. The Wilkins score of less than 8, Padial scores of less than 10, and less than moderate regurgitation have better outcomes after a catheter-based balloon mitral valvotomy procedure.

An exercise echocardiogram is performed using an upright treadmill or supine bicycle with Doppler recording of transmitral and tricuspid valve velocities. This measures the transmitral gradient and pulmonary artery systolic pressure at rest and with exercise.

Cardiac catheterization is an invasive procedure. Cardiac catheterization should be performed to assess the severity of mitral stenosis when noninvasive tests are inconclusive or when there is a discrepancy between noninvasive tests and clinical findings regarding the severity of mitral stenosis (Class I, Level of Evidence C).

**Classification of Severity of Mitral Valve Stenosis**(Adapted from the ACC/AHA 2020 Valve Guidelines)

**Mitral Valve Anatomy According to the Wilkins Score**

Grade 1

- Mobility: Highly mobile valve with only leaflet tips restricted

- Thickening: Leaflet near normal in thickness (4 mm to 5 mm)

- Calcification: A single area of increased echo brightness

- Subvalvular Thickening: Minimal thickening just below the mitral leaflets

Grade 2

- Mobility: Leaflet mid to base portions have normal mobility

- Thickening: Mid leaflets normal, considerable thickening of margins (5 to 8 mm)

- Calcification: Scattered areas of brightness confirmed to leaflet margins

- Subvalvular Thickening: Thickening of chordal structures extending to one of the chordal length

Grade 3

- Mobility: Valve continues to move forward in diastole, mainly from the base

- Thickening: Thickening extending through the entire leaflet (5 mm to 8 mm)

- Calcification: Brightness extending into the mid portions of the leaflets

- Subvalvular Thickening: Thickening extended to the distal third of the chords

Grade 4:

- Mobility: No or minimal forward movement of the leaflets in diastole

- Thickening: Considerable thickening of all leaflet tissue (more than 8 mm to 10 mm)

- Calcification: Extensive brightness throughout much of the leaflet tissue

- Subvalvular Thickening: Extensive thickening and shortening of all chordal structures extending down to the papillary muscles.