Cycloplegics are drugs that paralyze the ciliary muscles and cause relaxation of accommodation. Once the ciliary muscles are relaxed, the anterior zonules stretch, and posterior zonules lose tension leading to thinning of the lens. This allows the eye to be relaxed and helps in focusing on distance.

Cycloplegic drugs are the anticholinergic agents that block acetylcholine's muscarinic action in ciliary muscle receptors. This inhibits the cholinergic stimulation of the iris sphincter and ciliary muscles, allowing relaxation of accommodation and inhibiting the accommodative power of the eye.

The various cycloplegic agents are atropine sulfate, homatropine hydrobromide, cyclopentolate hydrochloride, and tropicamide.

**Atropine Sulphate**

It is an anticholinergic agent that acts directly on muscarinic receptors of structure innervated by post-ganglionic parasympathetic fibers. It is available in 0.01%, 0.5%, 1% and 3% topical ophthalmic drops and ointment. For refraction, 1% atropine ointment should be applied as a morning dose for three days. Atropine is one of the strongest drugs available for cycloplegia. It paralyzes the sphincter pupillae and ciliary muscles, thus causing mydriasis and cycloplegia. Atropine is a competitive inhibitor of the muscarinic action of acetylcholine.

Apart from its use as a cycloplegic agent, atropine is also indicated for pupillary dilatation in inflammatory conditions to prevent pain and release synechiae. It is also used in ciliary block glaucoma, for penalization as part of amblyopia management, to treat accommodation spasms, to prevent undue vagal response in Tensilon test, and pre and post-operatively in some intraocular surgeries. Low dose atropine in the form of 0.01% topical application is widely accepted to control myopia progression. Atropine is contraindicated in patients with primary angle glaucoma or narrow anterior chambers. It is also contraindicated among those with hypersensitivity to any preparation components.

**Homatropine Hydrobromide**

It is an anticholinergic agent used as a 2% sterile ophthalmic solution. It acts in the same manner as atropine by blocking the muscarinic action of acetylcholine, thus causing mydriasis and cycloplegia. It is also used for penalization therapy in amblyopia and to treat ocular inflammatory conditions like iritis. This is used as one drop repeated every 10 minutes six times for performing cycloplegic refraction. Retinoscopy can be performed after about 90 minutes of installing the first drop. The effect lasts for 48 to 72 hours. A drug correction of 0.5D is done from the retinoscopy value as tonus allowance.

**Cyclopentolate Hydrochloride**

It is also an anti-cholinergic agent used as a 1% sterile ophthalmic solution as a cycloplegic action. It is also available as 0.5% and 2% formulations. Cyclopentolate has a faster onset of action and a shorter duration of effect. Cycloplegia action occurs in 30 to 45 minutes of instillation. It is applied as one drop and repeated after 5 minutes. The effect of the drug lasts 6 to 18 hours. A drug correction of 0.75D is done from the retinoscopy value as tonus allowance.

**Tropicamide**

This is a commonly used anti-cholinergic mydriatic drug. The drug has a powerful mydriatic effect, fast onset of action, and low side effect profile. Tropicamide is available at a dose of 0.5% and 1%. It works by blocking the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. The 1 % preparation paralyzes the accommodation. The 0.5% strength produces mydriasis with slight cycloplegia. Tropicamide is implicated in mydriasis and cycloplegia, diagnosis, and short-acting mydriatic for pre and post-operative stages. The pupillary dilatation is less dependent on iris pigmentation. For premature infants combination of 2.5% phenylephrine and 5% is recommended due to less dilatation alone.

**Characteristic Features of Cycloplegics and Mydriatics******

**S. No**

**Drug**

**Age Group**

**Dose**

**Peak effect**

**Timing of Retinoscopy**

**Duration of action**

**Cycloplegic effect**

**Tonus allowance**

**1**

Atropine

Sulfate (1% ointment)

Below 5 years

Three times x 3 days

2-3 days

4 day

10-20 days

After 3 weeks of retinoscopy

1 D

**2**

Homatropine

hydrobromide

(2% drops)

5-8 years

One drop for every 10 mins ( 6 times)

1-1.5 hours

After 90 minutes of drug administration

2-3 days

After 3 weeks of retinoscopy

0.5 D

**3**

Cyclopentolate hydrochloride (1% drops)

8-20 years

One drop every 15 mins (3 times)

80-90 minutes

After 90 minutes of drug administration

(Havener's recommended dose)

6-18 hours

After 3 days of retinoscopy

0.75 D

**4**

Tropicamide (0.5%, 1% drops)

Above 15 years, used as a mydriatic

One drop every 15 mins (3-4 times)

20-40 minutes

-

4-6 hours

-

-