The suboccipital nerve innervates the group of four suboccipital muscles, namely the rectus capitis posterior major, rectus capitis posterior minor, obliquus capitis superior, and obliquus capitis inferior.

The rectus capitis posterior major forms the medial border of the suboccipital triangle. It originates from the bifid spinous process of the C2 vertebra before extending superolaterally to insert just below the nuchal line of the occipital bone. It is a head extensor and ipsilateral rotator of the head and the atlas.

The rectus capitis posterior minor muscle lies outside the suboccipital triangle, situated between the rectus capitis posterior major and the midline. It originates on the posterior arch of the atlas (C1 vertebra) and extends superiorly to insert below the nuchal line of the occipital bone, just medial to the insertion of the rectus capitis posterior major. It is a weak extensor of the head.

The obliquus capitis superior forms the superolateral border of the suboccipital triangle. It originates from the transverse process of C1 (atlas) and fans out superiorly to insert on the occipital bone between the superior and inferior nuchal lines. It is a lateral head flexor.

The obliquus capitis inferior forms the inferolateral border of the suboccipital triangle. It originates just below the origin of the rectus capitis posterior major on the bifid spine of the C2 (axis) vertebra and traverses superomedially to inserts on the transverse process of the atlas, just medial to the origin of the obliquus capitis superior. It rotates the atlas ipsilaterally.