A flail chest represents a major traumatic injury that can be disabling. The injury is best managed by an interprofessional team with good communication, and a coordinated interprofessional response so that optimal care can be provided. When you consider the main determinants in the management of a flail chest; maintaining adequate ventilation, adequate pain control, and pulmonary toilet, they all require multiple providers working together for a successful outcome.

Most patients do require admission and some may require ICU care. Nurses who look after these patients need to be aware of the potential complications and when to consult with the clinician managing the case. Respiratory therapy is usually involved to help patients cough, clear secretions, and maintain a patent airway. A pain specialist is a must because most patients have moderate to severe pain.

The dietitian should be involved to ensure proper nutrition and the prevention of muscle wasting. Oxygenation can be an issue and some patients may require mechanical ventilation. Other patients may require surgery to stabilize the fractured rib segments. These patients often have a prolonged stay in the hospital and the nurses have to ensure that the patient has DVT and stress ulcer prophylaxis. Finally, physical therapy is necessary to ensure that the patient does not lose muscle mass or develop contractures. Only through such an interprofessional team approach can the morbidity of the disorder be reduced.

**Outcomes**

Data indicate that flail chest when associated with other organ injury has a mortality rate of 5 to 10%. Complications that may occur include ARDs, sepsis, respiratory failure, and pneumonia. Overall, patients who do not require mechanical ventilation have better outcomes compared to patients who are intubated. Even in the absence of another organ injury, the recovery after a flail chest is prolonged. Most patients take 6-12 months before they can fully recover and some continue to have chest pain for many years.