Although there is still more to discover about the particulars of lithium, valproic acid/divalproex, and carbamazepine, a suggested common mechanism for their mood-stabilizing abilities is inhibition of the inositol uptake process, resulting in inositol depletion. In this proposed mechanism, the myo-inositol monophosphate transporter and its respective mRNA become downregulated by the above-mentioned three major mood-stabilizing agents.

**Lithium:**Lithium’s mechanism of action is still under investigation for its neuroprotective benefits. However, the currently proposed inositol depletion hypothesis explains that lithium downregulates polyphosphoinositide signaling by acting as an uncompetitive inhibitor of inositol monophosphatase and inositol polyphosphate 1-phosphatase. Thus, lithium inhibits neuronal excitation, leading to its benefits as a mood stabilizer.

**Divalproex:**Divalproex—or valproate, valproic acid—is an anticonvulsant drug that functions as a mood stabilizer and antiepileptic agent by enhancing the inhibitory effect of gamma aminobutyric-acid (GABA). This therapy reduces repetitive neuronal firing and can reduce inhibition and excitation within neuronal networks.

**Carbamazepine:**Carbamazepine follows suit with the other mood-stabilizing agents mentioned, with an additional specific mechanism of action identified wherein cAMP accumulation becomes inhibited, resulting in the downregulation of the inositol transporter.

**Lamotrigine:**Lamotrigine, like valproate, is an anticonvulsant. Its mechanism of action involves reducing only the frequency (and not amplitude) of excitatory postsynaptic currents in the CNS, causing a decrease in glutamate release while causing a concomitant increase in frequency and amplitude of inhibitory postsynaptic currents, which enhances GABA release. Therefore, lamotrigine causes opposite effects on glutamate and GABA transmission, downregulating glutamate release and increasing GABA release.