**Classification**

**Classic 21-Hydroxylase Deficiency**

Salt-wasting (severe form, with a defect in cortisol and aldosterone biosynthesis)

Approximately 75% of patients with classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency have the salt-wasting type. It is the most severe form of the disease, and it is most often associated with large gene deletions or intron mutations that result in no enzyme activity.

The biochemical and clinical abnormalities of the classic form manifest both prenatally and postnatally. Physicians recognize the condition in infant females in the neonatal period because of ambiguous genitalia compared with that of infant males. Males have normal genitalia and, in the case of the salt-wasting form, they can present with nonspecific symptoms like vomiting, dehydration, and poor feeding at ages 1 to 3 weeks. Hence, the diagnosis in boys can be delayed or missed.

Since aldosterone regulates sodium homeostasis, untreated patients will have excessive renal sodium excretion resulting in hypovolemia and hyperreninemia. These patients cannot excrete potassium efficiently and are prone to hyperkalemia, especially in infancy. In addition, accumulated steroid precursors may directly antagonize the mineralocorticoid receptor and exacerbate mineralocorticoid deficiency, particularly in untreated patients. Progesterone is well known to have anti-mineralocorticoid effects.

Cortisol deficiency contributes to poor cardiac function, poor vascular response to catecholamine, a decreased glomerular filtration rate, and increased secretion of antidiuretic hormone. Cortisol and aldosterone deficiency together cause hyponatremic dehydration and shock in inadequately treated patients.

Since high levels of glucocorticoids are needed for normal development of the adrenal medulla, as well as, for expression of the enzymes required to synthesize catecholamines, patients with salt-wasting type may also have catecholamine deficiency, further increasing the shock.

Females are exposed to high systemic levels of adrenal androgens from week 7 of gestation. Thus, they have ambiguous genitalia at birth: a large clitoris, rugated and potentially fused labia majora, and a common urogenital sinus instead of separate urethra and vagina. The uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries are normally formed, but there is no development of Wolffian ducts.

Postnatally, in untreated or inadequately treated patients, long-term exposure to high sex hormones promotes rapid somatic growth and advanced bone age. Linear growth is affected, even with close therapeutic monitoring. Pubic and axillary hair may develop early. Clitoral growth may continue in girls. Young boys may have penile growth despite having small testes. Long-term exposure to androgens may activate the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, causing centrally mediated precocious puberty.

Girls may present with oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea in adolescence. As surgical, medical, psychological treatments have improved, more women with 21-hydroxylase deficiency, have completed pregnancies and giving birth.

The prevalence of testicular adrenal rests in boys with classic CAH aged 2 to 18 years varies from 21% to 28%. These so-called testicular adrenal rest tumors are benign, often related to suboptimal therapy, and usually, a decrease in size after optimization of glucocorticoid therapy. Testicular masses in boys with classic CAH are usually bilateral and smaller than 2 cm in diameter and therefore not palpable but detectable by ultrasound.

************Simpl**********e Virilizing (normal aldosterone biosynthesis)**

Approximately 25% of patients with classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency present with simple virilization without salt wasting. The simple virilizing form most commonly results from point mutations that lead to amino acid substitution, causing low but detectable enzyme activity resulting in adequate aldosterone secretion, but decreased levels of cortisol.

Females present at birth with ambiguous genitalia. Without newborn screening, affected boys are diagnosed in childhood when signs of androgen excess develop. Later diagnosis is associated with greater difficulty in achieving hormonal control, and short stature.

****Non-classic 21-Hydroxylase Deficiency (mild form)****

The nonclassic or late-onset form is more common, occurring in 0.1% to 0.2% in the general white population and 1% to 2% among Ashkenazi Jews. Females with the nonclassic form may be compound heterozygotes with a classic mutation and variant allele or heterozygotes with two variant alleles, allowing 20% to 60% of normal enzymatic activity.

Compound heterozygote females have a less severe phenotype, and clinical presentation varies. Females may present at any age but usually not younger than 6 months. Heterozygote females may have mild biochemical abnormalities but no clinically important endocrine disorder.

Patients with nonclassic form, have normal levels of cortisol and aldosterone at the expense of mild to moderate overproduction of sex hormones precursors. Newborn screening can detect nonclassic cases, but most are missed because of relatively low baseline levels of 17 hydroxyprogesterone.

Hirsutism is the single most common symptom at presentation, followed by oligomenorrhea and acne. Thus, nonclassic 21-hydroxylase deficiency and polycystic ovarian syndrome may present in similar ways.