Because HBAT can only interact with the unbound toxin, patients have been shown to have better outcomes the earlier it is administered in a patient’s course.

Before the administration of HBAT, the CDC recommends a skin test to evaluate for hypersensitivity. In all cases, epinephrine and other supportive measures for allergic reactions should be readily available. However, in the packaging insert, the FDA suggests that patients at high risk for hypersensitivity should be given HBAT at less than 0.01 mL per minute.

HBAT is delivered as a vial that must be thawed and prepared prior to administration. If the vial is frozen upon receiving it from the CDC, there are two ways of thawing the contents.

- Place in the refrigerator at 2 to 8 C for about 14 hours (not recommended as the time to administer the antitoxin is critical)

- Place at room temperature for 1 hour and then in a water bath at 37 C (more rapid)

Important points regarding the handling of the antitoxin from the FDA insert:

- Once thawed, the antitoxin may not be refrozen.

- Do not use if the vial has discolored or turbid fluid, and look for particles other than “a few translucent-to-white proteinaceous particulates.”

- As soon as the vial is opened, anti-toxin must be used as quickly as possible.

- Do not shake the vial.

- Discard any excess antitoxin.

Botulinum antitoxin is given in a 1 to 10 dilution with 0.9% normal saline only by IV through a continuous pump. FDA specifies using a 15 micron sterile, non-pyrogenic, low protein binding in-line filter. When drawing up antitoxin, each vial must be evaluated closely as vials with different lot numbers will contain different volumes. The FDA recommends that when diluting the antitoxin, even if the pediatric dosing calls for a percentage of the vial, to withdraw the entire volume in the vial to ensure the dose administered is the most accurate.

**Dosing per FDA Botulinum Antitoxin Insert**

Adults (17 years old and up) have a starting infusion of 0.5 mL per minute; if the infusion rate is tolerated, the rate can be doubled every 30 minutes. The maximum infusion rate is 2 mL per minute. The dose is 1 vial.

Pediatric patients (age 1 to younger than 17 years old) have a starting rate of 0.01 mL/kg per minute, which can be increased by 0.01 mL/kg per minute every 30 minutes if tolerated. The maximum infusion rate is 0.03 mL/kg per minute, and the rate is not to exceed the adult rate.

In infants (younger than 1 year of age), the dose is 10% of the adult dose with a starting infusion rate of 0.01 mL/kg per minute. The infusion rate can also be titrated by 0.01 mL/kg per minute if tolerated. The maximum infusion rate is also 0.03/mL/kg per minute. There is a separate product available to treat infant botulism, and it must be obtained from the California Health Department, not the CDC.