Inamrinone is a phosphodiesterase-III (PDE3) inhibitor. Inodilators such as inamrinone and milrinone increase stroke volume and cardiac output by stimulating myocardial contractility and decreasing afterload from systemic vasodilation (decreased systemic vascular resistance).

Throughout the vascular network, the inamrinone-mediated increase in the bioavailability of cyclic adenosine monophosphate has an opposite effect on the mechanisms of action in the myocardium. Indeed, an increase in cyclic adenosine phosphate within the vascular smooth muscle causes a reduction in the intracellular calcium concentration, subsequently relaxing the vascular smooth muscle.****However, chronic treatment with PDE3 inhibitors deteriorates heart failure and should be avoided.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Inamrinone shows the following pharmacokinetic behavior after 1 to 2 minutes of an intravenous bolus dose in the 0.68 to 1.2 mg/kg range.

**Absorption:**The onset of action is rapid (within 5 minutes), and the peak effect is observed in 10 minutes.

**Distribution:**Inamrionone has minimal plasma protein binding, ranging from 26% to 40%. The volume of distribution is 1.2 L/ kg.

**Metabolism:**Inamrinone is metabolized by conjugation. Metabolites are N-glycolate, N-acetate, O-glucuronide, and N-glucuronide (pharmacologically inactive).

**Elimination:**In healthy volunteers, approximately 63% of the orally administered dose was excreted unchanged in urine over 96 hours, while 18% of the administered dose was excreted in feces in 72 hours. Similarly, approximately 10% to 40% of the intravenously administered dose was excreted in the urine within 24 hours. Terminal half-life is 3.6 hours in normal volunteers and 5.6 hours in patients with congestive heart failure after intravenous bolus.