The cavernous sinus works as a conduit. Cranial nerves leaving the brainstem travel through the cavernous sinus before entering the orbit to innervate extraocular and intrinsic eye muscles. Also, different venous tributaries drain into the cavernous sinus. The superior ophthalmic vein collects venous blood from the ethmoidal, vorticose, central retinal, and nasofrontal veins before draining into the anterior part of the cavernous sinus through the superior orbital fissure. The inferior ophthalmic vein, on the other hand, receives blood from the lacrimal sac, eyelids, the inferior rectus and inferior oblique muscles, the vorticose vein, and from the anterior and medial wall of the orbit. It then runs posteriorly toward the lower part of the orbit and divides into two branches. One of these branches joins the cavernous sinus, while the other one drains into the pterygoid plexus. The superficial middle cerebral originates on the lateral surface of the hemisphere, runs in the lateral sulcus, and drains most of the temporal lobe into the cavernous sinus. The sphenoparietal sinus receives blood from some branches of the middle meningeal vein before draining into the cavernous sinus. It is noteworthy to mention that efferent hypophyseal veins also drain into the cavernous sinus. After collecting venous blood from these different veins, the cavernous sinus drains to the superior and inferior petrosal sinuses, which then join the sigmoid sinus to form the internal jugular vein. The internal jugular vein exits the brain through the jugular foramen and connects with the subclavian vein to become the right or left brachiocephalic vein.