**Surgical Excision**

- Main Lesion

- Less than 0.76 mm excised with 1 cm margin.
- 0.76 to 1.0 mm excised with 2 cm margin
- More than 1 mm excised with 2cm to 3 cm margin
- Excision should be down to the fascia

Because melanoma of the skin carries a high mortality rate, prevention should be emphasized in all patients, especially fair-skinned patients. Wearing sunscreen, avoiding the sun, and checking skin annually with a dermatologist is highly recommended.

**Staging**

Once the biopsy is obtained, one moves on to assess the depth of the melanoma. Based on the Breslow Depth, the surgeon decides on surgical excision margins.

**Surgery**

Preoperatively, it is important to discuss the patient's overall plan, including the risks of the procedure, aesthetic results, and the likelihood of cure. It is important to have detailed and realistic communication with the patient about the scar that may be left after surgery, the need for regular skin cancer screening after surgery, and tobacco cessation if the patient is a current smoker. Because cancer is a systemic disease, the patient with malignant melanoma may be predisposed to more skin cancer and even other cancer types. This is why such screening is an important detail to discuss.

Once surgery plans are made, the surgeon has to decide whether a sentinel lymph node biopsy needs to be performed. Sentinel lymph node biopsy should be performed on patients with greater than 10 mm depth or less than 10 mm depth and ulcerations or high-grade pathology. A technetium colloid is injected around the lesion site, and a lymphoscintigraphy scan will determine which lymphatic drainage tract is draining the lymph node. This will decide where the sentinel lymph node biopsy will be performed. Usually, a lymphoscintigraphy scan is performed on the day of surgery.

The treatment for malignant melanoma is wide, local excision with margins noted above. Surgeons should never attempt Mohs surgery for malignant melanoma. On extremities, usually, an elliptical incision is made in a 3:1 spacing (length: width) to allow for cosmetic closure results. The incision should be carried down to superficial muscle fascia but not deep muscle fascia. Flap creation is sometimes needed to allow for tension-free closure. The incision should be made along the length of the extremity. Sometimes skin grafting is required to cover the excised region if not enough skin is available for primary closure. However, this should be a last resort, as it can be quite cosmetically unappealing.

There is a role in adjuvant interferon therapy in high-risk melanoma patients, such as ones with high-grade lesions or ulcerated melanomas. Genetic testing is available to determine who is at high risk of recurrence or in patients with a family history of melanoma or pancreatic cancer.

The most common site of metastasis to small bowel is malignant melanoma. Metastatic melanoma should be treated with surgery for palliation only and adjuvant chemotherapy and interferon therapy.

Interferon therapy works by creating antibodies in the lab that have been pre-exposed to cancer cells. Those antibodies are then injected into the patient and are ready to fight cancer cells.

After the procedure, the pathology should be candidly reviewed with the patient, including the need for further treatment (such as when sentinel lymph node comes back positive, warrants full lymph node dissection of the region) and the prognosis of the lesion based on excision and margins.

Education and prevention are the most important tools to prevent malignant melanoma. All patients should be counseled on skin cancer preventative tactics such as staying out of the sun and wearing high sun protection factor (SPF) on exposed areas even with the cloudy weather. Preventative education should start in school-aged children. Community-based programs designed to screen individuals at risk aid in early diagnosis and may ultimately improve mortality associated with malignant skin neoplasia.