# Continuing Education Activity

Health care teams and providers who prescribe, administer, or distribute opioids for chronic pain should understand the challenges of opioid prescribing, the goal to maintain adequate and safe pain control for chronic pain, and to avoid drug diversion and abuse to provide the best patient outcomes and prevent misuse. This activity outlines best practices in evaluating and managing pain with opioids and understanding the healthcare team's and provider's role in managing patients requiring opioids for chronic pain while simultaneously avoiding their misuse and/or diversion.

**Objectives:**
- Review Federal laws governing controlled substance prescribing, administration, and monitoring.
- Describe the epidemiology and extent of the opioid crisis in the United States of America.
- Outline expected findings and the treatment of acute opioid toxicity.
- Summarize how opioid stewardship involving an interprofessional approach to evaluating, treating, and managing opioids in clinical practice can lead to better patient outcomes.

# Introduction

Opioid use and misuse/abuse for acute and chronic pain are significant problems in the United States (US).

Over one-quarter of United States citizens suffer from chronic pain.

The International Association for the Study of Pain defines chronic pain as pain lasting longer than three months.

Unfortunately, studies have revealed an inherent lack of education regarding pain management in most medical schools and training programs.

Appropriate opioid prescribing includes prescribing sufficient opioid medication through regular assessment, treatment planning, and monitoring to provide effective pain control while avoiding addiction, abuse, overdose, diversion, and misuse. To be successful, clinicians must understand appropriate opioid prescribing, assessment, the potential for abuse and addiction, and potential psychological problems. Inappropriate opioid prescribing may involve not prescribing, under-prescribing, overprescribing, or continuing to prescribe opioids when they are no longer effective. These concerns are particularly prominent in patients with chronic pain. To make the challenges even worse, chronic pain patients often develop opioid tolerance and significant psychological, behavioral, and emotional problems, including anxiety and depression related to under or overprescribing opioids.

Clinicians who prescribe opioids face challenges involving medical negligence in either failure to provide adequate pain control or risk of licensure, or even criminal charges if perceived they are involved in drug-related diversion or misuse. All providers that prescribe opioids need additional education and training to provide the best patient outcomes and avoid the social and legal entanglements associated with over-and under-prescribing opioids.

**Provider Opioid Knowledge Deficit**

There are substantial knowledge gaps around appropriate and inappropriate opioid prescribing, including deficits in understanding current research, legislation, and appropriate prescribing practices. In addition, providers often have knowledge deficits that include:

- Understanding addiction

- Populations at risk for opioid addiction

- Prescription vs. non-prescription opioid addiction

- The fallacious belief that addiction and dependence on opioids are synonymous

- The belief that opioid addiction is solely a psychological problem, while in reality, it is likely a complex psychological and physiological issue that may be related to a chronic, painful disease

With a long history of misunderstanding, poor societal and provider education, and inconsistent laws, the prescription of opioids has resulted in significant societal challenges that will only resolve with significant education and training.

**Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act**

The Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act provision updates federal guidelines to expand the availability of evidence-based treatment to address the opioid epidemic. The MAT Act empowers all health care providers with a standard controlled substance license to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder (OUD), just as they prescribe other essential medications. The MAT Act is intended to help destigmatize a standard of care for OUD and will integrate substance use disorder treatment across healthcare settings.

As of December 2022, the MAT Act has eliminated the DATA-Waiver (X-Waiver) program. All DEA-registered practitioners with Schedule III authority may now prescribe buprenorphine for OUD in their practice if permitted by applicable state law, and SAMHSA encourages them to do so. Prescribers who were registered as DATA-Waiver prescribers will receive a new DEA registration certificate reflecting this change; no action is needed on the part of registrants.

There are no longer any limits on the number of patients with OUD that a practitioner may treat with buprenorphine. Separate tracking of patients treated with buprenorphine or prescriptions written is no longer required.

Pharmacy staff can now fill buprenorphine prescriptions using the prescribing authority's DEA number and does not need a DATA 2000 waiver from the prescriber. However, depending on the pharmacy, the dispensing software may still require the X-Waiver information in order to proceed. Practitioners are still required to comply with any applicable state limits regarding the treatment of patients with OUD. Contact information for State Opioid Treatment Authorities can be found here: https://www.samhsa.gov/medicationassisted-treatment/sota.

**Definitions**

- Abuse - Use of an illegal substance and/or maladaptive pattern of substance use for a non-medical purpose other than pain relief (i.e., for the sake of altering one's state of consciousness)

- Addiction* - Pursuit of a chemical substance to find relief or reward associated with diminished control over drug use, compulsive use, craving, and/or continued use despite harm

- Dependence - Physiologic reliance on a drug resulting in a withdrawal syndrome with cessation or reduction in the amount of drug administered

- Diversion - Transfering a controlled substance from an authorized person's use to an unauthorized person's use for distribution or possession

- Misuse - Use of a medication in a manner different than how it was prescribed

- Pseudoaddiction - Pursuit of additional medication due to poor pain control, with the cessation of drug-seeking behavior upon achievement of appropriate pain control

- Tolerance - The lessened effect of a substance after being exposed to that substance or the need to escalate doses to achieve the same effect

*The American Society of Addiction Medicine describes addiction as a treatable chronic disease that involves environmental pressures, genetics, an individual's life experiences, and interactions among brain circuits. Individuals who become addicted to opioids or other medications often engage in behaviors that become compulsive and result in dangerous consequences. The American Society of Addiction Medicines notes that while the following should not be used as diagnostic criteria due to variability among addicted individuals, they identify five characteristics of addiction:

- Craving for drug or positive reward

- Dysfunctional emotional response

- Failure to recognize significant problems affecting behavior and relationships

- Inability to consistently abstain

- Impairment in control of behavior

Unfortunately, most health providers' understanding regarding addiction is often confusing, inaccurate, and inconsistent due to the broad range of perspectives of those dealing with patients suffering from addiction. While a knowledge gap is present among healthcare providers, it is equally prevalent in politicians writing laws and law enforcement attempting to enforce the laws they write. Additionally, payers are responsible for the expenses associated with the evaluation and treatment of addiction. Persistent lack of education and the use of obsolete terminology continue to contribute to a societal lack of understanding for effectively dealing with addiction challenges.

In the past, the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders defined "addiction," "substance abuse," and "substance dependence" separately. Over time, the manual has eliminated these terms and now uses "substance use disorder," ranging from mild to severe.

# Etiology

**Causes of Pain**

Most patients who suffer from chronic pain complain of more than one type of pain.

There are multiple categories and etiologies of pain types, including neuropathic, nociceptive, musculoskeletal, inflammatory, psychogenic, and mechanical.

**Neuropathic Pain**

- Peripheral neuropathic pain, as in the case of post-herpetic neuralgia or diabetic neuropathy

- Central neuropathic pain - cerebral vascular accident or stroke sequella

**Nociceptive Pain**

- Pain due to actual tissue injuries such as burns, bruises, sprains, or fractures.

**Musculoskeletal Pain**

- Back pain

- Myofascial pain

**Inflammatory Pain**

- Autoimmune disorders (rheumatoid arthritis)

- Infection

**Psychogenic Pain**

- Pain caused by psychological factors, such as headaches or abdominal pain caused by emotional, psychological, or behavioral factors

**Mechanical Pain**

- Expanding malignancy

**Causes of Opioid Abuse and Associated Morbidity and Mortality**

Unfortunately, opioids as a pain treatment are associated with morbidity, mortality, and abuse of opioid therapy. Causes of opioid abuse include medical, social, and economic problems.

**Medical and Social**

Twenty years ago, a national shift occurred where clinicians were encouraged to treat pain more aggressively. Pain was considered the fifth vital "sign," and clinicians who undertreated noncancer pain potentially incurred liability, patient complaints, and licensing board complaints. At the same time, oxycodone was introduced and touted to have low addiction potential. Further, patients and clinicians concluded that it was better and safer to take prescription opioids than street drugs. The result was more than a decade of growth of prescription opioid use with severe adverse consequences for individual patients and communities.

**Economic**

Opioid use has increased due to direct marketing to consumers, promotion to physicians and pharmacists from sales forces, and illicit production and distribution of opioids. Due to the opportunity for enormous profits, "pill mills" developed where unscrupulous providers provided prescriptions for opioids that required little or no documentation. As these sources have gradually diminished, heroin use has made a resurgence.

**Manufacturers**

Since the early 2000s, various lawsuits have been filed against manufacturers and distributors of opioids, with claims that manufacturers did not provide adequate warnings regarding the addiction potential of opioids or, worse, knowingly withheld information about the risks of opioids.

**Prescribers**

Prescribers who prescribe for chronic, non-cancer pain in excess of practice guidelines, higher than normal doses, long-acting formulations, and/or large volume prescriptions with limited follow-up may increase the risk of opioid abuse and associated morbidity and mortality among patients.

**Dispensers**

Interprofessional collaboration, often mandated by states, encourages optional and safe patient care. Pharmacists and prescribers should have an open dialogue regarding prescriptions, and pharmacists must be able to obtain further information from prescribers regarding prescriptions that seem unreasonable. Pharmacists can use noninvasive means such as checking state opioid use databases and then contacting prescribers concerning patients.

# Epidemiology

**Frequency of Chronic Pain**

According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), about 20.4% of people over the age of 18 years old in the US suffered from chronic pain in 2016.

Chronic pain is estimated to cost approximately $560 billion annually in lost productivity and medical treatment.

The incidence of chronic pain is increasing due to the prevalence of obesity-related pain conditions, increased survival of trauma and surgical patients, an aging population, and heightened public awareness of pain as a treatable condition.

**Frequency of Opioid Use, Morbidity, and Mortality**

In the past, providers in the United States rarely prescribed opioids for any condition except chronic cancer pain. This approach began to change in the 1990s.  Dr. James Campbell addressed the American Pain Society in 1995 and urged healthcare providers to treat pain as the fifth vital "sign."

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of acute and chronic pain is complex and not completely understood. Research is ongoing. In general, the following provides an overview of the current understanding of pain pathophysiology.

**Acute Pain**

Acute pain is caused by the activation of peripheral pain receptors and specific A-delta and C-sensory nerve fibers (nociceptors). It is commonly a response to tissue injury. It may be classified based on time (typically pain that lasts a duration of 3 months or less).

**Chronic Pain**

Chronic pain may be classified by duration, typically pain that lasts beyond a period of 3 months.not occurred, and the pain is still classified as "chronic" (for example, pain associated with inflammatory disease or metastatic carcinoma). In fact, chronic pain may be caused by persistent activation of pain fibers secondary to ongoing tissue injury. Chronic pain may also develop from ongoing damage to or dysfunction of the peripheral or central nervous system (i.e., in the case of neuropathic pain).

**Nociceptive Pain**

Nociceptive pain receptors may be somatic or visceral.

Somatic pain receptors are located in the subcutaneous tissues, fascia, connective tissues, endosteum, periosteum, joint capsules, and skin—stimulation results in pain that is typically well localized.

Visceral pain receptors are located in the viscera and connective tissue. Visceral pain may be due to infection, stretch, distension (i.e., fluid or gas), or compression (i.e., tumors) of hollow organs. This pain is deep, cramping, poorly localized, and may be referred to a remote site. Visceral pain from injury of connective tissue or organ capsules may be more localized and sharp.

**Neuropathic pain**

Neuropathic pain typically occurs when there is metabolic, traumatic, infectious, ischemic, toxic, and/or immune-mediated damage to structures of the peripheral and/or central nervous system. Some common examples include diabetic neuropathy, postherpetic neuralgia, or lumbar radiculopathy (i.e., sciatica). This pain is typically described as numbness, tingling, shooting, and/or burning in nature.

**Psychologic Factors**

Psychologic factors in the modulation of pain intensity are highly variable. Culture, emotions, and thoughts affect an individual's perception of pain. Patients who suffer from chronic pain may also have psychological stress. Chronic pain patients often have comorbid mental health disorders and have a higher incidence of anxiety and depression in particular than the general population.

**Multifactorial Pain Syndromes**

Many pain syndromes are multifactorial; for example, cancer and chronic low back pain syndromes have a nociceptive component and may also involve neuropathic pain due to nerve damage.

**Pain Modulation and Transmission**

Pain fibers enter the spinal cord at the dorsal root ganglia and synapse in the dorsal horn. Fibers then cross to the contralateral side and travel up the lateral columns reaching the thalamus and, finally, the cerebral cortex. Repetitive stimulation from prolonged pain can sensitize neurons in the posterior horn of the spinal cord so that a minimal peripheral stimulus results in pain.

Peripheral and nerves at other levels of the central nervous system are sensitized, resulting in long-term synaptic changes in cortical receptive fields that can result in exaggerated pain perception. This process of chronic afferent input causes increased sensitivity and lower pain thresholds, with the remodeling of the central nociceptive pathways and receptors termed central sensitization.****The consequence may be:

- Allodynia (nonpainful stimulus perceived as painful)

- Hyperalgesia (excessive pain response to a normally painful stimulus)

**Substances Released When Tissue is Injured**

The inflammatory cascade can sensitize peripheral nociceptors. Substances released include vasoactive peptides such as calcitonin, gene-related protein, neurokinin A, substance P, and mediators such as bradykinin and epinephrine, prostaglandin E2, and serotonin. The pain signal is modulated in both segmental and descending pathways by neurochemical mediators such as endorphins (enkephalin) and monoamines (norepinephrine, serotonin). These mediators are thought to increase, reduce, shorten, and/or sustain the perception and response to pain. They also mediate the benefits of CNS-active drugs such as antidepressants, antiseizure drugs, membrane stabilizers, and opioids interacting with neurochemicals and specific receptors that treat chronic pain.

Psychologic factors are important pain modulators. They affect how patients describe and react to pain. Overt pain behaviors may include complaining, being irritable, grimacing, or being stoic. These responses to pain may also generate neural output that modulates neurotransmission along pain pathways. The psychologic reaction to protracted pain interacts with central nervous system factors that may induce long-term changes in pain perception.

**Gate Control Theory**

In 1965, Patrick David Wall and Ronald Melzack announced the first theory that viewed pain through a mind-body perspective. This theory became known as the gate control theory.

The sensation of pain that an individual feels results from the complex interaction among these three components of the spinal cord. Simply stated, when the “gate” closes, the brain does not receive the information that is coming from the periphery to the spinal cord. However, when the signal traveling to the spinal cord reaches a certain intensity level, the “gate” opens. Once the gate is open, the signal can travel to the brain, where it is processed, and the individual proceeds to feel pain. The information mentioned above accounts for the physical component of pain. Still, as stated earlier, the Gate Control Theory was one of the first to acknowledge that psychological factors contributed to pain as well. In their original study, Melzack and Wall suggested that in addition to the control provided by the substantia gelatinosa, there was an additional control mechanism located in cortical regions of the brain.

In more recent times, researchers have postulated that these cortical control centers are responsible for the effects of cognitive and emotional factors on the pain experienced. Current research has also suggested that a negative state of mind amplifies the intensity of the signals sent to the brain.

The gate control theory has proven to be one of the most significant contributions to the study of pain throughout history. The concepts that Melzack and Wall introduced to the study of pain are still utilized by researchers today. Even though this theory initiated the idea that pain wasn’t solely a result of physical injury but rather a complex experience influenced by cognitive and emotional factors, additional research was necessary to comprehend the mechanisms and etiology of pain completely. This need precipitated the introduction of the following two philosophies regarding pain.

**Neuromatrix Model**

Almost thirty years after introducing the gate control theory of pain, Ronald Melzack introduced another model that contributed to the explanation of how and why people feel pain. Until the mid-1900s, most pain theories implied that this experience was exclusively due to an injury that had occurred somewhere in the body. The thinking was that if an individual suffered an injury, whether it be through trauma, infection, or disease, a signal would transmit to the brain, which would, in turn, result in the sensation of pain. Although Melzack had contributed to these previous theories, his exposure to amputees experiencing phantom limb pain in well-healed areas prompted his inquiry into this more accurate philosophy of pain. The theory he proposed is known as the neuromatrix model of pain. This philosophy suggests that the central nervous system is responsible for eliciting painful sensations rather than the periphery.

According to Melzack, the neuromatrix consists of multiple areas within the central nervous system that contribute to pain signals, which allows for the feeling of pain. The signal that these areas of the central nervous system work together to create is responsible for allowing an individual to feel pain, which he referred to as the “neurosignature.” Furthermore, this theory states that input coming in from the periphery can initiate or influence the neurosignature, but these peripheral signals cannot create a neurosignature of their own.

This idea that peripheral signals can alter the neurosignature is an important concept when considering the effect of nonphysical factors on an individual’s experience with pain. Melzack’s theory claimed that not only are there specific neurosignatures that elicit certain sensations, but when there is an alteration in a certain signal, this allows for memory formation of these particular experiences. If the same circumstances occur again in the future, this memory allows for the same sensation to be felt. In addition, the neuromatrix model continued to elaborate on the idea that was initially brought forward in the gate control theory, that pain can be affected not only by physical factors but by cognitive and emotional factors. Melzack suggested that hyperactivity of the stress response would lead to an individual experiencing a higher pain level.

**Biopsychosocial Model**

The biopsychosocial model provides the most comprehensive explanation behind the etiology of pain. This specific theory of pain hypothesizes that pain results from complex interactions between biological, psychological, and sociological factors.

This methodology takes into account that the human body cannot be divided into separate categories when considering treatment options. Instead, it is beneficial to acknowledge that illness and disease result from complex interactions between biological, psychological, and sociological factors, and they all affect an individual’s physical and mental well-being.

**Mechanism of Action of Opioids**

Any compound that binds to an opioid receptor is considered an opioid. There are endogenous opioids (i.e., endorphins, enkephalins, dynorphins) released in response to noxious stimuli, and there are prescription and illicit opioids, all of which bind opioid receptors. Opioid analgesics act on the 3 major opioid receptors: mu, delta, and/or kappa, as well as several minor classes of opioid receptors (i.e., nociceptin and zeta) at both pre and post-synaptic terminals. Most commonly, opioid analgesics are potent mu receptor agonists.

Simplifying significantly, the mu receptors are thought to provide analgesia, respiratory suppression, bradycardia, physical dependence, gastrointestinal dysmotility, and euphoria. Kappa agonism can yield hallucinations, miosis, and dysphoria. The delta receptor likely has pain control and mood modulation effects, but some have suggested that mu agonism is necessary for the delta receptor to function strongly for analgesia.



**Mu Receptor**

**Kappa Receptor**

**Delta Receptor**

Main location

Brainstem, medial thalamus

Diencephalic systems (limbic system), brain stem, spinal cord

Brain

Subtypes

Mu1, Mu2, Mu3

Kappa1, Kappa2, Kappa3

Delta1, Delta2

Functions

Supraspinal analgesia (mu1), euphoria (mu1), respiratory suppression (mu2), pruritis (mu2), physical dependence (mu2), sedation (mu2), vomiting (mu2), bradycardia, reduced gastrointestinal motility

Spinal analgesia, sedation, dysphoria, respiratory depression, hallucinations, miosis, dependence

Weak analgesia, antidepressants, physical dependence, and constipation may modulate mu receptor-mediated respiratory depression.

Endogenous opioid ligand

Endorphins (precursor: pro-opiomelanocortin); Dynorphins (precursor: pro-dynorphins)



Enkephalins (precursor: pre-enkephalin)

Note that there is also the opioid-receptor-like (ORL-1) receptor, at which the endogenous ligand nociceptin (precursor: prepronociceptin) binds. Unlike the aforementioned endogenous opioids, nociceptin acts as a hyperalgesic agent; additionally, it may play a role in anxiety and depression.

All opioid receptors are G-protein coupled receptors (GRCRs) that send signals via a second messenger (cAMP) to activate protein kinases. When activated, cAMP kinase may increase excitability, catecholamine synthesis, and alter gene transcription proteins and gene expression. Opioid receptors are distributed widely in the brain, spinal cord, peripheral neurons, and digestive tract. When opioids bind to their receptors located on presynaptic terminals of pain fibers (C-fibers and A-delta fibers), voltage-gated calcium channels are inhibited, thereby decreasing calcium ion entry into the cell, and cAMP levels are reduced. As a result, there is a reduction of nociceptive fibers' presynaptic release of pro-nociceptive neurotransmitters like glutamate, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), and substance P, resulting in diminished nociception.

Opioids decrease the release of GABA, resulting in an increase in the firing of dopaminergic neurons. An increase in dopamine levels in the nucleus accumbens plays a role in pleasure, reward, addiction, and analgesia.

Opioids may be pure mu receptor agonists (like morphine, fentanyl, oxycodone, etc.), agonists/antagonists (aka mixed agonists/antagonists), or partial agonists.

- **Opioid agonists/antagonists**have variable activity on each opioid receptor. Nalbuphine, pentazocine, and butorphanol have a high affinity and limited efficacy at the mu receptor, functioning as mu antagonists, and they are partial kappa agonists

- **Opioid partial agonists**have a strong affinity for the mu receptor, resulting in some efficacy (less than a full agonist would offer). Buprenorphine is a partial agonist that may be used as an analgesic, a medication-assisted treatment for addiction, and/or may be formulated with naloxone to deter intravenous abuse. Tramadol is a synthetic 4-phenyl-piperidine codeine analog that acts as a partial mu agonist with activity at the GABA, catecholamine, and serotonin receptors.

- **Opioid antagonists**are competitive mu, kappa, and delta receptor, antagonists. They****have a strong affinity for mu-opioid receptors but produce no or very low receptor activation, thereby reversing the effects of opioids. Naloxone acts centrally and peripherally to effectively and quickly reverse opioid overdose, given its rapid onset, but it also has a rapid offset. As such, when used to treat opioid overdose, naloxone will likely require re-dosing or an infusion as the duration of action of the opioid will be longer than the duration of action of this antidote. Naltrexone also acts centrally and peripherally; it has a long half-life and is typically used to deter abuse (but only should be used following opioid detoxification).

Pure mu agonists offer dose-dependent analgesia and side effects, whereas agonist/antagonists and partial agonists have a "ceiling effect," resulting in a plateau in analgesia and side effects after surpassing a given dose. As a result, these medications offer a safer profile regarding respiratory depression. It is important to note that in patients using pure opioid agonists, initiating treatment with an agonist/antagonist or a partial agonist may result in withdrawal as these medications have a higher affinity for the mu-opioid receptor but with less activation of the receptor than a pure agonist.

There are 4 chemical classes of opioids:

- **Alkaloids extracted from poppy seeds/****Pheneathrene****opioid agonists**:
- Morphine, codeine
- Semisynthetic derivatives: oxycodone, oxymorphone, hydromorphone, hydrocodone

- **Synthetic phenylpiperidines**: Meperidine, fentanyl, sufentanil, alfentanil, remifentanil

- **Diphenylheptanes**: Methadone, propoxyphene

- **Benzomorphans**: Pentazocine

**Metabolism of Opioids**

Opioids are mainly metabolized by glucuronidation or by the CYP450 enzymes (most commonly CYP3A4 or 2D6) of the liver and then excreted by the kidney. The CYP3A4 enzyme is responsible for the metabolism of more than 50% of all pharmaceuticals, so there is a high risk of drug-drug interactions when using opioids metabolized by the CYP3A4 system. Conversely, the CYP2D6 system metabolizes fewer medications, so opioids metabolized by this system have a moderate risk of drug-drug interactions. Opioids metabolized by glucuronidation (morphine, hydromorphone, oxymorphone) have little risk of drug-drug interactions.

The opioids metabolized by the CYP3A4 system include fentanyl (to inactive metabolites), oxycodone (and a small amount metabolized by CYP2D6 to oxymorphone [active] and noroxycodone [inactive]), tramadol (CYP3A4 and CYP2D6* to active metabolite O-desmethyltramadol [M1] excreted by kidneys), and methadone (complex metabolism including up to 6 different CYP450 enzyme systems; no active metabolites, no extensive renal elimination).

The opioids metabolized by the CYP2D6 system include hydrocodone (metabolized to active metabolite hydromorphone), codeine (to active metabolite morphine), and dihydrocodeine (to active metabolite dihydromorphine), as well as (partially) tramadol*. There is wide genetic variability in the CYP2D6 gene, which is highly polymorphic, resulting in a wide range of phenotypes ranging from poor metabolizers to ultrarapid metabolizers.

The opioids metabolized by phase 2 glucuronidation include morphine, oxymorphone, and hydromorphone. Oxymorphone produces very little (<1%) active metabolite (6-hydroxy-oxymorphone). Morphine is metabolized into two main metabolites; M3G predominantly, which lacks opioid activity and is neuroexcitatory and may cause seizures, and M6G, which offers some analgesia and may contribute to respiratory depression. Hydromorphone is mainly metabolized to hydromorphone-3-glucuronide (H3G), which is neuroexcitatory (similar to M3G). These metabolites are really excreted, so caution is advised when using morphine or hydromorphone in elderly patients and/or patients with renal failure or dehydration.

**Opioid Conversions and Morphine Milligram Equivalents (MME)**

Potency is the dose required to offer the desired outcome (in this case, pain control). The equianalgesic dose is the dose at which one opioid at steady-state provides an equal amount of pain relief as another opioid at steady-state.

There is a large variability in suggested conversion ratios (both for route and conversion from one opioid to another).**Prescribers must use their best clinical judgment when converting between routes of administration or medication and not rely solely on recommended conversion tables.**

When converting any given opioid from one route to another (for example, from oral administration to IV administration or vice versa), this rough guidance is generally followed:

Intrathecal

Epidural

Intravenous

Oral

1

10

100

300

When converting from one opioid to another, all potencies are discussed compared to morphine (in other words, all opioid potencies are discussed in terms of their MME). Relative opioid potencies are represented by equianalgesic dose tables; several such tables exist (a few online examples include the GlobalRPh online calculator and the Agency Medical Directors' Group opioid dose calculator). There is some variability between these different tables' equipotent dose recommendations.

One consideration to take into account when rotating from one opioid to another is the concept of incomplete cross-tolerance. Cross-tolerance occurs when there is a reduced effect from a substance after being exposed to a different but pharmacologically similar substance (especially if these two substances have action on the same receptor site). With opioids, there is incomplete cross-tolerance.

If the half-lives of the 2 medications in question are not similar, that should be accounted for when calculating the conversion. As mentioned above, other considerations must include concurrent medications and the patient's overall clinical picture. It is generally better to start a hypoalgesic dose and titrate up to effect than to overshoot and suffer potentially fatal consequences of respiratory depression.

It is worth mentioning that while other opioids are typically converted based on a static MME conversion factor at any given dose, methadone's conversion ratio is dose-dependent; its MME conversion ratio increases as the methadone dose increases.

# Histopathology

Chronic pain and opioids generally do not cause any specific histopathology in and of themselves. However, there is a diversity of histopathologic changes that can occur in the presence of improper/recreational parenteral administration of opioids. There may be chronic tissue damage present due to the original assault.

# Toxicokinetics

Opioids have an extensive diversity of durations and intensities of effect. For example, remifentanil has a half-life of around 10 to 20 minutes, whereas methadone has a half-life of between 8 to 60 hours (with an average half-life of about 24 hours).

# History and Physical

**History**

History should include the onset of pain, description, mechanism of injury if applicable, location, radiation of pain, quality, severity, factors contributing to relief or worsening of the pain, frequency of the pain, duration of the pain, and any breakthrough pain. A verbal numeric rating scale (VNRS) or number scale for pain is a common measure to determine the severity of pain, numbered from 0 to 10. This tool is commonly used for pain intensity. Furthermore, associated symptoms should be assessed, such as muscle spasms or aches, temperature changes, restrictions to range of motion, morning stiffness, weakness, changes in muscle strength, changes in sensation, and hair, skin, or nail changes.

There are multiple acronyms used to obtain the history of a patient's pain. Some of the most commonly used abbreviations are "COLDERAS" and "OLDCARTS." These acronyms summarize the character, onset, location, duration of exacerbating symptoms, relieving symptoms, radiation of pain, associated symptoms, and severity of illness. "PQRST" stands for provocation or palliation, quality, radiation or region, severity, and timing.

In addition to the patient's symptoms, the significance of the impact of the pain on day-to-day function should be discussed, and a review of daily living activities. It is important to understand how pain (particularly chronic pain) affects the patient’s quality of life. Is pain impacting relationships or hobbies? Does the patient find themselves becoming depressed? Is the patient able to sleep throughout the night or exercise regularly? Can the patient go to work without limitations? Are activities of daily living affected, such as toileting, dressing, bathing, or walking? Is eating limited or restricted?

Chronic pain is common in the elderly. The self-reporting of pain can be difficult in this population. Self-reporting of pain is essential for identifying and treating pain, while the inability to describe or communicate pain leads to undertreatment. Often, elderly patients describe pain differently than the average population. For example, they may complain of soreness or discomfort.

A multidimensional assessment of a patient's pain and the severity of their pain can be completed. A Pain, Enjoyment, General Activity (PEG) tool can aid the multidimensional assessment of patients in pain.

The Four-item Patient Health Questionnaire or PHQ-4 combines the PHQ9 and GAD7 assessment tools used to evaluate depression and anxiety, respectively.

The Defense and Veterans Pain Rating Scale (DVRPS) is a five-item tool with a 0 to 10 out pain scale, as well as an assessment of the impact of pain on sleep, mood, stress, and activity levels.

In children's self-reporting, behavioral observation scales are used to assess pain.

The Pediatric Pain Questionnaire and the Adolescent and Pediatric Pain Tool are used to assess the location of a patient's pain as well. The patient is asked to draw on the body map where they feel pain.

Observational pain assessment tools are used in populations who cannot self-report. The facial expression, fussiness, distractibility, ability to be consoled, verbal responsiveness, and motor control are observational findings used in such an assessment tool. Observational pain assessment in infants or young children can use the (r-FLACC) tool.

It is particularly challenging to assess pain in nonverbal children with neurologic impairment (NI). Caregivers are often needed to help determine changes in the patient's behavior. Grimacing, moaning, increased muscle tone, crying, arching, and atypical behavior such as aggressive behavior are a few symptoms to monitor in this population. Nonverbal children with NI include the Revised Face, Legs, Activity, Cry, Consolability (r-FLACC) scale and the Individualized Numeric Rating Scale (INRS). The assessment adds specific behavior for atypical presentations.

The Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) can be used to assess patients' beliefs as they pertain to pain and the impact of pain on their lives.

**Physical**

A detailed physical, including musculoskeletal, neurologic, and psychiatric exams, should be completed, as well as a focused examination of the area of pain.

# Evaluation

**Chronic Pain Assessment**

Standard blood work and imaging are not necessarily indicated for chronic pain that has been previously evaluated, but the clinician can order it when specific causes of pain are suspected and/or when there is worsening of chronic pain or a change in symptoms. This is determined on a case-by-case basis. When managing patients with opioid therapy for chronic pain, it is advisable to obtain random urine toxicology screening at the start of implementation of opioid therapy and then at least once a year to monitor compliance and exclude the use of nonprescription drugs. This is the current Center for Disease Control (CDC) recommendation.

Psychiatric disorders can amplify pain, signaling making symptoms of pain worse.

Furthermore, comorbid psychiatric disorders, such as MDD, can significantly delay the diagnosis of pain disorders.

**Prescribing Opioids**

Before prescribing opioids, complete a detailed patient history that includes:

- Indication requested for pain relief

- Location, nature, and intensity of pain

- Prior pain treatments and response

- Comorbid conditions

- Potential physical and psychological pain impact on function

- Family support, employment, and housing

- Leisure activities, mood, sleep, substance use, and work

- Emotional, physical, or sexual abuse

When considering opioids, weigh the risks of abuse, addiction, adverse drug reactions, overdose, and physical dependence. If there are any special concerns, such as a history of substance abuse, consult a psychiatrist or addiction specialist. If current substance abuse, withhold prescribing until the patient is involved in an addiction treatment and monitoring program.

Following the World Health Organization (WHO) Analgesic Ladder is recommended instead of starting an opioid without trialing alternative therapies first or alongside opioid management.

**Addiction Risk Assessment**

The clinician should consider information from the history and physical, family members, the state prescription monitoring program, and screening tools to assess the risk of developing an untoward behavioral response to opioids. Patients can be stratified into three risk levels based on responses to screening tools (such as those listed below):

- Low-risk: standard monitoring, vigilance, and care.

- Moderate-risk: additional level of monitoring and more frequent provider contact.

- High-risk: intensive and structured monitoring, frequent follow-up contact, consultation with an addiction psychiatrist, and limited monthly prescription of short-acting opioids.

Personal or family history of substance abuse, current substance abuse, poor social support, family or social environments that lend themselves to misuse, younger age, and comorbid untreated psychiatric diseases are some of the risk factors for opioid misuse and addiction.

**Assessment Tools**

Screening tools help determine the risk level and degree of monitoring and structure required for a treatment plan; however, their validity is not yet supported in the literature. Some examples of opioid tools follow.

**Brief Intervention Tool**

Brief Intervention Tool is a 26-item "yes-no" questionnaire used to identify signs of opioid addiction or abuse. The items assess for problems related to drug use-related functional impairment.

**CAGE, CAGE-AID, and CAGE-Opioid**

CAGE (Cut down, Annoyed, Guilty, and Eye-opener) Questionnaire consists of four questions designed to assess alcohol abuse. CAGE-AID and CAGE-OPIOID are revised versions to assess the likelihood of current substance abuse.

**Current Opioid Misuse Measure (COMM)**

The Current Opioid Misuse Measure is a 17-item patient self-report assessment designed to identify abuse in chronic pain patients. It identifies aberrant behaviors associated with opioid misuse in patients already receiving long-term opioid therapy.

**Diagnosis, Intractability, Risk, and Efficacy (DIRE) Tool**

The Diagnosis, Intractability, Risk, and Efficacy is a clinician-rated questionnaire used to predict patient compliance with long-term opioid therapy. Patients scoring low are poor candidates for long-term opioids.

**Mental Health Screening Tool**

The Mental Health Screening Tool is a five-item screen that evaluates feelings of calmness, depression, happiness, peacefulness, and nervousness in the past month. A low is an indicator that the patient should be referred to a pain management specialist.

**Opioid Risk Tool (ORT)**

The Opioid Risk Tool is a five-item assessment to evaluate for aberrant drug-related behavior. It categorizes the patient into low, medium, or high levels of risk for aberrant drug-related behaviors based on question responses concerning previous alcohol, drug abuse, psychologic disorders, and other risk factors.

**Pain Assessment and Documentation Tool (PADT)**

Guidelines by the CDC, the Federation of State Medical Boards, and the Joint Commission stress documentation from both a quality and medicolegal perspective. The Pain Assessment and Documentation Tool (PADT) was designed to help the clinician document appropriate information.

**Screener and Opioid Assessment for Patients with Pain-Revised (SOAPP-R)**

The Screener and Opioid Assessment for Patients with Pain-Revised (SOAPP-R) is a screen with questions addressing the history of alcohol or substance use, cravings, mood, psychological status, and stress. The SOAPP-R helps assess the risk level of aberrant drug-related behaviors and the monitoring level needed.

**Urine Drug Tests (UDT)**

Urine drug tests evaluate the use of the medication prescribed and detect unsanctioned drug use. The CDC recommends drug testing before starting opioid therapy and at least annually.

One study suggests urine drug screen monitoring frequency based on risk level.

Testing is usually done with class-specific immunoassay drug panels; however, this may be followed with gas chromatography/mass spectrometry for specific metabolite detection. The test should identify the specific drug. If urine test results suggest aberrant opioid use, discuss the issue in a positive, supportive approach, and document the discussion.

**Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs (PDMPs)**

Prescription drug monitoring programs, or PDMPs, are now in place in various degrees in all states and most territories. They assist prescribers and dispensers in working together to decrease drug abusers and diverter's access to prescription opioids. The PDMP regulations are state-based and, as such, vary in application. The key benefits are as follows:

- Assists in monitoring outpatient prescriptions

- National decrease in multiple providers providing prescriptions (avoids "doctor shopping")

- Encourages prescribers and pharmacists to work together as an interprofessional team

- Assists regulatory boards, Medicaid, medical examiners, law enforcement, and research organizations in gathering data on the effectiveness and enforcement of provisions

- Some states are participating in PMP Interconnect, which allows the sharing of prescription information across state lines.

The authors recommend that the PDMP should be checked prior to every prescription written at the time it is written, regardless of the amount and regardless of whether the script is for acute or chronic pain. The current CDC recommendation is that the prescriber should review the PDMP when starting opioid therapy and then again at least every 3 months and/or every time a script is written.

**Weaknesses In PDMP System**

- The system is not interlinked among all states.

- Many states only require clinicians and pharmacists to consult the PDMP if they have a reasonable belief there is drug-seeking

- The database may be out of date by several days as they are often not updated in real time.

**Future PDMP System**

- In the future, it is expected that PDMP requirements will expand to mandatory checking of the database by both prescribers and dispensers, real-time reporting, easier use, more active management, and flagging by government agencies.

**PDMP Systems Success**

- States with aggressive PDMPs in place are seeing as much as an 80% decrease in opioid prescribing.****

**Checklists For Prescribers and Dispensers**

**Prescribing/Dispensing**

- Dose, frequency, and length prescribed consistent with the indication - avoid long-acting opioids for acute pain.

- Age, weight, height, and sex considered

- Evaluate for potential drug interactions

- Evaluate for potential allergic reactions

- Patient informed and understands risks and benefits - warnings addiction, abrupt halting, use of power equipment, side-effects, respiratory depression, avoiding sharing, storage, theft protection.

- Medication use agreement in place

- Instructions for storage and disposal of unused opioids

**VIGIL**

- Verification: Is this a responsible opioid user?

- Identification: Is the identity of this patient verifiable?

- Generalization: Do we agree on mutual responsibilities and expectations?

- Interpretation: Do I feel comfortable allowing this person to have controlled substances?

- Legalization: Am I acting legally and responsibly?****

**Patient Validation and Red Flags**

- Check government-issued photo ID

- Only drugs prescribed are controlled substances

- Early refills

- Insurance present but pays cash

- Lost prescriptions

- Remote address

- Multiple prescribers

- Unrealistic expectations

- PDMP concerning results

**Prescriber Validation and Red Flags**

- The prescriber writes the same drug, dose, frequency, and length despite differences in age, height, sex, and weight.

- Prescriber outside the geographic area

- Prescriber writes outside scope of practice

- Combination of opioids, benzodiazepine, or muscle relaxant

- Excessive drug quantities

- Multiple prescriptions from the same provider

- The provider does not take insurance

**Prescription Validation and Red Flags**

- Eraser marks

- Handwriting irregularities

- Late night and weekend prescription drop-offs

- Prescription irregularities

- Federal and state-controlled substance number irregularities

- Evidence turned away by another pharmacy

- Misspellings

**How to Handle Not Prescribing or Dispensing**

- Provide news to the patient in a calm manner

- Do not accuse of wrongdoing

- Report concerning prescription to the authorities

# Treatment / Management

Healthcare professionals who treat patients with chronic pain should understand best practices in opioid prescribing, approaches to pain assessment, pain management modalities, and appropriate use of opioids for pain control. Pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic approaches should be evaluated. Patients with moderate-to-severe chronic pain who have been assessed and treated with non-opioid therapy without adequate pain relief are candidates for opioid therapy. Initial treatment should be a trial of therapy, not a definitive course of treatment. The CDC has issued updated guidance on the prescription of opioids for chronic pain. These guidelines address when to initiate or continue opioids for chronic pain; opioid selection, dosage, duration, follow-up, and discontinuation; and assessing risk and addressing opioid use harm.

**Pain Management Referral**

Recommendations are to refer a patient to pain management in chronic pain that does not respond to initial therapy. The pain may be located at multiple locations, requiring multimodal treatment or increases in dosages for adequate pain control or invasive procedures to control pain. Treatment of both pain and a comorbid psychiatric disorder leads to a more significant reduction of both pain and symptoms of the psychiatric disorder.

**Pharmacologic Options and Risks/Benefits**

The list of pharmacological options for chronic pain is extensive: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, local anesthetics, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, topical analgesics, skeletal muscle relaxants, N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists, alpha 2 adrenergic agonists, and opioids are also possible pharmacological therapies.

Musculoskeletal pain conditions involving both central and peripheral sensitization mechanisms.

If neuropathic pain is a component of the patient’s chronic pain syndrome, a combination of multiple pharmacological therapies may be necessary.  Less than half of patients with neuropathic pain will achieve adequate pain relief with a single agent.

Antidepressants in the class of serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRI) and tricyclic antidepressants (TCA) are other appropriate options for pain management. Antidepressants are beneficial in the treatment of neuropathic pain, central pain syndromes, and chronic musculoskeletal pain. For neuropathic pain, antidepressants have demonstrated a 50 percent reduction of pain.

Adjunctive topical agents can be used to manage chronic pain and allow for less systemic adverse effects than parenteral or oral administration.  Common examples include lidocaine, topical NSAIDs (e.g., diclofenac), capsaicin, and methyl salicylate-menthol. There are also compounded topical medications, which usually include a mixture of three or more single medications, to provide a more customized therapy regimen; however, the studies are limited due to the preparation of these medications and the pain conditions treated with these medications.

Additionally, botulinum toxin can also be an option for chronic pain and disorders of muscle spasms, including myofascial pain syndrome, headaches, temporomandibular joint disorders, and neuropathic pain.

Opioids are considered a second-line option for chronic pain syndromes; however, they may be warranted for pain management for patients with severe persistent pain or pain due to a malignancy. Opioid therapy can be considered for the management of neuropathic pain if non-opioid therapies have failed or while titrating first-line medications when prompt pain relief is needed.

The patient must make an informed choice before starting opioid treatment after discussing the risks, benefits, and alternatives to opioids.

When initiating opioids, the clinician should start with a dose as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA) to provide analgesia without significant adverse effects.

**Non-Pharmacologic Options**

The list of nonpharmacological therapies for chronic pain is extensive. Non-pharmacological options include heat and cold therapy, massage therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy, relaxation therapy, biofeedback, group counseling, ultrasound stimulation, acupuncture, aerobic exercise, chiropractic manipulation, physical therapy, osteopathic manipulative medicine, occupational therapy, and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS). However, the data supporting the efficacy of TENS for the treatment of chronic pain have been inconclusive.

Interventional techniques can also be utilized in the treatment of chronic pain. Commonly performed procedures include trigger point injections, nerve blocks, radiofrequency nerve ablations, intra-articular injections, and epidural steroid injections. Neuromodulation procedures, including spinal cord stimulation, peripheral nerve stimulation, and intrathecal drug delivery systems, are also options to consider, especially in patients that have exhausted more conservative measures. The Food and Drug Administration has approved spinal cord stimulation to manage chronic intractable pain of the trunk and limbs associated with failed back surgery syndrome, complex regional pain syndrome, and neuropathy.

# Differential Diagnosis

Developing a differential diagnosis for a patient's chronic pain is based on assessing the possible etiologies of the patient's pain. Identifying the disease process allows the clinician to develop an appropriate treatment plan.  For example, a patient’s chronic hip and leg pain could manifest osteoarthritis of the hip, lumbar radiculopathy, or sacroiliac joint dysfunction. These underlying pathologies may require very different management options.  Certain diagnoses may be more responsive to the use of an NSAID versus a neuropathic pain medication.  The clinician also has to consider the possible interventions to address a particular diagnosis: surgical intervention, intra-articular steroid injections, epidural steroid injections, nerve blocks, or radiofrequency ablation procedures.

The clinician should also consider overlapping diagnoses.  For example, a patient on chronic opioids may develop opioid-induced hyperalgesia in conjunction with their original presenting pain syndrome. Chronic pain is also frequently accompanied by major depression and sleep disorders. Acknowledging these coexisting conditions can allow a clinician to choose an appropriate pharmacologic option: using an SNRI or TCA to address both neuropathic pain and depression symptoms.  Furthermore, autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus or psoriasis, fibromyalgia, and central pain syndromes, should be considered in states involving widespread chronic pain states. Thus, it is important to remember that chronic pain can be a symptom of one or multiple diagnoses.

# Treatment Planning

Opioid therapy should begin as a trial for a predefined period, usually less than 30 days. Treatment goals should be established with the patient prior to the initiation of opioid therapy.

Before initiating opioid therapy, the clinician and patient should agree on a set of practical goals in terms of pain relief, functionality with activities of daily living, and management of co-existing conditions such as anxiety and depression. In addition, the plan should include therapy selection, progress measures, and involvement of other specialty providers if needed. When developing a pain management plan that involves opioids, the clinician should:

- Start at the lowest possible dose and titrate to effect

- Start with short-acting opioid formulations

- Discuss the need for frequent risk and benefit assessments

- Instruct the patient (and include family members if possible) of the signs and symptoms of respiratory depression

- Reassess risks and benefits with each dose increase

- Use extra precaution and be able to justify reason when prescribing 50 or more morphine milligram equivalents per day

- Be knowledgeable of federal and state opioid prescribing regulations

- Be knowledgeable of patient monitoring, equianalgesic dosing, and cross-tolerance with opioid conversion

- Augment treatment with nonopioid or, if necessary, immediate-release opioids over long-acting opioids

- Taper opioid dose whenever possible

**Consent and Treatment**

According to the American Medical Association, a physician can proceed with informed consent after assessing the patient’s ability to understand the medical information to make an independent decision. The informed consent should include a discussion of the following:

- Patient diagnosis

- Purpose of recommended treatment

- Risks and benefits of treatment

- Alternative treatment or no treatment and their associated risks and benefits

**Informed Consent for Opioid Therapy Should Include the Following Potential Risks**

- Physical side effects/complications

- Addiction

- Physical dependence

- Cognitive effects

- Psychological dependence

- Tolerance

- Hyperalgesia

- Patient victimization****

Prescribing policies should be clearly described, including policies regarding the number and frequency of refills and procedures for lost or stolen medications.

**Patient and Physician Treatment Agreement**

There is no consensus as to what should be specified in an opioid treatment agreement or contract. Still, it should promote a discussion of information, adherence to treatment, and an understanding of treatment goals.

Many physicians include descriptions in the opioid treatment agreement documentation that specify that the patient should agree to use medications safely, avoid "doctor shopping," and consent to drug testing.  The physician also has an active role in the agreement to address issues related to the treatment plan and have appropriate follow-up visits to assess the progress of the interventions.

Reasons for opioid therapy change or discontinuation should be included. Agreements can also include monitoring strategies and mechanisms for the safe storage and disposal of unused drugs.

**Discontinuing Opioid Therapy**

Discontinuing opioid therapy should be based on a physician-patient discussion. Prescribers should consider ending opioid treatment when pain is minimal or resolved, side effects develop, analgesia is inadequate, quality of life has not improved, the function has deteriorated, or evidence of aberrant medication use is present. Opioids should be tapered slowly to minimize withdrawal symptoms. An addiction specialist may need to be involved in cases of aberrant behavior or when tapering is difficult to tolerate.

# Toxicity and Adverse Effect Management

The American Society of Interventional Pain Physicians (ASIPP) has a set of guidelines for prescribing opioids for the management of chronic non-cancer pain.  To monitor for adherence, abuse, and noncompliance, the ASIPP recommends utilizing UDT and PDMPs in addition to clinical and behavioral assessments.

The treatment plan for opioid use in chronic pain should include frequent assessment of pain level, origin, and function. The ASIPP recommends assessing whether pain relief and/or functional status is improved by at least 30% without adverse effects to continue opioid therapy.

- Affect

- Aberrant drug-related behaviors

- Activities of daily living

- Adverse or side effects

- Analgesia

Signs and symptoms, if present, that suggests treatment goals are not being achieved include:

- Decreased appetite

- Excessive sleeping or day/night reversal

- Impaired function

- Inability to concentrate

- Mood volatility

- Lack of involvement with others

- Lack of re-engaging in life

- Lack of hygiene

The decision to change, continue, or terminate opioid therapy is based on achieving treatment objectives without adverse effects. Therefore, physicians, wherever possible, should work with pharmacists.****

Side effects of opioids can include constipation, sedation, respiratory depression, immunosuppression, tolerance, physical dependence, sexual dysfunction, osteoporosis, and opioid-induced hyperalgesia. Constipation is one of the most common side effects. Therefore, clinicians should consider initiating a bowel regimen even before the onset of constipation and definitely after the patient reports constipation. Certain opioids require additional monitoring measures: patients on methadone should have an electrocardiogram periodically to assess for QT interval prolongation.

**Acute Overdose Management**

Accidental or deliberate overdose is always a risk factor in patients taking opioids. Therefore, the patient and family should be instructed on the signs and symptoms of an overdose and basic emergency management until emergency medical services can arrive.

The immediate response to overdose management is to secure the airway; however, survival depends heavily on the rapid administration of an opioid antagonist.

While opioid antagonists such as naloxone, naltrexone, and nalmefene are available, acute overdoses are usually treated with naloxone as it quickly reverses opioid-related respiratory depression. Naloxone competes with opioids at receptor sites in the brain stem, reversing desensitization to carbon dioxide and preventing respiratory failure.

The naloxone dose is 0.4 to 2 mg administered intravenously, intramuscularly, subcutaneously, or intranasally.

# Prognosis

Most pain syndromes and associated impairment typically resolve within one month of the injury onset.

Ultimately, prevention is critical in the treatment of chronic pain. If acute and subacute pain receives appropriate treatment and chronic pain can be avoided, the patient will have limited impacts on their quality of life. A longer pain duration history is correlated with increased pain levels, disability, and emotional distress.

# Complications

Chronic pain leads to significantly decreased quality of life, reduced productivity, lost wages, worsening comorbidities, and psychiatric disorders, such as depression, anxiety, and substance abuse disorders. Patients with chronic pain are also at a significantly increased risk for suicide and suicidal ideation. In addition, the clinician has to consider that many medications used to treat chronic pain have potential complications associated with their use.

For example, acetaminophen is a common pharmacological therapy for patients with chronic pain. It is taken either as a single agent or in combination with other analgesics, including opioids. The acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity can occur with doses exceeding four grams per day.

Frequently used adjunct medications such as gabapentin or pregabalin can cause sedation, peripheral swelling, mood changes, and confusion. Respiratory depression can occur when these gabapentinoids are used in elderly patients or patients also using opioids.

Feared complications of opioid therapy include addiction as well as overdose resulting in respiratory compromise. However, opioid-induced hyperalgesia is also a significant concern. Patients become more sensitive to painful stimuli while on chronic opioids.

**Drug Diversion and Drug Seeking**

Unfortunately, due to addiction or financial gain, some individuals seek prescribed opioids for illicit purposes. Prescription opioids may be obtained from a friend or relative, a black market seller, doctor shopping, and theft from clinical sites.

- Aggressively demanding more opioids

- Asking for opioids by name

- Displaying behaviors suggesting opioid use disorder

- Forging prescriptions

- Increasing alcohol use

- Increasing medication dose without provider permission

- Injecting oral medications

- Obtaining medications from nonmedical sources

- Obtaining opioids from multiple providers

- Losing or stealing prescriptions

- Reluctance to decrease opioid dosing

- Resisting medication change

- Requesting early refills

- Selling prescriptions

- Sharing or borrowing similar medications

- Stockpiling medications

- Using illegal drugs

- Using pain medications to treat other symptoms

**Drug Diversion Interventions**

**Prescribers and dispensers can take several precautions to avoid drug diversion. Some approaches include:**

- Communication among providers and pharmacies to avoid "doctor shopping."

- Educate patients on the dangers of sharing opioids.

- Encourage patients to keep opioid medications in a private place.

- Encourage patients to refrain from public disclosure of opioid use.

- Report patient prescribing to the state central database if available.

**If a patient is suspected of drug-seeking or diversion, consider the following actions:**

**Inquire About Prescription and Illicit Drug Use**

- Obtain a urine drug screen.

- Perform a thorough examination.

- Perform pill counting.

- Prescribe smaller quantities of the opioid.

If a patient is abusing prescribed opioids, this is a violation of the treatment agreement. The provider may discharge the patient from their practice. If the relationship is terminated, the provider must do it legally. The provider should avoid patient abandonment, ending a relationship with a patient without considering the continuity of care, and without providing notice to the patient. To avoid abandonment charges, the patient must be given enough advanced warning to allow them to secure another clinician and facilitate the transfer of care.

Patients with a substance abuse problem or addiction should be referred to an addiction specialist. Theft or loss of controlled substances should be reported to the Drug Enforcement Administration. If drug diversion has occurred, the activity should be documented and reported to law enforcement.

# Consultations

Particularly for long-term chronic pain management, clinicians should seek consultation from a pain specialist, addiction specialist, or psychiatrist. Clinicians who prescribe opioids should be aware of opioid addiction treatment options.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

**Involvement of Patient and Family**

The patient and family can assist in making informed decision-making regarding continuing or discontinuing opioid therapy. For example, family members are often aware of when a patient is depressed and less functional. If the patient agrees or does not object to discussing information with their family members, clinicians may ask the family members:

- Is the patient's day focused on taking opioid pain medication?

- What is the frequency of pain medication?

- Does the patient have any other alcohol or drug problems?

- Does the patient avoid activity?

- Is the patient depressed?

- Is the patient able to function?****

**What To Teach A Patient Taking Opioids**

- Avoid driving or operating power equipment

- Avoid stopping opioids suddenly

- Avoid taking other drugs that depress the respiratory system as alcohol, sedatives, and anxiolytics.

- Follow up with the prescriber if medication is not adequate for relief

- Dispose of extra or remaining opioids appropriately

- Do not share opioids with friends or family

- Follow the prescribed dosing regimen

- Provide product-specific information

- Set appropriate expectations

**Interprofessional Approach To Prevent Opioid Abuse**

Clinicians, pharmacists, and allied health professionals must work together as an interprofessional team to provide safe and appropriate opioid medication use. While clinicians initially evaluate and prescribe, pharmacists play a crucial role by evaluating the appropriateness and legitimacy of prescriptions received. Failure to assess possible abuse, misuse, or diversion results in patient and society problems. A team approach of prescribers and dispensers is likely to produce the best outcome.

# Pearls and Other Issues

**Maintain Accurate Medical Records of Opioid Prescriptions**

All clinicians should maintain accurate, complete, and current medical records, including:

- Records of controlled substance prescriptions

- Record instructions provided

- Detailed history, physical exam, the reason for prescribing, and monitoring measures

**Federal and State Laws**

Several regulations and programs at the federal and state levels reduce prescription opioid abuse, diversion, and overdose. These laws require:

- Immunity from prosecution for individuals seeking assistance during an overdose

- Patient identification before dispensing

- A physical examination before prescribing opioids

- Prescription limits

- Limitations from obtaining controlled substance prescriptions

- Tamper-resistant prescriptions

**Federal Laws**

The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) sets national standards for controlled substances. Drug scheduling was mandated under The Federal Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 (also referred to as the Controlled Substances Act). This act addresses controlled substances within Title II. The DEA maintains a list of controlled medications and illicit substances categorized from schedule I to V. The five categories are based on the medication's proper and beneficial medical use and the medication's potential for dependency and abuse. The purpose of the law is to provide government oversight over the manufacturing and distribution of these types of substances. Prescribers and dispensers are required to have a DEA license to supply these drugs. The licensing provides links to users, prescribers, and distributors.

The schedules range from Schedule I to V, with Schedule I drugs having the highest risk of abuse and Schedule V drugs having the lowest potential for abuse. Other factors considered by the DEA include pharmacological effect, evidenced-based knowledge of the drug, risk to public health, trends in the use of the drug, and whether or not the drug has the potential to be modified into a more dangerous drug.

- "High abuse potential with no accepted medical use; medications within this schedule may not be prescribed, dispensed, or administered"

-  Examples include marijuana (cannabis), heroin, mescaline (peyote), lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), and methaqualone.

- "High abuse potential with severe psychological or physical dependence; however, these medications have an accepted medical use and may be prescribed, dispensed, or administered"

-  Examples include fentanyl, oxycodone, morphine, methylphenidate, hydromorphone, amphetamine, methamphetamine (meth), pentobarbital, and secobarbital.

- Schedule II drugs may not receive a refill

- "Intermediate abuse potential (i.e., less than Schedule II but more than Schedule IV medications)"

- Examples include anabolic steroids, testosterone, and ketamine

- "Abuse potential less than Schedule II but more than Schedule V medications"

- Examples include diazepam, alprazolam, and tramadol

- "Medications with the least potential for abuse among the controlled substances."

- Examples include pregabalin, Diphenoxylate/atropine, and dextromethorphan.

It is essential to understand the DEA controlled-substance scheduling to ensure adequate caution when prescribing medications with high abuse potential and to ensure against prescribing outside of one's authority.

The Controlled Substances Act has great potential to improve patient safety by providing federal oversight for drugs with a high potential for abuse. Providers of scheduled substances (physicians, dentists, podiatrists, advanced practitioners) may have links to the distribution of these substances. They are required to have a DEA license and record prescriptions of scheduled drugs. This licensing prevents overprescribing and identification of potential drug-seeking patients. The dispenser must also be aware of a patient's medication history and be mindful of the potential for polypharmacy if a patient seeks multiple providers. The current opioid epidemic is when federal oversight and interdisciplinary coordination can potentially reduce harm to patients who are prescribed scheduled drugs. However, it will take further time and evaluation to know if drug scheduling actually reduces abuse, addiction, and overdose.

**State Requirements**

Tennessee laws govern the prescribing, dispensing, reporting, and consumption of controlled substances. A summary of key clinical information is as follows.

**Summary Healthcare Practitioner Prescribing**

- 
**No Requirements Before Prescribing**

- 
              
- Rx - Up to 3-day opioid prescription, maximum dose 180 morphine milligram equivalent (MME)

- 
**Requirements Before Prescribing (Check CSMD, thorough patient evaluation, document consideration of alternatives and why an opioid was used, obtain informed consent, include ICD-10 code on the chart and RX)**

- 
              
- Rx - Up to 10-day opioid prescription, maximum dose 500 MME
              
              
- Rx - Up to 30-day opioid prescription, maximum dose 1200 MME, for a minimally invasive procedure
              
              
- Rx - Up to 30-day opioid prescription, maximum dose 1200 MME, medical necessity (after trial and failure or contraindication of a non-opioid treatment)

- 
**Exempted Patient Prescriptions (Includes ICD-10 Code and the word "exempt")**

- 
              
- Receiving active cancer treatment, palliative or hospice care
              
              
- Sickle cell disease
              
              
- Receiving opioids from a licensed facility
              
              
- Pain specialist
              
              
- Treated with an opioid for 90 days or more in the last year or who are subsequently treated for 90 days or more
              
              
- Treated with buprenorphine, methadone, or naltrexone
              
              
- Treated for severe burns (thermal or chemical 2nd or 3rd degree)
              
              
- Treated for major physical trauma (serious injury due to blunt or penetrating force that resulted in serious blood loss, fracture, temporary or permanent impairment, or disability)

**Chronic Pain Guidelines For the Management of Chronic Non-Malignant Pain**

The practitioner should review the detailed guidelines provided by the Tennessee Department of Health. The following is a summary of the key points.

**Section I: Before Initiating Opioid Therapy for Chronic Non-Malignant Pain**

- Try non-opioid therapy first. Do not initiate opioid therapy just because a previous provider did

- A full medical workup including history, physical, review of systems, prior opioid use, comorbid conditions, mental health disorder screening, and review of medical records should be documented.

- Conduct an in-person exam. Do not initiate prescription through telemedicine.

- A current diagnosis should justify the need for opioids

- Assess for risk of abuse using risk assessment tools, obtain a urine drug test, and check the Controlled Substances Monitoring Database (CSMD)

- Establish and follow goals for treatment with the 3-item PEG Assessment Scale (**P**ain average, interference with**E**njoyment of life, and Interference with**G**eneral Activity). The goal is to increase function and reduce pain

- Administer a urine drug screen to the newly pregnant woman; before administering opioids or renewing prescriptions to child-bearing women, discuss a birth control plan and evaluate for a possible pregnancy

**Section II: Initiating Opioid Therapy for Chronic Non-Malignant Pain**

- Prescribe the lowest effective dose for the shortest time period required

- Start with immediate-release opioids and gradually switch to extended-release or long-acting opioids if required

- Avoid benzodiazepines or naloxone combinations with an opioid for chronic pain

- Methadone should only be used for addiction or by pain specialists

- Document any deviations from guidelines

- Obtained informed consent discussing and documenting risks and benefits

- Obtain a written treatment agreement that includes reasons for discontinuation, refill policy, lost prescription policy, safe storage, periodic drug testing, and pregnancy issues

- Establish ongoing monitoring for abuse, misuse, or diversion

- If potentially child-bearing, obtain pregnancy test and discuss methods to avoid unintended pregnancy if child-bearing age with documented and signed discussion of risks and benefits

**Section III: Ongoing Opioid Therapy for Chronic Non-Malignant Pain**

- All opioid therapy should be from a single provider and single pharmacy

- One opioid should be prescribed.

- Document five A's (analgesia, activities of daily living, adverse side effects, aberrant drug-taking behaviors, and affect).

- Review the patient's history of controlled substance prescriptions using the Controlled Substance Monitoring Database (CSMD) data to determine whether the patients are receiving opioid dosages or potentially dangerous combinations.

- Continually monitor for signs of abuse, misuse, or diversion—order urine drug screen at least twice per year.

- Emergency physicians should inform providers of any incidents or conditions.

- Opioids are to be discontinued when the risks, side effects, lack of efficacy, or aberrant behavior outweigh the benefits.

- Document CSMD queries.

- Discuss a method to prevent unintended pregnancy with every woman of childbearing age who has reproductive capacity when opioids are initiated.

- If the patient plans to become pregnant, refer her to an obstetrician.

- Document urine drug screen results.

**12 Core Competencies for Prescribing Controlled Substances**

- Understand the epidemiology and population level of opioid addiction.

- Develop competence in performing a pain evaluation.

- Have a pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic treatment of pain.

- Understand the practical aspects of prescribing and communication.

- Develop techniques for conflict prevention and resolution.

- Follow chronic pain goals.

- Understand acute pain care for chronic pain patients.

- Develop an interoffice and interprofessional focus.

- Always perform a substance use disorder risk evaluation.

- Development of the treatment plan for the patient with substance use disorder.

- Educate patient and family on the management of overdose risk.

- Know the professional and legal standards.

**State Laws on Opioid Prescribing**

- Offer reasonable alternatives, risks, and benefits.

- Explain opioid use, what to expect, and disclose the risk of dependency, addiction, diversion, and misuse

- A consent signed by the patient or legal representative

- Discussion and consideration of whether an opioid should be taken

- If childbearing age, include access to information on birth control and neonatal abstinence syndrome

- Give and document an opportunity to ask and answer questions

- An agreement (contract), usually including informed consent, providing patient-provider long-term conditions for the prolonged (typically > 90-days) use of opioids or controlled substances

- Informed consent is for the episode of care for which the controlled substance is prescribed (TN law does not specify an expiration)

- Agreement (contract) is for the duration of care under that provider or practice and are typically renewed with major changes in treatment or periodically

- Sent electronically

- If PA or ARNP must include collaborating physician's name, address, and phone

- MME = (Daily amount opioid prescribed) X (# days prescribed)

- Example

- Oxycodone = 1.5X as potent as morphine
- Oxycodone 10 mg = Morphine 15 mg (30 MME)
- Prescribe Oxycodone 10 mg q 12 hours for 30-days

- Oxycodone 20 mg X 1.5 = 30 mg morphine
- 30 mg X 30 days = 900 MME

- Before a new controlled substance prescription

- Before each new controlled substance prescription for 1st 90 days

- Before prescribing, if abuse suspected

- At least every 6 months

- Benzodiazepines

- Gabapentin

- Opioids

- Pregabalin

- An authorized delegate may check

- 3-day or less prescription

- Hospice or palliative patient

- 3-day or less prescription, maximum 180 MME

- In-person H & P with a diagnosis

- In-person documentation of reaction

- counsel patient on disposal of initial prescription

- Dispenser confirmation remainder will not be filled

- 10-day maximum of one opioid, 500 MME

- In-person exam

- Document non-opioid and other treatments discussed or tried or reasons not tried.

- Document reasons for opioid

- ICD-10 code in the chart and on prescription

- Informed consent (if childbearing age, includes access to information on birth control and neonatal abstinence syndrome)

**Post-Op Pain (1-30-days)**

****

- 30-day maximum of one opioid, 1200 MME

- In-person exam

- Document non-opioid and other treatments discussed or tried or reasons not tried.

- Document reasons for opioid

- ICD-10 code in the chart and on prescription

- Signed informed consent (if childbearing age, includes access to information on birth control and neonatal abstinence syndrome)

****

**Prolonged Pain (1-30-days)**

****

- 30-day maximum of one opioid, 1200 MME

- In-person exam

- Document non-opioid and other treatments discussed or tried or reasons not tried.

- Document reasons for opioid

- ICD-10 code in the chart and on prescription

- Signed informed consent (if childbearing age, includes access to information on birth control and neonatal abstinence syndrome)

- Write "Medical Necessity" on the prescription.



-  Maximum of 14 days

- Active cancer, palliative, and hospice care

- Sickle cell

- Severe burn

- Major physical trauma

- Inpatients

- Pain management prescribers (or supervised APRN or PA) or under a supervised collaborative direction of a care plan

- Treatment with an opioid agonist

- Patients treated with opioids daily already for 90 days or more

- ICD-10 code for primary disease on prescription

- Include the word "EXEMPT" and the reason on the prescription

- Signed informed consent (if childbearing age, includes access to information on birth control and neonatal abstinence syndrome)

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Chronic pain is a significant condition that affects millions of people. It is an important public health concern with considerable morbidity and mortality, especially if associated with opioid diversion and misuse. Without proper management, the patient's quality of life can have a deleterious impact. Thus chronic pain is best managed with an interprofessional approach.

Chronic pain correlates with several severe complications, including severe depression and suicidal ideation and attempts. The lifetime prevalence for chronic pain patients attempting suicide was shown to be between 5% and 14%; suicidal ideation was approximately 20%.

These complications often require psychiatric intervention and advanced pharmacological or interventional therapies. Severe symptoms must receive treatment immediately, leading to an increase in healthcare costs. It is of the utmost importance to identify the risk factors and perform a thorough assessment of the patient with chronic pain and monitor for the progression of symptoms. A team approach is an ideal way to limit the effects of chronic pain and its complications via the following recommendations:

- Evaluation of a patient with acute pain by the primary care provider to prevent the progression of chronic pain is the recommended first step.

- Conservative chronic pain management should begin when symptoms are mild or moderate, including physical therapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and pharmacological management.

- A pharmacist or other knowledgeable clinician should evaluate the medication regimen to include medication reconciliation to preclude any drug-drug interactions and alert the healthcare team regarding any concerns.

- Regularly follow up with a primary care provider and pain specialist as necessary to assess and effectively manage the patient's pain.

- Clinicians must address comorbid psychiatric disorders. Depending on the severity of the patient's symptoms, this action may require the involvement of a psychiatrist.

- If symptoms worsen on follow-up or there is a concerning escalation of pharmacological therapy, such as with opioids, a referral to a pain medicine specialist merits consideration.

- If the patient has exhausted various pharmacological and nonpharmacological treatment options, interventional procedures can be a consideration.

- If the patient expresses concern for suicidal ideation or plan at any time, an emergent psychiatric team should evaluate the patient immediately.

- Patients who have developed opioid dependence secondary to pharmacological therapy should be offered treatment and possibly referral for addiction treatment or detoxification if indicated. The patient should be put on a medication weaning schedule or medications to treat opioid dependence.

- Based on CDC recommendations, patients on high-dose opioid medications or patients with risk factors for opioid overdose (e.g., obesity, sleep apnea, concurrent benzodiazepine use, high daily opioid dosages) should receive naloxone at home for the emergent treatment of an unintentional overdose.

Effective, open interprofessional communication is crucial in the optimal management of chronic pain and in minimizing the negative effects of chronic pain on the patient.

**Interprofessional Team Case Study #1**

**CC: Syncope and Confusion**

**HPI:**A 70-year-old confused female is brought to the hospital after being unconscious on the bathroom floor. The husband reports a history of morbid obesity, diabetes, kidney disease, and chronic right hip pain, for which hip replacement surgery has been delayed until she can better control her weight. She has been prescribed a combination of hydrocodone-acetaminophen for pain control to allow for ambulation and daily pool exercises. Lately, the pain has been getting worse, and the husband mentions that occasionally she takes more medicine than prescribed.

**PE:**Vital signs T 98.7 degrees F, Bp 100/70, HR 110, RR 14, and O2 Saturation 92%.

Physical exam reveals a somnolent female that is arousable to painful stimuli. Her cardiac and pulmonary exams are normal. There are no focal neurologic deficits.

**Work-up**

Laboratory studies, including a complete blood cell count, chemistry panel, and urinalysis, are normal except for a moderate elevation of the blood urea nitrogen and creatinine. A chest and pelvic radiographs are negative for fracture. The ECG was normal. The urine drug screen is positive for opioids and cannabinoids.

The patient is given naloxone and becomes awake and conversant.  She states that the event she can remember was urinating on the toilet and feeling faint. She indicates that she has difficulty sleeping and walking due to chronic hip pain, and she has severe pain with exercise in their home pool. She denies suicidal ideation. She admits to taking an extra pain pill and “smoking a joint” prior to the episode.

A PDMP inquiry reveals her orthopedic surgeon has prescribed her three times daily dose of her hydrocodone-acetaminophen for the last six weeks.

**Treatment**

The patient is admitted to the hospital, and orthopedic surgery, pain management, pharmacy, physical therapy, and dietician are consulted. A subsequent workup by the interprofessional team concludes the incident was caused by an accidental overdose of her opioid medication combined with her comorbid conditions.

The family and husband were informed that due to age, diabetes, and kidney disease, the opioid she is taking was cleared less efficiently. With the doubling of her dose, she developed acute toxic encephalopathy. The family and patient have a limited understanding of the potential side effects of opioids in treating pain and a poor understanding of exercising and dieting for weight control.

The interprofessional team recommends opioids at the prescribed dose without any additional doses, NSAIDs sparingly for breakthrough pain, monitored physical therapy and exercise, a planned diet, use of a TENS unit, and follow-up with a pain specialist and orthopedic surgeon for surgical intervention as soon as possible.

A written treatment and management plan is presented to the patient and family for discussion and consent at discharge. The goals include pain control, increased exercise, weight loss, and surgical intervention for hip replacement.

The patient is scheduled for outpatient pain management, physical therapy, and dietician appointments. Before discharge, the pharmacist counsels the patient and family regarding the safe use, dosage regulation, side effects, and proper disposal of opioid medication. Naloxone is prescribed, and the family is educated on its use.

**Follow-up**

Three months after discharge, the patient has successfully lost 40 pounds (18 kg) and was cleared for surgery. Following hip replacement, the patient's pain has dramatically diminished, and she is gradually tapered off of her opioid medications. She continues to maintain regular exercise and diet. She reports that she feels better, is enjoying life, and is encouraged by her progress.

An interprofessional approach to diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up provides a positive outcome.

**Interprofessional Case Study #2**

**CC: Request For Increased Pain Medicine**

A 76-year-old woman presents to the pharmacy to fill a prescription for acetaminophen-codeine. The pharmacist asks if this is a new prescription. The patient says she has been on it for months ever since she tripped over her hungry cat between her legs and broke her back. The patient says she recently moved from her own home to live with her daughter just down the street from the pharmacy.

The pharmacist asks if the patient has been having any problems, and she states she “has the runs,” “sleeps as much as her cat,” and “hurts all over.” She also indicates she would like to return to her volunteer job as a librarian. However, due to her ongoing pain and feeling unhappy all the time, she cannot bend over to put books on the shelves and does not have the energy or drive to do the work. The pharmacist notes the patient is a bit agitated.

The pharmacist accesses PDMP and confirms this is the only narcotic the patient has been prescribed for the last six months, with a recent drop in frequency from four times daily dosing to two times daily dosing. The pharmacist is concerned about chronic pain, and long-term treatment with an opioid is a risk factor for opioid use disorder.

The pharmacist calls the orthopedic surgeon prescriber and presents the concerns regarding the development of opioid use disorder. The clinician concurs. The dose is increased to three times daily dosing, and the clinician agrees to see the patient in the office the next day.

**Work-up/Treatment**

During the visit, the orthopedic surgeon obtains a follow-up X-ray and is reassured the lumbar vertebral fracture has healed. In addition to the three times daily dose of the opioid, the surgeon adds a low-dose NSAID for another 30 days and refers the patient for physical therapy. She also instructs the patient to apply hot and cold ice packs to her lower back, get a weekly massage, and start gentle stretching exercises. The patient is instructed to follow up in two weeks with the clinician's nurse practitioner.

**Follow-up**

The patient sees the nurse practitioner fourteen days later. The patient's pain is under control, and her signs and symptoms of opioid use disorder have resolved. The patient is instructed to continue the opioid at a BID dose and is placed on a long-term NSAID with a higher safety profile. She is instructed to return in 14 days.

The orthopedic surgeon sees the patient on the next visit and reviews the report of the physical therapist. The patient feels much better, and the opioid is decreased to once per day. For 14 days, and then she is instructed to stop the medication and return for a follow-up visit 2 days later.

The patient is in minimal pain on this visit and has no symptoms of opioid withdrawal or use disorder. She is kept on the NSAID at a once-daily dose and continues to see the physical therapist for another month.

The patient follows up with the nurse practitioner, who prescribes a low-dose, high-safety profile NSAID. She sees the pharmacist who refills the NSAID, and she reports she is back to work at the library, she is feeling much better, and she now feeds the cat on the counter to avoid tripping over it during feeding.

An interprofessional approach to diagnosis, treatment, and dispensing provides a positive outcome.

**Interprofessional Case Study #3**

**CC: Chronic Leg Pain**

**HPI:**A 60-year-old male presents with a history of progressive neuropathic leg pain with an unclear etiology. Physical therapy, relaxation therapy, massage therapy, and acupuncture have been tried without relief. Gabapentin, SSRIs, NSAIDs, and tramadol controlled the pain for the last year, but the pain is now worse and inhibits the patient's mobility. The clinician tried a short-acting opiate for the last 2-weeks, and the pain was relieved.

**PE:**Vital signs T 98.6 F (37 C), BP 120/80, HR 90, RR 16, and O2 Saturation 98%.

Physical exam reveals a male in no apparent distress. The heart, lung, and extremity exam is normal. A neurologic exam revealed hyperalgesia and hyperpathia of the lower legs.

**Work-up**

Prior EMG studies were consistent with severe neuropathy. Laboratory blood tests reveal no vitamin deficits or toxicities.

Treatment: The clinician, a neurologist, decides to transition the patient from short-acting to long-acting opioids and discusses the risks and benefits. The nurse provides a hand-out and discusses monitoring, understanding, signing required documentation, safe opioid use, safe storage, expectations, addiction risks, and required regular follow-ups. The nurse also discusses the signs and symptoms of opioid overdose and the use of naloxone.

The clinicians prescribe a long-acting narcotic at a low dose and for naloxone. The patient is asked to follow up in 7 days.

The pharmacist is familiar with the patient. The pharmacist accesses PDMP and confirms the prior narcotic order, the new long-acting order, and that no other potentially interactive medications have been prescribed. The pharmacist educates the patient on narcotic and naloxone use.

**Follow-up**

The patient follows up at 7 days, and the pain is now under control with no complications. The prescriber completes appropriate documentation and provides for a 30-day course with monthly follow-ups.