In 1838, Gluge described the earliest report of microsporidia existence when the parasite infected fish. This was later named Glugea anomala. In 1857, Professor Carl Wilhelm von Nageli recognized the first microsporidia Nosema bombycis.N. bombycis infected both Lepidoptera and Hymenoptera, causing pebrine/pepper disease, named by Professor Jean Louis Armand de Quatrefages de Breau in Paris. The disease infected silkworm eggs causing the larvae to be covered with blackish blotches. The disease caused by N. bombycis was severe and almost destroyed the European silk industry in France, Italy, and Germany. Nageli first regarded this parasite as a yeast-like organism and classified it as Schizomycetes, a consensus group of yeast and bacteria.

Further microsporidia research included that of Louis Pasteur with his landmark study of N. bombycis. He proposed pebrine disease control and prevention that not only significantly saved the silk industry in Europe but also became the primary influence of Pasteur’s germ theory of disease. The taxonomic determination of microsporidia was controversial for several years, and many researchers proposed they were unicellular algae, yeast spores, fungi-related organism, and even as tumor cells or degraded erythrocytes.

After a series of studies on the silkworm pathogen, Balbiani recognized that the organism lacked several Schizomycetes characteristics but shared similarities with the Sporozoa. Consequently, in 1882, Balbiani first suggested the separate taxon Microsporidia for N. bombycis, which was the only named microsporidium at that time. In 1977, Sprague designated the phylum Microspora which was updated in 1992.Microsporidia were considered a primitive protozoa, but molecular phylogenetic analysis explained that these organisms are not primitive but instead degenerate.

In 2008, Microsporidia were thought to be related to fungi as a sister group or basal branch.Microsporidia in silkworms and found that similar organisms globally distributed among various kinds of animals, generally invertebrates and fish, but also humans.

Recent classification in 2012 suggested that Microsporidia are a single-cell eukaryotic (protist) parasite that belong to the SAR-inclusive class or super-group.

**Morphology and Life Cycle**

Microsporidia are eukaryotic obligate intracellular organisms with oval appearance under a microscope and present with a nuclear envelope intracytoplasmic membrane system, and a chromosome separation on a mitotic spindle. Microsporidia do not have peroxisomes but do have vesicular Golgi bodies and a primitive mitochondrial-like organelle lacking in genome termed as mitosome.

Microsporidia produce an environmentally-resistant spore due to its tubular shape which enables them to extrude its coiled, internal polar tube thereby inoculating its content into the nearby host.

The life cycle of Microsporidia consists of 2 distinct stages which are merogony or the proliferating stage, and sporogony or infecting or mature stage. Briefly, the life cycle of Microsporidia are:

- Spores enter the host by ingestion and or inhalation. Germination occurs, resulting in an extension of the polar tube and the injection of sporoplasm into the host cell’s cytoplasm by the injecting tube known as the polar tube, a highly unique specialized invasive structure. The injected sporoplasm in some species also is part of the glycocalyx.

- Sporoplasm later develops into meronts which is the proliferative stage; here replication occurs through fusion with the formation of multinucleate plasmodial. This meront cell membranes thicken and form sporonts.

- The sporonts divide and develop into sporoblast that later enters a mature stage of spore without additional multiplication. The mature form is equipped with the injection apparatus. The presence of the injection apparatus in the spore is a characteristic that sharply defined microsporidia as a monophyletic taxon.

- The host cells later become distended with mature spores, resulting in rupture and release of the spores to the outer milieu or nearby cells inside the body. In a single infection, Microsporidia can multiply into numerous spores creating a basis of enormous reproductive potential resulting in their high pathogenic capability.