Overall, labetalol is usually well tolerated. Most adverse effects are typically mild and transient. As previously described above, symptomatic postural hypotension is a potential occurrence if patients are tilted or allowed to change positions from the supine or seated position to standing too quickly. This is especially important in the post-operative period (PACU or the ward) when managing a hypertensive patient with labetalol who can otherwise ambulate to the bathroom. Increased sweating, as well as flushing, have been reported with the use of labetalol. It seems the incidence of adverse reactions after administering labetalol seems to be dose-dependent.

As with all beta-blockers, labetalol has negative inotropic effects and has the potential to cause acute left ventricular failure if given in sufficiently large enough doses to those patients who have impaired function of the left ventricle. All beta-blockers can exacerbate intermittent claudication and Raynaud phenomenon in patients with coexisting peripheral vascular disease. Another important consideration for anesthesia providers in the perioperative period is that non-selective beta-blockers that interact with beat receptors can result in bronchospasm in patients with a history of asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease due to antagonism of beta receptors. Sudden withdrawal of beta-blockers can result in increased sensitivity to catecholamines. This upregulation can lead to tachyarrhythmias, acute hypertensive crises, and palpitations, although this is more common with chronic use.