Indications for HBOT use should be carefully weighed against the patients' potential contraindications for treatment to ensure that patients' benefit outweighs the associated risks. Interprofessional collaboration is crucial to ensure that patients' contraindications are considered and ruled out while ensuring that HBOT is used with a reasonable indication of benefit. As HBOT can be used emergently or electively, interprofessional roles vary considerably. In emergent situations, earlier HBOT initiation is correlated with improved outcomes.

Emergency medical service personnel are responsible for producing the initial history, which may include indications that emergency HBOT is needed, such as a diving injury or evidence of carbon monoxide toxicity. Radiology staff must evaluate past radiographs for evidence of pulmonary nodules or other pulmonary abnormalities that may contraindicate elective HBOT. In addition, radiology will have a critical role in emergent situations to rule out tension pneumothorax, the single absolute contraindication of HBOT. Pharmacists and pharmacy staff have an important role in considering the patient's current medications and medication schedules so that patients undergoing chemotherapy can also utilize elective HBOT safely and without risk of medication effects. Nurses play an important role in monitoring patients undergoing HBOT for adverse reactions and are essential to maintaining patient safety and well-being during HBOT treatment. For elective HBOT, primary care providers must carefully note medical conditions that may relatively contraindicate HBOT, including claustrophobia, upper respiratory infections, diabetes, eustachian tube malformations, and chronic respiratory diseases. When considering HBOT, the primary care staff must continuously review potential comorbidities that may introduce additional risk to the patient.

**Oxford CEBM Evidence Levels for HBOT by Condition**

- Gas embolus: Level II

- Radiation injury treatment: Level II

- Refractory osteomyelitis: Level III