Treatment of high-altitude pulmonary edema depends on illness severity, resources, and rescue logistics in austere environments. Descent and supplemental oxygen are the mainstays of therapy.

Supplemental oxygen therapy should be initiated immediately upon suspicion of HAPE to relieve hypoxia, decrease the hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstrictor response, and provide symptom improvement. Goal oxygen saturations should be 90% or greater.

In a hospital setting, oxygen remains the most effective therapy for patients with HAPE. Supplemental oxygen immediately improves hypoxia, reduces pulmonary vasoconstriction, relieves shunting, and demonstrates symptomatic relief with an improvement of the patient’s work of breathing, tachypnea, and tachycardia. In severe cases of HAPE, patients may benefit from continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or expiratory positive airway pressures (EPAP).

Medications have a limited role in managing HAPE, as descent and oxygen therapy are highly effective. Medications have a role in situations in which descent and oxygen therapy are not feasible or as adjuvants in severe cases to decrease pulmonary artery pressures. Nifedipine, a calcium channel blocker, can provide a small reduction of pulmonary vascular pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance. The common dosing of nifedipine for HAPE is 30 mg every 12 hours.

Patients with mild symptoms that resolve fully with descent can begin a slow reascent after 2 or 3 days of rest at a lower altitude. Cases of HAPE at moderately high-altitude resorts may require only rest and administration of low flow supplemental oxygen for 2-3 days duration if the patient elects not to descend and the health care team is familiar and comfortable with management.