The risk of development of neuro-deficit following spinal surgery with or without any recognizable adverse event is known. Intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring (IONM) use during spinal surgery, including motor-evoked potentials (MEPs), somatosensory-evoked potentials (SSEPs), and electromyography (EMG), leads to early recognition and management of any signal changes during the procedure, thus predicts a favorable surgical outcome. Loss of IONM signals or any variation from baseline IONM signal during surgery indicates a neural injury and predicts postoperative neuro deficits' development.

Multiple factors, including anesthetic agents, blood pressure, body temperature, oxygenation, hypocapnia, and any technical problem, can affect the IONM signal. Intravenous anesthetics are compatible with IONM; inhaled anesthetics leads to dose-dependent suppression of amplitude and increases in latency; muscle relaxants are only used for intubation as they block neurotransmission. Mechanical compression of neural tissue increases latency and decreases amplitude; a decrease in blood supply decreases amplitude.

Evoked potentials signal changes with the change in body temperature, so it has been recommended to maintain a temperature close to baseline within a range of +/- 2 degrees C to 2.5 degrees C; at core temperatures below 28 degrees C, no MEPs, and SSEPs are recorded. The partial pressure of carbon dioxide levels less than 20 mmHg causes cerebral vasoconstriction leading to neural tissue ischemia associated with a change in cortical MEP and SSEP readings.

Studies have shown that with the use of IONM, there are significant improvements in neurological outcomes.