**Plain Radiographs**

It is necessary to get anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs of the affected knee, as well as patellar (sunrise) views.

The lateral view can also allow assessment of trochlear dysplasia. The 'crossing sign' is present when the trochlear groove is in the same plane as the anterior border of the lateral condyle, suggestive of flattening. The 'double contour sign' is present if the patient has a convex trochlear groove or underdeveloped medial condyle. It occurs when the anterior border of the lateral condyle is in front of the anterior border of the medial condyle. The Merchant (sunrise) view is for assessment of patellar tilt; it is an axial view at 45 degrees of flexion. The sulcus and congruence angles can be measured on this view.

**Computer Tomography Scans (CT)**

CT scan allows measurement of the TT-TG distance which is an important parameter in evaluation and management of patellar dislocation. A line is drawn tangent to the posterior border of both femoral condyles. Then 2 lines are drawn perpendicular to this line. One line is from the apex of the tibial tubercle (A), and one line is from the deepest point of the trochlear groove (B). The distance between lines A and B is the TT-TG distance, and is normally less than 20mm. A measurement above 20mm is considered abnormal. The CT scan can also delineate the presence and extent of osteochondral fractures and can help plan any surgical intervention.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**

Magnetic resonance imaging is very helpful in looking at the soft tissue structures of the knee. In cases of complete dislocation, there is typically a characteristic bruising pattern of the lateral femoral condyle and medial patella. There may be disruption of the MPFL (usually at the medial femoral epicondyle insertion).