The following are the most common etiologies:

**Alcoholic Liver Disease**

Alcoholic liver disease is a spectrum of disease which includes alcoholic fatty liver with or without hepatitis, alcohol hepatitis (reversible because of acute ingestion) to cirrhosis (irreversible). Patients with severe alcohol use disorder mostly develop chronic liver disease; this is the most frequent cause of CLD.

**Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD/NASH)**

NAFLD has an association with metabolic syndrome (obesity, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes mellitus). Some of these patients develop non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, which leads to fibrosis of the liver. All the risk factors of metabolic syndrome can aggravate the disease process.

**Chronic Viral Hepatitis**

Chronic hepatitis B, C, and D infections are the most common causes of chronic liver disease in East Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. There are various genotypes of hepatitis C. In Europe and North America, genotype 1a and 1b are more prevalent, while in Southeast Asia, genotype 3 is more common. A molecular epidemiological study revealed a high prevalence of HCV genotype 4, subtype 4a among Egyptian patients living in Sharkia governorate, Egypt. Chronic hepatitis C, if not treated, may lead to hepatocellular carcinoma.

**Genetic Causes**

- **Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency:**This is the most common genetic cause of CLD among children.

- **Hereditary hemochromatosis:**It is an autosomal recessive disorder of iron absorption. Here due to a mutation involving the HFE gene that regulates the iron absorption from the intestine, excessive iron is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. As a result, there is a pathological increase in total body iron (such as ferritin and hemosiderin). This process leads to the generation of hydroxyl free radicals, which in turn causes organ fibrosis.

- **Wilson disease:**Autosomal recessive disorder leading to copper accumulation

**Autoimmune Causes**

Autoimmune hepatitis is a rare disease in which there is the destruction of liver parenchyma by autoantibodies. Most of the patients who present with this disease have already developed cirrhosis. Females are more commonly affected than males.

- **Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC):**This is an autoimmune and progressive disease of the liver, which is the destruction of intrahepatic biliary channels and portal inflammation and scarring. It leads to cholestatic jaundice and fibrosis of liver parenchyma. PBC is more common in middle-aged women. Alkaline phosphatase levels increase in PBC.

- **Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis (PSC):**commonly associated with ulcerative colitis. This condition is characterized by a decrease in the size of intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts due to inflammation and fibrosis.

- **Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH):**This is a form of chronic inflammatory hepatitis, more common in women than men, and is characterized by elevated autoantibodies such as antinuclear antibodies, anti-smooth muscle antibodies, and hypergammaglobulinemia.

**Other Causes of Chronic Liver Disease**

- Drugs - amiodarone, isoniazid, methotrexate, phenytoin, nitrofurantoin.

- Vascular. Budd-Chiari syndrome.

- Idiopathic/cryptogenic, around 15%