The phenotypic spectrum of patients with OAVS is quite heterogeneous. Multisystem involvement is quite common in OAVS. The examination findings and symptoms can be divided according to the organ system involved. The classical triad of OAVS includes mandibular hypoplasia with facial asymmetry, oculo-auricular malformations, and vertebral abnormalities.

The most common clinical features include epibulbar and lipodermoids, auricular abnormalities like microtia, hemifacial microsomia, preauricular tags, appendages and fistula, vertebral anomalies, hypoplasia of various bones like maxilla, mandible, zygomatic arch, and malar area. Mental retardation and global developmental delay have also been reported. Most common systemic malformations include ear abnormalities (100%) followed by ocular involvement (72%), vertebral (67%), central nervous system anomalies (50%), and congenital heart defects (33%).

**Central Nervous System (CNS)**

Strömland et al. reported various brain abnormalities by performing neuroimaging in ten patients with OAVS. These include occipital encephalocele, absent septum pellucidum, Arnold-Chiari malformation II, cortical dysplasia, enlarged ventricles, and hypoplasia of craniofacial bones. Various functional deficits like autism spectrum disorder, developmental delay, speech abnormalities, dysphagia, hearing loss, and low vision have also been reported.

**Oro-craniofacial Anomalies**

These are commonly unilateral but can also have a bilateral asymmetrical presentation. The oro-facial anomalies include microsomia, macrostomia, cleft lip, cleft palate, malformation in the epiglottic fold, bifid uvula, jaw protrusion, and malocclusions. Dental abnormalities include delayed tooth development, agenesis of premolars and molars, enamel, and dentin malformations. Parents have also reported speech difficulties, feeding problems in infants, chewing and swallowing problems. Few authors have reported facial palsy, trigeminal anesthesia, and asymmetrical palatal elevation.

**Auricular Abnormalities**

External and middle ear abnormalities are quite common. However, the inner ear is less commonly involved. Hypoplastic external ear with preauricular tags, fistulae, low lying ear, and narrow ear canal are known. Microtia has been classified into four types by various authors depending on the severity level. Type I includes only a small external ear; type II is characterized by the moderate anomaly of the external ear such as hook-shaped, S-shaped, or question mark-shaped auricle; type III has a rudimentary external ear with no cartilage, and type IV includes anotia and absence of all external ear structures. Middle ear abnormalities include reduced cavity size and fusion between malleus and incus bones. Inner ear defect of the vestibular organ is documented. The most common type of hearing loss is conductive; however, sensorineural and combined have also been reported.

**Vertebral Malformations**

Spinal cord abnormalities in the cervical spine and scoliosis are reported in the literature. Renkema et al. described the different vertebral anomalies in patients with OAVS. The most commonly reported anomalies include hemivertebrae, scoliosis, and spina bifida occulta. Depending upon the location, block vertebrae, cervical ribs, hemivertebrae, and capitalization of the atlas are common in the cervical region. Hemivertebrae and block vertebrae are common in the thoracic region. Though less commonly involved, the lumbar region can present with scoliosis, hemivertebrae, and block vertebrae.

**Other Systemic Abnormalities**

Congenital heart defects like tetralogy of Fallot, atrial and ventricular septal defects, persistent truncus arteriosus, transposition of the great vessels, aortic arch anomalies, dextrocardia, conotruncal defects, and situs inversus are common. Urogenital anomalies include renal agenesis, hydronephrosis, ectopic and fused kidneys, polycystic kidney, double and hydroureter. Gastrointestinal tract anomalies include tracheoesophageal fistula, rectal atresia, and esophageal atresia. The respiratory system can also be involved with abnormal anatomy of the larynx, pharynx, and lungs. Limb anomalies can also be seen like club foot, thumb, and radial hemimelia.

**Ocular Features**

The most common ocular finding is epibulbar or limbal dermoid, followed by lipodermoid and eyelid coloboma. Other findings include microphthalmia, anophthalmia, lid coloboma, ptosis, strabismus like Duane retraction syndrome, lacrimal duct stenosis. The main distinguishing feature among the ocular anomalies of Treacher Collins syndrome and OAVS is that the former has lower eyelid coloboma. In contrast, the latter has upper eyelid (junction of inner and middle one-third) coloboma.

Rooijers et al. classified the ocular anomalies into four categories as follows

- Type I: anatomical anomalies usually not impairing vision like lid coloboma, lipodermoid, orbital dystopia, lacrimal stenosis, epicanthus, and telecanthus

- Type II: anatomical anomalies likely to impair vision like epibulbar dermoid, microphthalmos, anophthalmos, exposure keratopathy, cataract, fundal coloboma, and optic nerve hypoplasia.

- Type III: motility disorders like esotropia, exotropia, Duane syndrome, abducent nerve anomaly, and ptosis.

- Type IV: refractive errors like astigmatism, anisometropia, myopia, and hyperopia.

The incidence of ocular anomalies in the literature varies from 6.7% to 100%, with severe visual impairment in 7.7 to 30%. Thus, complete ophthalmic evaluation is necessary for all patients with OAVS.