There are currently no studies specific to the epidemiology, incidence, and prevalence of the adverse effects potentially experience by CAWs. Despite this, adverse effects associated with compressed air work can be categorical and multifactorial. There are adverse effects related to both the actual construction work and the atmospheric environment in which they work. The environmental concerns pertain to the air, its potential contaminants, and those associated with breathing compressed air and mixed gases.  Construction injuries get classified according to etiology. They range from minor injuries requiring first aid as simple cuts or abrasions or can be major, including traumatic amputations, burns, ergonomic injuries, and multiple trauma from falls.

Common Mechanical Adverse Effects of Compression and Decompression

The mechanical effects relate to Boyle's law that states pressure and volume are inversely proportional to one another. As pressure increases, volume decreases, and vice versa.  This change in volume of air or gas will effect CAWs in the air containing spaces of the body only; the eustachian tube (ET), middle ear space (MES), sinuses, respiratory tree, lungs, and gastrointestinal tract.  Hyperbaric pressure will have no direct mechanical effect on body tissues, plasma, blood, or other matter. Hyperbaric pressure may also effect iatrogenically created air spaces such as air pockets surrounding dental work and air created by a tooth abscess.  Also included is air introduced into the globe of the eye following common surgical procedures such as cataract extraction, or intraocular injections.

During descent or compression of the hyperbaric chamber, the most common adverse effect is eustachian tube dysfunction (ETD) and middle ear barotrauma (MEB).

Physiologic Adverse Effects

Nitrogen narcosis usually occurs at depths greater than 4.0 atm.  Symptoms are similar to alcohol intoxication as it impairs judgment and slows responses that will impede the CAWs performance.

Decompression with oxygen has significantly mitigated the risk of DCS and decreases the total time necessary for decompression.

Dust inhalation during all types of construction work that includes dust exposures during hyperbaric tunneling interventions may lead to minor and major clinical pathological problems.