Coccidioides is a genus of dimorphic fungi that exist as mycelia or as spherules (1). Both mycelia and spherules are asexual forms. The sexual form of coccidiosis has not been found. Molecular analysis suggests Coccidioides is related to ascomycetes such as Histoplasma capsulated or Blastomyces dermatitidis. Two species within the genus Coccidioides are recognized namely, C. immitis and Coccidioides posadasii. C. immitis is found in California while C. posadasii is found in other US states as well as other parts of the world. The clinical manifestation and in vitro susceptibilities of these two species are the same. The two species of Coccidioides are phenotypically identical and can only be identified by molecular methods. Therefore, Coccidioides species are not routinely identified to species level in clinical microbiology laboratories. This fungus likes arid deserts with high salt content. In soil, and in agar, the Coccidioides grow as mycelia or filamentous form.

Arthroconidia, the infectious particles of Coccidiosis species are deposited in the lung when inhaled. Arthroconidia transform into spherules in the lung and tissues. Spherules are filled with endospores (2 micrometers to 5 micrometers). This spherule can burst in tissues releasing endospores, which can magnify the infection.

Coccidioides species grow well on most mycologic or bacteriologic media after five or seven days of incubation. Typically, the colonies are white. However, appearance is nondiagnostic. The yeast is very infectious at this stage. Outbreaks in the laboratory personnel have occurred; therefore, the laboratory must be informed when Coccidiosis species are suspected.