The somatic nervous system contains both afferent nerves traveling from the periphery towards the CNS and efferent nerves that are responsible for sending signals from the CNS to the periphery. The brain and spinal cord are responsible for processing and integrating the various sources of information to allow us to develop a response. Therefore the main function of the somatic nervous system is to connect the CNS with organs and striated muscle to perform our daily functions. The basic motor pathway involves the upper motor neurons located in the precentral gyrus (primary motor cortex), which sends signals through the corticospinal tract via axons in the spinal cord to the lower motor neurons. These signals travel through the ventral horn of the spinal cord and synapse with the lower motor neurons and send their signals through peripheral axons to the NMJ of skeletal muscle. UMN release neurotransmitters acetylcholine, which binds to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors of the alpha-motor neurons creating a stimulus that propagates towards the NMJ, which innervates muscles.

The peripheral(outside of the CNS) processes of the somatic nervous system form the somatic peripheral nerves, which are structurally and functionally different from the autonomic nervous system. The somatic peripheral nervous system is a single neuron system with the motor neurons lying inside the brainstem or spinal cord and the sensory neurons lying in the dorsal root ganglia. The autonomic peripheral nervous system is a two neuron system with a neuron lying outside of the CNS in the autonomic ganglia. The nerve fibers have different sizes with different conduction velocities. The size depends on the actual size of the axons and, more importantly, the degree of myelination, which provides electrical insulation and fast conduction seed through the so-called "saltatory conduction." The fastest conducting fibers are, therefore, the most heavily myelinated. They are the motor fibers from the motor neurons and sensory fibers serving discriminative touch, joint position, and vibratory sensations. The small fibers are mainly sensory fibers serving pain and temperature sensations.

Somatic Reflex Arc

These are neural pathways that are responsible for the automatic response between a sensory and motor neuron. The sensory input generates a specific motor output. The simplest spinal reflex is mediated by a single synaptic process called the monosynaptic reflex. It contains only one synapse between the two neurons involved in the arc (sensory and motor). An example to illustrate this is the patellar reflex- Striking the patellar ligament just below the patella with a reflex hammer leads to automatic contraction of the quadriceps, this results in knee extension. The next order of a simple reflex involves two or more synapses termed the polysynaptic reflex (one or more interneurons). For example, the sensory neuron becomes stimulated, which activates the interneuron, which then directly stimulates the motor neuron, causing a movement.