Patients present at an early age with symptoms of recurrent infections, partial oculo-cutaneous albinism, and coagulation defects. It has been observed that the severity of the disease correlates with the molecular phenotype. Generally, mutations resulting in a loss of function leads to a severe childhood-onset of the disease. Whereas, a missense mutation is associated with a milder adolescent or adult-onset disease. However, exceptions to this have been reported in two cases.

The severity of the disease is not only associated with molecular phenotype but also with the cellular phenotype. A range of intracellular granule enlargement in different cell types was observed from the studies of melanocytes and fibroblasts from patients with different clinical phenotypes.

**Clinical Manifestations**

**(a) Partial oculo-cutaneous albinism:**This is a prominent feature but the degree of pigment dilution varies and can either be present normally, partially or could be absent. It can include skin, hair, and eyes. There is a metallic or "silvery" appearance of the hair that can be seen in the classic forms of the disease.

The clumping of the pigment within the hair shaft also can be visualized under a light microscope

A decrease in the pigmentation of the iris leads to a decrease in the pigmentation of the retina. The visual acuity might be affected and patients could either have a normal acuity or have some moderate impairment. Other ophthalmologic symptoms include photophobia, increasing red reflex, and a horizontal or rotating nystagmus.

(**b) Immunodeficiency:**Affected individuals have recurrent infections that are often severe and typically begin in infancy. Patients are more susceptible to bacterial and fungal infections with staphylococcal, streptococcal, pneumococcal, and beta-hemolytic species being the most predominant. Skin infections and upper respiratory tract infections are some of the most common infections. Recently, periodontitis has been identified as an important indicator of immune dysfunction and could help lead to the correct diagnosis.

Patients with atypical disease may not show symptoms of unusual or severe infections.

**(c) Bleeding tendency**: Symptoms are usually mild and include epistaxis, mucosal or gum bleeding, and easy bruising. Symptoms are subtle and generally do not require any medical intervention.

**(d) Accelerated phase:**This arises in 85% of the individuals affected and can occur at any age. It is associated with a poor prognosis and is the most common cause of mortality. The accelerated phase is characterized by fever, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, neutropenia, anemia, and sometimes thrombocytopenia. There is also a diffuse lymphohistiocytic infiltration of the liver, spleen, bone marrow, lymph nodes, and the central nervous system.

The accelerated phase was initially thought to be caused by a malignancy such as a lymphoma but is now known to be hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis that is associated with multi-organ inflammation.

The hemophagocytic syndrome is caused by the inappropriate stimulation of the macrophages in the bone marrow and the lymphoid organs that lead to phagocytosis of blood cells and the production of a large number of pro-inflammatory cytokines. The triggers of the accelerated phase remain unclear. It is believed that infections such as the  Epstein-Barr virus might hasten the development, although it is yet unproven. The absence of natural killer (NK) cells also is believed to play a role in the development.

Approximately 90% of patients die within the first 10 years of life.

**(e) Neurologic manifestations**: Neurological features manifest by early adulthood despite successful allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. These changes are due to the long-term progression of the disease and include stroke, coma, ataxia, tremor, motor, and sensory neuropathies, and absent deep tendon reflexes.

**(f) Atypical phenotype:**An unknown number of individuals have atypical or milder phenotypes of the disease that are unrecognized. Features may include the following:

- Subtle or absent oculocutaneous albinism

- Decreased platelet-dense bodies with subtle bleeding symptoms

- Severe infections in childhood that become less frequent with age or infections that are insignificant.

- Progressive neurological symptoms such as intellectual disabilities, tremors, gait disturbances, parkinsonism.

- The neurological manifestations are inconsistent and nonspecific. Neurodegeneration may be the predominant symptom with only subtle alterations in the pigmentation, immune functions, and bleeding abnormalities.

- All individuals, however, have abnormal granules within the leukocyte.