**Physical Exam and Auscultation**

Cardiac auscultation is performed in virtually every form of doctor-patient interaction. The physician listens to the heart sounds, rate, and rhythm. If murmurs are detected during this examination, it can be determined if the murmur takes place in systole (between S1 and S2) or diastole (after S2 and before the next S1). Determining the timing of murmurs can help narrow down an otherwise broad differential. For example, a murmur determined to be systolic rules out diastolic murmur causes such as mitral stenosis and aortic regurgitation. As a general rule, systolic murmurs involve blood leaving the ventricle (e.g., mitral regurgitation, aortic stenosis, HOCM), and diastolic murmurs involve blood entering the ventricles (mitral stenosis, aortic regurgitation).

The symptomatology of various cardiac pathology may be evident on physical examination by methods other than auscultation. Palpation and simple observation can reveal alterations to the normal pressure-contraction cycling of the heart. Palpation of the distal extremities for temperature and the presence of edema is a rapid bedside maneuver. One can also inspect the neck for jugular venous distention. Because the jugular veins are continuous with the right atria, their distention can be used as a rough estimation of the right atrial pressure. An elevated right atrial pressure can correlate to pathologies such as arrhythmia or poor cardiac output. One striking example occurs in congestive heart failure, where poor forward flow causes a backup into preceding cardiac chambers.

**Cardiac Imaging**

An understanding of the cardiac cycle is vital to the interpretation of cardiac imaging. In particular, one of the most direct methods for cardiac imaging is the echocardiogram. This ultrasound-based technology allows representative visualization of cardiac wall motion, valve function, and blood flow. Using this type of imaging, and comparing the results to the normal physiological principles stated above, one can identify pathologies such as heart failure, pericardial effusion, or aberrant valves. These pathologies will demonstrate altered blood flow and chamber pressures and are discussed below.