Compared to surgery or radiation therapy alone, surgical excision followed by immediate postoperative radiation therapy has been shown to be the most effective treatment, with a recurrence rate of about 20%.

**Radiation Dosing and Fractionation**

There is a range of radiation prescriptions that have been used.  The recommended total dose ranges from 12 to 20 Gy and historically was low dose per fractionation (3 to 4 fractions daily in 3 to 4 Gy/fx). However, newer data has suggested that using a radiation prescription that delivers a biologic effective dose (BED) of greater than 30 Gy (e.g., 13 Gy/1fx, 16Gy/2fx, 18Gy/3fx over 5 to 7 days), has better long-term control.

**Radiation Treatment Planning**

Simulation and Target Volume

The scar plus a 1cm radial margins, 0.5 to 1 cm depth, is targeted for radiation. Depending on the site of the lesion and concern for radiation dose to surrounding structures, either a clinical or CT simulation can be used. The patient should be placed in a reproducible position. Lead shields or absorbers can be positioned near the field to block critical structures.

For example, if a patient gets radiation to the earlobe, they would be simulated in the supine position with the head turned so that the affected ear is facing up.  Then an aquaplast mask can be made to immobilize the head and replicate the rotation of the head. The mask can be cut out near the ear to allow visualization of the treatment area. The scar may be wired, and the 1 cm margin can also be wired to help with creating an electron cut out and with treatment planning.  A lead shield with wax cover can be placed behind the lobe to block radiation dose to the neck and brain.

Radiation Modality

Different forms of radiation can be used to deliver dose to a superficial target, including electrons (less than or equal to 6 MeV), x-rays (70 to 150 kV), and iridium-192 brachytherapy with implants or surface applicators. The modality most commonly used to treat keloids is electrons.  Electrons are generated and delivered by a standard radiation machine called a linear accelerator, the same machine that delivers photons that are used in a majority of radiation treatments.  Electrons have a shallow dose penetration compared to photons and are ideal for treating superficial lesions while minimizing dose to normal underlying structures, making it ideal for skin lesions. Often a 1 cm bolus is placed over the lesion increase the dose at the skin while reducing the depth of penetration.

Superficial x-ray therapy uses photon beams to deliver energy to a maximum depth of 5 mm. Similar to EBRT, superficial x-ray therapy can treat superficial lesions without damage to the underlying structure. This method is also less costly and easier to use but can result in uneven delivery of dosage since radiation drops off at the periphery.

Brachytherapy is also another modality to treat keloids that have been very successful. However, it is not as widely used because all radiation centers do not have the physical radioactive source (Iridium-192) needed for brachytherapy. Usually, a surface applicator or mold would need to be created so that the catheters that would hold the Ir-192 could be placed on the scar to allow for dose penetration to the skin at risk for re-developing a keloid. Brachytherapy can deliver more precise radiation. However, the radiation dose delivery is very heterogeneous, and it could lead to increased skin toxicity. In a meta-analysis systemic review of post-excisional radiation modalities by Mankowski et al., brachytherapy was demonstrated to have the lowest recurrence rate (15%) compared to EBRT (23%) and x-ray therapy (23%).