Sphenopalatine ganglion block can be performed through transnasal, transoral, or transcutaneous approaches.

**Transnasal Topical Approach**

- The patient is placed in the supine position with the cervical spine extended.

- The measurement of the distance from the opening of the nares to the mandibular notch directly below the zygoma can be used to estimate the depth of cotton-tipped applicator advancement needed.

- The cotton-tipped applicator is soaked in local anesthetic (viscous lidocaine 4%)

- The cotton-tipped applicator is advanced into the nares parallel to the zygoma with the tip angled laterally until it lays on the nasopharyngeal mucosa posterior to the middle nasal turbinate.

- A second applicator may be placed slightly posterior and superior to the initial applicator.

- A response is typically seen in 5 to 10 minutes. However, the applicator(s) may be left in position for 30 minutes.

**Transnasal Injection Approach**

- The patient is placed in the supine position with the cervical spine extended.

- A cotton-tipped applicator soaked in local anesthetic is advanced along the superior border of the middle turbinate. It is stopped when the posterior wall of the nasopharynx is reached. Alternatively, a small about of viscous lidocaine can be instilled into the nare(s), after which the patient inhales briskly to draw the lidocaine toward the posterior nasopharynx.

- The chosen SPGB device (The SphenoCath, Allevio SPG Nerve Block Catheter, or Tx360 Nasal Injector) is then advanced into the ipsilateral nare.

- Contrast can be injected under fluoroscopy to visualize needle tip placement.

- Once the catheter tip is in place, the inner catheter is advanced to administer local anesthetic.

- The patient should be instructed to remain in the same position for 10 minutes.

Advantages: Simplest technique, short procedure time, low risk with complications limited to epistaxis and infection

Disadvantages: It requires the diffusion of local anesthetic across mucous membranes.

**Transoral Approach**

A curved dental needle passes through the greater palatine foramen (GPF) in the posterior portion of the hard palate. This should be just medial to the gum line opposite the third molar tooth to reach the superior aspect of the pterygopalatine fossa.

Advantages: Provides more direct access to the sphenopalatine ganglia.

Disadvantages: Needle-based invasive approach, technically challenging, exhibits the greatest complications, and most patient discomfort, and is unpredictable with regards to ensuring proper anesthetic placement.

**Infrazygomatic Approach**

Fluoroscopy or computed tomography (CT) is recommended for patient safety and improved chance of direct delivery of local anesthetic to the SPG.

- The patient is placed in the supine position.

- Apply sterile prepping and drape to the appropriate side of the face

- Obtain a lateral fluoroscopic view of the face using a C-arm by superimposing the mandibular rami on top of one another

- Anesthetize the skin above the mandibular notch

- A 10 cm curved blunt 20 or 22-gauge needle is preferred. Alternatively, a 22 or 25-gauge 3.5-inch short-bevel needle with the distal tip bent to a 15-degree angle may be used.

- Advance the needle in a superior and medial direction toward the pterygopalatine fossa under fluoroscopy.

- An intermittent anteroposterior (AP) view should be obtained to assess needle depth.

- Needle tip advancement should terminate immediately adjacent to the ipsilateral nasal wall.

- 0.5-1 mL of nonionic, water-soluble contrast should be injected under continuous fluoroscopy to rule out intravascular uptake and intranasal spread.

- Once proper needle placement is confirmed, 1 to 2 mL of local anesthetics, such as 1 to 2% lidocaine or 0.25% bupivacaine with or without corticosteroids, is injected.

Advantages: Needle-based invasive approach and use of fluoroscopy allow for direct administration of a local anesthetic to the SPG

Disadvantages: CT guidance requires greater radiation exposure to the patient, more invasive.