The management and treatment of cauliflower ear can take many forms depending on when the patient presents and the size and scope of the deformity. It should be noted from the outset that the cauliflower ear is potentially avoidable through the appropriate covering and protection of the ear during contact sports. This protection reduces or eliminates the types of blunt, shearing forces the ear experiences altogether and subsequently, the formation of an underlying hematoma. According to studies of wrestlers, the use of protective headgear can reduce the prevalence of auricular hematomas by up to 50%.

Any trauma to the head severe enough to injure the exterior ear mandates a thorough head and neck examination that includes the otoscopic inspection of the tympanic membranes, a cranial nerve examination, and a detailed neurologic examination. This helps ensure a more critical intracranial injury is not overlooked. If any focal deficits are noted, computed tomography of the head may be required.

The primary treatment for cauliflower ear is prevention. The best possible outcomes require early identification and management of the hematoma before cartilage death has occurred. Typically, this requires a patient be seen within the first six hours after the injury so that an emergency department provider can aspirate the underlying auricular hematoma and secure a bolster to prevent re-accumulation. This involves anesthetizing the distribution of the greater auricular nerve (often best achieved via a circum-auricular block) using lidocaine and epinephrine. This is followed by the insertion of an 18-gauge needle into the area of greatest fluctuance. If the patient is unfortunate enough to present outside the 6-hour period where aspiration is likely to be successful, a more invasive incision may be required to be sure to remove any blood that has begun to coagulate. Aspiration is always an appropriate first step, and if any palpable clot is still present, the needle incision can be gently probed with a hemostat or enlarged with a scalpel to allow bimanual expression of the clot before placing a bolster dressing.

By removing the pocket of blood, the perichondrium can reattach to the ear’s cartilage, preventing the loss of its valuable blood supply. Further aiding in the ear’s development of healthy cartilage, is the use of compressive dressings. A variety of compressive dressings are described in the literature including cotton bolsters, dental silicone, silicone rubber splints, or even auricular stents, but no one technique has been studied and deemed superior. Some sort of compressive bolster must be placed to eliminate the dead-space and re-appose the perichondrium or recurrence is assured.

Unfortunately, recurrence remains a frustrating complication of treating cauliflower ear. The most successful management of an auricular hematoma comes with the high likelihood that the blood will re-accumulate, particularly if no bolster was placed. These patients require close follow up to ensure there has been no re-accumulation (or to drain any re-accumulated fluid). Outpatient follow-up in three to five days after the injury is prudent.

For patients who present outside the window when auricular hematoma drainage is feasible, surgical intervention remains the mainstay of treatment. In general, surgical referral is appropriate for any patient with an existing cauliflower ear, where extensive fibrosis has already occurred. Once the surgery is settled upon, the exact approach can vary based on the degree and location of the underlying deformity. Some texts go so far as to classify the cauliflower ear into four distinct types, each requiring a unique reconstructive technique. The overall goal of surgery, however, remains the same regardless of surgical method, and that is to remove the damaging fibrocartilage without compromising the ear's structural integrity or its natural contours. If damage to the ear is so severe that simply removing the malformed cartilage does not equate to the desired cosmetic outcome, costal cartilage can be used to provide greater structural integrity. For these reasons, many plastic surgeons are loathed to operate on a mature cauliflower ear that is not causing obstruction of the external ear canal, simply advising protective headgear. This is especially true if the patient is continuing to engage in the high-risk activity.