Aminophylline's mechanism of action is not entirely understood. Upon entering the body, aminophylline releases theophylline, which is responsible for the bronchodilatory effects. There are various proposals for the molecular mechanism for theophylline, but not all of them take place at clinically effective concentrations. Theophylline works in three distinct ways:

**Phosphodiesterase Inhibitor**

Theophylline causes non-selective inhibition of type III and types IV isoenzymes of phosphodiesterase, which leads to increased tissue cyclic adenine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic 3′,5′ guanosine monophosphate concentrations, resulting in smooth muscle relaxation in lungs and pulmonary vessels, diuresis, CNS and cardiac stimulation. The bronchodilatory effect is not maximal at therapeutically effective dosages.

**Adenosine Receptor Antagonist**

Theophylline antagonizes adenosine receptors A1, A2 strongly, and  A3 less potently. It binds to adenosine A2B receptors to prevent bronchoconstriction by inhibiting the release of mediators like histamine and leukotrienes from mast cells.

**Histone Deacetylase Activator**

In inflammatory states, histone deacetylase activity becomes reduced due to oxidative stress via the activation of phosphoinositide-3-kinase-delta (PI3K-Delta).

Recently, mitochondrial dysfunction has been linked to the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma. A new study indicates that aminophylline plays an essential role in mitochondrial biogenesis in epithelial cells of the lung. It increases the ratio of mitochondrial DNA to nuclear DNA. Consequently, aminophylline is believed to have a beneficial effect on epithelial mitochondrial function in lung diseases.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Aminophylline is rapidly and completely absorbed by the body and converted to theophylline, up to 40% bound by albumin. The remaining unbound theophylline distributes freely throughout the body except for body fat. The volume of distribution ranges from 0.3 to 0.7 L/kg. It passes across the placenta and is present in breast milk. Theophylline metabolism occurs in the liver via the cytochrome CYP450 system. At lower concentration's it is a substrate of CYP1A2, and at higher concentrations, CYP2E1 may also have involvement. Pharmacokinetics of theophylline are not predictable by sex, age, or other characteristics. Besides, other factors like certain illnesses, tobacco use, marijuana use, and co-administration of other drugs can significantly alter its clearance. Below is a list of factors affecting the clearance of theophylline.

Factors that increase clearance are:

- CYP450 enzyme induction by drugs like phenobarbital, carbamazepine

- Smoking

- High protein and low carbohydrates diet

- Barbecued meat

- Age range 4 to 16

Factors that decrease clearance are:

- Old age

- P450 enzyme inhibition

- Liver disease

- Infectious diseases like pneumonia or viral infection

- Congestive heart failure