Following a thorough history and relevant physical examination, most cases of familial short stature (FSS) can be properly diagnosed. Some experienced providers do not investigate at all when the diagnosis of FSS is clear. However, in certain instances, when CDGP occurs in combination with FSS, the provider is dealing with a very short child, much shorter than the usual FSS patient, and added to this is the additional delay in the onset of puberty. A family history of delayed puberty, in addition to SS in other family members, may be a good clue to this combination. Such clues may include a male relative with delayed facial hair growth and late age of onset of shaving or a female relative with delayed menarche.

A bone age (BA) estimation using an x-ray of the non-dominant hand along with standard tables of ossification provides vital tools. The BA equals the chronological age (CA) in FSS.

A short child much below the usual percentile of FSS, even when SS is familial, will need investigations consistent with the history and physical examination to exclude pathological causes of short stature.

Patients with partial growth hormone deficiency (GHD) cannot be definitively distinguished from FSS, ISS, or CDGP, given the sensitivity of the GH stimulation tests currently available. Hence, for such cases, clinical judgment must prevail.

A list of investigations that may be useful in excluding other causes of SS are the following:

- Bone age (X-ray of the non-dominant hand and wrist); compared with age-specific standards. (Greulich and Pyle charts).

- Hemogram, hemoglobin electrophoresis (for suspected thalassemia)

- Serum albumin (nutritional status)

- Thyroid function tests (hypothyroidism)

- IGF1, IGFBP3, and GH stimulation tests (GH deficiency, insensitivity)

- Renal function tests (chronic kidney disease)

- Liver function tests (liver diseases)

- Serum calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase, intact PTH (hypophosphatemic rickets, pseudo-hypoparathyroidism)

- Serum anti-gliadin antibodies and anti-endomysial antibodies (celiac disease)

- Karyotyping (Turner syndrome)

- Genetic analysis and special tests: GH receptor gene mutations, GH1 gene deletion, post-translational signaling defects of GH, low or undetectable GH binding protein, IGF1 gene deletion and inactivating mutations, or GH inactivating antibodies (selected rare cases of FSS with unexplained IGF1 deficiency; secondary causes of low IGF1, like malnutrition and liver disease, must first be excluded).