Microvasculopathy, the most common ocular manifestation of HIV, is seen in 40% to 60% of HIV-positive patients and is associated with low CD4 counts. Most patients are asymptomatic. Clinical findings include cotton wool spots at the posterior pole. It may be associated with intraretinal hemorrhages and microvascular changes like microaneurysms and telangiectasia. It can be differentiated from CMV retinitis by the presence of fewer hemorrhages and the absence of subtle iritis or vitritis.

Large vessel occlusions like central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO), branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO), and branch retinal artery occlusion (BRAO) are infrequently seen and may be associated with a viral retinitis.

CMV retinitis is the commonest ocular opportunistic infection in AIDS patients. Before the introduction of HAART, it was a very common cause of blindness in HIV/AIDS  and remains so in developing countries. There are three clinical forms of CMV retinitis. The classical form also called the pizza or cottage cheese with ketchup retinopathy is characterized by confluent areas of retinal necrosis with hemorrhages seen in the posterior pole. These lesions enlarge and may coalesce and ultimately lead to full thickness retinal necrosis, gliosis, and pigment epithelial atrophy. Patients may present with loss of visual field or acuity. The second form, the indolent variety, is characterized by granular peripheral retinal lesions with little or no hemorrhages. The third form is called frosted branch angiitis, which is characterized by marked vascular sheathing. Loss of vision in CMV retinitis can occur due to the direct involvement of macula or optic nerve, RD, and also due to immune recovery uveitis. Widespread use of HAART has caused a change in the natural history of CMV retinitis, leading to marked reduction in the incidence of this condition and clinical findings not seen in classical CMV retinitis like AC and vitreous inflammation.

Retinal whitening and hemorrhages characterize necrotizing viral retinitis, but the lesions are usually multifocal, progress rapidly, and may be associated with skin lesions. There are two clinical forms: ARN and PORN. ARN is characterized by peripheral retinal necrosis, associated with marked anterior uveitis and vitritis. Pain is usually seen, associated with blurred vision and floaters. Multifocal, deep retinal infiltrates, with minimal vitritis characterize PORN.

Toxoplasma retinochoroiditis in HIV patients is usually bilateral and multifocal and may be associated with central nervous system (CNS) involvement. The retinal lesions may resemble CMV retinitis, but have fewer hemorrhages and marked intraocular inflammation.

Ocular syphilis is seen in 2% of patients and may present as anterior segment inflammation or diffuse intraocular involvement. Pneumocystis carinii choroiditis is another opportunistic infection, characterized by bilateral, multifocal, yellowish, choroidal lesions, associated with a clear vitreous. Cryptococcal choroiditis may also be seen. Mycobacterium tuberculosis may cause the development of multifocal choroidal tubercles, mainly at the posterior pole.

Patients with CMV retinitis on HAART may suffer from a condition called immune recovery uveitis which causes diminution of vision and is characterized by cataract, vitritis, macular edema, optic disc edema, epiretinal membrane, and proliferative vitreoretinopathy. It is the leading cause of new vision loss in persons with AIDS and is seen in about 16% to 63% of HAART responders. The severity of inflammation is dependant on the immunity, severity of CMV retinitis, CMV antigen load, and previous treatment.