Methylprednisolone is a systemic synthetic corticosteroid, which, just as the naturally occurring glucocorticoids, exerts a wide range of physiologic effects. Clinical use of methylprednisolone is mainly due to its anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive activity in the human body.

**Labeled indications**of methylprednisolone subcategorize by its use in different organ systems:

- In dermatology, it has utility in managing atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis, pemphigus vulgaris, and foliaceus, bullous pemphigus, erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis.

- In endocrinology, it is used to manage congenital adrenal hyperplasia, hypercalcemia associated with cancer, and as a second-line treatment in conjunction with mineralocorticoids for primary or secondary adrenocortical insufficiency.

- In gastroenterology, methylprednisolone's use is for acute exacerbations of inflammatory bowel disease.

- In hematology, it serves to treat autoimmune hemolytic anemia, congenital (erythroid) aplastic anemia, and immune thrombocytopenia.

- In neurology, it is the mainstay therapy in acute exacerbations of multiple sclerosis.

- In ophthalmology, it is a therapeutic choice in severe allergic and inflammatory processes of the eye and its adnexa, such as uveitis, scleritis, chorioretinitis, iritis and iridocyclitis, keratitis, optic neuritis, retinal vasculitis, and allergic conjunctivitis,

- In nephrology, it is helpful in the management of nephrotic syndrome, idiopathic type, or secondary to lupus nephritis.

- In pulmonology, its indications include aspiration pneumonitis, asthma, chronic beryllium disease as an adjunct to antituberculous chemotherapy in disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis, eosinophilic pneumonia, and symptomatic sarcoidosis.

- In rheumatology, it has indications for the management of acute rheumatic carditis, acute gout, ankylosing spondylitis, dermatomyositis and polymyositis, psoriatic arthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis, including the juvenile type and systemic lupus erythematosus.

Other miscellaneous labeled indications for methylprednisolone include:

- Intraarticular and soft tissue administration in acute gouty arthritis, acute and subacute bursitis, acute tenosynovitis, epicondylitis, and synovitis of osteoarthritis.

- Intralesional administration in alopecia areata, discoid lupus erythematosus, keloid disease, and lichen planus.

**Off-label indications**of methylprednisolone include:

- Adjunct therapy for acute spinal cord injury

- Moderate to severe acute distress respiratory syndrome and severe alcoholic hepatitis

- As a preventive agent in bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome

- Hormonal resuscitation in cadaveric organ recovery

- Treatment of acute cellular and antibody-mediated rejection in cardiac transplant

- Adjunct in the management of acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

- Severe/refractory nausea and vomiting of pregnancy

- Adjunct treatment of Pneumocystis pneumonia in HIV-infected patients

- As palliation alternative in castration-resistant metastatic prostate cancer