The management of a caffeine overdose requires a consolidated approach by various healthcare providers, including nursing staff, phlebotomy, pharmacy, toxicology, nephrology, and possibly physicians from other specialties. Morbidity and mortality can be high if caffeine overdose is not recognized and treated early. The emergency medicine physician is responsible for stabilizing the patient and coordinating the patient's care while in the emergency department. Some of the responsibilities of the emergency physician include:

- Ordering drug levels in the blood and or urine

- Monitor the patient for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression, cardiac arrhythmias, electrolyte abnormalities, and seizures

- Performing various maneuvers to help limit the absorption of the drug in the body

- Consult with poison control and pharmacy about the use of activated charcoal, benzodiazepines, supplemental potassium, and esmolol

- Consult with a toxicologist and nephrologist on further management, which may include dialysis

- Consult with the intensivist about ICU care and monitoring while in the hospital

Patients need continued care from the moment they enter the emergency department until the time of discharge and beyond. If it is determined that the patient intentionally overdoses, then a mental health provider should be consulted once the patient has recovered medically.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes after caffeine toxicity are excellent. Mortality is very rare for patients who seek treatment. Those who do not seek treatment or the treatment is delayed may develop seizures, arrhythmias, or even aspirate vomitus. Over the past decade, less than 3 dozen deaths have been reported. For those who survive, there are no residual sequelae.