As with any medical condition, a detailed history and physical exam can significantly narrow the differential diagnosis, and help in selecting appropriate testing and imaging to evaluate for AUB. For adolescent patients, it is essential to take a history both with the patient’s parents present and again in their absence, as adolescent patients may not be willing to candidly discuss their symptoms and sexual practices in the presence of a parent. Irregular bleeding that is associated with AUB-O usually demonstrates by phases of amenorrhea that can last for months, and phases with either heavy bleeding or spotting. Typical premenstrual symptoms are usually absent. AUB-O should be suspected in women, especially at the extremes of reproductive age, who have an irregular bleeding pattern.

Assessment of history should include:

**Bleeding History**

- Frequency, regularity, and duration of bleeding

- The volume of blood loss

- Studies have shown that patient perception of blood loss during menstruation is unreliable.

- Presence/absence of postcoital bleeding

- The presence of postcoital bleeding is more suggestive of an extrauterine cause (e.g., cervical polyps).

- Bleeding with stools

- The presence of this symptom suggests a gastrointestinal etiology, which may be confounding the perception of blood loss.

**Associated Signs/Symptoms**

- Fevers, chills, pelvic pain, vaginal discharge, bowel or bladder dysfunction

**Signs/symptoms Associated with Known Causes of AUB-O**

- PCOS: Obesity, male-pattern or rapidly worsening hirsutism, acne, acanthosis

- Thyroid dysfunction: Palpitations, tachycardia, hot/cold intolerance, fatigue, weight gain

- Hyperprolactinemia: Galactorrhea, spontaneous, or expressed lactation on an exam

- Coagulopathy: Positive family history, easy bruising, petechiae

**Sexual History**

- Last intercourse

- Number of partners

- Contraception use

- Sexually transmitted infection (STI) exposure history

- History of abnormal cervical cancer screening

**Medical History**

Current medications (include pills, powders, shakes, and supplements)

**Surgical History**

Family history with special focus on:

- Menstrual history of mother and siblings

- Coagulopathies (e.g., von Willebrand disease, factor VIII deficiency)

- Hormone-sensitive cancers (e.g., breast, ovarian)

Physical exam should include an evaluation of:

- Vital signs: Vital signs, including orthostatic blood pressures if hypovolemia or anemia is a concern

- General: BMI/body composition assessment

- Head & neck: Conjunctival or mucosal pallor, thyroid exam

- Abdomen: Tenderness, masses, distension

- Pelvic/perineal: Vulva, vaginal exam, speculum exam, pap smear, and cervical cultures if concern for STI. Rectal exam if concern for rectal source of bleeding.