Hepatocytes have specific transporters on their apical and basolateral membranes that play a central role in synthesizing canalicular bile, of which there are two components: bile acid-dependent canalicular fraction and bile acid-independent canalicular fraction. There is a direct correlation between the quantity of bile acid secreted into bile and the amount of water osmotically driven into the bile. Due to the enterohepatic circulation and re-secretion of specific bile acids such as ursodeoxycholic acid, these bile acids have higher choleretic activity and contribute to generating a larger volume of bile.

Three primary transporters on the basolateral membrane of the hepatocytes facilitate sinusoidal uptake of the bile acids, the most important being a sodium-dependent transporter termed the sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP). The sodium-independent transporter is the organic anion-transporting polypeptide (OATP) that brings in the bile acids in exchange for molecules such as bicarbonate and glutathione. Another sodium-independent bile acid transporter is the organic solute and steroid (OST-alpha/OST-beta) transporter, which works to remove bile acid from the hepatocytes in cases of excess bile acid accumulation.

For the secretion of bile acids, there are specific transporters on the canalicular membrane of the hepatocytes. For instance, the ATP-dependent bile acid efflux gets carried by the bile salt export pump (BSEP). In addition, there is apical ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporters, including multidrug resistance-P glycoprotein 3 (MDR3) for phospholipids, MDR1 for lipophilic cationic drugs, multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2) for non-bile acid organic anions, and the protein ABCG5/G8 for the secretion of cholesterol and other sterols.

The cells lining the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary ducts are called cholangiocytes. Their primary role is to alter and refine the contents of the hepatically synthesized bile via a complex mechanism controlled by many molecules, hormones, and neurotransmitters.

**Composition of Bile**

In order of abundance: water, bile salts, fatty acids, cholesterol, bilirubin, lecithin, and plasma electrolytes (sodium, chloride, bicarbonate, potassium, and calcium).

- Bile pigments
- Biliverdin (green pigment)

- A byproduct of hemoglobin breakdown.
- Converted to unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin via biliverdin-reductase.


- Bilirubin (yellow pigment)

- Unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin is lipid soluble, meaning it cannot be filtered by the glomerulus and is not typically found in the urine.
- Undergoes conjugation within the liver via UDP glucuronyl transferase.
- Conjugated (direct) bilirubin is water soluble, which can be filtered by the glomerulus and may appear in the urine.
- Within the intestine, glucuronic acid is removed by gut bacteria, forming urobilinogen.

- 80% of urobilinogen is excreted in the feces as stercobilin.
- 2% of urobilinogen is excreted in the urine as urobilin.
- Approximately 18% of urobilinogen is reabsorbed into the enterohepatic circulation and delivered back to the liver.

- Bile acids
- Primary bile acids: cholic acid, chenodeoxycholic acid

- Synthesized in the liver from cholesterol.
- Conjugated to glycine or taurine to form bile salts.
- Concentrated and stored in the gallbladder during fasting.
- Released into the intestine in response to dietary fat.


- Secondary bile acids: deoxycholic acid, lithocholic acid

- Synthesized from primary bile acids via interaction with intestinal bacteria.
- Reabsorbed in the ileum and colon into the enterohepatic circulation and then transported back to the liver.
- Minimally lost in feces.

- Bile salts
- As previously mentioned, the precursor to bile salts is cholesterol.
- Within the liver, cholesterol is synthesized into bile acids, which are then conjugated with either glycine or taurine to form bile salts.
- The cholesterol precursor is taken from the diet or synthesized in the liver during fat metabolism.
- Most (95%) bile salts are absorbed in the terminal ileum.
- Essential functions of bile salts

- Aid in the absorption of fatty acids, monoglycerides, and, most importantly, cholesterol.
- Bile salts provide the only primary method of cholesterol excretion. They do this by forming small physical complexes with lipids, called micelles, which are taken to the intestinal mucosa, where they are absorbed into the blood.
- Without bile salts, 40% of ingested fats would be lost in the feces, and a metabolic deficit would occur due to this nutrient loss.
- Bile salts have a potent antibacterial effect, as they play an essential role in determining the microbial ecology of the intestine. Alterations in the intestinal levels of bile salts can lead to increased colonization by pathogens, such as Staphylococcus aureus.