The chance of spontaneous resolution of Bouveret syndrome after conservative treatment is rare.

Decompression of the distended stomach by a nasogastric tube should be performed prior to therapeutic endoscopy to reduce the risk of aspiration. More endoscopy-based treatment options have become available with continued progress and refinement of endoscopic techniques over the last two decades. This improvement is reflected in rising success rates for the treatment of Bouveret’s syndrome from 13.6% - 18.0% to 43.0%.

Mechanical lithotripsy is a common method used, and fluoroscopy is a preferable adjunct to avoid the instrument wrongly entering the cholecystoenteric fistula. The other common method of lithotripsy is electrohydraulic lithotripsy (EHL). High EHL intensity may be needed because of the large gallstones commonly found in cases of Bouveret syndrome.

Of all the successful endoscopic interventions which have been published in the recent decades, visualization of the gallstones was achieved in approximately two-thirds of cases.

Surgery was considered first-line treatment in the past and has demonstrated higher success rates than the minimally invasive modality —up to 90% for enteric or gastric lithotomy alone and up to 82% with simultaneous fistula repair and cholecystectomy.

Open surgery of Bouveret syndrome has high morbidity and mortality. When laparoscopic equipment and expertise are available, laparoscopic enterolithotomy should be considered the preferred approach and has been reported as effective and safe in managing this condition in the failure or unavailability of endoscopic therapies.

Cholecystectomy and fistula repair in one or a multi-step approach to treat Bouveret syndrome is debatable. Most patients are poor surgical candidates as they are older and have multiple comorbidities. Cholecystectomy with fistula repair is generally not recommended as the benefits of cholecystectomy in these patients generally outweigh the risks of further operations or complications from gallstones. However, there is always a risk for recurrent gallstone ileus and gallstone pancreatitis if the fistula is not repaired.