Urethritis has an incidence of affecting 4 million Americans each year. The incidence of Neisseria gonorrhea is estimated at over 600,000 new cases annually, and the incidence of nongonococcal urethritis is approximately 3 million new cases annually.

In one study of 424 men presenting with signs and symptoms of acute urethritis, of which 127 (30%) had infections of N. gonorrhea. In the other 297 males with nongonococcal urethritis, the infectious agent in almost half of them was C. trachomatis, with 143 (48.1%) infections. In 154 men presenting with non-chlamydial nongonococcal urethritis, the agents detected were: M. genitalium (22.7%), U. urealyticum (19.5%), human adenovirus (16.2%),
H. influenzae (14.3%), U. parvum (9.1%), M. hominis (5.8%), N meningitidis (3.9%), T vaginalis (1.3%), and various forms of herpes simplex virus 1 (7.1%) and 2 (2.6%).

Urethritis is more commonly diagnosed in males.Neisseria gonorrhea is one of the most common sexually transmitted diseases and the bacterial cause of gonococcal urethritis in males and cervicitis in females.Chlamydia trachomatis is among the most common sexually transmitted diseases. It is the most common cause of nongonococcal urethritis in males and cervicitis in females. Trichomonas vaginalis infections are also very common; however, prevalence is difficult to quantify due to many asymptomatic cases, and these infections are not required to be reported to public health departments. Vaginalis is also a common cause of nongonococcal urethritis in Africa.Mycoplasma genitalium is the causative agent in approximately 15-20% of nongonococcal urethritis in men.

For cases of NGU, Chlamydia trachomatis continues to be a primary concern, although Trichomonas vaginalis and Mycoplasma genitalium are increasingly recognized as significant pathogens. Whereas the less common bacterial infectious agents are Ureaplasma parvum, Ureaplasma urealyticum, Mycoplasma hominis, and Gardnerella vaginalis.