Mechanical ventilation (MV) works by applying a positive pressure breath and is dependent on the compliance and resistance of the airway system. During spontaneous inspiration, the lung expands as transpulmonary pressure (P) is produced mainly by a negative pleural pressure generated by the inspiratory muscles. In contrast, during controlled mechanical ventilation, a positive airway pressure drives gas into the lungs, resulting in a positive P.

MV can be delivered in different modes, including mandatory mode or assisted mode. In the assisted mode the inspiratory effort generated by the patient triggers the MV to deliver the breath while the P is the product of negative pleural pressure and positive alveolar pressure combination. The most common modes of MV include:

- Volume-limited assist control ventilation (VAC)

- Pressure-limited assist control ventilation (PAC)

- Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation with pressure support ventilation (SIMV-PSV)

Pressure support ventilation (PS) is usually not used alone; instead, it is commonly used during weaning from MV. Other types of modes of MV include controlled mechanical ventilation (CMV; volume-limited or pressure-limited), intermittent mandatory ventilation (IMV), and airway pressure release ventilation (APRV) or Bilevel MV are less commonly used as initial settings.

Generally, breath delivery can be divided into either volume-limited or pressure-limited types. Depending on respiratory compliance, airway resistance, and the type or mode of MV, the breath's VT and airway pressure will change. For example, in cases of using volume assist control VAC mode, VT is set to a fixed amount; therefore, the static airway pressure (or plateau pressure at end inspiration) will depend on lung compliance. On the other hand, when pressure assists control PAC mode is used, the driving pressure is set and fixed; hence VT is variable from breath to breath and dependent on lung compliance (i.e., when the lung compliance is high, VT is high, and when lung compliance is low, VT is low).

There are four stages of mechanical ventilation. There is the trigger phase, the inspiratory phase, the cycling phase, and the expiratory phase. The trigger phase is the initiation of an inhalation which is triggered by an effort from the patient or by set parameters by the mechanical ventilator. The inhalation of air into the patient defines the inspiratory phase. The cycling phase is the brief moment when inhalation has ceased but before exhalation has begun. The expiratory phase is the passive exhalation of air from the patient.

**Setting MV**

Mode selection: It is recommended to use commonly used MV modes listed above for initiation of MV. The selection of MV mode should be individualized to achieve safety via optimization of ventilation-perfusion matching and pressure-volume relationship of the lungs.

**VAC mode:**When VAC  mode is chosen, the following parameters have to be set on the ventilator:

- Tidal volume: VT is usually selected based on ideal or predicted body weight (PBW), not actual weight. In conditions such as ARDS that require a protective lung strategy, the VT is set at a low range of 4 to 8 mL/kg PBW.

- Respiratory rate (RR): RR is typically set at 12 to 16 breaths/minute, and higher RR ( up to 35 breaths/minute) is selected to achieve adequate minute ventilation, such as during protective lung strategy in ARDS to avoid severe hypercapnia or to offset severe acidosis.

- Inspiratory flow rate (IFR): IFR is usually set at 40 to 60 L/minute to target an inspiratory: expiratory ratio of 1:2 or 1:3. Higher IFR is usually recommended (up to 90 L/min) in cases of severe distal airway obstruction such as acute COPD exacerbation or severe asthma exacerbation which will allow longer expiratory time to empty the lung and hence target I:E ratio of more than 1:3.[10]

- Fraction of inspired oxygen (FI02): FI02 should be set to the lowest level to achieve pulse oximetry (SP02) of 90% to 96%, as hyperoxemia has been shown to increase mortality in critically ill patients.

- Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP): PEEP is used to increase the functional residual capacity and stent open collapsable alveoli, thus reducing atelectatic trauma.

- Trigger sensitivity: The triggers are two types flow-trigger and pressure-trigger. For pressure-trigger, it is usually set at -2 cmH2O but should be avoided in cases where auto-PEEP is suspected, and instead, flow-trigger should be used and set at a 2 L/min threshold.

**PAC mode:**When PAC mode is selected, the following parameters have to be set on the ventilator:

- Inspiratory Pressure (Pi): Pi level is usually selected (10 to 20 cmH2) to achieve adequate tidal volume based on the patient's underlying condition, as discussed above.

- Inspiratory time (Ti): Ti is typically set to  1 second and adjusted to achieve an I:E ratio of 1:2 to 1:3.

- PEEP and FiO2 are selected similarly to VAC mode. However, the Pi adds additional pressure to the peak airway pressure and may further increase the risk of barotrauma.

**SIMV/PSV mode:**When SIMV/PSV  mode is selected, the initial settings include the following:

- Pressure support (PS): The PS typically starts with 5 to 15 cm H2O for spontaneous breaths taken by the patient above the set rate. The PS can be adjusted as needed to maintain certain Minute ventilation.

- Tidal volume: VT is set similarly to VAC mode at levels to achieve targeted minute ventilation without causing ventilator-associated lung injury (4 to 8 mL/kg PBW) for the non-spontaneous breaths.

**Airway Pressure Release Ventilation Mode**

APRV is a form of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) characterized by a timed pressure release while allowing for spontaneous breathing.

Setting up APRV requires adjusting four main variables, P-high, P-low, T-high, and T-low.

Spontaneous breathing is paramount in APRV; thus, a small amount of pressure support or automatic tube compensation should be added to account for the endotracheal tube's intrinsic resistance.