Adults determined to have asymptomatic bacteriuria should not typically be treated unless pregnant, undergoing a genitourinary procedure, or immunocompromised (e.g., neutropenic, possibly renal transplant). Before antibiotics are initiated in individuals with a known UTI, urinary catheter removal or exchange should occur if it was not previously completed prior to urine specimen collection. Multiple antibiotics are available for the treatment of UTIs. These include fluoroquinolones, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, beta-lactams, and nitrofurantoin (the latter only indicated for cystitis).

Increasing bacterial resistance to commonly used oral antibiotics has increased the necessity of carefully reviewing culture susceptibility results. The resistance of commonly encountered UTI pathogens occurs not only in the inpatient setting but in outpatients as well. E. Coli and Klebsiella species are now becoming resistant via extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) positive or Amp C producers. There are some exceptions, but these resistance mechanisms lead to in vivo clinical failures with all penicillins, cephalosporins, and monobactams. Carbapenems are typically the drug class of choice in these multi-drug-resistant pathogens.

Local antibiogram data should be reviewed to determine the best empiric therapy options for UTIs. This requires determining the best option for organisms such as E. Coli, Klebsiella species, and Proteus species. Preferably the susceptibility for a given organism should be 80% to 90% or higher from recent local urine susceptibility data. Empiric therapy should also be determined by an individual's allergies and any recent urinary cultures from the individual in case any multi-drug resistant organisms need to be covered.

Once an individual's culture susceptibility results are known, therapy should be modified to ensure an antibiotic with the narrowest spectrum to cover the organism(s) being treated is used while still obtaining appropriate penetration in the bladder and kidneys as necessary. If the patient also has a bloodstream infection due to the same organism as the UTI, a bactericidal antibiotic is preferred. It should have at least 90% oral bioavailability if an oral antibiotic is an appropriate option for both sites of infection. Any antibiotics requiring renal dosing should be evaluated based on the individual's creatinine clearance or estimated glomerular filtration rate. Once the antibiotic has been de-escalated appropriately, one additional step should be taken to ensure antimicrobial stewardship practices are implemented.

Healthcare providers should ensure that the duration of therapy is sufficient to eradicate the pathogen(s) but not excessively long to cause adverse events or resistance. Uncomplicated cystitis patients are typically treated from 3 to 7 days, depending on the antibiotic chosen. In uncomplicated pyelonephritis, therapy ranges from 5 to 14 days based on antibiotic therapy. In complicated cystitis and pyelonephritis, treatment can last as long as 7 to 14 days, depending on the individual circumstance. Of note, more studies continue to evaluate the shorter length of therapy for urinary infections.