Obesity blunts the effect of CCK, which means there is insensitivity of vagal afferent neurons to CCK. This reduced expression of CCK accounts for reduced effect on satiety and the fact that most obese people always complain about feeling hungry. Consumption of high-fat diets with diminished expression of the CCK-1 receptor increases the levels of ghrelin in plasma. This increases food intake, and it does this by suppressing the expression of satiety peptide cocaine and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) in vagal afferent neurons. CCK is also involved in metabolic regulation and lipid absorption. They link inactivation of the CCK signaling pathway to reduced weight gain. Inactivation increases energy expenditure and lowers energy extraction.

CCK acts via the vasovagal pathway and is activated peripherally via gastric wall distension. They use intragastric balloons in clinical practice to treat weight loss by mimicking this pathway. By distending the stomach it activates the vagal nerve and the nucleus of tractus solitarius and the paraventricular nucleus, leading to a centrally mediated feeling of satiety.

CCK plays a minor role in the release of incretin as compared to glucagon-like peptide (GLP-1) from islet cells. Decreased size of islet cells and mass of beta-cells correlates with upregulation of CCK expression and increased sensitivity to CCK for insulin release in obesity. It, therefore, can mediate compensatory mechanisms within the islets of Langerhans.

Cancers of the GI tract including medullary thyroid cancer, small cell lung cancer all express gastrin and CCK-2 receptors. Gastrin and CCK2R/gastrin receptor (GR) play a role in regulating cellular proliferation, loss of cell-cell adhesion, differentiation and morphology and the enhanced motility/invasion of epithelial cells. The activation of the CCK2R/GR via the intracellular signaling pathway can lead to carcinogenesis. These receptors, therefore, play a crucial role in starting the events leading up to preneoplastic lesions and cancer development.