The pudendal nerve is generally composed of fibers from the ventral nerve roots of S2, S3, and S4.****The nerve travels anterior to the piriformis muscle, squeezing between it and the coccygeus muscle through the greater sciatic foramen and between the sacrotuberous and sacrospinous ligaments.****Upon leaving this site, the nerve travels through Alcock's canal (also known as the pudendal canal). It divides into the deep and superficial perineal nerves, the dorsal nerve of the penis or clitoris, and the inferior rectal nerve. Many variations in the nerve structure have been noted during surgery and anatomical dissections.

Four common sites of pudendal nerve entrapment are described.

- Type I -  Entrapment below the piriformis muscle as the pudendal nerve exits the greater sciatic notch.

- Type II - Entrapment between sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments (this is the most common cause of pudendal nerve entrapment).

- Type III- Entrapment within Alcock's canal.

- Type IV - Entrapment of terminal branches only. (Inferior rectal nerves, superficial and deep perineal nerves, and the dorsal nerve of the penis/clitoris.)

Bony remodeling in the pelvis occurs commonly and is related to repetitive use and overuse of pelvic floor muscles. This causes changes in the ischial spine and the inferior lateral angle of the sacrum. When untreated, pudendal neuropathy progresses from minor symptoms, often beginning with bladder complaints, to more generalized and painful symptoms as nerve damage advances. Severe pain may occur in many sites and is often confused with various morphologic/organ diseases. The pain tends to be chronic and can be severe enough to be disabling.

Pudendal neuralgia is generally a "tunnel" syndrome, typically resulting from cumulative, repetitive microtrauma to the nerve.****However, it can also be caused by indirect trauma, viral infections (such as HIV and Herpes Zoster), multiple sclerosis, and diabetes.

Common causes include:

- Prolonged sitting (e.g., seamstresses, computer operators, office workers, judges, concert pianists, commercial drivers, chess players, locomotive engineers)

- Repetitive hip flexion (sports activities, exercising, jogging, cycling)

- Direct trauma including falls, motor vehicle accidents, and pelvic surgeries, especially when using mesh in pelvic organ prolapse repairs

- Radiation therapy, especially in males treated for prostate cancer as well as patients treated for rectal and gynecological cancers

- Childbirth injuries from stretching of the pelvic musculature from the fetal head

- Chronic constipation

Infrequent causes include:

- Benign tumors and metastatic lesions to the nerve pathway and herpes simplex infections

Stress is not causal but may be a potent aggravator of neuropathic pain.