**18-F-FDG PET**

The use of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18-F-FDG PET/CT) has grown in recent years and has become one of the primary nuclear medicine modalities in evaluating infection. 18-F-FDG PET has a variable normal biodistribution to the liver, brain, kidneys, bladder, heart, and bowel. Glucose transporters, hexokinase, and glycolytic activity are upregulated in inflammatory/infectious conditions allowing for the use of 18-F-FDG PET imaging in the evaluation of inflammatory/infectious conditions. Before an FDG PET scan to evaluate an infectious cardiac focus.

**67-Ga-Citrate Scan**

67-Gallium-Citrate Scans had a historical significance in the evaluation of infection before the introduction of 18-F-FDG PET but are still on occasion used in the assessment of spinal osteomyelitis. Gallium acts as an analog to iron and functions as a helpful radiotracer by being recruited to sites of inflammation via lactoferrin.

**White Blood Cell Scans**

White blood cells can be most commonly radiolabelled with two isotopes, Technetium-99m (99m-Tc) or Indium-111 (111-In). Depending on the radiopharmaceutical used, white blood cell scans have varying normal biodistributions and different scan accuracy. Therefore the radiotracer used should be tailored to the indication. Radiolabeled human leukocytes, properly prepared and handled ex vivo, behave in vivo in a fashion essentially identical to native leukocytes, including migrating to foci of acute and/or chronic inflammation and infection.  The most common method currently in clinical use involves labeling autologous leukocytes or purified neutrophils with In-111-oxine or 99m-Tc-HMPAO, reinfusion of the labeled leukocytes, and imaging at variable time points.

**Bone Scintigraphy**

Traditional bone scans using either methylene diphosphonate(MDP) or hydroxydiphosphonate (HDP) radiolabelled with technetium can be of value in assessing bone infections. The radiopharmaceutical targeting mechanism is through chemisorption into the bone matrix via attachment to hydroxyapatite crystals. Bone scans with SPECT or PET are highly sensitive techniques and have a high negative predictive value, and are very good at excluding disease when negative but can lack specificity in certain clinical scenarios especially following bony instrumentation. Tc99m-besilesomab and Tc99m-sulesomab have also been used successfully in certain markets where they are available. The addition of recent hybrid techniques with SPECT-CT is extremely beneficial and more accurate.

Common practice has been to image patients through 2D planar imaging and occasionally use 3D SPECT data as an adjunct. However, the availability of SPECT-CT cameras has become essential in improving diagnostic accuracy as SPECT lacks much-needed anatomical resolution and correlative information. Recent reviews have found that SPECT-CT is useful in accurately predicting anatomy, increasing reader confidence, and improving scan accuracy compared to SPECT and planar imaging. SPECT-CT of the region of interest should be routinely considered in adults when performing a WBC scan as it has been shown to increase specificity and sensitivity (Figure 1). Beyond correlation, the low dose associated with a CT from the SPECT-CT improves imaging data. CT is used in the reconstruction of SPECT data in creating attenuation correction maps. It also improves spatial, contrast resolution and allows for proper quantification of data.

Historically radiolabeled leukocytes have been used when suspected infective processes are three weeks or less in duration, whereas 67-Gallium-citrate scans were felt to be more useful when infections are more chronic (>3 weeks). 67-Gallium-citrate scans are more helpful in imaging the chest and in a fever of unknown origin (where the differential diagnosis may include occult malignancy). However, nowadays, this does not have supportive literature data. When available, 18-F-FDG PET is increasingly used over 67-gallium-citrate. When 18-F-FDG PET imaging is not available, 67-Gallium-citrate with the use of a SPECT-CT technique is helpful.