Antiplatelets can be classified based on the mechanism of action as follows

- Platelet aggregation inhibitors such as;

- Aspirin and related cyclooxygenase inhibitors
- Oral thienopyridines such as clopidogrel, ticagrelor, ticlopidine, and prasugrel

- Glycoprotein platelet inhibitors (e.g., abciximab, eptifibatide, tirofiban)

- Protease-activated receptor-1 antagonists (e.g., vorapaxar)

- Miscellaneous (e.g., dipyridamole - a nucleoside transport inhibitor and phosphodiesterase type 3 (PDE3) inhibitor, cilostazol - also a PDE3 inhibitor)

Aspirin is the most commonly used oral antiplatelet drug. It works by irreversibly inhibiting the cyclooxygenase enzyme (COX) activity in the prostaglandin synthesis pathway (PGH2). This prostaglandin is a precursor of thromboxane A2 (TXA2) and PGI2. Thromboxane A2 works by inducing platelet aggregation and vasoconstriction, and COX-1 mediates its production, while PGI2 works by inhibiting platelet aggregation and induces vasodilation, and is mediated by COX-2. Low-dose aspirin (75 mg to 150 mg) can induce complete or near-complete inhibition of COX-1, thus inhibiting the production of TXA2, while larger doses are required to inhibit COX-2.

Oral thienopyridines selectively inhibit adenosine diphosphate-induced (ADP-induced) platelet aggregation. These drugs are converted into the active drug with the help of the hepatic CYP450 system that can irreversibly inhibit the platelet P2Y12 receptor. Prasugrel is the most potent of all three drugs, has a rapid onset of action, and is superior to clopidogrel in patients undergoing coronary stenting. Ticlopidine has fallen out of favor because of bone marrow toxicity. Cangrelor is a new intravenous, reversible P2Y12 receptor antagonist and has a rapid onset of action. It achieves a significant degree of platelet inhibition compared with clopidogrel.

Glycoprotein platelet inhibitors work by inhibiting glycoprotein IIb/IIIa (GpIIb-IIIa) receptors on platelets, thus decreasing platelet aggregation, and most commonly used in ACS.

Dipyridamole has antiplatelet and vasodilating properties and inhibits platelet cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase. This enzyme is responsible for the degradation of adenosine monophosphate (AMP) to 5'AMP, which increases intra-platelet cyclic AMP accumulation and inhibits platelet aggregation. It also blocks the uptake of adenosine by the platelets, which also increases cyclic AMP.

Cilostazol is also reported to have vasodilatory, antiplatelet properties, and antiproliferative effects. It also reduces smooth muscle cell hyperproliferation and intimal hyperplasia after an injury to the endothelium.