Tetracaine has a pKa of 8.46 at room temperature (25 degrees C), which is moderate, although the drug has a relatively quick onset of action, especially for intrathecal administration. Lipid solubility for tetracaine is high at a relative value of 80; thus, it is among the most potent of any local anesthetic. Its protein binding is moderate at 75%, allowing a relative duration of action up to 200 minutes. The drug undergoes hydrolysis primarily via plasma cholinesterase (butyrylcholinesterase), produced in the liver, into an alcohol and para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA). There is also a small amount of metabolism by RBC cholinesterase. There is a minimal amount of tetracaine excreted unmetabolized in the urine. It has a pH of 4.5 to 6.5 in plain solution. It is commonly administered topically, subcutaneously, or via intrathecal injection.

Dosing for some common indications for the ophthalmic formulation (as the most common use) include the following:

- Corneal foreign body removal: 1 to 2 drops in the affected eye every 5 to 10 minutes for 1 to 3 doses. This regimen can also be used for suture removal.

- Brief ophthalmic anesthesia (tonometry or short corneal/conjunctival procedures): 1 to 2 drops in the eye(s) prior to starting the procedure.

- Prolonged ophthalmic anesthesia (e.g., cataract extraction or other extended procedures): 1 to 2 drops in the affected eye(s) every 5 to 10 minutes for 3 to 5 doses.

For local dermal anesthesia, tetracaine is also available in a topical cream combined with lidocaine. It is applied to intact skin from 20 to 60 minutes in advance of superficial dermal procedures.