- Chapman’s reflexes

- There are roughly 100 documented Chapman’s points. These are areas of gangliform contraction, which, when in certain areas, are associated with specific organs that have dysfunctions. Treating these points will decrease sympathetic tone, increase myofascial motion, and improve lymphatic return to the visceral dysfunction.
- Chapman’s points have been documented in chronic hepatitis patients found on physical exam. They can help physicians narrow their differential, validate a diagnosis, and increase treatment options.

- Thoracic pump

- Increases mobilization of all lymphatic fluid movement and increases rib case mobility.

- Pedal pump

- Increases mobilization of all lymphatic fluid movement. This technique is very useful in pediatric patients.

- Thoracic inlet release

- Sibson’s fascia mentioned above is the fascial layer comprised of the connective tissues of the longus coli and scalene muscles. The right and left thoracic ducts travel through this fascia once and twice, respectively. Using techniques to release Sibson’s fascia will better allow all lymph to return to the circulatory system.

- Rib raising

- Increases thoracic movement and lessens somatic dysfunctions of the area treated. Parathoracic sympathetic ganglia are also normalized during this treatment.
- This treatment is effective for pneumonia, COPD, and asthma.

- Splenic/liver pump

- This procedure facilitates the flow of lymph to the liver and spleen. In the liver, this increases the ability of the Kupffer cells to interact with antigens and toxins in the lymph. The spleen’s ability to screen and remove damaged cells from the system is also enhanced.

- Facial sinus pressure techniques

- Improves sinus congestion and otitis media
- Involves direct strokes applied to the sinuses, zygomatic bones, and the temporal mandibular joints bilaterally to enhance lymph movement towards the right and left lymphatic ducts.

- Galbreath technique

- Facilitates the opening of the eustachian tubes and allows the flow of lymph distally from the ears.

- Anterior cervical mobilization

- Side to side movement of the hyoid, thyroid, and cricoid cartilage, and the trachea increases drainage from the head, neck, and throat.

- Extremity pump

- Wave-like motions are applied in a distal to proximal fashion to the arms and legs to improve lymph motion towards the axillae and groin, respectively.

- Doming the diaphragm

- Increases mobilization of lymphatic fluid from the lower extremities and increases diaphragm mobility.
- Useful for hiccups