Patients can present to their primary care providers, endocrinologists, or mental health provider. Sometimes, it is a primary concern, whereas others might present with confounded mental health problems. Also, due to greater exposure, social acceptance, and greater access to care, this population tends to present earlier before puberty, unlike before, when they might present in adulthood or late adolescence. Necessary referrals should be made according to the patient to give them a more robust support system.

It should also be specified according to age. Sadock et al. suggest the following. Individual, family, and group therapy are important for children to explore and counsel on gender preference. For adolescents, the added anticipation of puberty is of concern, so hormonal treatment and psychotherapy should be considered simultaneously. For adults, psychotherapy and hormonal and surgical treatments are all available options.

Adequate counseling is necessary for this population before starting treatment:

- Care team: a comprehensive approach with an endocrinologist and mental health providers should be made available.

- Expectations: transgender hormonal and surgical treatment options will help address the patient's external appearance to be in congruence with their gender identity. Unrealistic expectations should be addressed adequately. A supportive network of peers, friends, and family is often helpful.

- Risks and benefits of treatment: both hormonal and surgical therapies accompany significant risks: venous thromboembolism, bone mineral density, and pubertal suppression.

- Fertility preservation: before initiating hormonal and surgical treatment, the patient might lose the ability to reproduce. So it is important to discuss fertility preservation by freezing the individual's gametes.

- Sexual health: incidence of sexually transmitted infections and HIV was higher in this population.

Also, the practitioner must understand that even with a standardized protocol in place, the approach needs to be individualized to ensure a good prognosis post-treatment.

The World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH) currently publishes the Standards of Care (SOC) to provide clinical guidelines for the health care of transsexual, transgender, and gender non-conforming persons in order to maximize the health and well-being of patients with gender dysphoria. All treatment options should be offered, and depending on an individual's goals and expectations, the most appropriate surgical technique should be performed. The Standards of Care outlined by WPATH recommends against physical interventions before age 16. They recommend that surgery only be performed after age 18 and after the individual has lived in their desired gender role for at least two years. For people to undergo physical (hormonal or surgical) interventions to make their body more in line with their gender identity, they must be assessed by a mental health professional with special competence in this area, and often recommendations are required from two such mental health professionals.

**Hormonal Therapy**

The aim is to suppress the internally produced hormones and to administer and maintain cross-sex hormones in their physiological range. There has been a great push to start hormonal therapy in these patients before they hit puberty, but it is still under research, and ethical issues persist.

Criteria for starting treatment:

- Persistent and well-documented gender dysphoria

- Capacity to consent for the treatment.

- Mental or medical underlying issues are in control.

Transgender women (MTF):

The desired goals are to eliminate facial hair, induction of breast formation, and a female body contour. They can be a combination of antiandrogens (spironolactone), progestins, medroxyprogesterone acetate (associated with excess cardiovascular and breast cancer risk in older women taking conjugated estrogen), GnRH agonists (long-acting gonadotropin-releasing hormone-suppresses testosterone), finasteride and estrogen (17-beta-estradiol). The goal of treatment is to avoid supraphysiologic doses or blood levels of estrogen to avoid adverse effects. The most common adverse effects of estrogen therapy include thromboembolic disease, liver dysfunction, hypertriglyceridemia, macroprolactinoma (due to the impact on lactotroph), coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, and hypertension.

Counseling should be provided against cigarette smoking, especially to those on estrogens. Estradiol level, testosterone level, blood pressure, cholesterol panel, prolactin, and liver function should be routinely monitored. Clinical and laboratory evaluation is recommended every three months during the first year of hormone therapy for transgender females and then once or twice yearly. Speech/voice therapy can be offered to all transgender females. Different methods can be used, including professional techniques for vocal training, speech therapy by trained speech pathologists, or even surgeries. Having voice and speech characteristics in agreement with one's gender identity is often important to transgender individuals.

Transgender men (FTM):

Their primary treatment measure is testosterone injectables, usually scheduled once weekly (the oral route is not recommended due to the first pass through the intestines and liver). During the first few months, increased muscle mass, acne, and libido are seen, along with the cessation of menses. Eventually, more permanent changes, such as the deepening of the voice and enlarged clitoris, occur following 3 to 6 months of therapy. Routine monitoring of hemoglobin, hematocrit, liver function, cholesterol, and screening for diabetes should be done. As per Endocrine society guidelines 2017,  hematocrit or hemoglobin needs to be measured at baseline and every three months for the first year and then one to two times a year. The goal is to maintain the testosterone levels in the physiologic normal male range and avoid the adverse events resulting from excess testosterone therapy, particularly erythrocytosis, sleep apnea, hypertension, excessive weight gain, salt retention, lipid changes, and excessive or cystic acne. Measuring BMD and screening for osteoporosis is essential, especially in patients who are not compliant or are at higher risk for bone loss.

Providers in this area of care are encouraged to start hormonal therapy before puberty for maximum results and patient satisfaction. However, parental consent for children and young adolescents for initiating hormonal therapy remains controversial. The physician should inform the patients that testosterone is teratogenic. Contraceptive methods, including IUDs, etc., should be discussed with the patients.

**Surgical Therapy**

The criterion is needed, in addition to those listed above, for initiating hormonal treatment before opting for surgical treatment. The individual should be on one year of continuous hormone therapy and living in the desired gender role.

This is often the last step of the treatment process. The counseling discussed above should be continued for these patients, and unrealistic expectations should be addressed. Since these are often irreversible procedures, good insight and counseling, along with social support, are required to predict a favorable outcome.

These surgeries are often referred to as "top surgery" and "bottom surgery."

For MTF: breast augmentation is a common top surgery that trans-women desire. Also, gonadectomy, including penectomy and vaginoplasty, is desired to remove the primary source of testosterone from the body. Vaginal dilators are also routinely used to maintain anatomy if sexual intercourse is a goal.

For FTM: Metoidioplasty, where the clitoris is released from the ligament it is attached to, and tissue is added to increase the length and the girth. Scrotoplasty (testicular implants) and phalloplasty (penile implant) are also methods; however, the expense involved is significant, and the expertise required for these surgeries is not very common.

In the end, constant and continued support from family, community, and peers predict favorable outcomes, even after seeking medical and mental health treatment. Individual and group therapies should be continued. Confounding substance use problems should be addressed.