Video endoscopy with stroboscopy (also known as "videostroboscopy" or "stroboscopy" for short) is the most common method of visualizing vocal fold vibration and is an essential tool for voice assessment.

During phonation, the vocal folds vibrate at high frequencies, too rapidly to be perceived by the naked eye. Stroboscopy is used to visually "slow down" the vibration in order to facilitate assessment. It uses a flexible or rigid endoscope combined with a microphone and a flashing strobe light. The microphone is placed next to the larynx and is used to estimate the fundamental frequency of the voice. The strobe frequency is then synchronized at a rate slightly below the larynx's fundamental frequency, thus capturing successive phases of the glottic cycle.

Historically, the "slow-motion" effect of laryngeal stroboscopy has been mistakenly attributed to Talbot's law (which concerns the relationship between perceived brightness of an object and illumination exposure time) and the persistence of vision (which posits that images are retained upon the human retina for up to 0.2 ms) when, in fact, it is a result of the phenomenon of visual perception of flicker-free images when the frequency of the strobe lamp exceeds 50 Hz and the resulting appearance of motion due to the effect of visual sampling during sequential phases of vocal fold motion.

Stroboscopy is a low-cost alternative to other technologies such as high-speed video, which requires a more specialized camera and large volume data storage. There are some drawbacks to stroboscopy due to the sampling technique required; as only periodic vocal fold movements from successive glottic cycles are captured, aperiodicity or fluctuating vocal fold movements cannot be tracked. Another situation in which stroboscopy performs poorly is diplophonia, a condition that produces two separate pitches simultaneously, thereby disrupting the stroboscopy microphone's fundamental frequency estimate and causing irregular flashing and an inconsistent set of images.