Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD) frequently is an asymptomatic condition that may be diagnosed at the time of a routine eye examination.

- PPCD is a hereditary disease. A family history of corneal disease should be elucidated.

- Asymptomatic patients will have normal or near-normal visual acuity.

- Glare symptoms are frequently reported.

- With careful biomicroscopy, bilateral polymorphic irregularities are evident at the Descemet membrane and the endothelium.

- Although corneal dystrophies are a bilateral entity it is not uncommon to have asymmetric signs.

- The appearance of the lesions is highly variable. Clusters of blister-like vesicles are most commonly encountered.

- Another pathognomonic configuration has parallel linear bands with scalloped edges across or adjacent to the visual axis.

- Larger areas of diffuse opacities are rare but are more likely to diminish visual function.

- The onset of signs or symptoms should be ascertained. Infants or toddlers within the critical or sensitive period are likely to develop amblyopia.

- Structural irregularities of the Descemet membrane can induce corneal steepening and high astigmatism

- Significant asymmetry in refraction may contribute to the development of anisometropic amblyopia in susceptible children.

- Rarely corneal edema due to compromised corneal endothelium is evident at birth.

- Persistent central corneal opacity may contribute to the development of deprivation amblyopia in susceptible children.

- If endothelial findings are present gonioscopy should be performed to evaluate the anatomic angle.

- Peripheral anterior synechia (PAS) can found in isolation or as broad bands. Peripheral corneal edema may overly broad bands of PAS.

- If intraocular pressure is elevated a careful glaucoma workup should be initiated.

- If there are iris or pupillary distortions a glaucoma workup should be initiated.