**Angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma**

Initial evaluation, in addition to physical examination, should include complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, LDH, HTLV-1, systemic imaging such as CT chest, abdomen, pelvis with contrast, or positron emission tomographic [PET-CT] scan, bone marrow evaluation, echocardiogram (before anthracycline therapy).

Diagnosis is based on clinical features, histopathologic features, immunophenotyping, and molecular studies.

Hematology

Some of the hematological abnormalities include polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia, direct coombs positive autoimmune hemolytic anemia, peripheral eosinophilia.

Histopathology

The cell of origin of AITL is the follicular T helper cell. There is dysregulation of T helper cells resulting in unchecked B cell activation and development of AITL. It is histologically characterized by effacement of normal lymphoid architecture, accompanied by a pleomorphic cellular infiltrate, resulting in loss of follicles and extensive intranodal revascularization. The cellular infiltrate includes B cells, plasma cells, histiocytes, eosinophils. Some of the B cells are EBV+ reflecting the immunodeficient state.

Immunophenotyping and molecular studies

Immunophenotyping reveals that the malignant cells are CD3+, CD4+, and CD10+. CXCL13, uniformly expressed in neoplastic cells, is diagnostically significant, whereas CD30+, which is seen in about 20% of all AITLs, is therapeutically relevant.

An abnormal karyotype is seen in AITL and frequently involves chromosomes 3 and 5. Clonal complexity is considered a negative prognostic factor.

A diagnosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma may be uncovered concomitantly at the time of diagnosis of AITL or at relapse, warranting the need for re-biopsy if a relapse is suspected.

**Large Cell Cutaneous Ki-1 Anaplastic Lymphoma**

The diagnosis depends on clinical and histopathological findings. Histopathology usually reveals large cells, with about 75% expressing CD30. Immunophenotyping reveals that mostly these cells are CD4+ with loss of pan-T markers such as CD2, CD3, and CD 5. In contrast to systemic ALCL, the cells in PCALCL are usually negative for CD15 and epithelial membrane antigen.

**Mycosis fungoides and Sezary Syndrome**

Diagnosis is usually based on clinical and histopathologic findings. Once a diagnosis is made, accurate staging is essential as it provides prognostic significance. Initial workup includes biopsy of the skin and/or lymph nodes, bone marrow biopsy (if cytopenia or extracutaneous disease is suspected), flow cytometry, and systemic imaging. The purpose of flow cytometry is to assess the clonality of T-cells.

Histopathology: The classic MF skin lesion appears as a superficial lichenoid lymphocytic infiltrate. The lymphocytes range from small to large and characteristically reveal cerebriform nuclei. The hallmark of this malignant infiltrate is epidermotropism (lymphocytes frequent the epidermis without any obvious spongiosis) and clusters of lymphocytes around the Langerhans cell in the epidermis, what is known as the Pautrier microabscesses. In the advanced stages, there is a lack of epidermotropism, and the lymphocytes are characteristically large, atypical, and extend deeper into the dermis.

Immunophenotyping plays a vital role in diagnosis, with cells expressing CD3+CD4+CD45RO+CD8-. Loss of maturation markers on the CD4+ cell, such as CD7 and CD26, indicates malignant clonality of the T-lymphocyte.