Plant chemistry and toxicology are complex with a rich history. Much about plant chemistry remains unknown, and our understanding relies on animal research combined with documented human experiences. The dynamic science of pharmacognosy, which highlights the therapeutic value of plants, has elucidated several major classes of organic molecules found in plants, of which alkaloids represent one. Others include phenols and phenylpropanoids; terpenes and resins; glycosides; and proteins, peptides, and lectins. Plant alkaloids represent a diverse array of secondary plant metabolites exemplified by familiar compounds such as nicotine, caffeine, cocaine, mescaline, ephedrine, and strychnine. Chemically classified as amines, plant alkaloids are defined by their function as bases generally containing one or more nitrogen atoms within a heterocyclic structure.

They typically exhibit strong pharmacologic activity and serve as a constituent of these plants’ chemical arsenals. A given plant species may contain one, a few, or many types of alkaloids. Certain plant families are particularly rich in these phytochemicals, such as the Papaveraceae (poppy) and Solanaceae (nightshades).

Plant alkaloids illustrate the overlap between the toxic and the therapeutic: one may appreciate the cytoprotective effects of the vinca alkaloids and the genotoxic effects of the pyrrolizidine alkaloids; the disruption of cholinergic neurotransmission by hyoscyamine and the therapeutic potential of pro-cholinergic galantamine in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer disease; the lethal potential of the “deadly nightshades” contrasted with the light shed on novel life-promoting therapeutic agents.

Within this same group which we find coniine, the piperidine alkaloid and so-called “killer of Socrates” that claimed the philosopher’s life by respiratory arrest, we have the indole alkaloids with therapeutic potential in obstructive lung disease.

In certain cases, one alkaloid may serve as the antidote for the toxicity of another. Since the discovery of morphine by modern chemistry, through repurposing and metabolic engineering, plant alkaloids have been exploited for their immense medicinal properties in a wealth of pharmacologic applications. These include the treatment of pain (e.g., morphine, cocaine), fever (e.g., quinine), malignancy (e.g., vinblastine, berberine), asthma (e.g., ephedrine), dysrhythmias (e.g., quinidine), hyperglycemia (e.g., piperine), hypertension (e.g., reserpine), and bacterial infections (e.g., ciprofloxacin). This activity will incorporate the available data to highlight the less desirable effects of these metabolites, the exposure to which may lead to disease.