# Continuing Education Activity

Corneal dystrophies are a collection of genetic diseases that affect corneal transparency and refraction due to increased deposition of abnormal material. This activity will review the classification of these diseases, their clinical presentations, diagnostic approaches, and clinical management by an interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the corneal dystrophies based on the affected anatomical layer.
- Outline various corneal dystrophies based on genetic etiology, history, physical exam findings, and laboratory diagnostics. 
- Review the management of corneal dystrophies, from non-invasive treatments to corneal transplantation, as well as the risks and complications of surgical intervention. 
- Summarize an interprofessional team-based approach to the management of corneal dystrophies for early diagnosis, proper treatment and improved outcomes.

# Introduction

Corneal dystrophy (CD) is most recently defined as a collection of rare hereditary non-inflammatory disorders of abnormal deposition of substances in the cornea.

The objective of this article is to present an overview of the evaluation and management for the most prominent and understood variants of CD.

Patients with CD can be asymptomatic, but if symptoms occur, they typically experience bilateral visual acuity loss, typically in the form of irregular astigmatism. Depending on the corneal layer affected, patients may also manifest with photophobia, dry eyes, corneal edema, and recurrent corneal erosions, especially with epithelial-based CD, which causes considerable pain. Symptoms can begin at any age, depending on the diagnosis.

CD is a significant but rare ocular disease. The genetic component of this disease is important for patients to understand, especially for affected patients involved with family planning. As we begin to understand genetics in greater detail, better evaluation and treatments for CD will come to fruition.

The objective of this article is to present an overview of the general evaluation and management for the most prominent and understood variants of CD.

**Epithelial and subepithelial dystrophies**

- Epithelial basement membrane corneal dystrophy (EBMCD), also previously known as map-finger-dot dystrophy, Cogan microcystic dystrophy, and anterior basement membrane dystrophy.

- Epithelial recurrent erosion dystrophies (EREDs) which includes Franceschetti corneal dystrophy, dystrophia smolandiensis, and dystrophia helsinglandica

- Subepithelial mucinous corneal dystrophy (SMCD)

- Meesmann corneal dystrophy (MECD) also known as juvenile epithelial corneal dystrophy

- Lisch epithelial corneal dystrophy (LECD)

- Gelatinous drop-like corneal dystrophy (GDLD)

**Epithelial-Stromal Dystrophies**(still included under epithelial and subepithelial dystrophies)

- Lattice corneal dystrophy (LCD), with its subtypes: type I (TGFBI mutation) and type II (familial amyloidosis Finnish type),

- Granular corneal dystrophy (GCD), types I and II (Avellino-type)

- Reis-Bückler’s corneal dystrophy (RBCD)

- Thiel-Behnke corneal dystrophy (honeycomb dystrophy)

**Stromal dystrophies**

- Macular corneal dystrophy (MCD)

- Schnyder corneal dystrophy (SCD)

- Congenital stromal corneal dystrophy (CSCD)

- Fleck corneal dystrophy (FCD)

- Posterior amorphous corneal dystrophy (PACD)

- Pre-Descemet corneal dystrophy (PDCD)

- Central cloudy dystrophy of francois (CCDF)

**Endothelial Corneal Dystrophies**

- Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD)

- Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD)

- Congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy (CHED)

- X-linked endothelial corneal dystrophy (XECD)

# Etiology

Clinicians need to distinguish corneal degeneration from corneal dystrophies. Corneal degeneration is a broad term for afflictions that cause alterations to the corneal structure due to a multitude of factors, such as trauma, infection, increasing age, and other environmental factors. Corneal dystrophy is a disorder distinguished from general corneal degeneration by a genetic etiology, either inherited or through de novo mutation.

The IC3D categorized CD into four different categories, based on our genetic understanding of each disease variant: category 1 identifies a CD with the mutated gene(s) identified, category 2 identifies the locus of the mutation, category 3 is a CD without a gene or locus identified, and category 4 is reserved for new or suspicious CD.

Many corneal dystrophies are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.

While many genes could be affected and lead to corneal dystrophy, some genes have been  confirmed:

**Transforming Growth Factor, Beta Induced (TGFBI)**

This gene is altered in epithelial-based dystrophies such as type I LCD, GCD types I and II, EBMCD, Reis-Bücklers CD, and Thiel-Behnke CD.

**Gelsolin**: Type II LCD (Finnish type) is caused by a mutated form of gelsolin. This protein normally functions in removing excess actin filaments from plasma, but that can cause systemic amyloidosis when mutated.

**KRT**: Meesmann CD is an autosomal dominant disease caused by a mutation in the Keratin gene, specifically KRT3 and KRT12, which normally produce intermediate filaments inside cells to provide structure to keratocytes.

**UBIAD1:**Schnyder CD is caused by a mutation in the UbiA prenyltransferase domain-containing protein 1 gene, which is involved in vitamin K and coenzyme Q metabolism.

**TACSTD-2:**An autosomal recessive mutation of tumor-associated calcium signal transducer-2 is found in gelatinous drop-like dystrophy.

**CHST6**: Carbohydrate sulfotransferase 6 is found in MCD and inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion.

**SLC4A11:**Found in FECD, late-onset, as well as congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy, this gene produces a bicarbonate transporter protein.

**ZEB1**: Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1, formerly known as TCF8, leads to Posterior Polymorphous CD, as well as FECD, and is responsible for embryonic development and type I collagen expression.

**Phosphoinositide kinase FYVE mutations (formerly PIP5K3):**This mutated gene, which produces proteins that help regulate endosomal function, is found in Fleck CD.

**COL8A2**: Early-onset FECD, if inherited, is an autosomal dominant disease caused by a mutation in COL8A2.

# Epidemiology

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy is the most common among the corneal dystrophies.

Demographically, CD has a variety of presentations. Both genders are equally affected by CD, although it has been shown that Fuchs CD is more common in females.

# Pathophysiology

The cornea consists of several layers. From superficial to deep, the layers are squamous epithelium, anterior basement layer (Bowman’s), a stroma comprised of keratocytes and collagen, a posterior basement membrane (Descemet’s), and an endothelial layer. The major function of the cornea is to provide a medium in which light may be refracted and focused on the retina for visual acuity.

Defining corneal dystrophies depends on which layers of the cornea are affected. Alterations in proteins cause deposits within the cells of the cornea, leading to abnormal vision examination findings.

The squamous epithelium is highly innervated by unmyelinated nerves, which function to increase tear production and to signal the blink reflex.

The primary function of Descemet’s membrane and the endothelial cells is to pump ions against a gradient to maintain corneal dehydration or deturgescence.

Amyloidosis is a disease of abnormal protein deposition in tissues.

# History and Physical

Patients with CD may be asymptomatic or report blurriness of vision.

Slit-lamp (biomicroscopy) examination findings are usually the first step in differentiating the different types of corneal dystrophies. Symptoms often group among the dystrophies based on anatomic location. An overview of typical symptoms and biomicroscopic findings are presented below, organized by anatomical classification. A more detailed description of these findings will be mentioned in other StatPearls articles on each separate dystrophy. The symptoms and findings are:

**Epithelial and subepithelial dystrophies**: Patients will usually suffer from recurrent corneal erosions with these dystrophies, with different degrees of severity. History and biomicroscopy findings are as follows:

**EB****M****CD**: This CD presents with irregular, gray, map-like patches or intraepithelial (Cogan) microcysts.

**Meesmann CD**: While MECD typically presents asymptomatically, or with mild symptoms of visual acuity loss and eye irritation, it can progress to painful erosions due to foreign body sensation, and potentially be severe enough to cause significant subepithelial fibrosis and vision loss.

**ERED****:**The recurrent erosions start in the first decade, and episodes can be severe and last for up to a week.

**Subepithelial Mucinous CD****:**Similar to ERED, SMCD may present with subepithelial opacifications, with most of the findings in the center of the cornea.

**Lisch Epithelial CD****:**presents with gray whorled to band or club-shaped densities, even feather-shaped (see figure 2).

**Gelatinous Drop-Like Dystrophy****:**GDLD starts with a presentation similar to band keratopathy, but it progresses to mulberry-like subepithelial nodules that grow in size over time (see figure 2).

**Epithelial-Stromal Dystrophies**: Not only will patients have corneal erosions, but visual acuity loss and photophobia may occur as well, due to stromal involvement.

**Lattice CD**: On biomicroscopy, LCD presents with linear/branching opacities, forming a ropy lattice structure (see figure 3).

**Granular CD**: If patients are symptomatic, corneal erosions starting in the first decade are likely to be seen. Visual imparity usually presents in the 5th decade of life. Biomicroscopy will present with crumb or flake-like opacities, with the spaces between the opacities clear of deposits (see figure 3).

**Reis-Bücklers CD:**This dystrophy can present in childhood with geographic, map-like findings similar to EMBCD (see figure 4).

**Thiel-Behnke CD****:**The patient will present with symptoms like RBCD; however, they tend to be milder in TBCB, with visual impairment beginning later in life, and erosions starting in the first or second decade.

**Stromal Dystrophies**: Corneal haze is often noted in these dystrophies, which affects visual acuity in most patients.

**M****acular****CD**: MCD presents with corneal haze and grainy, ground glass-like opacities, made of glycosaminoglycans. (see figure 4).

**Schnyder CD**: Early findings by the second decade involve central crystalline subepithelial deposits with a stromal haze that progresses to a ring-like structure.

**Congenital Stromal CD**: CSCD typically presents with symmetric corneal clouding with white flaky stromal opacities.

**C****entral****C****loudy****D****ystrophy of François**: CCDF presents with a lizard-like patterned gray stromal opacities, called crocodile shagreen.

**Fleck CD****:**This dystrophy presents with small white oval dandruff-like opacities.

**Posterior Amorphous CD**: PACD presents with sheet-like opacities, both centrally and peripherally, along the posterior stroma.

**Pre-Descemet CD****:**This dystrophy presents with a condition similar to cornea farinata, which describes the accumulations as gray-white dust-like opacities made of lipids on biomicroscopy.

**Endothelial dystrophies**: Patients with these dystrophies have blurriness and visual disturbances such as haloes around light, due to corneal edema and thickness.

**F****uchs****E****ndothelial****CD**: FECD presents with guttae, or drop-like conglomerates, along Descemet’s membrane (see figure 5).

**C****ongenital Hereditary CD**: CHED presents with diffuse ground glass-like corneal haze and edema, along with focal gray spotting.

**Posterior Polymorphous****CD**: PPCD can present with a variety of asymmetric or unilateral biomicroscopic findings, including vesicles, breaking bands, or gray haze (see figure 5).

**X-linked Endothelial CD****:**XECD presents with diffuse milky opacities with band keratopathy as well as moon crater-like endothelial cells.

# Evaluation

Diagnosis begins with a full eye examination, with emphasis on biomicroscopy, which was the original technique to observe the physical findings on the cornea.

Staining of histologic slides is crucial to diagnose some forms of CD, as it may lead to the type of substance deposited in the cornea. Many dystrophies that include a mutation in TGFBI, like LCD and GCD, will stain positive for Congo red, as these dystrophies produce an amyloid-like disease.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is often involved in academic investigations of CD, but it can also be used to confirm the diagnosis in some dystrophies.

# Treatment / Management

In patients who are asymptomatic or mild cases of CD, regular follow-up with the clinician is recommended for any typical ophthalmologic changes, as well as the possibility for any disease progression.

Treatment for symptomatic dystrophies can be organized by anatomic location, as symptoms tend to become similar among dystrophies of the same classification. Elaboration on management for each type of dystrophy will be discussed in other StatPearls articles.

**Epithelial dystrophies**: The most common symptoms seen are corneal erosions, especially in the morning, due to the increase of epithelial sloughing from nocturnal corneal drying.

**Stromal dystrophies**: CD involving the stroma may most likely lead to visual acuity loss.

**Endothelial Dystrophies**: With the advent of Descemet’s stripping endothelial keratoplasty (DSEK) and Descemet’s membrane endothelial keratoplasty (DMEK), the need for penetrating keratoplasty has diminished due to faster recovery, better post-surgical visual acuity, and decreased graft rejection, because there is no impact on the anterior face of the ocular surface with these procedures.

Other techniques that are used presently or may be implemented in the future consist of using gene or enzyme therapy, mesenchymal stem cells to replace dystrophic cells, and lipid-based therapies.

# Differential Diagnosis

It is often the case that corneal dystrophies must be differentiated among each other, as clinical presentations may often overlap. While biomicroscopy findings may identify different types of CD, these findings may be similar among dystrophies. Genetic testing may aid in the differentiation among dystrophies of similar presentations.

The presenting signs and symptoms of CD may be due to other ocular diseases. Recurrent corneal erosions may be caused by non-genetic etiologies.

A patient with corneal erosions could also be affected with Herpes keratitis, infectious keratitis, conjunctival foreign bodies, dry eyes secondary to autoimmune disease, among other pathophysiological processes.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of CD depends mainly on the subtype of dystrophy. However, most CD presents with progressive loss of visual acuity.

There is a chance that recurrence of the dystrophy can happen post-graft transplantation, requiring retreatment. It is more likely to occur in stromal dystrophies.

# Complications

Complications from CD can arise from untreated disease, and there are always risks of complications involved with surgical intervention. If not treated, patients with severe forms of CD may develop progressively worse vision, to the point of severe visual impairment.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

It is important to let patients understand the limitations of surgical intervention. Many dystrophies can reoccur in a few years, despite corneal transplant.

Patients should be educated on post-surgical safety measures to promote optimal outcomes. Bandage contact lenses may aid in preventing loose sutures and displacement of the graft.

The application of artificial tears in the morning may help alleviate corneal erosion pain.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Corneal dystrophies are a collection of inheritable diseases leading to cellular dysfunction of the cornea.

Patients with corneal dystrophy range from being asymptomatic to displaying symptoms such as painful corneal erosions, photophobia, and visual acuity loss, and can be associated with other systemic symptoms based on the genetic abnormality.

Physical exam findings, especially biomicroscopy, histologic exam, and genetic testing, are vital to the accurate diagnosis of corneal dystrophies.

Treatment can vary from conservative measures to corneal transplantation and is dependent on disease onset and progression.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Management of corneal dystrophy is a combined effort by many medical professionals. Despite the rarity of these diseases, optometrists and ophthalmologists performing routine screening exams on patients should always be aware of the slit-lamp findings that are pathognomonic of CD. A clinician, as well as medical assistants, technicians, and nurses, should be aware of symptoms and signs of CD and be thorough patient history gathering, especially family history, to increase the chance of recognizing potential dystrophy. Proper communication among team members of these clinical findings is crucial to appropriate diagnosis through a physical exam and laboratory testing. Over-testing should be avoided to limit the cost to the patient. Finally, proper communication and education should be given to the patient regarding diagnosis and treatment, follow-up, and potential surgical intervention. It is noteworthy that the ICD-10 codes for CD are divided into six categories: endothelial, epithelial (Juvenile’s), granular, macular, unspecified, and other hereditary corneal dystrophies.