Surgical intervention is indicated for tethered cord syndrome if clinical signs and symptoms are present in conjunction with radiographic findings.

The surgical steps for spinal cord untethering begin with a midline skin incision corresponding to the level of the conus at the filum terminale junction.

Once the dura is exposed, a midline incision of the dura and arachnoid membrane is made, and stay stitches are placed at the dural edges. Gentle caudal dissection of the conus medullaris proceeds until the exit of the most caudal coccygeal nerve root(s) is identified with the filum terminale beginning caudally to the most caudal coccygeal nerve root.

Once the filum terminale is identified, any adherent coccygeal or lower sacral nerves are dissected from the filum terminale. Once cleanly dissected, the filum terminale is cauterized and resected approximately 5 mm below the conus-filum junction. If there is a question as to whether the filum terminale is completely freed of adherent nerve roots, nerve root stimulation studies can be employed intraoperatively.

Following untethering and inspection of nerve roots, the dura is closed in a water-tight fashion, which can be confirmed by asking anesthesia to provide a Valsalva maneuver. Sealants can be applied over the dural closure, including synthetic sealants, dural substitutes, or a combination of the two. If a laminoplasty is performed rather than a laminectomy, absorbable or titanium plates can be used to fix the lamina back into place. Once hemostasis has been achieved, the incision can be closed in a multilayer closure. Intraoperative electrophysiologic monitoring can be considered as it has been found to reduce perioperative surgical risk.

Recently, in a small series, minimally invasive tubular tethered cord release has been proposed as a safe and viable alternative to the traditional open approach with a statistically significant decrease in blood loss and length of hospitalization.