When we study the cell under a light microscope, we can see the structure of the cell and its organelles. Some of the finer details are only appreciated when examined with a more advanced electron microscope.

**The Cytoplasm**(Greek, kytos=covering): Also called plasma (Greek, plasma=molded), as it looks as though it is molded around the nucleus. It is highly crowded with two types of broadly divided components: cytoplasmic organelles and macromolecules. The cytoplasmic organelles (minute organs) will be floating within the cytoplasmic matrix (cytosol). There will also be non-essential structures called inclusion bodies such as pigmented granules or stored fat droplets.

**The Nucleus:**It is the most rigid and largest cell organelle.(Latin, nux=nut, Greek, karyo=nut). The nucleus is programmed to control all the functions of the cell. Hence it is referred to as the “brain” of the cell. Surrounding the nucleus is a double-layered thin membrane called nuclear envelope (nuclear membrane) that shows innumerable perforations. These pores are called nuclear pores**,**which are specialized to have selective permeability.nucleolus/nucleoli made up of RNA that helps make ribosomes. The nuclei are heterogeneous structures with electron-dense (dark) and electron-lucent (light) areas. These dense areas called heterochromatin consist of tightly coiled inactive chromatin found in irregular clumps often around the periphery of the nucleus. On the other hand, the electron-lucent nuclear material called euchromatin represents part of DNA that is active in RNA synthesis. The heterochromatin and euchromatin are collectively called chromatin** **(Greek, chroma=colour) as they show affinity towards certain dyes**. **It contains DNA molecules (hereditary molecules), which appear as granules or threads calledchromatin when a cell is in a non-dividing state. When dividing, they look like short, rod-like, tightly coiled structures and now called chromosomes**. **The human cells typically contain 46 chromosomes (except mature sex cells which contain a haploid number of chromosomes, i.e., 23 chromosomes). The DNA molecules carry the master code for making all of the enzymes and other proteins of a cell. Thus they dictate both the structure and the function of the cells. The non-staining component within which the nucleoli are suspended is known as thenuclear sap.

**Ribosomes:**The ribosomes are approximately 15 nm in diameter and appear as attached as well as free structures. Many of them attach to the rough endoplasmic reticulum. And many of them are also seen scattered free throughout the cytoplasm. When present alone, they are said to be monosomes and when present in groups, then called polyribosomes. Each of these ribosomes has subunits composed of ribonucleic acid (RNA). The RNA can be rRNA (ribosomal RNA), mRNA (messenger RNA), or tRNA (transfer RNA). Their function is to synthesize proteins for the use, both within and outside the cell. Hence it is said to be theprotein factory of a cell. They “translates” the DNA into proteins.

**Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)**: It means a ‘network’ present towards the center of the cytoplasm and is said to be one of the largest organelles. It is a membrane channel made up of cisterns or tubules. The cytoplasm within these tubules is calledvacuoplasm, and that outside is called hyaloplasm or cytosol. It is a complex organelle performing different functions like protein synthesis, calcium storage, steroid synthesis, and lipid metabolism. The ER is said to have different shapes, and each is associated with a specific function. It has been observed that the cells involved in synthesizing excessive amounts of proteins have more sheets, and those involved in lipid synthesis have more tubules.

**Rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER):**They are identified by the membranes with a rough outer surface that is due to attached ribosomes. They act as aminiature circulatory system for the cell or the internal delivery system of the cell. Their lumen is continuous with those of smooth endoplasmic reticulum and perinuclear space. Their primary function is the modification of the synthesize proteins that are used up by the cells.

**Smooth endoplasmic reticulum (sER):**These structures are membranes having a smooth outer surface, as they are not covered by any ribosomes. Their primary function is to produce the lipids and further processing of membrane proteins that are synthesized by the rough endoplasmic reticulum. They also help in detoxification of drugs.

Typically, only well-folded proteins are delivered to the Golgi apparatus for further needful. If there is any defect or incomplete folding of proteins, they undergo ER-associated degradation. In certain conditions where there is an increase in the production of protein and accumulation of defectively folded proteins, it leads to a condition called ER stress.

**Golgi Apparatus**: The Golgi apparatus are irregular bodies present near the nucleus of a cell. They are observable under the light microscope by staining with silver salts. When observed under the electron microscope, one can appreciate that a single-layered membrane binds them in a ribbon-like fashion. They are similar to sER and made up of stacks of cisternae and small rounded vesicles at the periphery. They help in protein biosynthesis** **and packaging protein molecules for export from the cell. The materials from the ER will reach the Golgi bodies in the form of vesicles. From a functional point of view, the Golgi apparatus divides into three regions: cis Golgi, trans Golgi, and medial Golgi.

**Lysosomes**: They are vesicles that pinch off from the Golgi apparatus. They contain chemicals (enzymes) that help in degrading and recycling cellular waste by a process known as autophagy. This process helps in eliminating the unwanted molecules and foreign particles like the bacteria/virus/foreign bodies that get into the cells. This process occurs by chemicals like lysosomal hydrolases that are released by the lysosomes. Almost 60 different kinds of hydrolases have been identified.Digestive Bags’ or ‘Cellular Garbage Disposal units.’ Sometimes they are also called the “suicide bag” because, in some certain rare conditions, the lysosomes can release its chemicals, thus killing the cell itself. Recent research has given a new dimension to the lysosomes by discovering that they are not only dead-end bags but also regulate energy metabolism and cellular clearance. They are also said to play a role in plasma membrane repair, bone resorption, and immune response.

**Mitochondria**: They are in the form of rods or granules and hence the name mitochondria (mitos=granules, chondrium=rod). They are said to be the ‘Power Plant/house’ of the cell as they will provide all the energy needed by a cell to move, divide, contract, produce secretory products, and all other functions of a cell; this occurs by breaking down the food that helps in making the ATP, which is the principal fuel for all cell activities that require energy. Their size varies from 0.5 to 2 micrometers in length. Their number in each cell depends on the activity of the concerned cell itself being high in a metabolically active cell and low in an inactive one. They have two membranes: inner and outer. The inner layer possesses many folds, and these folds are called cristae.** **Embedded within the inner membrane is granular material called the matrix, which contains the main enzymes that are essential for the production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The location ofcellular respiration (the process that makes the cell energy).

**Vesicles & Vacuoles**: These structures act as the storage compartments of the cell. They usually hold proteins, wastes, food, etc. In the case of plant cells, they hold water within the vacuoles.

**Centrioles & Centrosomes**: These are essential structures that play in role in the cell division and replication.

**The Cell Membrane****:**It is also known as the plasma membrane or plasmalemma (Greek, lemma=bark). It is a tri-laminar membrane made up predominantly of lipids (fats). It is 7.5 nm in thickness and so thin that it can be seen only by an electron microscope. It also contains a small number of proteins and carbohydrates. These are the lipids like phospholipids, cholesterol, and glycolipids and proteins like integral membrane protein, peripheral membrane protein, and glycoproteins. The different types of proteins help in the active transport of chemicals, food, and wastes. The membrane basically keeps the cell together, separated from the surrounding, gives a definite shape, and maintains the same. In case it breaks, the contents of the cell will spill out. The membrane shows selective permeability being highly permeable to oxygen and water but limited to that of sodium ions, potassium ions, etc. Some of the large molecules enter the cell by endocytosis. They also bear specific receptors for specific enzymes or hormones. Some cells are also specialized to engulf foreign materials by a process called phagocytosis. When engulfing small molecules of fluid, the process is called pinocytosis.

Some of the cells show projection from its surfaces in the form of cilia, flagella, or microvilli.