Typhoid fever has non-specific manifestations. It may resemble multiple infectious diseases with similar clinical presentations. So a wide differential diagnosis must be considered.  Diseases with symptoms including diarrhea, dysentery, abdominal distension, fever, splenomegaly, and shock, should trigger consideration in the correct clinical context.

**Dengue fever:**Dengue is a hemorrhagic fever with non-specific symptoms like fever, headache, myalgia, shock, which may be confused with typhoid fever. It is known as “breakbone fever” for its severe arthralgias.

**Malaria:**Malaria has non-specific clinical features such as fever, headache, myalgia, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and anemia. The involvement of multiple organs may make it difficult to differentiate it from typhoid clinically, but unlike typhoid, jaundice is common in malaria. Laboratory testing should rule out malaria in cases of fever in or after travel to endemic areas.

**Amebiasis:**Amebiasis is caused byEntamoeba histolytica ingested in water or uncooked food. Etiological factors such as impure drinking water and lack of sanitation should increase suspicion for amebiasis, similar to typhoid fever. Abdominal manifestations of amebiasis such as dysentery and liver abscess are common and may be difficult to distinguish from typhoid fever on a clinical basis alone.

**Leptospirosis:**It is one of the most common zoonotic diseases. It presents with fever and jaundice as well as features like myalgias, headaches, and conjunctival suffusion. Organisms spread throughout the body after brief bacteremia. Less common symptoms include cough, diarrhea, meningitis, acute kidney injury, hemorrhages, and macular rash.

**Q fever:**Q fever (Coxiella
burnetii infection) is a worldwide disease that presents with non-specific symptoms of fever that may include headache, chills, maculopapular rash, pneumonia, and osteomyelitis. Those in direct contact with cattle, sheep, and goats, such as ranchers and veterinarians, may be at higher risk of contracting Q fever.

**Tularemia:**It is primarily a zoonotic disease prevalent in the northern hemisphere caused by a highly infectious gram-negative bacillus,Francisella tularensis. Though clinical features like hepatosplenomegaly, diarrhea vomiting, and pneumonia may be seen in typhoid fever, it is distinguished by skin ulceration with regional lymphadenopathy that is characteristic of tularemia.

**Melioidosis:**Melioidosis or “Whitmore disease” is caused byBurkholderia pseudomallei and is seen more commonly in northern Australia and Southeast Asia, where it is passed to humans and animals via contact with contaminated water and soil. Melioidosis is most likely to present in patients with chronic diseases such as diabetes, renal and liver disease, thalassemia, chronic lung disease, and cancer. Pneumonia is the most common feature though other common features include hepatosplenomegaly, diarrhea, and skin abscesses, and ulcerations.

**Giardiasis:**Giardia is a small intestine infection by the parasiteGiardia lamblia. It is characterized by diarrhea, malaise abdominal cramps, and weight loss, but fever is typically absent or not prominent. It occurs worldwide and is common in the tropics transmitted by the waterborne, foodborne, and fecal-oral routes.

**Bacterial gastroenteritis:**A variety of other bacteria cause gastroenteritis with common clinical manifestations. These include Staphylococcus, Bacillus cereus, Clostridium perfringens, Campylobacter, Escherichia coli, Clostridium difficile, Vibrio cholerae, and bacillary dysentery (shigellosis).

**Rickettsial infection:**Rickettsia fever is characterized by fever with a rash caused by rickettsiae, a gram-negative bacteria. A skin lesion is prominent long with multi-systems manifestations.

**Toxoplasmosis:**Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular parasite causing toxoplasmosis. Enlarged spleen, lymphadenopathy, fever, malaise, sore throat, headache are the usual signs which may be self-limited or may even go unnoticed in immunocompetent individuals.

**Tuberculosis:**Tuberculosis (TB) is a common disease in developing countries. Fever associated with night sweats and weight loss is the characteristic feature that often leads to the diagnosis. Osteomyelitis in typhoid mimics Pott disease of the spine in TB.

**Brucellosis:**Is an enzootic infection, similar to salmonella, in that it is also an intracellular organism that invades the reticuloendothelial system. Brucellosis spreads to humans typically from eating raw and unpasteurized dairy products or through contact with infected animals. Brucellosis presents with undulating fevers, fatigue, and arthralgias.