In situ simulation has been accepted as a valuable tool to identify latent hazards and practitioner knowledge gaps.  It is important to conduct scenarios in alignment with best practices to maximize outcomes and ensure participant engagement. Standardized approaches and protocols to conduct in situ simulation include pre-scenario planning, timing, setting, necessary personal, and criteria to cancel the simulation.

Before beginning any in situ simulation, a supervisor or ward manager should be aware of the plan to ensure proper coverage of patient areas. Often "no-go" criteria are established to minimize risks to active or incoming patients to the unit. Patients and family members in the vicinity should be alerted to on-going training to ensure their psychological safety. Participants should have access to a safe training environment with an introduction to the ground rules of the simulation. Some in situ simulations are “unannounced,” in which case there should be some level of ongoing briefings to potential participants in the days or weeks before the initiation of a one time or longitudinal program.

The final necessary component intrinsic to almost all medical simulation is a formalized debriefing. It can be a challenge to facilitate a debriefing among an interprofessional group of providers. It can be helpful to have an individual with formal debriefing experience be involved. Adequate time should be allotted to allow participants to identify LSTs and propose subsequent solutions. The seven most common descriptive categories of latent safety threats include staffing, medication, devices/equipment, knowledge-base, workspace/environment, protocols, and communication/teamwork.

In collaboration with the clinical operations team, mechanisms should be in place in advance of performing in situ simulation to review and address revealed LSTs. One of the more comprehensive reviews on the role of in situ simulation in addressing latent safety threats advises a model for addressing issues using a Comprehensive Unit-based Safety Program.