A detailed history of a patient suspected of having a snakebite is essential to delineate treatment options moving forward. Information to obtain includes the timing and location of the bite, the onset of any symptoms the patient has been experiencing, and any first aid administered in the field. Gathering a past medical history with detail to which medications they are on, specifically anti-platelet and anti-coagulant medications, and any allergies that would prohibit them from receiving an antivenom, such as horses. If possible, information on the offending snake should be gathered. This information should be compared to the local database of venomous snakes located on the WHO website to see if a local antivenom exists. Factors that contribute to the severity of the bite include size of the victim, with larger patients doing better, part of the body bitten, exertion following the bite, depth of the bite, species of snake causing the bite, time to the presentation at the hospital, and initial first aid given at the scene

The physical exam may or may not reveal fang marks at the injury site. There could be local tissue damage, such as ecchymosis, blistering, or even tissue necrosis. Neurotoxic effects will initially present with generalized weakness, ptosis, and ophthalmoplegia; this may progress to paralysis of the facial muscles, and eventually, respiratory failure secondary to obstruction or paralysis of the diaphragm. Significant bleeding from the puncture site, epistaxis, or evidence of spontaneous bleeding could indicate a hemotoxic effect. Patients may present with signs of shock secondary to venom-induced vasodilation, hypovolemia, or even anaphylaxis in some patients

The physical exam could help indicate the species of snake inflicting the bite. In general, Elapid bites are associated with minimal local tissue damage and have a neurotoxic syndrome with systemic toxicity. Viperid bites are associated with profound local tissue damage and have a hemotoxic syndrome with systemic toxicity.

Symptoms that may suggest systemic effects of the envenomation include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, lethargy, muscle weakness, muscle fasciculation, and severe headache. It is important to recognize these symptoms early to prompt initiation of antivenom administration.