- A recent meta-analysis showed the use of multi-strain probiotics to be most useful for eczema prevention in children.

- A study indicates that the administration subcutaneously of a single-dose of tralokinumab (150 to 600 mg), a  human monoclonal antibody in clinical development for atopic dermatitis and asthma, was well tolerated in healthy Japanese volunteers. This study was a phase I, single-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, and single ascending-dose study, and supports the 300 mg dose selection for Japanese patients with asthma.

- Epicutaneous immunotherapy (EPIT) can be used to treat food allergy. EPIT activates the skin natural desensitization pathway and offers a progressive, possibly sustained response. This immunotherapy provides potential alternatives for atopic immunotherapy, which is less invasive and also carries a lower risk for systemic reactions than oral immunotherapy.

- Oral immunotherapy consists of administering rising doses of a food antigen to food-allergic subjects, to provoke a state of desensitization. Tolerability, efficacy, and safety remain an ongoing concern.

- Randomized placebo-controlled studies showed that ciclesonide, an inhaled corticosteroid, can initiate and maintain disease control in individuals with persistent asthma of all disease severities.

- Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) exploring the capacity of vitamin D to stop acute respiratory infections have yielded positive results. Vitamin D supplementation was safe, and it also protected against acute respiratory infections overall in very deficient individuals and those subjects not receiving bolus doses as well as experienced the benefit.