Given the fact the Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease is a multifaceted disease, a collaboration of different members from the interprofessional team is needed to administer the best care possible to patients of PMD. This would involve a neurologist as the CNS is the primary target of PMD, a pulmonologist given the stridor and respiratory difficulties that might occur in some patients of PMD, a gastroenterologist because of the pharyngeal weakness leading to feeding difficulties, physiotherapist to ease breathing in cases of contractures and scoliosis, a geneticist to counsel families with PMD.

Treatment options for PMD are under investigation. A study conducted by Gruenenfelder et al. explores the role of stem cell transplantation in PMD. The study used genetically modified mice with a duplication mutation at PLP1, and it concluded that the injection of neural stem cells had the potential to restore the production of myelin and protect axons.

A clinical trial by Gupta et al. demonstrated good results of intracerebral injection of neural stem cells in 2 subjects of PMD. The results were consistent with remyelination. The first subject, though, did not have significant neurologic improvement, experienced an improvement in his continuous positive airway pressure support (recall that patients with severe PMD have stridor). The second subject had improved truncal support, ambulation, and speech.

Apart from potential treatments, a recent study by Cloake et al. shows that PLP1 mutations might be related to the pathophysiology in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. The genes of 42 female patients MS were sequenced, and it was found out they have mutations of PLP1. This concludes that myelin-producing genes could contribute to MS pathology, given the destruction of oligodendrocytes that occurs as a result of the mutation.