The underlying mechanisms associated with HIV-associated lipodystrophy involve changes induced by HIV infection itself and metabolic changes triggered by certain classes of antiretroviral drugs.

HIV-1 virus infection per se results in a pro-inflammatory change in adipose tissue, which can contribute to lipodystrophy and subsequent metabolic abnormalities. It stimulates the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-alfa, IL-6, and IL-1beta), which induce a stress response in adipocytes leading to physical cell damage. TNF-alfa mediates insulin resistance by reducing insulin receptor kinase activity, which triggers apoptosis and lipolysis. It also downregulates the insulin receptor kinase substrate (IRS-10) and GLUT-4 transporter. Inflammation is thought to contribute to insulin resistance through impaired adipocyte metabolism and lipolysis.

The mechanisms by which antiretroviral drugs play a role in developing lipodystrophy are incompletely understood. Protease inhibitors (PIs) and reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) have been shown to disrupt adipocyte function and lipid and glucose metabolism. These drugs reduce adipocyte differentiation as well as the expression, secretion, and release of adiponectin from adipose tissue. Adiponectin is a key player in glucose regulation and fatty acid oxidation. Antiretroviral drugs increase lipolysis and suppress lipogenesis, resulting in decreased free fatty acids (FFA) uptake by adipocytes and increasing the release of stored triglycerides and glycerol in the bloodstream.

Mitochondrial toxicity, insulin resistance, and genetics are also thought to be some of the additional pathophysiological mechanisms related to the development of HIV-associated lipodystrophy. Lipoatrophy correlates with severe mitochondrial dysfunction and inflammation. Lipohypertrophy shares links to mild mitochondrial dysfunction and cortisol activation that are stimulated by inflammation. Further, both lipoatrophy in the lower part of the body and lipohypertrophy in the abdomen carries associations with metabolic changes that are similar to metabolic syndrome, especially dyslipidemia and insulin resistance.

There also appears to be a genetic component to the pathophysiology of this disease. In treatment-naive patients, for example, the development of lipodystrophy and metabolic changes on antiretroviral therapy was linked to a single nucleotide polymorphism in the resistin gene.