Medical management is the mainstay of treatment for recurrent acute rhinosinusitis. Many patients require a combination of therapies that target different components of the complex pathophysiology that leads to the development of RARS. These treatments are outlined below.

- 
**Topical Intranasal Therapy**

- 
              
- Nasal saline irrigation effectively removes or reduces the burden of debris and pathogens from the nares, which may provide symptomatic relief. Evidence is mixed regarding the efficacy of hypertonic versus isotonic saline solutions, but hypertonic saline causes more adverse effects such as increased nasal discharge and local discomfort.
              
              
- Topical corticosteroid nasal sprays reduce mucosal inflammation, thereby reducing stenosis of the sinus drainage pathways. 
              
              
- Topical antihistamines such as azelastine can help reduce inflammation and irritation of the mucosa, reduce edema in the nasal passages, and open the sinus ostia. 
              
              
- Topical decongestant sprays such as oxymetazoline or phenylephrine may help reduce congestion via local vasoconstriction. Patients should be cautioned regarding the rebound congestion that may accompany prolonged use of these decongestant sprays. The use of these medications should be limited to 3 to 5 days.

- 
**Antibiotics**

- 
              
- Only 0.5% to 2% of cases of viral sinusitis are complicated by bacterial sinusitis.
              
              
- Amoxicillin with or without clavulanate is the recommended initial antibiotic therapy for recurrent acute rhinosinusitis. Research indicates that amoxicillin is as effective as amoxicillin-clavulanate in treating acute sinusitis but causes fewer adverse gastrointestinal symptoms.
              
              
- Intravenous antibiotics are the mainstay of treatment for patients with orbital cellulitis or moderate-to-severe preseptal cellulitis. Recommended antibiotics include vancomycin and ampicillin-sulbactam, clindamycin, a third-generation cephalosporin, or piperacillin-tazobactam.

- 
**Decongestants**

- 
              
- Oral decongestants provide symptomatic relief by reducing inflammation and secretions from the nasal, sinus, and respiratory tract mucosa. Oral decongestants may also help maintain patency of the nasal ostia, leading to a reduction of sinus pressure.

- 
**Oral Antihistamines**

- 
              
- Oral antihistamines block the biologic histamine pathway that causes mucosal edema and inflammation when sensitized patients are exposed to inhaled allergens. They may be helpful for patients in whom sinusitis is thought to be precipitated or exacerbated by allergic rhinitis.

- 
**Oral Steroids**

- 
              
- Oral steroids are not recommended as monotherapy for acute rhinosinusitis; there is limited evidence supporting oral steroids as an adjunct to antimicrobial therapy for acute sinusitis.

- 
**Oral Leukotriene modifiers**

- 
              
- Leukotriene modifiers such as montelukast are effective treatments for allergic rhinitis and nasal polyposis. They may benefit patients with rhinosinusitis who also have asthma, allergic rhinitis, or nasal polyposis.

Surgical intervention for recurrent acute rhinosinusitis can be considered for patients who do not respond to medical management, particularly if they have documented anatomic abnormalities that correlate with their symptoms. Surgery has been shown to decrease symptoms and improve the quality of life for appropriately-selected patients.

**Functional Endoscopic Sinus Surgery (FESS)**can be employed to****correct anatomic abnormalities that prevent optimal sinus drainage. A variety of procedures, including maxillary antrostomy, uncinate takedown, ethmoidectomy, Draf I-III, and/or saline washout, can be performed depending on the location and severity of the individual patient’s pathology. Non-contrast computed tomography of the sinuses should be performed before surgical intervention.

**Balloon sinuplasty**is a tissue-sparing treatment used to permanently dilate the sinus ostia and sinus drainage pathways via local micro-fracturing with balloon insufflation. This allows for improved mucus drainage and reduced negative pressure in the sinus cavities. Balloon sinuplasty is used to treat patients with recurrent acute rhinosinusitis and chronic rhinosinusitis without nasal polyposis (CRSsNP).

**Septoplasty**can be performed in patients with obstructive nasal septal deviations. The procedure reduces impingement of the sinus ostia, improves airflow, and facilitates proper mucociliary clearance.

**Turbinate reduction**may relieve nasal obstruction and allow further anterior drainage of nasal and sinus contents in patients with hypertrophy of the inferior turbinates.