Ultimately, the treatment of any illness is the removal of precipitating factors, not merely the management of its symptoms. The only definitive treatment of cannabis hyperemesis syndrome is the removal of cannabis exposure, which may ultimately require extensive coordination between the committed patient, an empathic and dedicated primary care physician, and appropriate substance use counseling and resources.

Cannabis is the most widely used illicit substance in the United States, and the third-ranking substance by prevalence for people seeking treatment (behind alcohol and opioids), is particularly plagued by users undergoing multiple attempts to halt their usage. A systematic review from 2018 showed that merely 54% of people in the outpatient setting were able to remain abstinent from cannabis for two or more weeks. Of these people, 71% of them lapsed back into drug use within six months, and of these people who relapsed, over 70% would return to previous levels of cannabis use. Only 8% of cannabis users who attempted to halt their drug use without professional assistance were able to be abstinent for six months.

There are also "twelve-step facilitation" (TSF) programs for other addictive substances such as Alcoholics Anonymous and Narcotics Anonymous. There is likewise a program named Marijuana Anonymous, which has also undergone small studies for success in lowering drug use and eventually obtaining cessation in adults and adolescents. One particular study examined a small cohort of 36 adolescents demonstrating a positive correlation between attending TSF meetings with a three-month number of days abstinent.