Subluxation of the annular ligament (a.k.a. nursemaid's elbow or radial head subluxation) is one of the most common pediatric injuries seen by ambulatory orthopedics. It occurs with the application of sudden longitudinal traction to the hand or forearm of a child younger than 5 years old.  With sudden traction, the radial head slips from under the ligament, and the ligament becomes trapped between the capitulum and the radial head. The child often presents with a refusal to use the affected limb while carrying his/her elbow in slight flexion with the forearm pronated.

A Smith fracture occurs at the distal radius, often from a direct blow to the dorsal wrist or forearm. The injury can also occur with a fall on a flexed wrist. The fracture is displaced ventrally, which differs from a Colles fracture where the fragment is displaced dorsally. Unlike nursemaid's elbow, which is seen almost exclusively in pediatric patients, distal radius fractures are seen commonly in those younger than 18 or older than 50 years old.

Colles fracture also involves an injury to the distal radius. The avulsion fracture occurs most commonly when a person falls on an outstretched hand while the forearm is pronated. There is dorsal displacement of the bone fragment and the subluxation of the annular ligament. The description of the injury is as causing a "dinner fork" or "bayonet" deformity clinically.

Barton fracture is very similar to the Colles fracture. It most commonly occurs when a person falls on an outstretched hand with the arm pronated. The impact causes a shearing fracture of the distal radius. The fracture moves dorsally but does not disrupt the radiocarpal ligaments. The articular surface of the distal radius remains in contact with the scaphoid. This difference is what distinguishes the Barton fracture from the Colle's fracture.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is an autosomal dominant mutation in the TBX5 gene that results in upper-limb and cardiac defects. Upper-limb malformations include the triphalangeal or absent thumb(s), unequal arm length caused by aplasia or hypoplasia of the radius, or fusion of the carpal and thenar bones. Aplasia or hypoplasia of the radius results in abnormal forearm pronation and supination as well as abnormal wrist adduction and abduction.