The mainstay of treatment in germinoma is RT. Dosage may vary depending on the extent of the tumor.

**Localized Germinoma**

Whole ventricular irradiation of 21 to 24 Gy with a local tumor boost of 40 to 45 Gy is quite effective in treating localized pure germinoma. This is a standard regimen when using RT alone. Traditionally, CSI was used to treat localized, pure germinoma. However, to reduce treatment-related toxicities, it was replaced with whole ventricular RT without any significant differences in outcome. Pure germinoma with beta-HCG secreting syncytiotrophoblastic cells is also treated as a localized disease.

**Disseminated Germinoma**

CSI is still used in patients with metastatic disease evident by imaging or positive CSF cytology, as these tumors require more aggressive management. CSI of 3o Gy with a 45 Gy local tumor boost is currently being practiced. The 5-year survival rate of up to 98% has been reported in patients with the disseminated disease who received two cycles of CT before CSI of 24 Gy with 40 Gy local boost. It is still not clear whether to treat bifocal germinoma (tumor arising in both pineal and suprasellar region) as a localized or metastatic disease. CSI has yielded greater results in such cases compared to whole-brain irradiation.

**Recurrent Germinoma**

Relapse rates are higher in patients who are treated with localized RT or CT alone. Recurrences are treated with RT with or without CT. Myeloablative high dose CT along with autologous stem cell rescue, is also found to be therapeutically beneficial for the patient with relapses.