Inguinal hernias are a common surgical disease. Understanding the anatomy of the inguinal canal is crucial for the identification and surgically repairing inguinal hernias. Surgical repair of inguinal hernias is based on repairing the hernial defect and reinforcing the posterior inguinal wall after reducing the hernial content and sac. Different methods of repair have been used in the past decades. Formerly, the repair was done by primarily closing the defect or approximating the edges of the widened inguinal ring to provide strength. It was noticed that the recurrence rate of this type of repair was unacceptably high. The explanation to this high recurrence is that the approximated tissue were put under high tension. Forcing the tissue to approximate will result in high tension on the defect edges. Over time, this tension will pull through the tissue resulting in the recurrence of the weakness and hernial defect. Therefore, It was realized that another material is needed to strengthen the posterior wall of the inguinal canal. The idea of using a mesh was then adopted. The mesh provides the necessary strength without exposing tissue to tension.

Surgical repair of inguinal hernias is one of the most common general surgery procedure performed in the U.S. Open inguinal hernia repair includes opening the inguinal canal by incising the external oblique aponeurosis. The inguinal contents are mobilized and dissected to identify, isolate and reduce the hernial sac. Repair and re-inforcement of the posterior wall of the inguinal canal are done with synthetic flat mesh sutured to the inguinal peri-tubercular tissue, incurved part of the inguinal canal, and the conjoint tendon tissue.

Minimally invasive hernia repair approach has been used increasingly in the last decade. Both the Totally Extra-Peritoneal (TEP) and Trans-Abdominal Preperitoneal (TAP) Approaches have been used. Minimally invasive repair involves less interruption of the inguinal canal structures. It includes reducing the hernial content and sac then re-inforcing the posterior inguinal wall pre-peritoneally by placing flat mesh centered on the hernia defect.