A careful history and physical examination are key to determine whether an SCH is benign or a sign of something more malignant. Sometimes a patient may be unaware of a problem until he or she looks in a mirror or is told by someone else. A clinician should determine what type of ocular trauma if any occurred. A subconjunctival hemorrhage in the setting of blunt trauma is worrisome and should be evaluated for possible ruptured globe or retrobulbar hematoma. Be sure to obtain past medical history especially vascular disorders like hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes. Be sure to note any anticoagulant therapy, underlying coagulopathy, or blood dyscrasia. Note any non-compliance with medications, use of contact lenses, and any prior ocular surgeries. The clinician should also determine any viral-like illnesses as well as any coughing, vomiting, or constipation. A history of any visual loss, discharge, photophobia, foreign body sensation, headache should prompt the clinician to investigate other etiologies.

On the physical exam, SCH is a painless, acute, sharply demarcated area of extravasated blood just beneath the surface of the eye. SCH is generally unilateral. There is no reduction in visual acuity. A traumatic SCH should be more localized and if spontaneous and elderly, the SCH could be more diffuse. The inferotemporal aspect of the conjunctiva is the most common site. A simple SCH should not have any chemosis, proptosis, purulent discharge, ophthalmoplegia. In instances of scleral rupture, intraocular blood can leak through a defect and collect in the subconjunctival space which can create an elevated, bullous appearing hemorrhage.

A key aspect of the physical exam is to distinguish between conjunctival versus ciliary injection. Conjunctival hemorrhage is caused by dilation of the posterior and more superficial conjunctival vessels. This can cause the eye to appear more dramatically red in a continuous pattern over the sclera. In contrast, ciliary injection involves dilation of the anterior ciliary arteries which could imply intraocular inflammation to the iris, cornea, or ciliary body. Ciliary injection can also be known as circumcorneal flush and appears as a halo of redness. The distinction is important since ciliary injection is associated with potentially more dangerous diagnoses such as iritis, acute glaucoma, episcleritis, and scleritis.

SCH can also be confused for viral or bacterial conjunctivitis. However, there is usually some degree of pain associated with these diagnoses. Additionally, on physical exam, the redness is more diffuse and not a discreet, confluent area of hemorrhagic change as seen in SCH. Viral conjunctivitis is bilateral and in most cases SCH is unilateral.