Bile duct strictures may present with nonspecific signs and symptoms of obstructive jaundice, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, fever, and leukocytosis. The cause of bile duct strictures may be one of the myriads of diagnosis, which includes benign and malignant etiologies. The complexity of this disease process lies in the challenges of its diagnosis and subsequent appropriate management. Inaccurate diagnosis or delay in management can have devastating outcomes for the patient. While the general surgeon is almost always involved in the care of these patients, it may become imperative to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that include gastroenterologists, interventional radiologists, hepatobiliary surgeons, surgical oncologists, and transplant surgeons.

The society of American gastrointestinal and endoscopic surgeons (SAGES) offers guidelines for the clinical application of laparoscopic biliary tract surgery. Regarding common bile duct injuries, the guidelines suggest that the factors which have been associated with bile duct injury include surgeon experience, patient age, male sex, and acute cholecystitis. (Level II, Grade C) If major bile duct injuries occur, outcomes are improved by early recognition and immediate referral to experienced hepatobiliary specialists for further treatment before any repair is attempted by the primary surgeon unless the primary surgeon has significant experience in biliary reconstruction. (Level II, Grade A)

Nurses play a vital role during the recovery of such patients. They monitor the patient closely for changes in vital signs and mental status as the patients recuperate. The nurses help in the timely recognition of common postoperative complications such as deep vein thrombosis and anastomotic leaks. The role of the laboratory personnel and pharmacist is critical as well. The pharmacist may be involved in the management of parenteral nutrition for critically ill patients.