Treatment of progressive fibrosing ILD remains challenging for health care providers, and these patients have significant unmet needs. ILD can lead to the continued deterioration of lung function, reduced exercise tolerance, worsening dyspnea, and cough. These changes can result in reduced health-related quality of life (HR-QOL), increased morbidity and mortality, and some diseases with ILD have a median survival rate as low as 4.5 years.

Over the last decade, anti-fibrotic drugs such as nintedanib and pirfenidone have become the emerging therapy for IPF. Other conditions associated with progressive ILD have also shown promising results in slowing the progression of the disease. When used alone or in combination, the safety and tolerability of these medications are well established, although more studies are needed to determine the degree of the potential synergistic effect.

Patient education is crucial and should be included in the provider's management tool kit. The pros and cons of this therapy, as well as supportive care, should be discussed with patients in detail. Adjunctive treatments, including oxygen therapy, should be prescribed to maintain daily activity and prevent or delay the onset of secondary pulmonary hypertension. Pulmonary rehabilitation has been shown to have long-term benefits as it emphasizes the importance of a comprehensive therapeutic approach to fibrotic lung disease.

A multidisciplinary team, including a pulmonologist, rheumatologist, cardiologist, and pulmonary rehabilitation medicine specialist, should be involved in patient care to prevent long-term complications. Although more studies are needed, such an approach may delay disease progression and reduce the need for lung transplantation. ILD is also a risk factor for ischemic heart disease.

Interprofessional teamwork is also essential to optimal patient management and care. In addition to the multidisciplinary physician team, mid-level practitioners (NPs and PAs), nursing staff, respiratory therapists, and pharmacists can all contribute from various areas of expertise to manage cases using nintedanib. All interprofessional team members must maintain meticulous records of their interactions and observations with the patient, so all team members operate from the same accurate, updated information. If any caregiver notes any concerns or changes in status, they should reach out to the appropriate team member(s) for further evaluation and possible interventions. This interprofessional approach will drive optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Patients should be encouraged to get approved vaccines against coronavirus, age-appropriate pneumococcal vaccine, and annual influenza vaccine. Continuous exposure to first-hand and second-hand smoking is detrimental and should be discouraged. There is also a strong association between ILD and depression is independently related to sleep quality, pain, and forced vital capacity.

In patients with progressive IPF not amenable to pharmacological therapy, the introduction of advance directives and palliative care should be considered as the prognosis remains guarded.