Patients will usually give a history of a wheeze or a cough, exacerbated by allergies, exercise, and cold. There is often diurnal variation, with symptoms being worse at night. Patients may give a history of other forms of atopy, such as eczema and hay fever. There may be some mild chest pain associated with acute exacerbations. Many asthmatics have nocturnal coughing spells but appear normal in the day time

Physical exam findings will depend on whether the patient is currently experiencing an acute exacerbation.

During an acute exacerbation, there may be a fine tremor in the hands due to salbutamol use, and mild tachycardia. Patients will show some respiratory distress, often sitting forward to splint open their airways. On auscultation, a bilateral, expiratory wheeze will be heard. In life-threatening asthma, the chest may be silent, as air cannot enter or leave the lungs, and there may be signs of systemic hypoxia.

Children with imminent arrest may appear drowsy, unresponsive, cyanotic, and confused. Wheezing may be absent, and bradycardia may occur, indicating severe respiratory muscle fatigue.

Life-threatening asthma is a type of asthma that does not respond to systemic steroids and beta 2 agonist nebulization. It is necessary to identify it early as it may lead to high mortality. It has the following characteristic findings on examination

- Peak expiratory flow less than 33% of personal best

- Oxygen saturation less than 92%

- The normal partial pressure of carbon dioxide

- Silent chest

- Cyanosis

- Feeble respiratory effort

- Bradycardia

- Arrhythmias

- Hypotension

- Confusion, coma

- Exhaustion

In near-fatal asthma, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide is raised, or mechanical ventilation is required with raised inflation pressures.