Typical peak flow meters are equipped with gauge markers indicating three “zones” that can be set by the patient or clinic staff to aid users in interpreting their peak flow scores. For ease of patient interpretation, the colors of a traditional traffic light have been used to designate varying degrees of peak flow limitation. These should correlate with a written asthma action plan.

**Green Zone:**Usually set at 80% to 100% of personal best or normal peak flow. As long as no symptoms are present, the patient is considered at steady state. No changes are needed to the present regimen.

**Yellow Zone:**Fifty percent to 80% of personal best. Patients are typically instructed to employ their home action plan when they identify repeated readings in this zone. Standard action plans include increasing the dose and frequency of short-acting beta-agonist and possibly increasing the dose of inhaled corticosteroids. Action plans often contain reminders to the patient to look for and avoid, noxious stimuli such as fumes and second-hand smoke as well.

**Red Zone:**Fifty percent or less of personal best. Peak flow measurements in this range indicate that serious airway obstruction may be occurring and should be considered a medical emergency.  Patients usually activate their Yellow Zone plan, as well as escalate to either oral corticosteroid therapy and/or seek emergency care.  Some patients may be instructed to keep a supply of oral corticosteroids on hand to initiate therapy immediately.

Peak flow measurement is also useful in guiding disposition in the emergency setting. A patient with a peak flow of less than or equal to 50% without improvement despite aggressive therapy should be admitted to the hospital for ongoing care and close monitoring for signs of impeding respiratory failure. Respiratory therapy and nursing can easily obtain and report serial peak flow measurements throughout the hospital course to guide disposition decisions as well. Of note, it is a common challenge in the inpatient setting that patients will not know their personal best. In this situation, published tables of normal peak expiratory flow rates for height and weight are available.

It has been noted that peak flow rates in individual patients tend to decrease over time, likely from waning skill and effort. This observation highlights the need for ongoing retraining of techniques, even after the initial clinic visit.  Some authors have recommended that this retraining occurs at every follow-up visit, in conjunction with inhaler retraining.

Clinicians should be cautioned against over-reliance on this method of ambulatory monitoring alone. A comprehensive approach that accounts for both subjective symptoms, as well as objective data from the peak flow meter, has been suggested by society guidelines, and data show that this approach can decrease health care utilization.

**Special Populations**

**Pediatrics**

Children as young as five can be trained to use the peak flow meter with reliable results. However, during acute exacerbations, cooperation with the technique may be limited, and the results, therefore, need to be interpreted with caution. Tables of normal peak flow rates are available for children and adolescents. Additionally, clinicians should consider providing a second meter for the child to keep at school in the nurse’s office should concerns arise.

**Pregnancy**

Despite body changes that occur as pregnancy progresses, peak flow rate and personal best numbers do not change through each trimester and into the postpartum period.  Changes in the observed peak flow rate in pregnant women should be treated as worsening obstruction until proven otherwise.