Following are the differential diagnosis of peripheral edema:

- Congestive heart failure: Decreased cardiac out or ejection fraction leads to pulmonary and peripheral venous congestion resulting in pulmonary edema and peripheral edema, respectively. Edema is bilateral and symmetric.

- Hepatic disease: Bilateral edema caused by portal vein congestion leading to an increase in capillary permeability and a decrease in plasma oncotic pressure due to a decrease in the synthesis of albumin by the liver.

- Renal disease: Bilateral edema caused by protein loss, especially albumin, such as nephrotic syndrome and an increase in plasma volume due to renal retention and activation of neurohumoral factors.

- Venous insufficiency: Usually, bilateral edema is caused by the failure of venous return secondary to chronic deep venous system damage and/or incompetence.

- Deep vein thrombus: Usually acute in nature and unilateral, caused by obstruction of deep veins

- Lymphedema: Chronic, often following lymphatic obstruction from trauma or surgery. Another common cause in developing countries is filariasis. Location can be upper or lower extremities depending on the underlying cause.

- Myxedema: Soft tissue edema in patients with severe and advanced hypothyroidism. It is typically associated with other hypothyroid features such as bradycardia, constipation, and weight gain.

- Angioedema and urticaria: Secondary to allergic reactions such as bug bites and medications.

- Cellulitis: Edema with signs of infection like fever and elevated white blood cell count. Most common in patients who are obese and have chronic medical conditions like diabetes mellitus.

- Lipedema: Chronic, begins around or after puberty. Predominantly involves thighs, legs, and buttocks. Spares feet, ankles, and torso.

- Medication-induced: Onset is weeks after the start of medication. Soft, pitting edema resolves within days after stopping the offending medication.

- Obstructive sleep apnea: Chronic secondary to pulmonary hypertension. Patients will usually have daytime fatigue, snoring, and obesity.