Carbon monoxide toxicity is a leading cause of fatal toxic exposures in the United States and a significant concern worldwide.

Evaluating carbon monoxide toxicity and instituting prompt management requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, beginning with pre-hospital personnel such as first responders, nurses, and several physicians in different specialties. Additionally, it is the responsibility of public health professionals to maintain awareness of this issue and educate the public on potential sources of toxicity, especially in natural disasters and emergencies where people will be using alternative sources of fuel or electricity. Carboxyhemoglobinemia can manifest with myriad presentations, severe toxicity characterized by respiratory depression, hemodynamic instability, cardiac arrest, and loss of consciousness. However, mild to moderate exposures can present as headache, flu-like illness, confusion, difficulty concentrating, dizziness, and nausea, which are very non-specific, and hence carboxyhemoglobinemia is often misdiagnosed. It is paramount for the triage team (mid-level provider or nurse) to inquire about the context of these symptoms and recognize carbon monoxide toxicity as a possible cause, especially if multiple family members or close contacts complain of similar symptomatology. Without recognition, the diagnosis can be easily missed; therefore, all providers' responsibility is to entertain the possibility of toxicity if plausible. With suspicion, providers need to begin prompt treatment with 100% oxygen and order blood gases for carboxyhemoglobin levels as indicated. Do not assess with CO-oximetry/noninvasive monitoring. [Level B] The emergency medicine clinician is responsible for performing a thorough neurologic evaluation and assessing for hypoxia and cardiac ischemia, as this may change management. Providers, as well as non-clinicians, should be aware of the resources at your institution. Consider hyperbaric treatment in those with abnormal neurologic signs, cardiovascular dysfunction, severe acidosis, transient or prolonged loss of consciousness, in pregnancy, and those with carboxyhemoglobin levels greater than 25%, and consult with your toxicologist and/or poison control. Presently, we have level II evidence (small randomized control trials) demonstrating the role of hyperbaric treatment with a possible reduced frequency of cognitive sequelae. It remains unclear whether physicians should use hyperbaric therapy or high-flow normobaric therapy for acute CO-poisoned patients. [Level B]