CT scans provide information as close to real-time that allows for proper management of multiple diseases. Before the invention of the CT scan, patients with abdominal pain, fever, and elevated white blood cell count would have been taken to the operating room for an exploratory laparotomy to find the cause. CT's invention has provided physicians and surgeons information to avoid unnecessary laparotomies and saved millions in healthcare costs. Ultimately, the patient benefit outweighs the risk of radiation and has remained a mainstay in the clinical diagnosis of disease. Technological advancements to the CT scan significantly augmented patient care by making it more efficient and cost-effective.

The CT scan was the mainstay instrument to detect and follow-up tumors until the advent of the MRI and PET scans. Tumors avidly enhance with the use of iodine contrast. The combined PET CT scan can detect and stage cancer patients.

Brain: for patients with hydrocephalus, the CT scan is the principal study to evaluate ventricle size and compare the size in cases of shunt malfunction.

Intraoperative CT scan has been used for neurosurgery, breast cancer, and lung cancer, to provide real-time images during a procedure or immediately follow it.

CT-myelography can be used for those patients in whom MRI can not be performed to evaluate the spinal cord for thecal sac compression and leaks.

Abdomen: used for tumors, ascites, effusion, cholecystitis, and obstruction. For abdominal pain, a CT scan can address the cause for pain in most patients; however, its use is more limited in oncologic pain.

Neck: used for tumors, benign masses, thyroid nodules, and lymphadenopathy. For head and neck pathology, the CT scan is the first-line imaging examination. If an adult patient presents with a neck mass, the study localizes and characterizes it and shows if adenopathy is present.

Spine: to evaluate fractures, degenerative changes, stability, and osteomyelitis. At the emergency department, the entire cervical spine can be assessed with a cervical CT scan.

Lung: to detect pulmonary embolisms, hemothorax, pneumothorax, excess fluid, emphysema, fibrosis, and pneumonia that may be missed on traditional X-ray. With the surge in Covid-19 cases, the use of chest CT scans has increased for diagnostic purposes.

Bone: to identify complex bone fractures, eroded joints, knee, tumors, and osteomyelitis. The CT scan has a higher sensitivity over X-ray imaging in identifying elbow fractures, especially those involving the growth plate.

Gyn: to identify cysts, fibromas, and tumors. Ultrasound is the primary diagnostic tool in gynecological pathology; however, CT plays an essential role in those cases where the sonogram is inconclusive.

Biopsy: CT guided biopsy to different organs for tumor diagnosis and pathogen identification.

Abscess: CT guided aspiration of deeper abscesses that would previously require surgical exploration and removal.