Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome has a broad spectrum of clinical presentations. Because of its rarity, there are no recommended guidelines regarding diagnostic work-up.

- The first line investigation is usually a posteroanterior chest radiograph, which will reveal reduced bronchovascular markings, a small hilar shadow, and hyperlucency of the diseased segment or lobe.

- Computed tomography (CT) of the chest is usually the modality of choice used to assess the extent and distribution of the disease. It may demonstrate emphysema, bullae, bronchiectasis, atelectasis, and scarring.

- A ventilation/perfusion scan may reveal a unilateral matched ventilation and perfusion defect of the diseased area. Some advocate it as the first-line investigation (following a chest radiograph) in the evaluation of patients with suspected Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome.

- CT pulmonary angiography is not essential but would demonstrate hypoplasia of the pulmonary vasculature in the affected lung or segment.

- SJMS commonly shows a restrictive pattern on pulmonary function tests. Patients with bronchiectasis may have a mixed restrictive-obstructive or even predominantly obstructive defect, where the airflow obstruction is irreversible with bronchodilators.

- Testings such as alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency are helpful to exclude rare inherited causes of bronchiectasis/emphysema.

The diagnostic criteria for this syndrome require one of the following:

- Unilateral loss of lung volume with hyperlucency as demonstrated by chest X-ray

- Unilateral reduction in vascularity on a computed tomographic scan of the chest

- Unilateral loss of perfusion on technetium Tc 99m lung scan