**Viral Hepatitis**

Complications of viral hepatitis include chronic infection with chronic active hepatitis, acute or subacute hepatic necrosis, cirrhosis, liver failure, hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with hepatitis B or C infection. Patients who have hepatitis B infection are at high risk of developing chronic infection. Patients are also at significant risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma, which is responsible for 45% of primary liver cancer worldwide. About 1% of patients can also develop fulminant hepatic failure, and the mortality rate is about 80% in those patients. About 75 to 85% of patients who get infected with hepatitis C end up developing chronic infection and about 20% of those patients end up developing cirrhosis and eventually hepatocellular carcinoma. Cirrhosis developing from hepatitis C infection is a leading cause of liver transplantation in the United States. Cirrhosis itself can cause multiple complications, including hepatic encephalopathy, portal hypertension, ascites, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, variceal bleed, hepatorenal syndrome, etc. Patients who have chronic hepatitis C infection also have a high risk of developing extrahepatic complications including cryoglobulinemia which can lead to rash, vasculitis, and glomerulonephritis secondary to deposition of immune complexes in the small vessels, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, focal lymphocytic sialadenitis, autoimmune thyroiditis, porphyria cutanea tarda, lichen planus, etc.

**Autoimmune Hepatitis**

Complications of autoimmune hepatitis are similar to complications of viral hepatitis, or patients can develop end-stage liver disease with cirrhosis, which can lead to complications like ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, coagulopathy, variceal bleed, portal hypertension, and severe malnutrition. Hepatocellular carcinoma can occur but is not as common as seen in patients with chronic hepatitis B or C infection. Some patients can develop primary biliary cirrhosis and eventually developed hepatocellular carcinoma.

**Alcoholic Hepatitis**

Complications of alcoholic hepatitis are similar to that of cirrhosis. Patients can develop variceal bleeding with portal hypertension, hepatic encephalopathy, coagulopathy, and severe thrombocytopenia, ascites, and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.

**Treatment of Complications of Hepatitis**

Patients developing cirrhosis and its complications many times require close monitoring with hospitalization and emergency treatment. Patients with variceal bleed require immediate resuscitation, protection of the airway, endoscopy with sclerotherapy or band ligation of the varices. Many patients require administration of somatostatin or octreotide. Patients with hepatic encephalopathy are usually put on rifaximin or lactulose as an outpatient and require close monitoring. Worsening of encephalopathy involves hospitalization. These patients are typically maintained on a low protein diet. Patients with severe coagulopathy require vitamin K administration and platelet transfusion if necessary. Patients with ascites are treated with diuretics, control of dietary salt intake, and may need frequent paracentesis with intermittent use of intravenous albumin. Some patients develop spontaneous bacterial peritonitis and require antibiotics.  The majority of patients require frequent hospitalizations due to complications of cirrhosis, and their quality of life is significantly altered.  Patients who develop hepatocellular carcinoma may require chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and liver transplantation.