Treatment of septic arthritis comprises antimicrobial therapy and joint fluid drainage (arthrotomy, arthroscopy, or daily needle aspiration). Empiric intravenous antimicrobial therapy should be initiated promptly after joint aspiration is complete and cultures obtained. Empiric antibiotic coverage includes antistaphylococcal coverage (nafcillin, oxacillin, or vancomycin) for all age and risk categories. Empiric antibiotics for nongonococcal septic arthritis usually involves the use of intravenous vancomycin directed against gram-positive organisms especially if there is a suspicion of MRSA based on community and institutional data. If the patient is immunocompromised, abuses intravenous drugs or the gram stain is negative, then a third-generation cephalosporin like ceftriaxone, ceftazidime or cefotaxime should be added for the additional gram-negative coverage.Salmonella or N. gonorrhea). Blood and synovial fluid cultures and sensitivities should direct prolonged antimicrobial treatment. Early involvement by an orthopedic surgeon is essential. The procedure used to drain joint fluid depends on multiple factors and is determined by the orthopedic surgeon.

Nongonococcal septic arthritis is usually treated with intravenous antibiotics for 2 weeks followed by another 1 to 2 weeks of oral antibiotic therapy for a total duration of three to four weeks. Longer antibiotic therapy for 4 to 6 weeks may be reasonable in cases of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Gonococcal arthritis responds well to intravenous ceftriaxone which is continued for 24 to 48 hours after clinical improvement then transitioned to oral therapy for the remainder of the treatment.

If no improvement is seen within 5-6 days, the joint should be re-aspirated and one should rule out Lyme disease. One should also consider the presence of fungi or reactive arthritis. Imaging studies are needed in such scenarios to rule out osteomyelitis.

Immobilization of the joint is not needed after 2-3 days. Aggressive physical therapy is necessary to restore joint function and prevent muscle atrophy.

Prosthetic joint infection often requires aggressive debridement and/or removal of the prosthesis. The new joint is then replaced with cement which is impregnated with antibiotics.