Benztropine is administered through oral, intravenous, and intramuscular routes. Each route has a particular advantage according to its specific indication.

**Oral Route**

Benztropine mesylate is available as 0.5 mg, 1 mg, and 2 mg strengths for oral administration. It can be administered orally with no specific regard for meals. The oral route is preferable to address initial and acute symptoms of drug-induced Parkinson. Benztropine therapy may start with the lowest initial dose of 0.5 mg and may increase up to 6 mg over a period of 5 to 6 days. Benztropine has cumulative action, so the dose should gradually be increased by 0.5 mg until optimal results are obtained without excessive adverse reactions.

**Intramuscular (IM) Route**

Benztropine mesylate is available as a 1 mg per mL injection for IM administration. There is no significant clinical difference in the action onset of benztropine between intramuscular or intravenous administration.

**Intravenous (IV) Route**

Benztropine Mesylate is available as a 1 mg per mL injection for IV administration. The IV route should be reserved for drug-induced extrapyramidal symptoms or whenever oral and IM administration are unsuitable.

**Specific Population**

**Infants and Children**

Usually, pediatric patients are relatively more sensitive to anticholinergic agents. Therefore, benztropine is contraindicated in children under the age of three years, infants, and neonates.

**Breastfeeding Women**

There are not enough studies in the literature that define the exact effects of benztropine on human breastfeeding, so it is unknown whether it is excreted in human milk. Moreover, atropine (which is structurally similar to benztropine) has little to no effect on human breastfeeding as a general. However, in general, certain studies of antimuscarinic drugs proved that they harm animal breastfeeding since they reduced the serum prolactin concentration in the experimental animals. Consequently, it is safe to contraindicate benztropine during breastfeeding as a cautionary measure.

**Pregnancy**

The effect of benztropine during pregnancy and labor is still unknown. There are several cases reported in the literature on the impacts of benztropine administration during pregnancy. According to the literature, it is neither indicated nor contraindicated to use benztropine during pregnancy, as more clinical data and research are needed to detect the exact influence of benztropine.

**Geriatric Population**

Geriatric patients are generally more sensitive to anticholinergic agents and give a relatively intense response to benztropine. Thus, a higher dose of benztropine is contraindicated at the beginning of the treatment. The dose should be started at its lower end according to emerging therapeutic needs. Additionally, oral benztropine is a potentially inappropriate medication (PIM) in treating geriatric patients that have Parkinson disease according to Beers criteria. Thus, clinicians should avoid the usage of benztropine as a preventative agent for extrapyramidal disorders is avoided in geriatric patients. In general, the geriatric population should avoid potent anticholinergic agents such as benztropine because of the higher incidence of side effects among this group of patients. Common side effects of benztropine in geriatrics are delirium, confusion, drug-induced dementia, benign prostatic hyperplasia in males, and urinary tract problems.

**Hepatic or Renal Impairment**

The manufacturer label does not have information on benztropine being used in this patient population.