A high index of suspicion is necessary for a timely diagnosis because the initial findings may be very unspecific and include weakness, headache, confusion, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Patients frequently refer infections in the days to weeks preceding an acute episode. Today, the classic pentad of signs, including fever, impairment of mental status, anemia, thrombocytopenia and renal failure, appear in less than 10% of cases. The more prevalent findings are profound thrombocytopenia (usually less than 30,000 x 10/l) and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (with schistocytes in blood smear); both are associated with their relative signs (cutaneous and mucosal bleeding, weakness and dyspnea).

The brain is affected in up to 60% of cases with a broad range of symptoms, from a headache and impairment of mental status to ischemic stroke, seizures, and coma. Chest paint and elevated troponin I may be present in 25% of patients and arrhythmias and congestive heart failure might occur, but myocardial infarction is rare.

Mesenteric ischemia might be frequent (up to 25% in some series), the digestive tract involvement can include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Renal failure requiring replacement therapy is not typical, and their presence may suggest another condition such as a hemolytic uremic syndrome. However, the presence of renal failure does not exclude the diagnosis.

Furthermore, patients may have signs related to another concomitant or previous condition. Approximately fifty percent of patients show an associated clinical condition as bacterial infection, systemic lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid syndrome, HIV infection, pregnancy, drugs such as quinine, mitomycin C, clopidogrel, ticlopidine, cancer, and organ transplantations. The other 50% is called idiopathic TTP.

In the absence of treatment, patients evolve to multiple organ failures and die within days or weeks.