The therapeutic approach to bone metastases should be a multidisciplinary approach targeted at preserving the quality of life, including pain control, minimizing SREs, and achieving local tumor control when possible. It is pertinent to consider a multitude of factors including the extent of disease spread, performance status, impending fracture, and consequence of treatment when creating the treatment plan.

A major consideration in the treatment algorithm is providing analgesia for the debilitating pain that often occurs with bone metastases. Pain control can be initiated with NSAIDs and titrated up or used in conjunction with narcotics as needed for symptom relief. Glucocorticoids may be useful for additional pain control but should be discussed with the multidisciplinary team prior to beginning therapy as it can compromise the diagnostic accuracy of a biopsy.

Osteoclast inhibitors (bisphosphonates and denosumab) decrease morbidity and mortality associated with bone metastases as they reduce skeletal-related events and can be used to help reduce bone pain.

Local radiation for symptomatic bone metastases is a significant component of the palliative approach in providing analgesia. It is also used postoperatively to consolidate continued bone healing. External beam radiation is the standard approach for painful bone metastases and is beneficial in reducing pain by up to 50% to 80%. Several studies have proven that a single 8 Gy fraction compared to more prolonged or fractionated radiation is non-inferior; however, it may carry a higher need for pretreatment (20 % vs. 8%). Stereotactic body radiation therapy spares the normal tissue while delivering highly conformal radiation to the affected area. There are no clear guidelines on stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) use however it may be indicated over external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) in specific instances of bone metastases specifically vertebral from certain radio-resistant neoplasms.

Bone-targeted radiopharmaceutical therapy (e.g., beta-emitting agents strontium-89, alpha-emitting radium-223) provides the specific advantage of treatment of diffuse pain associated with osteoblastic bone metastases. It is typically used in bowel movement associated with prostate and breast cancer or for analgesia in radiation therapy for refractory pain.

Systemic chemotherapy when amenable, aimed at the primary tumor can also provide analgesia by reduction of tumor size and control of tumor spread.

Prophylactic or stabilization surgery is indicated for impending or complete fracture of the long bones to provide mechanical stability and preserve patient function. Spinal decompression and stabilization can be done to prevent spinal cord compression. In cases where the spread of the primary cancer is limited (single bone lesion), en bloc resection of the metastasis can be considered as means of local tumor control.

Local ablation via radiofrequency ablation (RFA), cryoablation, and focused ultrasound (FUS) should be considered for patients with persistent pain following radiation therapy or patients with recurrent pain.