Empiric antibiotic therapy should cover Staphylococcus (methicillin-susceptible and resistant), Streptococcus, and Enterococcus. Initial treatment with vancomycin and gentamicin should cover a number of organisms prior to the results of blood cultures.

The duration of therapy depends on the pathogen and site of valvular infection. The duration of therapy should be counted from the first day of negative blood cultures. Most patients are treated parenterally with regimens for up to 6 weeks.

Patients with relapse of native valve endocarditis following completion of appropriate antimicrobial therapy should receive a repeat course of antibiotics.

**Treatment of specific organisms:**

- Methicillin-sensitive S. aureus: nafcillin or oxacillin

If nonsevere penicillin allergy: cefazolin

If severe penicillin allergy: vancomycin and daptomycin

- Methicillin-resistant S. aureus or coagulase-negative staphylococci: vancomycin for 6 weeks

- Viridans streptococci and S. gallolyticus: penicillin G or ceftriaxone for 4 weeks.

If penicillin-resistant: penicillin G for four weeks plus gentamicin for the first two weeks.

Penicillin allergy: vancomycin

- S. pneumoniae: penicillin G, cefazolin, or ceftriaxone for four weeks

Penicillin allergy: vancomycin

- Enterococcal species: penicillin or ampicillin plus gentamicin for 4 to 6 weeks

Penicillin allergy: vancomycin plus gentamicin for 6 weeks.

- Vancomycin-resistant enterococcus: linezolid or quinupristin-dalfopristin or imipenem

- HACEK organisms: ceftriaxone, ampicillin or ciprofloxacin for 4 weeks