Meniscal tears are categorized by both their shape and location when visualized on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), in which high-intensity intrameniscal signals communicate with at least one articular surface on an otherwise black-appearing meniscal tissue.  Horizontal (cleavage) tears run parallel to the tibial plateau through the mid-substance of the meniscus. They are more likely to occur in people over 40y/o with underlying degenerative changes, in the absence of a distinct inciting event.  Longitudinal (vertical) tears run perpendicular to the tibial plateau and parallel to the long axis of the meniscus. In contrast, radial tears run perpendicular to both the tibial plateau and long axis of the meniscus, originating from the inner free edge of the meniscus.  Complex tears involve some combination of horizontal, longitudinal, or vertical tears. In contrast, displaced tears involve either complete detachment of a piece of meniscus or flipping of a piece of the meniscus that is still attached to the rest of the meniscal body. Bucket-handle tears are fragments of complete longitudinal tears that migrate centrally over the remaining menisci, whereas parrot-beak tears are radial tears with partially detached fragments. Flap tears are partially detached fragments of horizontal tears.  Tears within the outer 1/3 vascular zone of the menisci are "red-red" tears, whereas those with central margins extending into the inner 2/3 avascular zone are "red-white" tears.  Tears contained within the inner 2/3 avascular zone are "white-white" tears.  Tears located within the red zone have the highest potential for either spontaneous healing with conservative management or successful outcome following meniscal repair.