Though there are several concepts of curriculum development, Kern's Six-Step Approach to Curriculum Development is widely used to guide simulation-based curriculums.

1.**Problem identification and general needs assessment**: The initial step aims at identifying the problem needing to be solved by an educational program. Issues range from individual to institutional to global healthcare problems. This step can be accomplished by using one or a combination of different methods, including literature or document review, interviews, Delphi methods, or surveys.

2. **Targeted needs assessment**: This step entails the identification of the specific needs of the learners that are relevant to their specific context. This requires understanding the baseline knowledge, skills, and attitudes of trainees relative to the context in which they work and live. Identification of specific needs allows the instructor to tailor the training towards addressing the specific needs of the learners. This results in an increased likelihood for the learners to implement new knowledge and skills in real life. One way of having a targeted needs assessment is to conduct mock codes or in-situ simulation. In-situ simulation is simulation activities that occur in the clinical environment.

3. **Goals and objectives**: After identifying the needs and gaps in knowledge, the instructors set the learning goals and specific objectives. The goal may be broad, but the objectives need to be specific, measurable achievable, realistic, and time-bound. The objectives may target the cognitive, psychomotor, or affective level.

4. **Educational strategies**: Educational objectives determine educational strategies. Simulation-based education has the advantage of offering the opportunity to teach cognitive, psychomotor, and affective skills. Educational strategies may be lectures, group discussions, simulation-based courses, and online courses.  While developing a simulation-based education curriculum, the instructor must create scenarios, set expected learner activities, and choose both assessment methods (observable behaviors of the learners), and the assessment tools (that will help the instructor to assess if learners have met the expected learning outcomes). The scenario can be geared towards procedural, psychomotor (technical), affective (non-technical skills), or both procedural and non-technical skills.

5.**Implementation**: The implementation takes place in a simulation center, and it is run based on the learning outcomes and learners' actions.

6. **Program evaluation**: Evaluation aims at assessing how learners met the learning objectives, if the program has achieved its goals, and if it was run as it was planned. Learner assessments may be either formative (assessment for improvement, usually done during the program) or summative (evaluation of knowledge gained, usually done after completion of the course).