Since gastrojejunostomy is a complicated surgical procedure, it comes with a significant amount of possible complications including, but not limited to:

**Postoperative Nausea and Emesis**

This typically resolves spontaneously with supportive treatment, although persistent nausea and emesis may indicate a technical error and possible bowel obstruction.

**Hemorrhage**

Always a possible complication for any operation. This may range from a small bleed, which resolves spontaneously to a significant bleed requiring operative revision.

**Deep Vein Thrombosis and Possible Embolus**

Always a possible complication for any operation. Patients should be kept on an anticoagulation regimen until they are ambulating.

**Anastomotic Leak**

Anastomotic leak is a feared complication of gastrojejunostomy, which most commonly presents on the third to fifth postoperative day. The first sign is typically tachycardia, followed by abdominal pain, and any patient with these symptoms should be evaluated for a possible anastomotic leak.

**Bowel Obstruction**

The bowel may be obstructed early secondary to a technical error such as excessive kinking of the bowel or late secondary to adhesions or other issues. While a trial of supportive care is not unreasonable, the prolonged obstruction will require operative revision.

**Internal Herniation**

After altering the native anatomy to create a gastrojejunostomy, there exists the possibility of a loop of bowel herniating through a non-native space, such as Petersen space. An internal hernia is always a surgical emergency as it creates a closed-loop obstruction and can strangulate the bowel.

**Nutritional or Micro Nutritional Deficiency**

By definition, a gastrojejunostomy bypasses at least some of the absorptive surface of the small bowel. If a significant enough amount of intestine is bypassed, the patient may lack the ability to absorb sufficient nutrients and become malnourished. Additionally, depending on the portion of bowel bypassed, certain micronutrients may not be sufficiently absorbed, causing a specific micronutrient deficiency.

**Dumping Syndrome**

In anastomosing the stomach directly to the jejunum, high osmotic chyme is dumped directly from the stomach. There are early and late types of dumping syndrome, both of which can be prevented by eating multiple small meals rather than a few larger ones.

**Marginal Ulcer**

By directly connecting the acidic stomach to the jejunum, which lacks the protective mechanisms of the duodenum, a gastrojejunostomy predisposes the region of the jejunum closest to the stomach to developing an ulcer.

**Bile Reflux**

In connecting the stomach to the jejunum bile from the duodenum proceeds in an antegrade fashion and can enter the stomach from the anastomotic site. This bile can then irritate the stomach in a condition termed bile reflux.