Understanding the genetics of limb development is an important aspect of both medicine and surgery as signaling errors in embryological development may lead to congenital deformities. Although the genetics are still not fully understood, recent advancements in the study of invertebrates and vertebrates have determined the key steps involved in the complex interactions of limb development.

**Macroscopic embryological development of the upper extremity and hand**

The limb bud consists of undifferentiated mesodermal cells covered by overlying ectoderm. Two important mesodermal tissues are the lateral plate mesoderm, that yields cartilage and bone, and the somites, which yield skeletal muscle.

**Microscopic embryological development of the upper extremity and hand**

In the limb, not only is it important for the development of the macroscopic structures (muscle, bone, and connective tissue) but it is critical for limb identity and limb outgrowth to occur in a stepwise order.

When the limb bud first appears on week 4 (approximately day 26), activation of mesenchymal cells of lateral plate mesoderm cause PD growth due to the development the apical ectodermal ridge (AER), a thickened area of ectoderm overlying the mesoderm. The process by which this occurs takes place when Hox gene expression initiates the T-box family, Tbx5 and Tbx4, proteins that program limb identity and stimulate ligands called fibroblast growth factors (FGF). T-box proteins initiate FGF10 expression in the proliferating mesoderm to produce the AER, and the AER produces its own FGFs to maintain the growth of the underlying mesoderm. In regards to limb identity, Tbx5 is responsible for the programming upper extremity structures, while Tbx4 is responsible for the lower extremity structures. The importance of the AER and FGFs in the developing limb is shown in experiments that result in severely shortened limbs with the removal of AER or FGFs are absent.

The second axis, AP, is controlled the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA), a collection of cells at the posterior border of the limb bud.

The third axis, DV, is controlled by Wnt7a, a protein expressed in the overlying ectoderm of the limb bud. Wnt7a is involved in interactions between two other factors that help the limb develop its correct dorsal structures.