Clinicians should assess and treat a man with Peyronie disease only when he or she has the experience and diagnostic tools to evaluate, appropriately counsel, and treat the condition.

**Nonsurgical Management**

There are a variety of oral and injectable therapies utilized in the nonsurgical management of PD. However, very few of these therapies are supported by well-designed, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trials. Obstacles in having good literature to support treatment include a low number of patients enrolled in studies resulting in low power, heterogeneity of treatments and duration of follow-up, and a variety of study endpoints. During the active phase, the hallmark symptoms are pain with or without erections.

Physicians may offer non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents to help manage pain during this period. Current AUA guidelines recommend offering oral therapy with vitamin E, tamoxifen, procarbazine, omega-3 fatty acids, or a combination of vitamin E with L-carnitine.

**Surgical Management**

Indications for surgical treatment of PD include a deformity that impairs satisfactory sexual relations, stable deformity without pain for at least three months, extensive plaque calcification, and failed nonsurgical management. Procedure decision-making should include consideration of the nature and location of the deformity, magnitude of penile deformity, baseline erection function, penile dimensions, surgeon's experience, and patient's preference.

Penile plication: the patients who are considered for this surgery should have adequate preoperative penile rigidity with or without pharmacotherapy, adequate penile length for satisfactory intercourse, simple curvature of fewer than 60 degrees, and an absence of a hinge defect or hourglass deformity. The Nesbit procedure was the first technique used for plication, and since variations of this technique have been used for correction of PD.

The surgical approach involves making a midline incision or circumcising incision and placing plicating sutures in the tunica albuginea using permanent, synthetic braided sutures contralateral to the area of maximal curvature. There are many variations on this procedure; please see the list below of all possible penile procedures. The discussion of each technique is beyond the scope of this article. Patients can resume sexual activity after 4 to 6 weeks of recovery. Potential complications of this procedure include perceived loss of penile length due to shortening of the long side of the penis, unstable penis, persistent pain, persistence or recurrence of penile curvature, penile hematoma, urethral injury, and sensation loss for neurovascular bundle injury during dorsal plication procedures.

Plaque incision or excision and grafting: indications for this technique include full to near full pre-procedural rigidity, which might be accompanied with or without oral pharmacotherapy, complex penile deformity, simple deformity of greater than 60 degrees, large plaque, destabilizing hourglass, or hinge effect, and short penile length. For an incision procedure, an incision is made on the plaque at the point of maximal curvature on the convex side of the penis. The graft material is then placed within the defect to help lengthen the shorter side of the penis. An excision procedure involves removing part or all of the plaque and placing a graft in the defect. There are a variety of graft materials, including autologous grafts, allografts, xenografts, and synthetic grafts.

All allografts and xenografts are processed sheets of the collagen matrix. Synthetic grafts are not recommended for the management of PD. Autografts: rectus sheath, tunica vaginalis, dermal graft, buccal mucosa, fascia lata, venous patch. Allografts: pericardium, processed human pericardial grafting, fascia lata process human grafting, 4-layer 3-D printed graft. Xenografts: porcine 4-layer small intestinal submucosa (SIS), porcine 1-layer SIS, bovine pericardium, collagen sponge coated with the human coagulation factors fibrinogen and thrombin. Synthetic grafts: polyethylene terephthalate mesh reinforced silicone sheet patch graft. Complications include post-operative ED, infection requiring graft removal, penile hematoma, penile pain, recurrence of curvature.

Penile prosthesis placement. This technique is appropriate for men with ED, severe deformity refractory to medical therapy, or if profound penile instability exists. Prosthesis placement can be complicated due to the presence of plaque and corporal fibrosis. This can make dilation of the corpora difficult and increases the risk for corporal perforation. Options for prosthesis include 2 or 3 piece inflatable prosthesis or malleable prosthesis. Please see the erectile dysfunction section for further detail on prosthesis placement surgery.