A two-step activation process is required to prevent unnecessary or detrimental responses. Step one begins with CD4 helper T-cell interactions with dendritic cells. Dendritic cells will take up an antigen, process it, bind it to an MHC II molecule and present it on its cell surface. The T-cell receptor complex (TCR) on helper T cells recognizes these MHC II-antigen complexes, bind, and become activated, which allows for the second signal to occur. The second step of activation requires a B7 receptor on the dendritic cell to interact with the CD28 receptor on the helper T cell. This step is critical to note because B7 receptors only express on activated dendritic cells. If the first signal occurs without the second, the T cell is inappropriately interacting with an unactivated dendritic cell and undergoes apoptosis. Destruction of these defective T cells eliminates self-reactive cells and improves self-tolerance. If all operate correctly and both the MHC-II and B7 receptors express, the T cell is fully activated and ready to migrate out of the lymph node into circulation or to the B cell areas of the lymph node and spleen.

Activated helper T cells begin as TH0 cells and enhance immunity by releasing cytokines such as IL-2, IFN-gamma, and IL-4 to stimulate lymphocyte growth and activate more dendritic cells. If IL-12 is present (released from dendritic cells and macrophages), the TH0 cell will transform into a TH1 cell and releases IL-2, IFN-gamma, and TNF-beta, which play roles in both the cellular and antibody responses. The production of TH1 cells becomes perpetuated by the release of IFN-gamma (also known as macrophage activation factor), which stimulates the further synthesis of IL-12. TH1 cells activate macrophages, natural killer cells, and CD8 cytotoxic T cells, which are important for intracellular infections such as viral illnesses.

Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) develop from CD8 T cells in response to cytokines released from TH1 cells and play a role in destroying virally infected cells and tumor cells. CTLs bind to their target cells via antigen-presenting MHC I molecules. They destroy infected cells using perforin proteins, which boreholes in the membrane and allow an influx of granzymes into the cell to promote apoptosis. CTLs can also trigger apoptosis through FasL (on T cells) and Fas (target cells) protein binding.

If IL-12 and IFN-gamma signals are not present, TH0 cells become TH2 cells. The TH2 cells are activated by dendritic cells presenting MHC II-antigen complexes on their surface. Once activated, TH2 cells release IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, and IL-10 cytokines, which stimulate a humoral (antibody) response. These cytokines promote B cell immunoglobulin class switching from IgM and IgD to IgG, IgE, and IgA. Antibodies play a role in eliminating infectious pathogens, preventing the hematologic spread, and providing future protection if re-exposed.

While the T cells are undergoing activation, antigens also enter the lymphatics traveling to the lymph nodes and spleen, where they interact with specific B-cell immunoglobulin receptors. The B cells ingest and process the antigen, bind it to an MHC II molecule, and express it on their surface. Now, the activated TH2 cells can bind these B-cell, which have a similar antigen receptor. Once bound together, TH2 cells signal the B cells to become plasma cells and produce immunoglobulins. Plasma cells will secrete IgM until cytokines from the TH2 cells prompt an isotype switch. Some of these B cells become memory cells and allow for long-term immunity.

Active immunity utilizes cytotoxic T lymphocytes, TH1, TH2 cells, and activated B cells to target infections from multiple angles. CTLs destroy infected cells, and the immunoglobulins produced by B cells target antigens in the bloodstream to bind and prevent them from reaching their target cells.