# Introduction

The hepatoduodenal ligament is a thick anatomical structure wrapped in the peritoneum that constitutes part of the lesser omentum. The hepatoduodenal ligament runs from the porta hepatis to the proximal 2 cm of the duodenum. The hepatic artery proper, common bile duct, and portal vein run through the ligament near its free edge to reach the liver. These three structures are often referred to as the portal triad.

# Structure and Function

The hepatoduodenal ligament is a double-layered tubular structure composed of peritoneum that encloses the portal triad. The opening behind the free edge of the hepatoduodenal ligament is the omental foramen (foramen of Winslow), the only opening of the lesser sac, and the sole connection between the lesser sac and the greater peritoneal cavity.

# Embryology

During the embryological formation of the gastrointestinal tract, the foregut is suspended from the abdominal wall by a double layer of peritoneum called the mesentery. The hepatoduodenal ligament derives from the ventral mesentery between the liver and the stomach as part of the lesser omentum. After the stomach migrates to its final location, the space posterior to it becomes the lesser sac, and the opening to this sac appears at the distal edge of the hepatoduodenal ligament. This opening is called the foramen of Winslow.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Various vessels surround the hepatoduodenal ligament that may contribute to the blood supply of this ligament. Aside from the hepatic artery proper and the portal vein that runs through the ligament, other vessels are adjacent to this structure. The right gastric artery, which derives from the left hepatic artery, the common hepatic artery, and part of the gastroduodenal artery seems to be associated with the blood supply of the hepatoduodenal ligament, and blood is typically drained by the right gastric vein.

# Nerves

The nerve supply of the hepatoduodenal ligament remains undetermined, but postsynaptic sympathetic nerve fibers may be associated with the vascular structure. The vagus nerve divides into both anterior and posterior branches as it enters the abdominal region. The anterior branch further divides into smaller branches, which travels through the lesser omentum. The vagus nerve also runs through the portal triad, and it may play a role in the parasympathetic nerve supply of the ligament.

# Muscles

No clinically significant skeletal or smooth muscle fibers have associations with the hepatoduodenal ligament.

# Physiologic Variants

Although anatomic variations of the hepatoduodenal ligament are rare, the content of the ligament may differ in the general population. Variation of the hepatic artery is common and is clinically important to identify before any surgery in this region is performed. If a specific significant variation exists, devastating hemorrhagic complications may occur. The most common variants include the right hepatic artery arising from the superior mesenteric artery that runs behind the pancreatic head along the right posterolateral flank of the portal vein, and the left hepatic artery as it arises from the left gastric artery that runs in the lesser omentum.

# Surgical Considerations

When the liver is injured during surgery or penetrating trauma, the bleeding can be torrential and quickly lead to hemorrhagic shock or death. A lifesaving maneuver sometimes performed to stop the bleeding is the Pringle maneuver, which was first described in 1908 by a surgeon named James Hogarth Pringle in Glasgow, Scotland. This surgical maneuver involves compressing the hepatoduodenal ligament with a clamp. This clamping interrupts blood flow to the liver and helps control bleeding. If no clamp is available, one may use their fingers to compress the ligament. If the bleeding from the liver continues, this indicates that the inferior vena cava or the hepatic vein may have suffered an injury.

Complications of the Pringle maneuver include ischemia and portal hypertension. It may also lead to a reperfusion phenomenon if the clamping time is prolonged. There are no absolute contraindications to the Pringle maneuver. However, in patients with a compromised liver function such as cirrhosis, one should not clamp for more than 10 minutes at a time.

# Clinical Significance

Viscera of the upper abdomen, pelvis, retroperitoneum, and body wall all connect via many peritoneal ligaments, including the hepatoduodenal ligament. As a result of this proximity, the hepatoduodenal ligament is an important pathway of inflammatory and neoplastic disease between the stomach, retroperitoneum, and the porta hepatis through mechanisms such as direct invasion and lymphatic extension. Lymph nodes that surround this ligament can facilitate the spread of disease.

# Other Issues

The tools for assessing the hepatoduodenal ligament are different:

- Ultrasonography (US) is the simplest and most informative tool about blood flow.

- Multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) can provide a general evaluation.

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has a higher resolution for soft tissues.

- Magnetic resonance (MR) cholangiography is useful to understand the clinical situation of the biliary tract.

- Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is used for an initial and general evaluation.

- Fludeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET / CT) is used when there is a need to evaluate the presence of tumors.

- Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) and intraductal ultrasonography are more effective for some authors as an assessment tool for the biliary area.