Spinal precautions should be implemented in all trauma patients until a spine fracture is ruled out. Limiting flexion, extension, rotation, and twisting of the spine can help avoid exacerbating an injury to the spinal cord. Precautions can be lifted once radiographic images and physical exams are reassuring for no spinal instability. Maintaining perfusion to the spinal cord with supportive care, including airway, breathing, and circulation management with a mean arterial pressure above 85 mmHg, is essential to enhance spinal cord perfusion. Based on the amount of instability or neurological involvement, the patient may require emergency surgery.

Injuries at the thoracolumbar junction, although very common, comprise a heterogeneous group of injuries that has led to an increased discrepancy over the ideal surgical or nonsurgical management. The TLICS scale can provide insight into the treatment of the patient’s spinal fracture. Many surgeons agree that the concept of spine stability is one of the most critical factors in deciding if the thoracolumbar junction fracture require surgical treatment or can be managed conservatively. Disruption of the posterior ligamentous complex integrity raises the likelihood of instability when identified by MRI.

Different studies have addressed the management of thoracolumbar fractures, with some prospective randomized controlled trials comparing operative versus conservative management of thoracolumbar burst fractures, reporting no clinically significant advantage with surgery.

Conservative management techniques include thoracolumbar orthosis, plaster cast, Jewett brace, and a plastic body cast for approximately 12 weeks. The majority of the compression fractures are stable and are treated with simple observation or an orthosis.

For surgical intervention, approach alternatives include anterior, posterior, lateral, or combined approaches. The operative planning and stabilization of these fractures usually include a multifactorial decision-making process. The key factor for deciding an anterior versus a posterior approach is the location of the pathology to be addressed. Different techniques include posterior segmental instrumentation and fusion with or without posterior decompression, percutaneous pedicle screw instrumentation, lateral interbody fusion, and anterior column fusion. Spinal neuromonitoring is routinely used during the surgery. Postoperative bracing does not offer an advantage after surgical stabilization; however, it can be used for comfort.

Burst fractures are stable if the posterior osteoligamentous complex and facet capsules are intact. Stable burst fractures can be treated with an orthosis. If unstable, posterior pedicle screw fixation of the adjacent levels is performed. If an anterior surgery is performed, the fractured bone is removed, and the defect filled with a solid bone graft or a metallic or synthetic cage. This technique restores the anterior column. Flexion-distraction injuries damage the posterior osteoligamentous complex. They are treated with posterior instrumentation and fusion over several levels to restore the sagittal alignment. Fracture-dislocations are very unstable and are treated with early decompression and posterior multilevel instrumentation and fusion.