**Weight Loss and Metabolic Consequences**

Unhealthy weight gain generally occurs through inducing and driving factors that perturb the metabolism, which may vary among individuals. Hence, the practitioners must recognize and evaluate the underlying causes and prescribe a regime for weight loss directed towards the specific causing and contributing factors to obtain desirable results. Furthermore, weight recidivism is observed at a high rate and thus requires a customized regime spanning metabolic effectors to maintain lost weight. This will involve a concerted effort from multidisciplinary staff such as physicians, nutritionists, exercise physiologists, and trainers to recognize the potential causes and target their treatment strategies accordingly. Besides, weight reduction and regeneration of healthy metabolism also depend on lifestyle, including healthy behavioral practices and eating habits. Thorough counseling of patients will warrant better patient outcomes. Weight management becomes more complex when it is a therapeutic pathway for health conditions such as type2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, liver or kidney diseases, etc. The outcomes of such therapeutic intervention may depend on a carefully directed approach that prevents adverse side effects. However, to improve therapeutic outcomes, prompt consultation involving an interprofessional group of specialists is recommended.

**Calorie Restriction**

According to the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force guidelines, a hypocaloric diet as a lifestyle change has been proposed to induce weight loss and sustained weight management by optimizing energy balance.

**Physical Training and Exercise**

Routine moderate to intense physical activities are effective in preventing weight regain. For a successful weight maintenance program, well-directed physical training is recommended. However, it depends on personal behavior, dedication, and an effective exercise plan. Initially, this was only considered a domain for physical trainers; however, it is realized that only exercise could not lead to healthy outcomes. Thus it is crucial to obtain assistance from experts from other fields. A complete health profile of the patient through diagnosis by a physician and laboratory technologist can help a physical trainer in devising exercise regimes and resistance/endurance training to generate metabolic activity towards sustained weight maintenance [Level 1]

**Drug and Surgical Intervention**

Prescribing a medication, especially for weight loss or management, requires careful understanding of the patient’s lifestyle, behavior, diagnosis of underlying conditions, and if a person is taking any other drug, etc. Hence to derive a good outcome, a physician must incorporate assistance from specialists, pharmacists, lab technologists, and nurses to achieve a better outcome from drug therapy when dietary regimes or physical training has not been successful. This also requires complete information about the dietary and exercise regimes to be obtained by the physician. Hence, an interdisciplinary approach is helpful to achieve successful and sustained therapeutic results.

Bariatric or metabolic surgical interventions are a procedure for treating excessive weight gain and for individuals with weight regain. These operations are also carried out to treat diabetes, high blood pressure, sleep apnea, and high cholesterol. These operations modify the stomach and intestines to treat obesity and comorbid conditions. The operation is intended to constrict the stomach size in addition to bypassing a stretch of the intestine. This changes food intake and absorption of food resulting in less hunger and a feeling of fullness. Surgical intervention poses a risk factor for the patients; hence assistance for interdisciplinary teams constituting surgeons, nurses, pharmacists are mandatory for assessment, post-operative patient care, monitoring, and follow-up. Furthermore, better outcomes can be enhanced by counseling and informing the patients about the goals and objectives of the bariatric surgery a priori.

The surgical procedures used for metabolic surgery are:

- Sleeve gastrectomy

- Gastric bypass

- Adjustable gastric band

- Biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch

- Single anastomosis duodeno-ileal bypass with sleeve gastrectomy

All these surgical procedures are usually aggressive, and hence reversal is not easy. Reversal may usually result in complications and risks. After a sleeve gastrectomy, the procedure can never be reversed.

**Evidence-based Approach**

Excessive and unhealthy weight gain generally progresses through inducing and driving factors that perturb the metabolism and vary among individuals. Long-term management of overweight conditions and maintenance of lost weight requires ongoing clinical attention. A weight management regime follows a sequential metabolic adaptation towards establishing sustained homeostasis. An interprofessional staff involving physicians, surgeons, nurses, pharmacists, nutritionists, exercise physiologists, and trainers who can determine the underlying causes and devise regimes can provide a holistic and integrated approach towards weight maintenance.

A collaborative effort in decision making and patient counseling are key elements for a good outcome in weight management to prevent recidivism. The interprofessional care of the patient must follow integrated care management combined with an evidence-based method to planning and evaluating all activities. A thorough understanding of signs and symptoms can lead to implementing a more successful regime and better outcomes.