Pitavastatin is available as 1 mg, 2 mg, and 4 mg tablets for oral administration. Patients may take the drug at any time of the day; however, the time of day should remain consistent. Patients can take it with or without food.

**Adult Dosing**

Pitavastatin is a moderate-intensity statin. The dose range for pitavastatin is between 1 mg to 4 mg once daily; 2 mg once daily is the recommended starting dosage, and the maximum dose is 4 mg once daily. The actual starting dosage and maintenance dosage should be individualized to the patient's characteristics and goals of therapy as per the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Guidelines.

**Pediatric Dosing**

For children aged eight years and older, for management of HeFH, 2 mg once daily is the recommended starting dosage. Lipid levels should be re-assessed four weeks after initiating therapy and adjusted accordingly. The maximum recommended dosage is 4 mg once daily.

**Geriatric Dosing**

Research has determined no significant difference in terms of safety and efficacy was determined between geriatric patients (age greater than 65) and younger patients.

**Renal Impairment**

Patients with a glomerular filtration rate between 15 to 59 mL/min/1.73 m not requiring hemodialysis, and patients with end-stage renal disease requiring hemodialysis should initiate pitavastatin at 1 mg once daily to a maximum dose of 2 mg once daily.

**Hepatic Impairment**

Pitavastatin is contraindicated in the presence of active liver disease and patients with unexplained elevated liver enzymes.

**Drug Interactions**

- Pitavastatin is mainly metabolized by glucuronidation via liver UGTs, and there is comparably only minimal metabolism by cytochrome P450 enzymes.
- The following drugs may decrease the serum concentration of pitavastatin: darunavir/ritonavir, lopinavir/ritonavir, ezetimibe, digoxin, and itraconazole.
- The following drugs may increase the serum concentration of pitavastatin: cyclosporine, erythromycin, rifampin, atazanavir, gemfibrozil, fenofibrate, enalapril, and diltiazem.