To perform the Weil-Felix test, a blood sample is obtained by venipuncture and allowed to coagulate. It is then centrifuged to allow the collection of a serum sample. An undiluted portion of the serum is combined with a suspension of proteus antigen on a white tile for an initial screening test. If there is agglutination within one minute, the tester can expect a titer of at least 1:20 in the confirmatory tube agglutination test. This confirmatory test consists of serial dilutions of the patient’s serum combined with the Proteus antigen. The final dilutions should range from 1:20 to 1:1280, along with a known-negative control sample for quality assurance. After mixing and incubating for 4 hours, the tubes are assessed for a reaction. Tubes without agglutination appear unchanged, while a granular appearance is seen in those that exhibit agglutination. The final result is the most dilute of the titered samples to exhibit agglutination at the end of the test.

Interpreting the Weil-Felix test requires knowledge of the disease course and corresponding immune response. The level of IgM necessary for a positive result is not seen until 5-10 days after the onset of illness, and a single negative test cannot exclude disease. A threshold for agglutinins that is considered “normal” is up to 1:40; however, many factors can contribute to a titer above this threshold in those without a rickettsial infection. It is especially seen with Proteus OXK suspensions, in which titers up to 1:160 have been observed in non-infected persons. A positive titer of 1:320 has been observed in 54% of healthy persons and 62% of persons with non-rickettsial infections, giving a low sensitivity with this threshold.