There are well-documented studies of individual variations in cricoid cartilage dimensions, as it has important clinical implications in placements of stents, transplantation, endotracheal tubes and for surgical procedures. In a Swedish study by Randestad et al., laryngeal dimensions were taken from 34 men and 27 women, demonstrating the dimensional differences of the inner cricoid ring. In women, the mean diameter was 11.6 mm (range: 8.9 to 17.0 mm), and in men, the mean diameter was 15.0 mm (range: 11.0 to 21.5mm). There were differences noted amongst countries as well. A series from Germany showed similarities, but studies from India and Nigeria showed large variations in the mean and standard deviations of inner cricoid dimensions. The minimum diameter measured in the German study was 6.6 mm and was 8.0 mm in the Indian series. This finding is clinically relevant because it demonstrates that standard size tracheal tubes (9.5 to 10.0 mm for women and 10.5 to 11.0 mm for men) may not be inserted without causing mucosal damage in patients with small cricoid diameters. The variation in cricoid cartilage dimensions was not shown to correlate with body weight or height.

Garbelotti et al. reported a structural variation in the cricoid cartilage. The cricoid cartilage described had a superior and inferior arch, with a fibrous membrane between them. While there have been few other documented cases of such variants, this difference can have clinical implications during a cricothyrotomy in certain individuals.

Fayoux et al., examined cases of congenital laryngeal atresia, in which the cricoid cartilage was involved in all cases. Severe abnormalities were noted in individual cricoid cartilages including a median crest on the cranial edge, associated with anterior or posterior enlargements of the caudal edge, and persistence of the pharyngeotracheal duct.