To diagnose this condition, the provider should perform a pelvic exam, a vaginal wet prep, pH testing, and testing to exclude other etiologies of vaginal discharge and infection (specifically gonococcal and chlamydial disease). In patients with candidal vulvovaginitis, inflammation is evident during a pelvic exam. However, the cervix is typically normal and not inflamed. The patient should not have cervical motion tenderness, and there should be no abnormal discharge from the cervical os. In patients with vulvovaginal candidiasis, the vaginal pH is typically less than 5. On wet prep, the provider should see lactobacillus as the prominent bacteria present, and will also likely see inflammatory cells. The patient should have a negative Whiff test (a fishy odor when potassium hydroxide is applied to the discharge on a slide). After potassium hydroxide application, the provider may see budding yeast, hyphae, or pseudohyphae on microscopy.

Vaginitis may be secondary to more than one etiology, and therefore the provider should be vigilant to the presence of clue cells (representative of bacterial vaginosis) or trichomonads (representative of trichomoniasis) on wet prep.

Most infections are secondary to Candida albicans, and if the provider sees budding yeast in the clinical setting of a reproductive age woman presenting with vulvovaginitis, there is no need to perform confirmatory cultures for Candida (although a DNA probe for sexually transmitted infections is often still appropriate). Since Candida species are part of normal vaginal flora in many women, routine cultures in asymptomatic women are also discouraged. In women with repeated episodes of candidal vulvovaginitis, culture should be obtained to identify the fungal species that may be resistant to typical empiric therapy or to identify alternative causes of vaginitis.