Norepinephrine is a sympathomimetic amine derived from tyrosine. It is structurally identical to epinephrine but differs because it lacks a methyl group on its nitrogen atom. This difference makes it primarily agonistic at alpha1 and beta1 receptors, with little-to-no beta2 or alpha2 activity. At low doses (less than 2 mcg/min), the beta1 effects may be more pronounced and increase cardiac output. However, in doses higher than 3 mcg/min, the alpha1 effects may predominate. The increased activation of the alpha1 receptors will result in vasoconstriction and dose-dependent increases in systemic vascular resistance. The ratio of venous to arterial activity is relatively equal.

**Pharmacokinetics**

According to product labeling, after initiation of intravenous infusion, the steady-state plasma concentration is attained in 5 min. The half-life of norepinephrine is approximately 2.4 min. The apparent volume of distribution is 8.8 L. Plasma protein binding of norepinephrine is approximately 25%. Norepinephrine crosses the placenta, but it doesn't cross the blood-brain barrier(BBB). Norepinephrine is metabolized by the enzymes catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) and MAO in the liver and other tissues. The major metabolites are normetanephrine and vanillylmandelic acid, VMA); both are metabolically inactive. Only small quantities of norepinephrine are excreted unchanged. Noradrenaline metabolites are excreted in the urine primarily as sulfate conjugates and, to a lesser extent, as glucuronide conjugates.