Managing patellar tendinopathy is a job for physicians trained in the care of musculoskeletal conditions along with other members of the interprofessional healthcare team. Sports medicine physicians, physiatrists, and rheumatologists provide the first line of care. Orthopedic surgeons are consulted for refractory cases or when the knee extensor tendons are partially or completely torn. An interprofessional team of professionals from multiple disciplines, including athletic trainers, physical therapists, sports biomechanists, and sports psychologists, is needed since the condition commonly affects athletes. The orthopedic specialty nurse is often responsible for coordinating care and follow-up and reporting concerns to the clinician. All professionals on the care team must keep accurate, updated records and openly communicate with other team members as needed.

Initially, the physical therapist must work with physicians to implement a nonoperative regimen consisting of therapy with isometric or eccentric exercises as the mainstay treatment. In a level 2 study, at 12 weeks, patients undergoing an eccentric exercise program showed significant improvement compared with those undergoing a concentric exercise program.

Alternative medical treatments have been studied at different levels of evidence, demonstrating mixed and inconclusive results. Acceptable outcomes have been obtained from surgical interventions in refractory cases.

An interprofessional team approach involving clinicians, specialists, orthopedic nursing, and therapists will yield the best results.