**Procedure**

Percutaneous RFA is performed by an interventional radiologist in the radiology suite after anesthesia/sedation.

Before a needle is inserted into a lesion, the point of entry, a safe trajectory, and the end position of the needle are planned via a review of pre-procedural imaging. Once a window of access is determined, the probe is introduced to the tumor percutaneously, typically under sonographic or computed tomographic (CT) guidance. Then, if required, a local anesthetic may be administered along the tract. Subsequently, the electrode is advanced through the anesthetized track and into the mass.

RFA is performed in the same manner despite the probe type; the only variations are the amount of power utilized and the length of ablative time. For lesions equal to or less than 2 cm in diameter, a needle electrode is positioned centrally within the tumor. The electrode tynes are extended to deliver 50 to 200 watts of alternating current. Once the temperature reaches 90°C, ablation is performed for approximately 8 to 25 minutes. The duration of ablation depends on the type of probe utilized. Both the tumor and a 1 cm surrounding margin of normal tissue are ablated. A tyne temperature of at least 60°C, approximately 30 seconds after the ablation ends, is necessary to ensure satisfactory tumor necrosis.

Large tumors require multiple overlapping ablation fields. Instead of placing the probe at the center of the lesion as is done with smaller lesions, the electrode is positioned along the distal edge of the tumor. Several superimposed ablations are performed sequentially, moving proximally until the entire lesion and a 1 cm margin of normal tissue have been adequately ablated. Successful RFA requires sustained progressive heat. This ensures that the temperature required to cause coagulative necrosis is reached without creating "charring" (carbonization), which can hinder electrical flow and, thus, tissue ablation.

After the ablation, the electrode is withdrawn while cauterizing the entry tract in an effort to prevent seeding of the pathway by tumor cells. For tumors located near vasculature, heat may be dissipated by cooler blood flowing through these vessels - an effect known as "heat sink." To attain effective temperatures in these cases, the tynes must be rotated or withdrawn slightly.

Postoperatively, patients undergo immediate repeat imaging (typically with contrast-enhanced CT) to evaluate the ablation(s) and look for potential complications.

**Post-Procedural Assessment and Follow-Up**

RFA is typically performed in specialty centers. This allows for evaluation by radiologists familiar with the post-RFA image appearance of treated (and recurrent) tumors. Post-RFA assessment often involves CT, ultrasound, MRI, and/or PET imaging. Studies are typically performed 4 to 6 weeks following the ablation. Later follow-up imaging studies may occur on a variable schedule but should be aimed at detecting local tumor recurrence, development of new lesions, or the emergence of extrahepatic disease.

**Contrast-enhanced CT**

Perihepatic fluid, right lung base pulmonary consolidation, and right-sided pleural effusion are normal, commonly seen changes on immediate post-RFA imaging. Free fluid in the peritoneal cavity can also be seen, which typically resolves in days.

A smooth, uniform, symmetric, concentric rim of enhancement surrounding the ablation zone, which represents a benign physiologic response to thermal injury, is the most common imaging feature in the first month.

A low-density lesion with no contrast enhancement approximately 1 to 3 months following the procedure represents a successful ablation.

Four different contrast-enhanced CT recurrence patterns following RFA have been described in the literature:

- Ingrowth: Enhancing tissue inside the border of the treated lesion, denoting inward growth of the tumor.

- Outgrowth: Enhancing tissue expanding outward from (but contiguous with) the border of the treated lesion, denoting outward growth of the tumor.

- Spread: New enhancing tissue separate from the treated lesion but contained within the same Couinaud liver segment

- Progression: New enhancing tissue seen in different Couinaud liver segments from the treated lesion

The post-ablation zone of necrosis should be larger in size than the actual lesion due to the additional 1 cm margin of normal hepatic parenchyma included in the ablation. If an ablation zone is noted to incompletely encompass the original lesion, close follow up is advised as viable tumor cells may still be present.

**Ultrasonography**

Grayscale

Sonographic exam following RFA will be variable. A simple grayscale sonographic exam in and of itself is not a sensitive imaging modality for follow-up due to limited ability to differentiate between an area of RFA-induced necrosis and residual tumor. Ultrasound findings post RFA are variable and may show echo-poor, echogenic, or mixed appearance.

Contrast-enhanced

While not readily available at all institutions, contrast-enhanced sonography represents a rapid and cost-effective alternative to traditional CT and MRI post-RFA follow-up imaging studies. Additionally, ultrasound examination inherently lacks the radiation exposure of the aforementioned traditional follow-up modalities.

Interestingly, multiple sources report that RFA-induced changes, such as necrosis, often appear smaller when imaged with contrast-enhanced ultrasound versus contrast-enhanced CT.

Limitations of contrast-enhanced ultrasound include limited ability to visualize the safety margin (the additional 1cm of ablated normal parenchyma surrounding the tumor).

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging**

MRI with or without gadolinium may be useful for assessing outcomes after RFA. A contrast-enhanced study will inherently be more useful than a plain, unenhanced one due to improved visualization of the ablation zone.

On MRI, ablation should be considered a success if there is no residual tumoral enhancement as well as low signal intensity on T2-weighted images.

While more time consuming than CT, MRI is more sensitive than CT at detecting tumor regrowth. Local tumor recurrence is often seen on T2-weighted images earlier than on contrast-enhanced CT.