In the field of medicine, the treatment for most conditions uses various pharmacological medications. For each of these individual medications, the route of administration, appropriate dosage, and frequency of use are determined by the medication’s pharmacokinetics (PK). PK is the relationship between an administered dose of a drug and its measured concentration within the body. An individual medication’s PK is governed by how it moves within the body through absorption, bioavailability, distribution, metabolism, and excretion.

The characteristics that define an individual medication’s PK can help determine the loading dose. While a patient is taking a specific drug to achieve the therapeutic benefit, the drug must reach a certain steady-state concentration.

A loading dose is typically calculated through the following formula:

**LD=(Volume of Distribution X Concentration Steady State)/Bioavailability**

For this formula, concentration steady-state is defined as the therapeutic concentration of medication in the body, while bioavailability is the fraction of an administered dose that reaches systemic circulation. The volume of distribution is typically calculated as follows:

**Vd=Dose of medication given/Concentration in the Plasma**

The calculation of loading dose should not be confused with maintenance dose, which is the dose required to maintain steady-state concentration. This calculation is:

**MD=(Concentration Steady State X Clearance X Dosing Interval)/Bioavailability**

Clearance can be determined using the known half-life of a medication, which is the length of time required for a dose to reach 50% of its initial plasma concentration. Clearance can ultimately be determined through:

**CL=(0.693 X Vd)/ Half-life**