# Continuing Education Activity

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive (AR) disorder that commonly affects the White population with an annual incidence of approximately 1 in 3,500 live births. This multisystem disorder is characterized by genetic mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene on chromosome 7, which encrypts a protein essential for the regulation of transmembrane chloride reabsorption. This activity focuses mainly on the diagnosis, evaluation, and management of patients with cystic fibrosis and liver disease. It highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of cystic fibrosis and liver disease. 
- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with cystic fibrosis and liver disease.
- Explain the management of the patient with cystic fibrosis and liver disease and its complications. 
- Describe the importance of interprofessional team approach and closed loop communication by primary care providers, hepatologists, pulmonologists, nutritionists, radiologists and surgeons to achieve optimal patient results.

# Introduction

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive (AR) disorder that commonly affects the White population with an annual incidence of approximately 1 in 3,500 live births.

# Etiology

The etiology of cystic fibrosis-associated liver disease has been attributed to an alteration in hydration and alkalinity of the bile composition due to mutation of the CFTR gene expressed in the cholangiocytes that regulate transmembrane chloride exchange. Approximately 2000 CFTR mutations classified into five different groups based on the involved functional defect (Class I: Defective protein production; class II: Defective protein processing; class III: defective gating of the channel; class IV: decreased chloride conductance; class V: Decreased protein synthesis) have been identified in patients with CF with the most common mutation being the deletion of a phenylalanine residue at position 508 (F508del) on chromosome 7 which is a class II mutation seen in 80% to 90% patients with CF.

# Epidemiology

The prevalence of CF differs by geographical background and ethnicity. It is commonly seen in Whites with an incidence of approximately 1 in 2000 to 3000 live births compared to an incidence of 1 in 4000 to10 000 and 1 in 15000 to 20000 live births in Latin American and African American populations, respectively. The prevalence of the disease in other racial groups is not well studied.

# Pathophysiology

A precise pathogenetic mechanism linking the development and progression of liver disease in patients with CF has not been well identified. Classically, the development of liver disease in patients with CF has been attributed to ductal cholestasis caused by CFTR dysfunction. CFTR is a cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) dependent chloride channel expressed in secretory epithelial cells of various organs. In the liver, CFTR is expressed by the cholangiocytes (bile duct cells) lining the luminal membrane of the biliary epithelium.

Normally, cholangiocytes serve to perform an array of intracellular transport functions that regulate the transmembrane chloride and bicarbonate reabsorption, thereby determining the secretion and composition of bile.

Besides its function on the regulation of transmembrane chloride conductance, newer studies have demonstrated the effect of CFTR in relation to toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) activity. CFTR normally regulates TLR4 dependent inflammatory responses by inhibiting the activity of Rous sarcoma oncogene cellular homolog (Src), which is a non-receptor protein tyrosine kinase. Mutations in the CFTR gene lead to self-activation of Src and phosphorylation of TLR4, resulting in the generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines resulting in disruption of the epithelial barrier by inflammatory cells and translocation of bacteria into portal circulation resulting in chronic inflammation and fibrosis.

CFTR dysfunction affects the gut microbiota causing intestinal inflammation and symbiosis with an overall increase in pathogenic bacteria favoring translocation of bacteria into the portal circulation.

# Histopathology

Microscopic exam of liver biopsies performed in patients with cystic fibrosis-associated liver disease demonstrate a wide spectrum of histopathological changes ranging from pan acinar steatosis, cholestasis, bile duct proliferation, portal inflammation to fibrosis of varying degrees of severity and nodular regenerative hyperplasia. Neutrophils were the most predominant inflammatory cells. While hepatic steatosis and focal biliary cirrhosis are common findings in pediatric patients with CFLD, focal biliary cirrhosis is not as common in adult patients with CFLD. Portal hypertension in patients with CFLD is not entirely due to fibrosis or cirrhosis, but non-cirrhotic portal hypertension (NCPH) also plays a role with demonstrated evidence of presinusoidal type portal hypertension because of obliterative venopathy with fibrosis.

# History and Physical

Pathological involvement of the hepatobiliary system in patients with CF typically develops before or during puberty with an incidence of 15% to 17%, clinically manifesting in a diverse manner ranging from asymptomatic elevation in liver function tests to advanced liver disease with decompensation. In infants with CFTR dysfunction, liver dysfunction may manifest in the form of cholestasis, which is relatively rare but is seen in approximately 50% of newborns with CF when it cooccurs with meconium ileus.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of cystic fibrosis-associated liver disease remains a challenge due to the non-availability of a sensitive and specific test. Most hepatic manifestations are not seen until the development of cirrhosis and portal hypertension. Nevertheless, the early diagnosis of CFLD relies on comprehensive clinical assessments, biochemical tests, and imaging modalities.

Ultrasonography plays a significant role in the diagnosis of CFLD and should be considered early as it is more sensitive in detecting hepatic steatosis, focal biliary fibrosis, multilobular cirrhosis, and biliary duct defects. However, a normal ultrasound examination does not translate as a low risk for the development of fibrosis, as patients with CF with normal ultrasound examinations have been shown to progress to cirrhosis.

Although liver biopsy remains the gold standard for diagnosis and staging of CFLD, it is not routinely recommended owing to the invasive nature of the test and patchy nature of the disease.

**Table 1. Diagnostic Criteria for CFLD**

# Treatment / Management

Currently, there is no available treatment that has proven to be efficacious or delay the progression of cystic fibrosis-associated liver disease. Best practice guidelines for the prevention and management of advanced liver disease in CF are lacking.

Portal hypertension is a relatively common complication in patients with end-stage liver disease, and its diagnosis and management are very crucial. Patients with cirrhosis should be assessed for portal hypertension with an abdominal exam to check for splenomegaly and ascites, ultrasound examination with Doppler velocity, and biochemical tests showing platelet counts of <150,000 units x 10/mL.****An alternative measure is the surgical placement of a portosystemic (PS) shunt and should be reserved for refractory cases only as it causes the risk of development of worsening hepatic encephalopathy and acute liver failure.

Ascites, if demonstrated on physical examination and or imaging, is considered to be a poor prognostic sign. Management includes sodium and fluid restrictive diet and initiation of diuretics. Referral for liver transplant evaluation should be considered.

The role of ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) in CFLD is controversial, with multiple clinical trials showing conflicting results. UDCA prescribed at 20 to 30 mg/kg body weight/day has shown to improve biochemical parameters, but there is no strong evidence that the administration of UDCA alters the natural course of CFLD.

Liver transplantation (LT) confers a substantial survival advantage in patients with CFLD, but the clinical criteria and timing of liver transplantation in CFLD are not well established.<50%) and declining quality of life linked to advanced liver disease.

# Differential Diagnosis

**Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis**

Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a chronic cholestatic liver disorder characterized by inflammation and fibrosis of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary ducts that ultimately progress to end-stage liver disease. It is commonly associated with IBD. Like CFLD, PSC results from prolonged cholestasis and the histological features and radiological features are similar to those seen in the liver of patients with cystic fibrosis-associated liver disease which has been explained by possible interaction between bile acids receptors such as Farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and G-protein coupled bile acid receptor 1 (TGR5).

**Secondary Sclerosing Cholangitis**

Secondary sclerosing cholangitis (SSC) is a chronic cholestatic liver disorder that is morphologically similar to PSC and is caused by an identified pathological process.

**Drug-induced Liver Injury**

Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is a concern in these patients as they tend to be on antibiotics frequently for recurrent bacterial sinus infections. Newer treatment agents (ivacaftor and lumacaftor) that directly modulate the CFTR function can cause a mild elevation in serum transaminases.

**Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease**

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is seen in approximately 10% to 20% of the general pediatric population incorporating a wide spectrum of chronic liver disorders ranging from hepatic steatosis to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) leading to end-stage liver disease.

# Prognosis

With an increase in the life expectancy of patients with CF, the increased prevalence of liver involvement has emerged as a significant healthcare burden.

# Complications

Cystic fibrosis-associated liver disease, as a disease entity itself, is a complication of CF. Approximately 5% to 10% of patients with CF develop multilobar cirrhosis during the first decade of life, and it remains to be the single most important non-pulmonary cause of death, accounting for 2.5% of overall CF mortality.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Cystic fibrosis is a progressive autosomal recessive disorder that involves multiple organ systems. To develop cystic fibrosis, a child must inherit one copy of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene mutation from each parent. Caucasians have a higher risk of carrying a mutation of the CFTR gene. The life expectancy of individuals with cystic fibrosis has dramatically improved in the last decade and continues to increase with improved treatment protocols. CFLD (cystic fibrosis-associated liver disease) is now the third leading cause of death, only behind pulmonary and transplant-related complications. Cystic fibrosis-associated liver disease accounts for 5% of deaths in patients with CF. Risk factors for the development of CFD include male sex, meconium ileus, and severe phenotype CF. Until recently, most patients with CFLD presented in childhood; however, recent studies show the second wave of this chronic liver disease become evident in adulthood, the etiology of which remains unclear. Currently, there is no consensus methodology for the diagnosis of CFLD, particularly given its variable presentation and patchy nature of the disease. Annual screening for CFLD is recommended for early identification to help prevent or delay its complications to reduce morbidity and mortality. Early identification of progressive CFLD allows monitoring for portal hypertension and prompt management of its complications. LT should be considered in patients with progressive hepatic failure characterized by portal hypertension-related complications, progressive hypoalbuminemia and coagulopathy, severe malnutrition, worsening pulmonary function, and declining quality of life.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Enhancing positive outcomes in patients with cystic fibrosis-associated liver disease requires an interprofessional team approach and closed-loop communication by primary care providers, hepatologists, pulmonologists, nutritionists, radiologists, and surgeons at times, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. Besides, the overall clinical management of this chronic liver disease by involved specialists, the prescribed medications should be vetted through a board-certified pharmacist who can collaborate on agent selection, verify dosing and oversee the medication regimen for drug interactions. Nursing staff who have a good understanding of this disease should administer medications, monitor treatment effectiveness, and alert the clinicians to any possible adverse effects from treatment. Such an integrated approach to the care of these patients can help to achieve the best possible outcomes.