Various obstetrical injuries during delivery can lead to foot drop in the patient. Injury to the roots of the lumbosacral plexus can lead to foot drop, often due to softening of the ligaments during late pregnancy. Injuries to the lumbosacral plexus itself can lead to a foot drop.

One of the hallmarks of this type of foot drop is that it may be accompanied by a lesion that appears as femoral neuropathy, or an obturator neuropathy, as these nerves share the L2-L4 segments with the lumbosacral plexus. A different injury is a lesion of the lumbosacral trunk. This structure passes on the anterior surface of the sacral ala, where it can be compressed by the baby’s head during the delivery process.

A somewhat different lesion that can lead to foot drop involves the common fibular nerve or its branch, the deep fibular nerve. As noted above, this is commonly due to the patient or the attending holding the patient’s legs flexed at the hip and flexed at the knee during the pushing or bearing down process increasing intra-abdominal pressure to facilitate movement of the baby into the birth canal. Placing the patient in the dorsal lithotomy position can also result in this type of foot drop.

Thus, a variety of different lesions can produce a foot drop. The art of differential diagnosis consists of being able to tease out the other aspects that can indicate exactly where the lesion occurred that resulted in the foot drop. Factors to be considered include motor losses, sensory losses, and pain. Tests will be needed. For L5 lumbar radiculopathy, an MRI may be helpful.

If the foot drop is caused by L5 lumbar radiculopathy, there should be evidence of damage to the ligaments and nucleus pulposus at the L4/L5 level. In addition to a careful and precise neurological examination, electrophysiological studies can be used to document precisely the extent of the lesion. These offer more precise information than physical examination. For example, mapping sensory losses and pain depends on the cooperation of the patient, who may be scared or distracted by her condition.

The following details form the basis for the differential diagnosis of foot drop.

**Radiculopathy**

**Sensory Criteria for Radiculopathy**

Lumbar pain radiating down into the lower limb is characteristic. The pain should follow a dermatomal pattern. For the L4 dermatome, the pain would involve the anterior and medial thigh and the medial leg. For the L5  dermatome, the pain will occur on the lateral thigh, leg, and dorsum of the foot. For the S1 dermatome, the pain will involve the posterior thigh, leg, and heel.

Motor criteria for radiculopathy:****The weakness and loss of motor function will occur in a myotomal pattern involving a ventral root. For the L4 myotome, the quadriceps femoris will be involved. For the L5 myotome, the tibialis anterior, extensor digitorum longus, and extensor hallucis longus are involved, as these cause the foot drop. However, the L5 myotome also involves the fibularis longus and the tibialis posterior. For the S1 myotome, the gastrocnemius and gluteus maximus will be involved.

Other criteria for radiculopathy include a positive Lasegue’s sign. In addition, there will be the abolition of the deep tendon reflexes. For the L4 myotome, the patellar tendon reflex will be lost. For S1, the Achilles tendon reflex will be lost. There is no reflex for L5.

For radiculopathy, electromyographic abnormalities will occur in a radicular pattern. The L4 myotome will involve the quadriceps femoris. For the L5 myotome, they will involve the tibialis anterior, the extensor hallucis longus, and the extensor digitorum longus. These cause the foot drop. But in addition, they will involve the fibularis longus and tibialis posterior. The S1 myotome will affect the gastrocnemius muscle and the gluteus maximus.

In addition, the MRI of the lumbar spine should show a lesion such as a herniated lumbar disc.

**Identifying a Lumbosacral Plexopathy**

A lumbosacral plexopathy should be suspected if a dermatomal pattern of sensory loss is not present and there is a global palsy of the lower extremity. If there is no global palsy of the lower extremities, but there is still involvement of the hip flexors and adductors, this indicates a lumbosacral plexopathy. Patient presentation of a sensory deficit over the foot strongly indicates a lumbosacral plexopathy. If a sensory deficit over the dorsum of the foot is not present, it is still likely to be a lumbosacral plexopathy based on the motor symptoms. However, additional factors and patient history should be considered before confirming a diagnosis.

**Sensory Criteria for Lumbar Plexopathy**

A sensory deficit will be present in the territories of the obturator (medial thigh) and femoral nerves (anterior and medial thigh, medial leg;  medial malleolus through its saphenous nerve branch).

Motor criteria include weakness in the obturator nerve (which innervates the adductor muscles of the thigh) and the femoral nerve (which innervates the psoas and quadriceps femoris muscles). The patellar deep tendon reflex will also be abolished.

Criteria for sacral plexopathy:****palsy and a sensory deficit in the sciatic (hamstrings included) and sacral territories

**Lesions of the Lumbosacral Trunk (Part of the Lumbosacral Plexus)**

The lumbosacral trunk is formed primarily from L5, with a contributing branch from L4. It appears at the medial margin of the psoas major and descends over the pelvic brim, anterior to the sacroiliac joint. Here it is vulnerable to injury by the head of the baby as it descends into the pelvis. It may be difficult to confirm the involvement of the L5 nerve root since the L5 ventral ramus is present in the lumbosacral trunk, in the sciatic nerve, and its derivative, the common fibular nerve.

Electromyography helps make the diagnosis of a lesion of the lumbosacral trunk. Voluntary motor unit action potentials (MUAPs) of obstetric patients exhibiting foot droop have been shown to be significantly reduced in all the muscles below the knee that contain the L5 segment:  tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis, extensor digitorum brevis, fibularis longus, tibialis posterior, and flexor digitorum longus.

The tibialis anterior, extensor digitorum brevis and fibularis longus are all supplied by the common fibular nerve. In contrast, the tibialis posterior and flexor digitorum longus are supplied by the tibial nerve. Thus, these patients could not be suffering from a common fibular neuropathy.

**Identifying a Common Fibular Neuropathy**

In the absence of involvement of the hip flexors or hip adductors, then the lesion is suspected to involve a common fibular neuropathy. A common fibular neuropathy will likely present as weakness in foot eversion, plantar flexion, dorsiflexion of the ankle, and/or extension of the toes. Loss of sensation over the lateral leg and dorsum of the foot may occur.

If the patient presentation aligns with these characteristics, conducting an EMG can aid in confirming a diagnosis of common fibular neuropathy. Electromyographic changes should be limited to the tibialis anterior, extensor digitorum longus, and extensor hallucis longus for the deep fibular nerve, the fibularis longus, and brevis for the superficial fibular nerve, and both for the common fibular nerve.

If there is more extensive involvement (such as the tibialis posterior for lumbosacral plexopathy), then the common fibular nerve is ruled out, and one should seek a lumbosacral trunk lesion other than lumbosacral plexopathy, or L5 radiculopathy.