Clinical significance of some cytokines are listed below:

- IL-1 acts on the hypothalamus to induce fever and is therefore called an endogenous pyrogen. It operates on hepatocytes to increase synthesis of specific serum proteins, such as amyloid A protein and fibrinogen. It causes fall in blood pressure or shock in large amounts. Corticosteroids inhibit the IL-1 effect.

- Gene knockout mouse studies have provided evidence that the primary IL-2 function in vivo is the suppression of T responses. Mice lacking IL-2 or its receptor (CD25) develop lymphadenopathy and T cell-mediated autoimmunity.

- Knockout mice lacking IL-10 develop inflammatory bowel disease, probably because of uncontrolled activation of macrophages reacting to enteric microbes.

- IL-12 overproduction causes allergic disorders. Corticosteroids inhibit the effects of IL-12.

- IL-19 may be used to induce angiogenesis in ischemic tissue.

- The administration of IL-21 may be considered for use as a preventive and therapeutic approach when dealing with Th2-mediated allergic diseases.

- IL-26 shows high expression in psoriatic skin lesions, colonic lesions from individuals with inflammatory bowel disease and synovia of individuals with rheumatoid arthritis. It may constitute a promising target to treat chronic inflammatory disorders.

- IL-27 was found to exerts anti-inflammatory effects in several experimental autoimmune models. IL-27 treatment suppressed autoimmune diabetes.

- IL-28 may be sufficient treatment of HCV patients.

- IL-29 is a marker of osteoarthritis as joint inflammation implicates it.

- IL-36 also seems to play a significant role in human psoriasis. In psoriatic lesion tissues, IL-36 levels were found to be elevated, and generalized pustular psoriasis was also discovered, which is rare and life-threatening.

- In lupus patients were elevated IL-37 levels in comparison with healthy controls, and mucocutaneous and renal involvement was correlated with high disease activity.

- Recent studies point to an association between IL-38 and autoimmune diseases. Its role in carcinogenesis or cancer growth is unclear.

- IL-39 secreted by activated B cells may be a critical pro-inflammatory cytokine and a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus.

- IL-40 expression in several human B-cell lymphomas suggests that it may play a role in the pathogenesis of these diseases.