When an injury occurs, the initial phase is always an outpouring of lymphatic fluid and blood. It is during this process that adequate hemostasis is achieved. Both the extrinsic and intrinsic coagulation pathways are activated and play a role in stopping blood loss. Aggregation of platelets follows the arterial vasoconstriction to the damaged endothelial lining. A release of adenosine 5´ diphosphate (ADP) results in the clumping of platelets and initiates the process of thrombosis. This vasoconstriction is a short-lived process that is soon followed by vasodilation, which allows the influx of white cells and more thrombocytes.

The inflammatory phase begins with hemostasis and chemotaxis. Both the white cells and thrombocytes speed up the inflammatory process by releasing more mediators and cytokines. Besides the platelet-derived growth factor, other factors promote collagen degradation, the transformation of fibroblasts, the growth of new vessels, and re-epithelialization. All of the processes occur at the same time but in a synchronized fashion. Mediators like serotonin and histamine are released from platelets and increase cellular permeability. The platelet-derived growth factor attracts fibroblasts and, along with transforming growth factor, enhances the division and multiplication of fibroblasts. The fibroblasts, in turn, synthesize collagen.

Inflammatory cells, such as neutrophils, monocytes, and endothelial cells, adhere to a fibrin scaffold formed by platelet activation. The neutrophils enable phagocytosis of cellular debris and bacteria, allowing for decontamination of the wound.

The proliferative or granulation phase does not occur at a discrete time, but is ongoing all the time in the background.

By days 5 through 7, the fibroblasts have started to lay down new collagen and glycosaminoglycans. These proteoglycans form the core of the wound and help stabilize the wound. Then, reepithelialization starts to occur with the migration of cells from the wound periphery and adjacent edges. Initially, only a thin superficial layer of epithelial cells is laid down, but a thicker and more durable layer of cells will bridge the wound over time. Next, neovascularization occurs through both angiogenesis, forming new blood vessels from existing vessels, and vasculogenesis, which is the formation of new vessels from endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs). Once collagen fibers have been laid down on the fibrin framework, the wound starts to mature. The wound also begins to contract and is facilitated by continued deposition of fibroblasts and myofibroblasts.

The maturational or remodeling phase starts around week 3 and can last up to 12 months. The excess collagen degrades, and wound contraction also begins to peak around week 3. Wound contraction occurs to a much greater extent in secondary healing than in primary healing. The maximal tensile strength of the incision wound occurs after about 11 to 14 weeks. The ultimate resulting scar will never have 100% of the original strength of the wound and only about 80% of the tensile strength.