The prostate is a dense fibromuscular gland. Its shape is like an inverted cone having a base above surrounding the neck of the urinary bladder, apex below situated on the external urethral sphincter.

**Location:**The prostate lies directly inferior to the bladder and wraps around the proximal urethra in the lesser pelvis. A fibrous capsule encloses the gland, with the nerves and vascular plexus which is further surrounded by a visceral layer of pelvic fascia.

**Relations:**

- Anteriorly, it is posterior to the pubic symphysis, separated by a pad of fat (retropubic fat) and venous plexus (prostatic venous plexus)

- Posteriorly it is in a close relationship to the rectum and is separated by fascia of Denonvilliers

- The external urethral sphincter muscle is beneath the prostate where it wraps around the urethra help to control ejaculatory and urinary flow

- On the lateral aspects, the gland is related to the levator ani muscle of the pelvic floor covered by endopelvic fascia

The prostate gland idivides anantomically into five lobes: anterior and posterior lobes, two lateral lobes, and one median lobe.  This description is in many anatomical textbooks.  In clinics, it is described as having two lateral lobes right and left and a median lobe.

The prostate gland is composed of histologically different zones; based on these, the gland divides into three anatomical zones.

- The central zone forms the base of the gland that surrounds the ejaculatory ducts

- The peripheral zone is the largest zone making up 70% of the gland and surrounds most of the central zone and partially surrounds the distal part of the prostatic urethra

- The transition zone is a small glandular zone that surrounds a portion of the urethra between the urinary bladder and verumontanum

- There is an area denoted as the anterior fibromuscular stroma within the prostate; this area is not glandular, and contains mostly muscular and fibrous tissue and surrounds an inferior portion of the prostate called the apex

- Lastly, the prostate is encompassed by a fibrous layer called a capsule

Importantly, the prostate gland has multiple tubular structures passing within it, including the proximal urethra and two ejaculatory ducts.  The ejaculatory ducts enter the prostate immediately as it emerges from the seminal vesicles.  Both of these ducts travel from posterior and lateral to medial and inferior.  They ultimately converge at the urethra within the prostate gland on an area called the seminal colliculus.