The muscles of the foot can be divided into two separate groups known as the extrinsic and intrinsic muscles.

The extrinsic muscles arise from the lateral, anterior, and posterior compartments of the leg and insert onto the foot. The anterior compartment of the leg contains the extensor digitorum longus, fibularis tertius muscles, tibialis anterior, and extensor hallucis longus muscles which are responsible for foot inversion, ankle dorsiflexion, and toe extension. The muscles in the lateral compartment are the fibularis brevis and fibularis longus muscles, whose primary role is in foot eversion. Finally, the muscles in the posterior compartment include the gastrocnemius, flexor hallucis longus, flexor digitorum longus, popliteus, plantaris, soleus, and tibialis posterior muscles. These muscles manage plantar flexion, foot inversion, and toe flexion.

The intrinsic muscles are found within the foot and function to control the fine motor actions of the foot, particularly the toes. On the dorsal aspect of the foot, there are only two intrinsic muscles which include the extensor hallucis brevis and the extensor digitorum brevis. The plantar aspect (sole) of the foot contains 10 intrinsic muscles that are arranged in the following order from superficial to deep; abductor hallucis, flexor digitorum brevis, abductor digiti minimi, the quadratus plantae, the lumbricals, flexor hallucis brevis, adductor hallucis, flexor digiti minimi brevis, and finally the plantar and dorsal interossei.