Once the diagnosis of retinitis pigmentosa is made, patient and family education becomes a primary goal. Understanding the type of disease which affects the patient is very important. In a study involving vision-related quality of life and coping mechanisms for managing RP, results indicated that the large majority of individuals with RP were unaware of their subtype. Without this understanding, it is obvious that these patients cannot fully understand their disease progression and implications for their future.

While no treatment options guarantee to arrest the progression of vision loss, patients should be made aware of the possible benefits of several interventions. Nutritional supplementation, especially with vitamin A,  is still an area of interest, though no definite benefits are identified. Avoidance of excessively bright light exposure has been a recommendation for many years, as it may decrease phototoxic effects on the retina. Good sunglasses are, therefore, a must.

Patient education should also include preparation for the anticipated progression of RP.  Once the diagnosis is made and the prognosis becomes relatively predictable, the patient and family must look toward adaptive changes to enable the patient to function with maximal independence for as long as possible. This involves things as simple as not rearranging the furniture in the home and installing additional lighting in work areas. As vision impairs the ability to drive and function outside the home without assistance, referral to community support agencies should be considered. As the disease affects independence and the patient begins to feel isolated, depression can be a serious complication. Patients and family members should be educated about the warning signs of depression, and clinicians should maintain vigilance in assessing the mental health of their patients.

Awareness of ongoing research and the development of new therapies should be promoted as well. This knowledge will enhance the patient's ability to make an informed decision about treatment options when they become available in the future. The National Eye Institute of the National Institutes of Health is an excellent source of information, as are the Retinitis Pigmentosa Foundation Fighting Blindness and the American Foundation for the Blind. These organizations can put patients and their families in touch with support groups and other sources for assistance as well as providing information about the disease.