Mirtazapine is a tetracyclic antidepressant drug (TeCA). Mirtazapine inhibits the central presynaptic alpha-2-adrenergic receptors, which causes an increased release of serotonin and norepinephrine. Mirtazapine is also sometimes called a noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressant (NaSSA). Noradrenaline is known to have an activating effect on the sympathetic nervous system, explaining the general increase in activity and increased metabolism seen with mirtazapine. It also acts as a potent antagonist of H1 histamine receptors (producing a sedating, calming effect) and 5-HT2A, 5-HT2C, and 5-HT3 serotonin receptors.

Mirtazapine's ability to antagonize 5-HTA, 5HT2C, and 5-HT3 receptors lead to the remaining serotonin concentration left to interact with the free 5-HT1 receptor. This interaction with the 5-HT1 receptor (particularly the 5-HT1A receptor) leads to antidepressant effects. It has also demonstrated a moderate to weak antagonist effect on peripheral alpha1-adrenergic and muscarinic receptors. Unlike many other antidepressants, mirtazapine does not inhibit the reuptake of serotonin, dopamine, or norepinephrine. Unlike most tricyclic antidepressants(TCA), it shows weak or no activity as a blocker of sodium or calcium channels or as an anticholinergic.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Mirtazapine is rapidly absorbed, and peak plasma concentrations are attained in 2 hours. The presence of food has a negligible effect on both the rate and extent of absorption and does not need a dose adjustment of mirtazapine. There is no clear, established relationship between the plasma concentration of mirtazapine and its antidepressant effect, nor is there a known dose-effect relationship.

**Distribution:**Mirtazapine has high plasma protein binding(85%) and is bound to plasma proteins in a reversible but nonspecific manner.

**Metabolism:**Mirtazapine is extensively metabolized in the liver by demethylation, hydroxylation, conjugation, and cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP1A2, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4). One of its major metabolites is desmethylmirtazapine.****

**Excretion:**Mean elimination half-life of mirtazapine varies from 20 to 40 hours. Metabolites of mirtazapine are excreted primarily via urine 75% and feces(15%).