**For Erectile Dysfunction (Adult Administration)**

Prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) can be administered via intracavernous or intraurethral routes. Dosages for individual persons require titration to achieve the most efficacious results.

Intracavernous administration involves an injection directly into the penis using a 27- to 30-gauge 1/2-inch needle syringe. Strong recommendations are that a healthcare professional administers the first dose; afterward, self-administration is permissible with adequate patient training. After sterilization of the injection site, the penis should be held firmly away from the body in preparation for injection. The injection should be given perpendicular to the base of the penis, avoiding any visible veins. Repeated administrations should be on alternate sides of the penis. Pressure should be applied to the injection site to cease bleeding if any. Studies have shown that efficacy is dose-dependent.

Dosing is as follows:

- For vasculogenic/psychogenic/mixed etiology: The initial dose is 2.5 mcg once intracavernous; within one hour, the patient may dose 5 mcg if there was a partial response or 7.5 mcg with no response to the first injection. After 24 hours, the patient may increase the dose by 5 or 10 mcg for a single dose and continue this process every 24 hours until achieving a response. Maximum dosing is twice per 24 hours during the initial titration, and then one dose per 24 hours to a maximum of 60 mcg. Patients should use the lowest effective dose.

- For pure neurological etiology: The initial dose is 1.25 mcg once intracavernous; within one hour, the patient may dose 2.5 mcg. After 24 hours, the patient may increase the dose by 5 mcg for a single dose and continue this process every 24 hours until achieving a response. Maximum dosing is twice per 24 hours during the initial titration, and then one dose per 24 hours to a maximum of 60 mcg. Patients should use the lowest effective dose.

When utilizing the urethral suppository via the intraurethral route, the pellet must be inserted immediately following urination. The applicator stem will get inserted into the urethra to deposit the medicinal pellet. To deposit the pellet, a user would press the button at the top of the applicator. Following administration, the user removes the applicator. A study on the drug’s efficacy indicated an increase in dosage (ranging between the lowest effective dose of 125 mcg and a maximum of 1000 mcg) also increased the maximum response. For this reason, the recommended initial starting dose is 500 mcg. There are no reported instances of increased adverse effects with increasing dosage.

Transurethral suppository dosing:

- Insert 125 or 250 mcg into the urethra with a maximum of two doses per 24 hours.

For both formulations, the maximum time of an achieved erection should not exceed one hour.

**For Ductus Arteriosus (Pediatric Administration)**

PGE1 administration for pediatric patients is via continuous IV infusion through a vein or at the site of the ductal opening using a catheter placed in the umbilical artery. The typical concentration of the infusion is 10 to 20 mcg/mL. Initial dosing requires titration by micrograms per kilogram of body weight per minute.

Dosing for PDA in infants:

- Initial dose: 0.05 to 0.1 mcg/kg/min continuous IV infusion

- Maintenance/maximum dose: 0.01 to 0.4 mcg/kg/min continuous IV infusion

No renal dosing adjustment is necessary for any of the above regimens, including dialysis. Hepatic dosing is undefined.