# Continuing Education Activity

Pemphigus vulgaris is a rare disease that causes blisters. It is the most common type of pemphigus. The mean age of onset is 50 to 60 years of age, and it affects both sexes equally. This activity reviews the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of pemphigus vulgaris medical conditions and emergencies.
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of pemphigus vulgaris.
- Review the management options available for pemphigus vulgaris.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance pemphigus vulgaris and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is an autoimmune disease that results in blisters on cutaneous and mucosal surfaces.

# Etiology

The etiology of pemphigus vulgaris is unknown, but patients are at risk that has a genetic predisposition. Several studies have linked PV with human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II alleles. HLA-DRB1 0402 is associated with PV in Ashkenazi Jews, while DRB1 1401/04 and DQB1 0503 HLA alleles are associated with PV in non-Jewish patients of European or Asian descent.

# Epidemiology

Though pemphigus vulgaris is prevalent worldwide, the occurrence of PV is related to ethnicity and geographic location. The reported incidence is between 0.1 and 0.5 per 100,000 people per year.

# Pathophysiology

Pemphigus vulgaris is caused by autoantibodies that target keratinocyte proteins (desmogleins). Acantholysis wherein there is a loss of keratinocyte to keratinocyte adhesion induced by the binding of circulating immunoglobulin G (IgG) autoantibodies to intercellular adhesion molecules.

Murine studies have shown that enzymatic inactivation of Dsg 1 and gene deletion of Dsg 3 results in pathology that is similar to PV. Also, the addition of IgG from patients with PV to mice results in pathology that is similar to PV. This phenomenon was observed to be dose-dependent and suggests that reducing the circulating levels of IgG against Dsg 1 and Dsg 3 can improve patient outcomes. In patients with the mucocutaneous disease, it was found that they have autoantibodies against Dsg 1 and Dsg 3, whereas patients with disease localized to their mucous membranes were only found to have autoantibodies against Dsg 3. This can be explained by the desmoglein compensation model in which there are Dsg 1 and Dsg 3 in the cutaneous epidermis and that having autoantibodies against just one of the desmogleins will not cause disease. However, due to the normal lack of Dsg 1 in mucous membranes, autoantibodies against only Dsg 3 will result in disease because Dsg 1 is not present to compensate for the inhibition of Dsg 3. The binding of antibodies to desmogleins has been confirmed by epitope mapping and is presumed to disrupt desmoglein binding by affecting steric hindrance. Another proposal of the pathophysiology in PV that may occur in addition to the above explanation is the desmoglein non-assembly depletion hypothesis. This theory suggests that autoantibodies not only bind desmoglein but that they also bind each other leading to crosslinking and the inability for desmosomes to maintain cell-cell adhesion.

PV has been shown to have a genetic component, although familial cases are uncommon.

Exposure to certain medications like penicillamine and captopril can trigger PV. Such a trigger can happen through the effects on binding to molecules involved in cell adhesion, influence on enzymes that mediate keratinocyte aggregation, and molecules involved in cell and by stimulating neoantigen formation.

# Histopathology

The diagnosis of pemphigus vulgaris is confirmed with a biopsy of the lesion. Histopathology and Tzanck smear will reveal acantholysis. Direct immunofluorescence is considered the "gold standard" for the diagnosis of PV. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing will show serum IgG against Dsg 1, Dsg 3, or both in 98.5% of samples. ELISA testing for PV is commercially available.

# History and Physical

Pemphigus vulgaris is a blistering disease that initially presents on the oral mucosa in 80% of cases. These intraoral blisters often rupture, leaving painful erosions. Cutaneous lesions may appear in about 75% of patients with PV after the first oral blisters have presented. Vesicles, erosions, or bullae may appear on erythematous or normal-appearing skin. A Nikolsky sign is described as a blister formation with minor pressure or trauma and is seen in PV.

Due to the painful nature of oral lesions, PV can result in an impaired nutritional status. Mucosal PV can be found in the conjunctiva, nasal mucosa, larynx, pharynx, esophagus, penis, vagina, and anus.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of pemphigus vulgaris is ascertained by obtaining a thorough history and through the use of a biopsy. The biopsy for direct immunofluorescence (DIF) should be taken from normal-appearing perilesional skin or mucosa.

In patients with positive DIF results, ELISA testing will show serum IgG against Dsg 1, Dsg 3, or both.

# Treatment / Management

Systemic corticosteroids have had a significant impact on the treatment of pemphigus vulgaris and remain the backbone in the management of PV.

Second-line treatment is in combination with corticosteroids and includes adding either azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil (MMF).

Anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies, such as rituximab and ofatumumab, have also been used in conjunction with corticosteroids for first-line treatment in moderate-to-severe pemphigus.

Third-line treatments for PV include intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), cyclophosphamide, dapsone, immunoadsorption, and methotrexate.

Most of the emerging therapies that could be effective for PV are monoclonal antibodies, with the cost being a major restriction to large trials. Obinutuzumab, ofatumumab, and veltuzumab are anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies that may be an alternative to rituximab. Other therapies that may offer hope in PV include medications that target B-cell derived B-cell activating factor (BAFF), a proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL), CD19, Bruton kinase (BTK), and interleukin (IL-4).

Future PV research should focus on better understanding the specific pathogenic molecules and cytokines, after which better therapies can be produced.

# Differential Diagnosis

IgA pemphigus is similar to pemphigus vulgaris in that is has painful blisters, but IgA pemphigus does not present with oral mucosa blisters. Direct and indirect immunofluorescence can both help to differentiate PV from IgA pemphigus.

Pemphigus foliaceus is similar to PV in the fact that it is an autoimmune blistering disease, however similarly to IgA pemphigus, pemphigus foliaceus does not affect the oral mucosa. Pemphigus foliaceus is less common than PV.

Paraneoplastic pemphigus also presents with mucocutaneous vesicles and bullae similar to PV. Paraneoplastic pemphigus can be differentiated from PV using indirect immunofluorescence and immunoblot.

# Prognosis

Follow up, and response to treatment of pemphigus vulgaris should be monitored closely. Pemphigus is an active disease and often requires dose adjustments and change in medications according to the response to treatment. Septicemia is the leading cause of death in PV.

# Complications

Systemic corticosteroids, which are the backbone of pemphigus vulgaris treatment, are well known for causing osteoporosis and other complications. Corticosteroids have been reported to cause fractures in 30 to 50% and cause osteonecrosis in 9 to 40% of patients receiving long-term therapy.

A case-control study by Namazi et al. looked at the incidence of P-wave dispersion (PWD) in patients with PV. The authors reasoned that atrial fibrillation can be predicted by the presence of PWD and hypothesized that atrial fibrillation might be higher in PV patients. Patients were excluded if they had obesity, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cardiopulmonary disease. The authors stated the limitations of their study included a small sample size of 90 patients, and the use of corticosteroids was higher in the patients with PV. Regardless of those limitations, the incidence of PWD confirmed by electrocardiogram (ECG) was higher in the PV group than in the control group.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education should include close follow-up visits with their provider and specialists. Medication compliance is integral to the management of pemphigus vulgaris and can be re-enforced by the support of the pharmacist.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Pemphigus vulgaris is a life-threatening autoimmune disease for which treatment is indicated. The goal of treatment in PV is to induce complete remission of PV with minimal treatment-related adverse effects. Cutaneous and mucosal involvement in PV can cause significant pain and functional impairment. Local measures may help to improve patient symptoms. Due to the serious adverse effects, prolonged treatment with high doses of a systemic glucocorticoid is not recommended.  A secondary infection like Herpes simplex should be considered when lesions fail to respond to treatment. An interprofessional approach, including social workers, wound care staff, dieticians, nursing, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, pharmacists, dentists, primary care physicians, hospitalists, and dermatologists, can optimize outcomes.