Nasal tip rhinoplasty is typically an elective, ambulatory surgical procedure. In this setting, the rate of complications must be minimized; an interprofessional team approach likely improves patient safety.

The surgical and perioperative staff should emphasize fluid, closed-loop communication to achieve optimal outcomes. The process begins well before the surgical date. Preoperatively, a multidisciplinary risk assessment is frequently performed, the so-called surgical "clearance."  Candidates for elective aesthetic surgery should be acceptably low-risk patients as determined by a primary care physician or another appropriate medical specialist. The surgeon should spend time reviewing the risks of the procedure and clarifying expectations for both long-term results and the immediate postoperative period. A thorough informed consent process should be implemented as a routine part of the surgeon's practice. Instructions for the night before surgery and the recovery process should be discussed in detail. The patient should be provided with written information, and a clear communication plan should the patient need to contact the surgeon emergently.

Before surgery, systematic patient identification procedures should be in place to ensure that the correct procedure is being performed on the correct patient. An additional consent process is usually performed, and the patient should have the chance to address any last-minute concerns or questions. Additionally, any updates to the history and physical examination should be documented. Occasionally, it is necessary to postpone or cancel surgery due to developments in the patient's health after clearance.

In the operating room, "time out" procedures are useful to reduce the incidence of unacceptable wrong-site or wrong-patient medical errors. During surgery, communication among the surgeon, anesthesiologist, surgical scrub technicians, and operating room nursing staff is critical to allow the case to proceed safely and efficiently. Ideally, perioperative staff should already be familiar with the surgeon and the procedure being performed. Delays in the operating room should be kept to a minimum to maximize efficiency and patient safety.

In the recovery area, communication between the recovery staff and the surgeon is critical. The staff should have a reliable means of communication to relay information that may indicate a complication and require an escalation of care and/or transfer to a hospital.  Although ambulatory surgery is known to be safe, a streamlined system to address emergencies must be in place. The post-anesthesia care staff should also have a general understanding of the surgeon's recovery protocols because they will often guide the patient at discharge. [Level 3]