Both the generation and maintenance of the resting membrane potential are of great importance in excitable cells (neurons and muscle). Conditions that alter the resting membrane potential of these cells can have a profound impact on their proper functioning. For instance, hypokalemia is a state in which there is a lower than normal amount of K+ in the blood. As a result, there is an enhanced concentration gradient that favors the flux of K+ out of cells. This results in hyperpolarization of the cells and requires a greater stimulus to achieve action potential. This leads to a more negative potential in cardiac muscles as a result of the recovery of sodium channel inactivation. Low potassium levels lead to delayed ventricular repolarization, which can contribute to reentrant arrhythmias.

Note: Depolarization refers to the increase in the positivity of membrane potential while hyperpolarization refers to the increase in negativity of membrane potential. These two events commonly occur in excitable cells that have an action potential, whereas most other cells have a constant resting membrane potential that does not change. Most are familiar with the concept of depolarization when referring to an action potential. For an action potential, an initial graded depolarization of the membrane results in the opening of the voltage-gated sodium channels. As large numbers of positive sodium ions rush into the cell through open channels, the interior of the cell becomes more positively charged, the membrane potential becomes more positive, and depolarization occurs. However, depolarization does not always result in an action potential. Action potentials occur only when the graded potentials (initiated by synaptic activity) are of significant strength to cause the membrane voltage to pass a threshold, after which the voltage-gated sodium channels open.