Obesity is a global issue, and almost every country faces this serious public health problem. Obesity is not a benign disorder, and its management usually requires an interprofessional group of healthcare team members. The answer to obesity is not only prescribing the latest weight loss medication or referring the patient for the most advanced bariatric procedure- but also educating the patient on its complications and the need to change lifestyle. The recommended course of action is as follows.

Clinicians prescribe phentermine-topiramate for the appropriate indication. The patient should be encouraged to exercise and become physically active. As phentermine-topiramate is teratogenic, clinicians should counsel women of childbearing age to avoid taking phentermine-topiramate. The pharmacist should counsel the patient about the potential side effects and report back to clinicians for significant drug interactions. Constipation is also a real issue with this drug combination, and the patient should be told to increase fiber in the diet, drink more water, and use stool softeners or laxatives as needed. Clinical dieticians should prescribe individual diet plans for the patient and educate the patient that a change in diet is necessary for any intervention to work.

Emergency department triage nurses and physicians should recognize the signs of acute overdose and ensure a patent airway, breathing, and circulation. In addition, the critical care physician consultation is necessary if the patient requires MICU level of care requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation. In the cases of severe acute overdose, medical toxicologist consultation is required. Finally, a psychiatrist consult is required if the overdose is intentional.

Clinicians can refer the patient to the bariatric surgeon if there is a failure to achieve desired weight despite maximal exercise, dietary, and pharmacological interventions. Weight loss with phentermine-topiramate can take many months, and thus, compliance with therapy is necessary. Therefore clinicians should counsel the patient regarding weight-loss expectations.

**Outcomes**

Based on clinical trial data, about 70% of patients did lose 5-10% of their body weight over 56 weeks.