The diagnostic evaluation of germinoma requires imaging, measurement of serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) oncoproteins, and biopsy for histological confirmation.

**Neuroimaging**

MRI is the preferred imaging modality for diagnosis and staging because of the higher sensitivity compared to CT scan. Germinomas form a homogenous mass with variable intensity and maybe isointense or hypointense on T1 and isointense or hyperintense on T2 weighted images. In more advanced disease, germinomas may become heterogeneous with a partially cystic appearance and may invade adjacent brain parenchyma. On CT scan, germinoma demonstrates engulfed calcifications in contrast to pineal parenchymal tumors in which calcifications are much more prominent. However, imaging alone cannot distinguish between germinoma, non-germinomatous GCT, and pineal parenchymal tumors. Therefore, a complete evaluation is crucial.

**Tumor Markers**

Quantitation of tumor oncoproteins in serum and CSF aids in making a distinction between germinoma and non-germinomatous GCT. Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and beta-HCG levels are normal in germinoma. beta-HCG may be slightly elevated in germinoma with syncytiotrophoblast cells, but levels remain less than 50 IU/ml. Greater levels raise suspicion for choriocarcinoma.

**CSF Cytology**

CSF cytology is crucial from a therapeutic standpoint as the detection of neoplastic cells in CSF indicates metastatic disease.

**Biopsy**

Surgical biopsy is indicated for histological confirmation.

**Immunohistochemistry**

IHC is an essential adjunct to histology as the tumor shows membranous reactivity for c-kit (CD117), which is a specific marker for germinoma. Oct 3/4 is also positive, but it is non-specific and also expressed by embryonal carcinoma. Placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP) with a membranous and cytoplasmic pattern is also expressed in germinoma.

The biopsy can sometimes be unreliable in identifying mixed GCT due to limited tissue sampling. Therefore, a careful correlation between imaging characteristics, tumor biomarkers, and histology is required for correct identification of the tumor.