Tyrosine is an aromatic amino acid that can cross the blood-brain barrier and be transported into neurons in the presynaptic terminal, where it serves as a precursor for catecholamine synthesis. Elevated levels of tyrosine in the central nervous system (CNS) triggers the production of norepinephrine and other catecholamines. The steps for norepinephrine synthesis are as follows:

Tyrosine is first hydroxylated to dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) by tyrosine hydroxylase (rate-limiting step). DOPA is then decarboxylated by L-amino acid decarboxylase to produce dopamine. Dopamine gets transported into a vesicle through vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT) where it can be converted to norepinephrine by neurons that contain an additional enzyme, dopamine beta-hydroxylase. Norepinephrine can then be released from the presynaptic terminal to the synaptic cleft via exocytosis or convert to epinephrine in neurons that contain the enzyme phenylethanolamine-N-methyl transferase.

Phenylalanine is another amino acid that can also be used for catecholamine synthesis after it is converted to tyrosine by phenylalanine hydroxylase.

In the peripheral nervous system, chromaffin cells in the adrenal medulla (following the same steps as mentioned above) synthesize norepinephrine. Once synthesized, they get stored in chromaffin granules. Norepinephrine can be released into the bloodstream or be converted to epinephrine by phenylethanolamine-N-methyl transferase. The release of these hormones into the bloodstream is stimulated by acetylcholine (released from preganglionic splanchnic fibers) which binds nicotinic receptors located in the adrenal medulla.