A detailed patient history and clinical examination are the most important factors for an accurate diagnosis of ATTS.

Patients will typically complain of sharp shooting pain, numbness, or tingling along the distribution of the DPN or its terminal branches. Symptoms are typically intermittent and exacerbated by physical activity and alleviated by rest and elevated. The most common location of symptoms is the dorsal forefoot, more specifically the distal dorsal first webspace. The patient may recall a history of acute trauma (ankle sprain or hyper-plantar flexion injury) or repetitive microtrauma (runner or military trainee). On physical exam, repetitive percussion of the DPN may reproduce radiating paresthesias in the distal (Tinnel sign) or proximal (Valleix sign) directions. Palpation of the ankle may reveal edema or a space-occupying lesion (varicose vein or ganglion), while palpation of the foot may reveal palpable dorsal osteophytes (bone spurs). Extreme active or passive plantar flexion of the ankle may reproduce the patients' symptoms due to a stretching/compression of the nerve. A pes cavus (high arch) foot type can be present on the exam, which can contribute to dorsal compressive forces and abnormal fitting of shoe-gear.

A full lower extremity musculoskeletal and neurologic exam should be performed, including muscle strength, vibratory, light touch, temperature, and two-point discrimination exams.

In a small case series of 13 patients, Yasin et al. reported that Tinel sign was positive in 100% of patients, and a palpable bulge in anterior ankle or foot was present in 92% of ATTS cases.