Tinea cruris is a prevalent pathology with a worldwide distribution and an extensive history of affecting human populations. Despite our familiarity with the condition, there has been limited research specific to this subset of dermatophyte infections. Renewed interest has emerged with the development of recalcitrant infections and concern over fungal resistance. Self-treatment with easy-to-access over-the-counter topical antifungal and steroid preparations have been implicated as a probable cause of the observed decrease in treatment efficacy. In the context of fungal resistance, newly developed formulations such as luliconazole and underutilized, older agents like ciclopirox may be beneficial.

With regard to corticosteroids, there is conflicting data on the appropriateness of their use for tinea cruris. Current management principles and guidelines label them as mistreatment; however, continued investigations of their utility are underway. If a practitioner believes topical steroids may benefit a patient, close supervision should be maintained throughout the treatment course with continued consideration of known adverse event potential for the individual and public health outcomes.

With an understanding of the changing landscape of this common condition, and by implementing an interprofessional healthcare team approach including primary care clinicians (including PAs and NPs), dermatologists, infectious disease specialists, pharmacists, and nursing, patient care and public health may be improved through targeted, conscientious mycological treatment, patient education, and antifungal stewardship. [Level 2] This interprofessional paradigm should lead to the best outcomes with minimal to no adverse events. [Level 5]