Aging is one of the main factors directly associated with disability. Moreover, aging is a determining factor related to worse nutritional status and frailty, which are other indirect conditions that predict the onset of disability, morbidity, and mortality.

Dementia:  it is a neurological disorder, with many subtypes of which Alzheimer's is the most common. Dementia is characterized by a decline of one or more cognitive functions of the brain (language, memory, perceptual-motor) that is severe enough to interact with the daily activities and the independence of a person.

Parkinson disease: it is a neurodegenerative disease whose cardinal symptoms are related to the motor system (tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity, and postural instability). It is also common to find other manifestations, especially neuropsychiatric, which make Parkinson disease a condition with a significant impact on the quality of life of these patients.

Stroke: it is cerebrovascular disease, with two main subtypes: ischemic or hemorrhagic. Ischemic is the most common, usually with an atherothrombotic etiology and risk factors (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, smoking, and aging); it makes the blood perfusion of specific brain areas to fail, causing different neurological manifestations. If the vascular event is severe enough, infarction and permanent neuronal loss can happen. Depending on the affected area, the symptoms and signs may vary; it is frequent seeing hemiparesis or hemiplegia (weakness or paralysis in half of the body), sensory loss, dysphagia, speech impairment, or body schema disorder, among others. Stroke is the first cause of disability in industrialized countries. Therefore, timely interventions and rehabilitation play an important role in the prevention and treatment of these patients.

Dressing disability is assessable using different scales and indexes. These methods provide us with an idea of the requirements, demands, and vulnerabilities of people. There are different types of indexes for evaluation of the essential daily living activities (DLA), such as the Katz Index, the Functional Independent Measure, and the Barthel Index for Activities of Daily Living.

The Katz ADL and The Barthel Index are probably the most commonly used. They assess functional independence in different areas, such as feeding, bathing, grooming, dressing, bowel and bladder control, toilet use, transfer, and mobility in different circumstances. Each section has a scale and punctuation to assign; the dressing scale includes +1 for the independent, and +0 for those who are unable in the Katz ADL, and +10 for the independent, +5 for those needing help, and +0 for those who are unable in the Barthel Index.