Radiotherapy utilization in low-grade gliomas was prospectively examined in the mid-1980s in the non-believers’ trial, which evaluated the role of immediate radiotherapy after resection versus salvage.

The role of radiotherapy in the setting of low-grade glioma is confined to patients considered at high risk of progression despite surgery. The NCCN guidelines recommend that radiotherapy be offered in patients >40 years old or those with subtotal resection.

For high-risk patients, radiotherapy is typically combined with chemotherapy.

The timing and sequencing may vary depending on the systemic agent. If PCV is planned, then radiotherapy is typically delivered before chemotherapy. If TMZ is being utilized, then radiotherapy is delivered concurrently.

**Simulation Setup**

The patient is typically placed in the supine position with head immobilization prior to CT simulation. This is usually accomplished with a thermoplastic head mask. Pre- and post-op MRI of the brain with and without contrast should be fused with the CT images to improve target delineation, including the tumor bed, gross residual disease, and residual edema.

**Delivery**

Typically, two modalities can be utilized in this setting: Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT) and Proton therapy. IMRT is the most common technique allowing for highly conformal treatment plans that, while leading to a low dose bath of radiation, can generally spare critical structures sufficiently to reduce the risk of long-term side effects. Proton therapy can be used in special circumstances, especially in children, to further reduce the dose to critical structures and hypothetically reduce the risk of long-term toxicity.

**Dose and Dose Constraints**

Doses typically range from 45-54Gy in 1.8-2.0Gy per fraction.

The optic nerve/chiasm should be kept under 55 Gy, which has a <3% risk of neuropathy.

**Target Delineation**

MRI imaging will be critical to target delineation in these patients. The pre and post-op MRI scans should be fused with the planning CT. Preoperative imaging can help delineate the tumor bed, while post-op imaging is useful for contouring any residual disease and edema. The gross target volume (GTV) is typically any residual disease based on the operative report or imaging. The clinical target volume includes the GTV, the tumor bed, and any post-operative edema on T2/FLAIR MRI sequence. A 1-1.5cm margin is typically added to make the CTV. A PTV margin of 0.5 to 0.7cm is also added.

**Re-irradiation**

One prospective study observing patients who have undergone a gross total resection of the low-grade glioma and younger than 40 years of age found that slightly over 50% have recurred within five years post-surgery.