The TWIST scoring system is often used to determine the presence of testicular torsion. It has been validated in several studies in ruling out torsion. The TWIST tool includes:

Hard testis - 2

Swelling - 2

Nausea/vomiting - 1

Absent cremasteric reflex - 1

High riding testis - 1

The higher the score, the greater the probability that the patient has torsion. Ultrasound is recommended for those with low scores. Those with high TWIST scores can be taken for surgery without ultrasound.

Ultrasound is the primary diagnostic modality beyond the physical exam. Ultrasound for testicular torsion is approximately 93% sensitive and 100% specific. Trained sonographers should perform this exam in a timely manner. The point-of-care ultrasound technique to evaluate the testicle involves the high-frequency transducer (5 to 10 MHz), ample ultrasound gel, and proper patient positioning. The process is described in brief below:

- Place the patient supine and frog-legged with a towel under the scrotum for support. Using ample gel and minimal pressure, evaluate the unaffected testicle first.

- Scan the testicle in its entirety in both the transverse and longitudinal planes. Scan with grayscale first while noting the presence of fluid collections and testicular texture. A normal testicular is around 4 x 3 x 2.5cm. In the longitudinal plan or long axis, the testicle appears as an oval structure with homogenous echotexture and smooth rounded borders. In the transverse plane or short axis, the testicle appears as a circular structure with homogenous echotexture and smooth rounded borders. Side-by-side comparison of the testicles is critical to evaluate for size, fluid collections, changes of echotexture, and discrepancies of color Doppler. If the testicle is torsed, there will often be a hydrocele present with a testicle with reduced color or power flow.

Color flow doppler must be applied to both the affected and unaffected testicle of the patient. Begin with the unaffected testicle to gain a sense of what normal vascular flow looks like in this particular patient. Power Doppler is useful in the evaluation of testicular vascular flow as well. Power Doppler has greater sensitivity for vascular flow but does not allow the examiner to discern between the arterial and venous flow.

Doppler can be employed to evaluate for both venous and arterial flow by placing the Doppler gate on areas of vascular flow and evaluating for both venous and arterial Doppler waveforms. Arterial waveforms will have large spikes due to the peaks of arterial blood pressure whereas venous waveforms appear typically as plateaus of Doppler flow. Applying Doppler and checking for both venous and arterial flow can further demonstrate the severity of the torsion.  The same technique will be employed on the affected testicle.

Assessment for pyuria with urine analysis is typically part of the acute scrotal pain workup. The presence of pyuria is consistent with epididymitis, orchitis, or urinary tract infection but does not rule out the possibility of testicular torsion.