The function of the wrist joint is to provide range of motion necessary to adequately perform daily functions while maintaining a physiologic level of inherent stability. This is accomplished, in part, by the osseous articular components creating a condyloid joint that permits simultaneous movement in two perpendicular planes, in this case, dorsopalmar and radioulnar.

The joint itself is formed through the articulations between the distal radius and the scaphoid, lunate, and triquetrum. The proximal articulation forms a concave shape composed of a combination between the distal end of the radius and articular disk. The distal articulation is convex and composed of the scaphoid, lunate, and triquetrum bones of the proximal hand. Note that the ulna is not part of the wrist joint itself, as it articulates with the distal via the distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ).

The four ligaments responsible for maintaining the stability of the joint are the palmar and dorsal radiocarpal ligaments and the ulnar and radial collateral ligaments.

The dorsal radiocarpal ligament is similar to the palmar ligament except that it is located on the dorsal side of the wrist joint and its alternative function is to ensure that the hand moves with the forearm during pronation. The ulnar collateral ligament runs from the ulnar styloid process to the triquetrum and pisiform bones, and the radial collateral ligament runs from the radial styloid process to the scaphoid and trapezium bones. Both collateral ligaments provide stability by reducing lateral motion.

Surrounding the wrist joint is a dual-layered joint capsule, which is common amongst all synovial joints. The outer layer is fibrous and attaches to the radius, ulna, and carpal bones. The inner layer forms a synovial membrane which secretes synovial fluid and lubricates the joint.