Pre-hospital and emergency department management of traumatic hand amputation patients should focus on the medical stabilization of the patient. The injury may not just involve hand amputation, and following proper ATLS (Advanced Trauma Life Support) protocol is critical before treating the often more noticed hand injury. Elevation and compressive dressings can control bleeding; a tourniquet may be necessary.

There are essentially two definitive options in the acute management of hand amputations: replantation or revision amputation. Indications for replantation for the upper extremity include any pediatric amputation, thumb involvement, multiple digit amputation, and amputations occurring at or proximal to the palm.

If replantation is the best option for the patient, following surgical debridement of the wound, bony fixation is the first step in replantation.

The revision of a hand amputation in lieu of a replantation attempt requires careful consideration. Although a hand amputation is nearly always an indication for replantation from a biomechanical perspective, the specifics of the injury and the patient comorbidities may preclude this as an option.  Amputation would be the preferred treatment when the amputated part is damaged or contaminated beyond resolve, such as in a crush injury.  Prolonged ischemia time outside of the window outlined above also indicates preferential amputation. Primary revision amputation is preferable for the patient who is medically unsuitable for the rigors of replantation and rehabilitation; advanced age alone is not a contraindication to replantation.