Generally, the exact detail and pathophysiology of radiation-induced cardiac toxicity are beyond the scope of this portion of the discussion. There are no official published screening or prevention guidelines. Therefore, no precise recommendations are possible. However, there are risks associated with worsened cardiac outcomes following radiation therapy. These include younger age at treatment, radiation doses above 30 Gy (although there is no truly safe dose of radiation), irradiation of left-sided breast cancers or intrathoracic lesions, pre-existing heart disease, and the presence of risk factors for coronary artery disease: diabetes, hypertension, smoking, and hyperlipidemia. The interprofessional team must identify these patients before receiving radiation therapy to optimize lifestyle and pharmacologic interventions and coordinate proper follow-up and care. Nursing and other medical support staff play a critical role in identifying these patients and ensuring that the providing physician is aware of these risk factors to discuss extended cardiac follow-up with the patient. Additionally, nurses involved in the patient intake should remain vigilant for any patient with a remote history of thoracic radiation therapy showing signs or symptoms suggestive of cardiovascular disease. Appropriate identification of risk factors, adequate patient follow-up, and anticipation of cardiac complications are key factors to significantly improve the morbidity and mortality in post-radiation cancer patients.