# Continuing Education Activity

Hypercoagulability or thrombophilia is the increased tendency of blood to thrombose. A normal and healthy response to bleeding for maintaining hemostasis involves the formation of a stable clot, and the process is called coagulation. Hypercoagulability describes the pathologic state of exaggerated coagulation or coagulation in the absence of bleeding. Arterial thrombosis, such as in myocardial infarction and stroke, is different from venous thromboses, such as deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE). This activity reviews the cause and presentation of hypercoagulability and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management

**Objectives:**
- Identify the causes of hypercoagulability.
- Describe the evaluation of a patient with
hypercoagulability.
- Summarize the treatment of
hypercoagulability.
- Explain modalities to improve care coordination among interprofessional team members in order to improve outcomes for patients affected by hypercoagulability.

# Introduction

Hypercoagulability or thrombophilia is the increased tendency of blood to thrombose. A normal and healthy response to bleeding for maintaining hemostasis involves the formation of a stable clot, and the process is called coagulation.  Hypercoagulability describes the pathologic state of exaggerated coagulation or coagulation in the absence of bleeding. Different constituents of the blood interact to create a thrombus. Arterial thrombosis, such as in myocardial infarction and stroke, is different from venous thromboses, such as deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE). Pathophysiology and treatment differ for arterial and venous thrombosis, but risk factors overlap.

# Etiology

Hypercoagulability disorders are either acquired or inherited.

# Epidemiology

Venous thromboembolism is the second most common cardiovascular disorder following myocardial infarction; it is more frequent than stroke. Its incidence ranges between 1 and 5 in 1000 per year in the general population.

# Pathophysiology

Coagulation is an inherent property of the hematologic system and under healthy conditions, normal blood flow is maintained by the balance between the pro-coagulant and anti-thrombotic factors. A hypercoagulable state and subsequent thromboembolism is a result of overactivity of pro-coagulant factors or a deficiency in anti-coagulants. The interplay of factors is complicated - coagulation activators and inhibitors and their production and degradation (quantitative) and functional properties (qualitative) all influence thrombosis. The triad of hypercoagulability, vascular stasis and vascular trauma as described by Virchow in 1856 still holds and remains the harbinger of vascular thrombosis.

Some Coagulation Disorders include the following:

**Antithrombin III (ATIII)**deficiency. Antithrombin III binds to heparin on endothelial cells and forms a complex with thrombin (thrombin-antithrombin (TAT) complex) thus inhibiting coagulation. The prevalence may be 1 in 500 in the general population. Its deficiency may present as early age thrombosis (less than 50 years old) and carries the highest risk for thrombotic events among the inherited thrombophilias. Antithrombin is synthesized in the liver but is not vitamin K-dependent. ATIII deficiency can occur as a consequence of reduced synthesis (liver damage) or increased loss (nephrotic syndrome, enteropathy, DIC, sepsis, burn, trauma, microangiopathy, and cardiopulmonary bypass surgery).

**Protein C deficiency**can present as thrombosis in teenagers. Protein C and S deficiency may be inherited but is also inducable by liver dysfunction, vitamin k antagonists, renal failure, DIC, and active thrombosis. Protein S enhances the effect of activated protein C. Protein S deficiency can be classified as type I (reduced quantity of protein S), type II (low APC activity), and type III (low free protein S due to increased binding to the complement factor C4b). The interaction of protein S with C4, which is an active phase reactant exemplifies the relation of coagulation, inflammation, and autoimmunity.

Protein C interacts with thrombomodulin to become **activated protein C (APC)**. APC has anticoagulant, anti-inflammatory, and cytoprotective properties and has been proposed for the treatment of sepsis. The signal cascade leading to APC can become distorted through many acquired or inherited mechanisms leading to APC resistance. Activated protein C inactivates coagulation factors V and VIII. The factor V Leiden mutation is a common cause for APC resistance and the most frequent genetic thrombophilia.

Prothrombin is the precursor of thrombin, which is factor II. The **prothrombin G20210A mutation**is the second most common inherited risk factor for thrombosis and leads to increased levels of prothrombin which demonstrates a higher risk for arterial and venous thrombotic events.

**Hyperhomocysteinemia**is associated with premature atherosclerosis and thrombosis and caused by defects of the methionine metabolic pathway. Deficiencies of cofactors of this pathway such as vitamin B6, B12, and folate or defects of enzymes such as cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) or methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) decrease the efficiency of homocysteine metabolism. Furthermore renal failure, hypothyroidism, and drugs such as methotrexate, phenytoin, and carbamazepine increase homocysteine levels. On the other hand, lowering homocysteine levels has not been shown to reduce thrombotic risk.

**Elevated factor VIII (FVIII)**increases the risk of thrombosis. African-Americans appear to have higher levels whereas individuals with blood group O tend to have lower levels of FVIII. High levels of this factor also correlate with acute phase reactions, estrogen usage, pregnancy, and after aerobic exercise.

**Dysfibrinolysis**includes plasminogen deficiency, dysfibrinogenemia, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) deficiency, plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI) increase, and factor XII deficiency, which is involved in plasmin generation. Deficient plasminogen clinically appears similar to protein c deficiency with thrombosis during the teenage years. PAI increase and deficient tPA has an association with diabetes mellitus,

The **sticky platelet syndrome**is an autosomal dominant disease in which platelets coming into contact with epinephrine or adenosine diphosphate (ADP) react to induce hypercoagulability.

The most common acquired thrombophilia is the **antiphospholipid syndrome (APS)**in which antibodies are directed against natural constituents of cell membranes, the phospholipids. These antiphospholipid antibodies (APLA) occur in 3 to 5% of the population and may cause arterial or venous thrombosis and fetal loss. APLAs being tested for include lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin, anti-beta-2-glycoprotein. Lupus anticoagulant leads to prolongation of coagulation (aPTT) in vitro but thrombosis in vivo.

**Malignancy**is the second most common acquired hypercoagulability and leads to a prothrombotic state through the production of procoagulant factors (tissue factor and cancer procoagulant) and the interaction of tumor cells with blood and vascular endothelium. Stasis from tumor compression, paraproteinemia, and cytokine release pose an additional risk.

The extrinsic coagulation pathway trigger is tissue factor (TF) which activates coagulation factor VII. Tissue factor is not expressed under physiologic conditions by endothelial cells but continuously produced by subendothelial (activation of coagulation in case of vessel damage) and malignant cells (association of malignancy and thrombotic events). TF is naturally counteracted by the tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI).

Arterial bypass grafts fail prematurely in smokers. **Smoking**tobacco contains various toxins. Nicotine results in endothelial cell damage. The release of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) and tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) get reduced. Carbon monoxide increases the permeability of endothelium to lipids thus leading to atheroma formation.

In general, **exercise**improves the cardiovascular risk profile, but observations of sudden cardiac death in some individuals led investigators to search for causes. Exercise influences coagulation, fibrinolysis, and platelet aggregation.

The onset of arterial thrombosis (myocardial infarction and stroke) follows a **circadian**pattern being most frequent during the early morning hours.

**Endogenous and exogenous hormones**influence coagulation. Oral contraception and hormone replacement therapy are a risk factor for thrombosis and cardiovascular events.

Through the increase of procoagulants (diverse coagulation factors and the number of platelets) and the decrease of anticoagulants (PAI) in addition to stasis caused by compression of the gravid uterus, **pregnancy**presents a time of hypercoagulability extending 2 months into the postpartum period.

Heparin is a commonly used anticoagulant. Under certain circumstances, arterial and venous thrombosis concomitantly with thrombocytopenia paradoxically results from prolonged heparin administration, which is called**heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT)**. In type-I HIT platelets show a weak reduction of platelets and have little clinical consequences. This is in contrast to the strong reduction of thrombocytes and serious sequelae of HIT type-II. The conformational change of heparin following heparin binding to platelet factor 4 triggers antibody production to heparin. Subsequently, monocytes become activated and attack the vascular endothelium leading to thrombotic events.

There is an interplay between **inflammation**and the coagulation system. Inflammation triggers a hypercoagulable state.

**Trauma**is another acquired hypercoagulable state. Procoagulant disbalance is more pronounced during the first 24 hours following injury and in women. The onset of respiratory distress syndrome and multiorgan failure following trauma has been associated with elevated tissue factor.

Other conditions associated with a hypercoagulable state include myeloproliferative disorders, multiple myeloma,

# History and Physical

A detailed history is critical to differentiate between provoked and unprovoked thromboembolism and should include demographics, family history, assessment of risk factors, description of symptoms and followed by a standard physical examination. In up to 70% of patients suffering from VTE, a provoking factor is present. One in three patients reports a positive family history.

# Evaluation

To diagnose hypercoagulability syndromes, the combination of screening tests, confirmation tests, and risk factors all must merit consideration.

Moll et al. suggest the "4P" approach, which is patient selection, pretest counseling, proper laboratory test interpretation, and provision of education and advice. Additionally, they created a risk of recurrence triangle to decide based on risk assessment, how long it would take to achieve anticoagulation. Not every patient requires testing for thrombophilia. Testing is not advisable during the acute thrombotic event (rather schedule for 3-month follow-up) while being on anticoagulation, and patients with provoked thromboembolism.

In patients with a history that brings up suspicion for APS (female, young age, recurrent VTE or fetal loss) unexplained PTT may prompt investigation for APS which are Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing for antiphospholipid antibodies, the diluted Russell venom viper test (dRVVT) and PTT-LA.

As DVT and PE occur in up to 20% of patients with undetected cancer and unexplained VTE in older patients should prompt work-up for malignancy. Screening for cancer includes routine (history and physical examination, ESR, CBC, liver and kidney function tests, urinalysis, and CXR) or extended investigations (tumor markers, CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, mammography in women more than 40 years old, and prostate ultrasound in men older than 50 years, lower endoscopy, Papanicolaou smear, and fecal occult blood test).

Up to 4% of strokes are due to coagulation disorders. The incidence of stroke in young adults is increasing gradually. In patients with hypercoagulability syndromes, there is an increased risk of venous thrombosis than ischemic stroke. In some instances, venous thrombosis can also give rise to arterial strokes by paradoxical embolism, commonly through patent foramen ovale. So, young adults with stroke and a right to left shunt should be checked for venous thrombosis like deep vein thrombosis by ultrasound of lower extremities. The Homocystinuria and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome associated with arterial strokes. Stroke is the most common arterial event secondary to antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. Any stroke patient younger than 45 should be screened for antiphospholipid antibody syndrome.

# Treatment / Management

The substitution of coagulation factors can achieve causal treatment. ATIII can be substituted in cases of inherited (prophylaxis and treatment of ongoing thrombosis) or acquired deficiency (increased consumption in DIC and sepsis). Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) contains the natural balance of procoagulant and anticoagulant factors.

Antithrombotic treatment decision should be based on a risk-benefit analysis.

Different anticoagulants and antiplatelets are available to prevent recurrent VTE.

# Differential Diagnosis

For investigation of patients suffering from thrombotic events, it is essential to differentiate provoked and unprovoked thrombosis through history and physical. Thrombotic events are observable under diverse conditions. Therefore a broad differential diagnosis is essential including the more frequent (immobilization, travel) and less frequent entities such as cardiac disease (atrial fibrillation, cardiomyopathy, mitral valve prolapse, prosthetic valves), non-bacterial thrombotic endocarditis (NBTE) and hematologic causes such as disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC) and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT).

Thrombophilia should be a differential diagnosis for vaso-occlusive events.  Arterial thrombosis such as osteonecrosis,

# Complications

Deep venous thrombosis has two major complications: pulmonary embolism, which is acute and life-threatening, and postthrombotic syndrome (PTS) with chronic venous ulceration (CVU).

# Deterrence and Patient Education

When considering hemophilia testing (recurrent thromboembolic events, strong family history, etc.) referral to a hematologist should be considered.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Thomas proposed the mnemonic **CALMSHAPES**to remember the causes of the hypercoagulable state.

- Protein **C**deficiency

- **A**ntiphospholipid syndrome

- Factor V**L**eiden mutation

- **M**alignancy

- Protein **S**deficiency

- **H**yperhomocysteinemia

- **A**ntithrombin III deficiency

- **P**rothrombin G2021A mutation

- Factor **E**ight excess

- **S**ticky Platelet syndrome

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

It is essential to exercise prudence on when to test for thrombophilia. Considering the negative implications of a positive test for the individual (anxiety, bleeding risk) and costs should be balanced with the benefit of avoiding adverse effects from thrombotic events or miscarriage through anticoagulation.

Prognostication implicates the question for the risks of recurrent thrombosis or bleeding as a side effect of anticoagulation. Patients with one VTE event have a 30% risk of recurrence in 10 years. Different scoring systems are available to predict the risk of recurrence. Thrombosis carries a high in-hospital mortality and is the second most common cause of death in cancer patients.

an interprofessional approach involving nurses and physicians in the evaluation and treatment of these patients results in the best outcomes. [Level V]