The exact mechanism is not understood entirely, but several active compounds of ginger have been shown to have biological activity.

- Gingerol and gingerol-related compounds: Antioxidant activity, anti-tumor activity via induction of apoptosis and modulation of genetic activity, anti-inflammatory and anti-analgesic activity, antimicrobial activity, and hepatoprotective activity

- Paradol: Antioxidant, anti-cancerous, and antimicrobial properties

- Shogaol: Antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-cancerous activity via inhibition of cell invasion, reduction of matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression, and anti-proliferation activity

- Zingerone: Antioxidant activity, anti-inflammatory, and anti-bacterial properties

- 1-Dehydro-10-gingerdione: Regulation of inflammatory genes

- Terpenoids: Induction of apoptosis via activation of p53

- Ginger flavonoids: Antioxidant activity

Microbes are an essential part of the human body and gut, most often keeping us healthy. However, foreign microbes can invade the body and make us ill, causing diseases such as the flu. There is evidence that harmful microbes can contribute to the formation of chronic conditions, such as cancer and coronary heart disease. As pathogens become more resistant to developed drugs, the use of antibiotics and vaccines can be non-effective. Ginger has been shown to play a vital role as an antimicrobial agent. Several active components have been shown to be active against E coli, Salmonella typhi, Bacillus subtilis, Candida albicans, M. avium, and M. tuberculosis.

Antioxidants help free the body of free radicals and reduce oxidative stress. The imbalance between reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and antioxidative defense mechanisms can induce oxidative stress. Long-term exposure can lead to many chronic diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, post-ischemic perfusion injury, myocardial infarction, chronic inflammation, and cancer. Ginger is a source of numerous antioxidants and plays a role in reducing lipid oxidation and ROS formation. Studies have shown ginger root's active compounds' ability to scavenge superoxide anion and hydroxyl radicals and inhibit lipid peroxidation in vivo.

Inflammation is an important immune response mechanism to damage and can be mediated via interleukin-1 (IL-1), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Just as NSAIDs are commonly used to treat inflammation, medicinal plants are of interest as well. In vivo studies have shown ginger's ability to suppress pro-inflammatory cytokines and down-regulate induction of inflammatory genes.

The exact mechanism of ginger on nausea and vomiting is not clear, but studies have shown that active compounds such as gingerols, shogaols, and diterpenoids possess antiserotoninergic and 5-HT3 receptor antagonistic effects, known to play a role in providing nausea sensation relief.

Unregulated cell growth and tumor development are complex processes involving many genetic and metabolic alterations. Medicinal plants have long been studied for such chronic disease management. Ginger's active compounds have been shown to control tumor development via regulation of tumor suppressor genes, induction of apoptosis, and inactivation of VEGF signaling. Numerous studies have shown 6-gingerols ability to suppress hyperproliferation and inflammatory processes leading to carcinogenesis, angiogenesis, and metastasis.

Ginger has specifically been found to be effective against various GI cancers such as gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, liver cancer, colorectal cancer, and cholangiocarcinoma.