**Arterial Supply**

The nasal cavity has an abundant supply of vasculature to aid in functions of warming and humidifying inhaled air. It allows the mucosa to enlarge and shrink, under the influence of sympathetic innervation. The arterial supply to the nose and nasal cavity originates from the internal and external carotid arteries.

**Internal Carotid Artery (ICA)**

The primary branch off of the ICA that supplies the nasal cavity is the ophthalmic artery. Coming off of the ophthalmic artery are the anterior and posterior ethmoid arteries, as well as the dorsal nasal artery. The anterior ethmoid artery supplies the lateral nasal wall and the nasal septum. The posterior ethmoid artery supplies the superior turbinate and the nasal septum. The dorsal nasal artery supplies the dorsal aspect of the external nose.

**External Carotid Artery (ECA)**

The ECA gives rise to the maxillary artery and the facial artery. These two significant arteries then branch into smaller vessels.

**Maxillary Artery**

The maxillary branches into the descending palatine artery that then travels through the pterygopalatine fossa down the palatine canal and then branches into the greater and lesser palatine arteries. The greater palatine artery then enters the greater palatine foramen on the posterior aspect of the palate before traversing the palate anteriorly to enter the nasal cavity via the incisive canal. It supplies the septum and the floor of the nasal cavity.

Like the descending palatine artery, the sphenopalatine artery is a branch of the maxillary artery. It branches off of the maxillary artery near the pterygopalatine fossa where it then enters the lateral wall of the nasal cavity through the sphenopalatine foramen, located just posterior to the medial turbinate. The sphenopalatine artery then branches into the posterior lateral nasal branches and the posterior septal branch. The posterior lateral branches supply the middle and inferior turbinates, while the posterior septal branch supplies the posterior septum.

**Facial Artery**

The facial artery gives rise to the superior labial artery, the lateral nasal artery, and the angular artery. The superior labial artery gives off an alar branch and a septal branch that supply the same structures as their name. The lateral nasal artery supplies the alar cartilage on the external nose and also supplies the nasal vestibule. The angular artery supplies the external nasal tip, dorsum, and lateral wall.

**Kiesselbach's Plexus (Little's Area)**

Kiesselbach's plexus is a vascular anastomosis between the anterior ethmoid artery, superior labial artery, greater palatine artery, and the terminal branch of the posterior septal branch of the sphenopalatine artery. This vascular plexus is located in the anterior nasal septum and is the most common site of epistaxis.

**Woodruff's Plexus**

Woodruff's plexus is a vascular anastomosis between the sphenopalatine artery and the ascending pharyngeal artery. Located on the lateral wall of the nasal cavity in the area posterior to the middle and inferior turbinates.

**Venous Drainage**

The names of the veins that drain the nose and nasal cavity follow that of the arteries with which they pair. The maxillary branches drain either into the cavernous sinus or the pterygoid plexus located in the infratemporal fossa. The veins of the anterior nasal cavity drain into the facial vein. Of note, infections located between the oral commissure and nasal bridge, have the potential to become intracranial infections. These must be treated promptly to prevent the extension of infection.

**Lymphatics**

The anterior nasal cavity drains anteriorly to the face that then makes its way to the submandibular lymph nodes in level IB. The lymphatics of the posterior nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses drain into the upper cervical lymph nodes and retropharyngeal lymph nodes.