Congenital ptosis should be differentiated from other acquired forms of ptosis, which include:

**Neurogenic Ptosis**

It can be congenital or acquired. Causes of neurogenic ptosis include innervational defects like a third nerve palsy, misdirection of the third nerve, Marcus Gunn jaw winking syndrome, Horner's syndrome, multiple sclerosis, and ophthalmoplegic migraine.

**Aponeurotic Ptosis**

In the presence of normal functioning LPS muscle, dehiscence in the levator aponeurosis leads to the development of aponeurotic ptosis. This is seen in age-related ptosis, ptosis after trauma or surgery, and in association with blepharochalasis.

**Mechanical Ptosis**

Increased weight on the upper eyelid due to multiple chalazia, eyelid edema, tumor, or dermatochalasis may result in ptosis. Other causes include scarring (cicatricial ptosis due to trachoma and ocular pemphigoid) and hematoma.

**Myogenic Ptosis**

Myogenic ptosis is usually acquired in origin: a disorder of the myoneural junction of the levator palpebrae superioris is seen in myasthenia gravis. Other causes include myotonic dystrophy, chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO), oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy, ocular myopathy, and cases of trauma to the levator palpebrae superioris.

Ptosis should be differentiated from pseudoptosis (apparent drooping of the eyelid due to ocular and adnexal diseases)

The main factor differentiating ptosis from pseudoptosis is the elevation of the ptotic eyelid. On elevating the droopy eyelid, if the other eyelid droops, then it is a case of true ptosis. If the other eye remains at the same level, it is a case of pseudoptosis.

Causes of pseudoptosis:

**Ipsilateral Causes**

- Phthisis bulbi

- Enophthalmos

- Hypertropia

- Microphthalmia

- Dermatochalasis

- Anophthalmos

- Superior sulcus defect

- Dermatochalasis

**Contralateral Causes**

- Buphthalmos

- Proptosis

- Upper eyelid retraction