Treatment of cerebellar hemorrhage is dependent on the size of the hemorrhage in addition to the clinical presentation. Airway protection with endotracheal intubation may be necessary for patients who present with severely altered and depressed level of consciousness or altered mental status (GCS less than 8). Neurosurgical consultation should be obtained urgently after diagnosis to assist with optimal management and treatment. Small hemorrhages without significant mass effect can often be managed conservatively with admission to a critical care unit capable of frequent neurologic assessments. Large hemorrhages, typically greater than 3 to 4 cm, may require surgical intervention and evacuation, particularly if associated with edema, intraventricular extension, brainstem displacement, or hydrocephalus. If patients are intubated, normocarbia should be maintained. There is no need for prophylactic hyperventilation except in the extreme cases of impending brainstem herniation, and it should only be for a short period.

Patients with cerebellar hemorrhage often have an acute blood pressure elevation, as in any other case of intracranial hemorrhage. It is often a fine balance to aim to minimize hemorrhage growth and increased intracranial pressure while maintaining cerebral perfusion. A recent consensus recommendation believes it is safe to lower the blood pressure to less than 140 mm Hg systolic.

Anticoagulation and/or antiplatelet medications should be immediately discontinued in cases of cerebellar hemorrhage. The reversal of the coagulopathy should take place with an appropriate reversal agent. Patients on warfarin should receive vitamin K (10 mg) and factor replacement in the form of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) or prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC), both of which are effective.