When the history and physical examination raise suspicion, the diagnosis of acquired hemophilia should be confirmed by a complete blood count and a coagulation profile. The complete blood test reveals a normal platelet count, whereas the coagulation profile shows an isolated prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) by 2 to 3 times its normal value. Prolonged aPTT can be attributed to the deficiency of multiple factors of the intrinsic pathway, including FVIII, FIX, FXI, FXII, as well as the presence of antibodies against these factors. To rule out either of the causes of the functional deficiency of the factors mixing studies are helpful.

These studies are performed by mixing normal plasma with that of the patient in a 1 to 1 ratio. An improvement in the aPTT after a mixing study points to the deficiency of coagulation factors in the patient, whereas if the mixing study does not correct the aPTT, it points to the presence of factor inhibitors, that have rendered the normal plasma factors dysfunctional as well. The mixing study requires the plasma to be incubated for 1 to 2 hours before proceeding with the study.

The antibody titers are described in the Bethesda unit (BU), which represents the amount of inhibitor that leads to 50% residual FVIII:C activity. The Nijmegen modification to the Bethesda method has helped to standardize the acidity as well as the concentration of protein in the testing mixture, which reduces the probability of an artifactual measurement, hence leading to increased specificity of the test.

In cases with massive bleeding, the complete blood count may reveal decreased hemoglobin levels. There are rare cases where patients do not have a prolonged aPTT, hence in such incidents, the clinical judgment of the provider, as well as interprofessional team collaboration, is required.