Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a multifactorial disorder which can be due to inherited or acquired risk factors.

- Inherited: Factor V Leiden is the most common condition. This condition might not cause blood clots on its own, only when combined with 1 or more other risk factors.

- Prolonged immobilization: Decreased activity of the soleus pump increase the risk of stasis and lead to thromboembolism formation. This is seen after prolonged bed rest, long plane flights, and intensive care unite (ICU) hospitalizations.

- Direct or indirect injury to veins or from surgical procedures can increase the risk of clot formation.

- Pregnancy can increase the risk by 2 mechanisms: Increase hypercoagulability as the concentration of clotting factors are affected these include fibrinogen, which can rise 3-times its normal value, thrombin levels increase, and Protein S, an anticoagulant, decreases.

- Birth control pills (oral contraceptives) or hormone replacement therapy: Oral contraceptives cause significant increases in fibrinogen levels.

- Obesity has been shown to be associated with an increased risk of venous thromboembolism.

- Smoking: Factor XIII, which stabilizes fibrin clots, is increased in smokers and exposure to nicotine may also increase plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (a major regulator of fibrinolysis). Quantitative exposure to passive smoke has been positively correlated with blood coagulation activity.

- Cancer: Some forms of cancer increase substances that cause blood to clot. Certain cancer treatments also increase the risk of blood clots.

- Heart failure: Decreased function leads to increased venous pooling and increased stasis.

- Inflammatory bowel diseases including Crohn disease or ulcerative colitis increase the risk of deep vein thrombosis (DVT).