Sporadic CJD is the commonest prion disease affecting humans. Usually, it manifests as a rapidly progressing dementia with ataxia and myoclonus, leading to death within one year, sometimes even quicker. It usually affects older individuals with a peak age of onset between 55 to 75 years old, the median age of death is 68 years, and the median duration of illness is 4 to 5 months. It presents similar to dementia with early neurological signs but progresses very rapidly. In the early stages of the sporadic CJD, patients may develop vertigo, headache, fatigue, and sleep disorders. However, memory problems, behavioral changes like agitation, irritability, depression, apathy and mood swings, sensory changes like incoordination, and vision loss can also occur. As the disease advances, rapidly worsening confusion, disorientation, problems with memory/thinking/planning/judgment become more pronounced, and involuntary jerky movements, myoclonus, muscle stiffness, and muscle twitching can develop. Extrapyramidal symptoms like bradykinesia, dystonia, rigidity, and sometimes blindness can occur. Patients gradually lose mobility, speech and develop into a comatose state. Certain infections such as pneumonia can lead to death.

Variant CJD (vCJD) occurs in young patients with a median duration of illness between 13 to 14 months, and the median age at death is 28 years. It usually begins with psychiatric symptoms, behavioral symptoms, and painful dysesthesias. Neurological signs are delayed and have a longer than usual duration from onset of symptoms to death. As prions have been detected in the blood and urine of patients with symptomatic vCJD, until the potential infectivity of these prions is established, caution should be exercised when handling body fluids and tissues from patients with vCJD.