Treatment options are united in their goal to reestablish enough stability to permit early ROM.

Non-operative management with immobilization in 90 degrees of flexion for 7 to 10 days is indicated when the elbow is sufficiently stable to permit early ROM, the coronoid fracture is small, the radial head fracture does not meet surgical indications, and humeroulnar and radiocapitellar joints have been anatomically reduced. Progressive ROM is routinely instituted following one week of immobilization, with active motion initiated in a resting splint at 90 degrees of pronation, ensuring avoidance of terminal extension, with static progressive extension splinting, followed by strengthening protocols beginning after six weeks.

A terrible triad elbow injury that includes an unstable radial head fracture, type III coronoid fracture, with associated elbow dislocation, is an indication for operative intervention, specifically, open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) versus radial head arthroplasty, LCL reconstruction, coronoid ORIF, with possible MCL reconstruction. In the event instability persists after addressing the radial head and LCL complex, the next best step is to proceed with operative MCL reconstruction.

Isolated dislocations should be managed by immediate closed reduction. Conscious sedation employed in the emergency department, ensuring adequate analgesia and relaxation, can be readily performed. Reduction maneuvers involve coronal plane translation, followed by olecranon pressure that pushes the ulna distally. Successful reduction is accompanied by a clunking sound parallel to the trochlea falling into the semilunar notch. The elbow should then be tested for stability by proceeding through a series of ROM exercises. Postreduction X-rays are mandatory to confirm reduction. The elbow should be splinted in 90 degrees of flexion. Early ROM should be encouraged. Splinting should not proceed beyond three weeks, subsequent to the risk of persistent flexion contracture and a possible predisposition to heterotopic ossification.

When surgery is indicated for radial head fractures, open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) is usually considered the most appropriate choice. Due to its important role as a stabilizer against valgus stresses, radial head resection in fracture-dislocations may lead to Essex-Lopresti instability and arthrosis. Every effort should be made in an attempt to maintain radial head integrity.

Radial head ORIF is ideal for non-comminuted fractures that involve <40% of the articular surface and demonstrate bony continuity between the radial head and neck. Intra-osseous screws, compression screws, retrograde pinning, or anatomic plates can be utilized for definitive fixation. When placing a plate, it must be positioned posterolaterally in the safe zone, with the forearm in neutral, to minimize the risk of injuring the posterior interosseous nerve. Radial head arthroplasty is recommended for patients with a comminuted/displaced fracture of more than three fragments.

Careful selection of appropriately-sized implants is vital to the success of radial head arthroplasty. A prosthetic head that is too small provides too narrow of a contact region and causes LCL laxity. Too large a head precludes poor congruence and excessive LCL tensioning, leading to postoperative stiffness.[Figures 1,2] Both arthroplasty and non-arthroplasty approaches have demonstrated good outcomes. However, patients undergoing arthroplasty with radial head replacement have demonstrated fewer postoperative complications, with significantly better ROM, than radial head repair.

Anatomic studies have proven that the elbow cannot be stable in fractures separating >50% of the coronoid process articular surface. Type 3 coronoid fractures are the most challenging type to treat and should be operatively repaired systematically.

Type 1 and 2 fracture treatment depends upon radial head conservation, elbow stability following bony column congruency, and soft tissue reconstruction. If repaired adequately, elbow stability is restored. While the coronoid can be repaired via sutures, anchors, screws, or the “suture lasso” technique, open reduction internal fixation is the most common treatment for terrible triad injuries.

If a medial approach is used, the median antebrachial cutaneous nerve should be preserved. The coronoid fracture can be exposed between the two heads of flexor carpi ulnaris; the ulnar nerve should always be visualized and protected. Via landmarks of the lateral epicondyle and radial head/neck under pronation-supination, the lateral approach provides better access to the coronoid process. Bear in mind that a lateral approach approximates the radial nerve throughout the procedure. Postoperatively, active and active-assist ROM therapy is begun after 10-14 days to allow soft tissue healing while reducing pain and edema.

LCL is repaired with the forearm in pronation if the MCL is intact. If MCL is injured, LCL is repaired with the forearm in supination to avoid gapping subsequent to overtightening, with the elbow at 90 degrees of flexion. Postoperatively, it is important to avoid excessive shoulder abduction, which places undue stress on the LCL repair. Prior studies have concluded that stability and adequate elbow function could be operatively restored without repairing the MCL; however, in cases where the elbow remains unstable after fracture fixation and lateral soft tissue (LCL) repair, especially in extension beyond 30 degrees, the MCL should be repaired.

Inherently, terrible triad injuries following high-energy insults are often accompanied by severe soft tissue injuries, which further prolongs the time to operative treatment, as soft tissue requirements for successful surgical outcomes are met in the interim. Several studies have documented that longer delays to surgery from injury preclude postoperative elbow stiffness. Furthermore, Zhou et al. found that prognostication is optimized when surgical treatment is undergone between 24 hours and 14 days after injury versus delaying until after 14 days.

Lindenhovius et al. demonstrated a better range of motion in patients who underwent surgery within two weeks of injury.