Hypertensive heart disease is a chronic progressive disease that develops throughout many years. Public safety campaigns have educated the general population about the risks of hypertension and the development of cardiovascular disease. However, the asymptomatic nature of the disease leads to many people being unaware they have elevated blood pressure as such healthcare providers including nurse practitioners should encourage ambulatory blood pressure monitoring. Patients should be encouraged to make the necessary lifestyle changes to decrease the risk and progression of cardiovascular disease. Implementing multiple lifestyle modifications such as weight loss, low salt intake, and smoking cessation can provide a significant improvement in blood pressure control similar to that of initiating additional pharmacotherapy.

When initiating pharmacotherapy, a thiazide diuretic should be one of the first medications started. Patients with substantially elevated blood pressure may not achieve proper blood pressure control without the use of a diuretic.  Diuretics, calcium channel blockers, and renin-angiotensin blockers exhibit synergistic effects allowing for better blood pressure control. Doses of antihypertensives have a nonlinear impact on blood pressure. A hypertensive medication exerts 75% of its maximal effect at only 50% of the max dose. So in patients whose blood pressure remains substantially elevated after hypertensive will benefit more from adding on another class of medication rather than maxing out the dose. Many hypertensive provide additional benefits that extend beyond their antihypertensive effects. Losartan is widely known to slow renovascular disease in patients with diabetes. However nighttime ingestion may reduce the risk of the development of diabetes mellitus type 2.