The classic tool for evaluating heart sounds is the stethoscope. The stethoscope has been around for decades with many changes in design, but the function has always remained the same-to amplify the noise created by the heart and blood for better evaluation. The basic components are a headset with earpieces connected to a chest piece via tubing. The chest piece can act as a bell for low-frequency sounds and a diaphragm for high-frequency sounds. Most chest pieces incorporate both the bell and diaphragm, usually through a two-sided model, or a one-sided model where changing the amount of pressure applied to the chest piece allows for switching between each. The headpiece and earpieces are designed to optimize hearing by creating a seal around the ear canal to decrease ambient noise. The external ear canal travels in an anterior angle towards the tympanic membrane. The angle of the headset facilitates alignment with the external ear canal anatomy to create a complete seal. The correct size of the earpieces is also important for creating a proper seal.

The stethoscope can be used to auscultate all four cardiac valves. The aortic valve is best heard in the 2nd right intercostal space. The pulmonic valve is best auscultated in the 2nd left intercostal space. The tricuspid valve is loudest in the 4th left intercostal space, and the mitral valve is loudest in the left 5th intercostal space at the midclavicular line.

The digital age has spawned the creation of phonocardiography, which is the use of a phonocardiogram to record sounds made by the blood and heart. One example of these is commercially available electronic stethoscopes.