Diagnosing renal failure in a patient with plasma cell dyscrasias should be done carefully as the prognosis is very grim without treatment. CKD-EPI using cystatin C not only predicts the overall survival, but it can also diagnose more patients with renal failure in MM. Creatinine of more than 2 mg/dL is one of the criteria to diagnose renal failure secondary to MM along with hemoglobin of less than 10 g/dL, a serum calcium level of more than 12 mg/dL. Urine dipstick can be misleading as it detects only albumin and not the paraproteins. The urine needs to be tested with sulfosalicylic acid to detect abnormal myeloma proteins. Quantification of the 24-hour urine protein and creatinine would be abnormal due to the presence of paraproteins. Paraproteins should be suspected when the ratio of urine microalbumin over urine creatinine is low and the ratio of urine protein over urine creatinine is high. Serum-free light chains (SFLC), serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP), serum immunofixation (SIFE), urine electrophoresis (UPEP), and urine immunofixation (UIFE) are performed. SPEP lacks sensitivity as it cannot differentiate between monoclonal and polyclonal light chains, whereas SIFE has limited use in monitoring the progression or treatment response of myeloma light chains.

Cast nephropathy typically presents with proteinuria in the absence of albuminuria, as the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) remains intact. At the same time, MIDD and light chain amyloid present with proteinuria and albuminuria due to the involvement of the GBM.

The SFLC assay quantitates the concentration of circulating kappa and lambda (unbound) free light chains (FLCs). The normal serum-free kappa to lambda ratio is 0.26 to 1.65 in patients without kidney impairment. Patients with kidney impairment have high SFLC, and it can be as high as 3.1 in patients with severe kidney impairment. Elevated FLCs along with an abnormal kappa to lambda ratio indicates a monoclonal plasma cell disorder. The SFLC assay is more sensitive than the urine protein electrophoresis for detecting FLCs. It helps in diagnosing the new cases and also the relapse of the disease. Light chain cast nephropathy should be strongly suspected in any patient presenting with unexplained kidney injury over fewer than 6 months and an elevated FLC level of greater than or equal to 1500 mg/L.

Though kidney biopsy is the diagnostic test to confirm the association between a monoclonal protein and kidney disease, it can be deferred in the following situations:

- A presumptive diagnosis of the light chain cast nephropathy can be made when MM presents with AKI or subacute kidney injury with an SFLC concentration greater than or equal to 1500 mg/L, the predominance of monoclonal light chains in the urine by urine protein electrophoresis and immunofixation.

- A presumptive diagnosis of renal amyloidosis can be made in patients with albuminuria or nephrotic syndrome with an established diagnosis of immunoglobulin light chain AL based on biopsies of non-kidney tissues.

- A presumptive diagnosis of light chain proximal tubulopathy can be made in patients with multiple myeloma or monoclonal gammopathy when they present with symptoms consistent with Fanconi syndrome (aminoaciduria, glycosuria in non-diabetics, hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia, hypouricemia, proteinuria).