Upper and lower motor neuron lesions cause very different clinical findings. An upper motor neuron lesion is a lesion anywhere from the cortex to the corticospinal tract. This lesion causes hyperreflexia, spasticity, and a positive Babinski reflex, presenting as an upward response of the big toe when the plantar surface of the foot is stroked, with other toes fanning out. On the other hand, lower motor neuron lesions are lesions anywhere from the anterior horn of the spinal cord, peripheral nerve, neuromuscular junction, or muscle. This type of lesion causes hyporeflexia, flaccid paralysis, and atrophy.

Knowledge of the anatomy of the motor neurons is critical to the ability to localize the lesion when faced with a patient who presents with a weakness that is likely due to a motor neuron injury. Focusing mainly on the lateral corticospinal tract, it is essential to keep in mind that this neuronal pathway decussates at the level of the pyramids in the medulla. This crossing means that an upper motor neuron lesion above the medulla will cause symptoms on the contralateral side of the body. However, a lesion to the lateral corticospinal tract after it decussates will present on the ipsilateral side of the body.

Upper motor neuron syndrome occurs when there is injury anywhere to the descending tract before the anterior horn of the spinal cord (cortex, internal capsule, pyramidal tract, lateral corticospinal tract). Examples of pathology that cause upper motor neuron symptoms are strokes, traumatic brain injury, spinal cord injury, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), primary lateral sclerosis (PLS), multiple sclerosis (MS), or anoxic brain injury. There are both positive and negative features of the upper motor neuron syndrome. Positive features include hyperreflexia (abnormally brisk reflexes), spasticity (a brisk stretch of muscles causes a sudden increase in tone followed by decreased muscle resistance), and a positive Babinski reflex. Negative features include impaired motor control, easy fatiguability, weakness, and loss of dexterity.

Lower motor neuron syndrome occurs when there is an injury to the anterior horn cells or the peripheral nerve. Diseases of the neuromuscular junction or muscle itself may mimic a lower motor neuron lesion and are important to consider in the differential diagnosis. Similarly to an upper motor neuron lesion, the patient with a lower motor neuron lesion will present with weakness; however, distinct lower motor neuron lesion findings will include hyporeflexia, flaccid paralysis, fasciculations, and atrophy.

There are many forms of motor neuron disease, the most common of which is amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This disease is unique in that it presents with both upper and motor neuron signs. The patient will typically present with weakness, along with spastic paralysis and hyperreflexia in the lower limbs and flaccid paralysis and hyporeflexia in the upper limbs. The patient may also present with fasciculations in both the tongue and extremities. Of note, there is no sensory loss. ALS is a progressive neurogenerative disease, and eventually, the patient will have serious dysarthria, dysphagia, extreme weakness, and dyspnea. The estimated median survival is 2 to 4 years, with the most common cause of death being respiratory failure.

One group of genetic disorders that causes lower motor neuron disease is spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). There are many different forms of SMA, but all of them are characterized by degeneration of the motor nuclei in the brainstem, in addition to the anterior horn cells found in the spinal cord. One specific type of SMA is spinobulbar muscular atrophy (Kennedy disease). This x-linked disease usually presents in adulthood (age 30 to 50). First presenting signs typically include tremor, lower extremity weakness, and orolingual fasciculations. This pathology is a progressive disease that is later characterized by the above symptoms in addition to atrophy of limb, bulbar, and facial muscles.

Poliomyelitis is another lower motor neuron disease. This disease results from poliovirus and results in the destruction of the anterior horn cells. Subsequently, the affected patient will experience weakness and lower motor neuron symptoms, including flaccid paralysis in the lower limbs. Usually, this presents asymmetrically. The patient may also provide a history of muscle aches or muscle spasm that occurred in the recent past. Unfortunately, this weakness and paralysis may extend up to involve the respiratory muscles. Many patients will recover some strength, but may later decompensate into “postpolio syndrome,” which is characterized by the onset of additional weakness, pain, and/or atrophy. Among other viral causes of anterior horn cell destruction are coxsackievirus, West Nile virus, and echovirus.

While most cranial nerves are innervated by upper motor neurons bilaterally, cranial nerves VII and XII are the exceptions, as they receive only unilateral input from the contralateral side of the brain. Specifically, damage to the corticobulbar tract and/or facial nerve causes a unique presentation depending on whether the damage occurred in the upper vs. lower motor neuron. The forehead region is dually innervated by corticobulbar tracts from each side of the brain, while the rest of the face below the forehead is innervated primarily by the lower motor neuron of CN VII. An upper motor neuron lesion of the facial nerve can occur anywhere in the corticobulbar tract rostral to the facial motor nucleus on the pons. If an upper motor neuron lesion occurs, the forehead will be spared due to its dual innervation. However, a lower motor neuron lesion of CN VII results in flaccid paralysis of the entire ipsilateral side of the face.

Overall, clinicians should consider motor neuron disease whenever a patient presents with weakness and any of the previously described motor neuron lesion signs without significant sensory loss. Referral to a neurologist for subsequent testing is warranted in these cases.