As discussed earlier, transmyocardial laser extravascular angiogenesis (TMLR) is performed in a particular group of patients. TMLR is a technique where a laser beam is used to create small channels on the surface of the heart. To allow access to the heart, a patient first undergoes anterior thoracotomy at the left fifth intercostal space. This generally causes the epicardial surface of the left ventricle and pericardium to be accessible. Based on how big the ischemic region of the heart is, a laser beam is used to create 20 to 40 microchannels, each 1 mm in width and 1 cm apart, from inferior to apex, then lateral and then the anterior surface of the epicardium. Then the chest tube is placed, and the incision is closed off—the majority of the time, the patient is extubated inside the operative room. Two different laser systems can be used in TMLR that are FDA approved. One is the carbon dioxide (CO2), and the other is the holmium: yttrium–aluminum–garnet (Ho: YAG) laser system.

The CO2 laser system works by a generation of infrared light to ablate the myocardial tissue. It is only delivered on beating heart, so laser pulsations are matched with r waves on ECG to avoid causing the arrhythmia. The Ho: YAG laser, on the other hand, is manually advanced a fiber optic bundle through the myocardium while the laser fires.  The most widely accepted theory about how TMLR causes short term and long term angina relief is as follows. Nociceptors that allow pain perception and afferent fibers transmit sensory information to the brain are located in the superficial myocardium that is easily accessible to the laser.

TMLR is thought to ablate these nociceptors and afferent fibers blocking the pain signaling. Besides, denervation at the myocardium leads to decreased production of norepinephrine at the myocardium, which leads to decrease inotropy and reduced oxygen demand of the heart, which results in angina relief. In the long run, angiogenesis is induced through inflammatory and vasculogenic mechanisms, which lead to increased vascular network at the site where laser channels were created leading to long-term angina relief. For instance, a study has found that after TMLR the myocardium has sustained increased VEGF release that is involved in inducing angiogenesis.

This procedure if performed alone takes about 2 hours. Patients are usually admitted to the cardiac intensive care unit and they stay anywhere from 4 to 7 days after the procedure in the hospital. Patients should generally be restarted on all their cardiac medications the same day after the procedure.