Approximately 30% to 50% of patients with ICH are seen to have an extension of the clot into the ventricles. It is thought to be particularly common in thalamic hemorrhages due to the anatomical relations to the third ventricle and the natural tendency for blood to move medially.

Obstructive hydrocephalus is a complication of IVH and can lead to potentially lethal complications of raised ICP. It is seen more frequently in patients with a larger blood volume within the ventricular channels

Seizures commonly occur as part of the presenting symptoms of ICH, but in some cases may be a delayed complication (two hours post hemorrhage). Just under 70% of seizures are seen within 24 hours of the initial ictus, and the vast majority (90%) occur within 72 hours. Seizures that occur within two hours of the initial ICH (early seizures) are a result of changes in the architecture of neuronal tissues and biochemical dysfunction, whereas delayed seizures are more likely a result of gliosis and tissue scarring.****and are often considered when a patient has a sudden drop in GCS and imaging revealing clot in seizure-prone parts of the brain, i.e., temporal lobe, cortical surface. Delayed seizures are most commonly associated with increased mass effect and midline shift on imaging and, therefore, may be a clinical sign of hematoma expansion.

Venous thromboembolism (VTE), in the form of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE), is a common complication seen in most unwell patients admitted to the hospital but has a rate of about 3% to 7% in those with ICH.****The high rate of VTE is likely related to the immobility of those with ICH, as many will suffer from hemiplegia/hemiparesis. Further catalyzing the development of VTE is the largely elderly population that develop ICH, the discontinuation of anticoagulant therapy, the diagnostic dilemma of starting prophylactic anticoagulation, as well as an increase in prothrombotic activity seen following acute hemorrhage.

Approximately 60% of patients with ICH are seen to develop transient hyperglycemia in the acute setting, lasting up to 72 hours, as part of the body’s natural stress response. Studies show a positive correlation between blood glucose levels and the size of the hematoma, hematoma expansion, and surrounding edema, thus making raised blood glucose an independent predictor of worse functional outcomes.

Within the acute phase following an ICH, over 70% of patients are found to be hypertensive (BP greater than or equal to 140/90 mmHg), despite having no such history before admission. The reasons for this phenomenon are unclear, but the hypothesized theory is that there may be upregulation of neuroendocrine pathways (sympathetic nervous system, renin-angiotensin axis) and increased cardiac output as part of the stress response to raised ICP.