Multifocal atrial tachycardia should be suspected in patients with tachycardia and irregularly irregular rhythm. Given its association with underlying medical conditions, it should also be suspected in patients with cardiac and pulmonary disease. Diagnosis is not clinical, but is made with electrocardiogram and can be made using the following diagnostic criteria. The electrocardiogram should show an atrial rate of greater than 100 beats per minute (although some suggest using a threshold of 90 beats per minute) with three or more discrete P wave morphologies in the same lead, not including that originating from the sinoatrial node. Furthermore, there should be irregular PP intervals, and the baseline should be isoelectric between P waves. Other findings that are commonly seen, but are not diagnostic include irregular PR and RR intervals. Variation in PR intervals has not been included in the diagnostic criteria because the PR interval varies with the length of the preceding RP interval.

A diagnosis of multifocal atrial tachycardia does not typically warrant any additional workup, other than workup required for any underlying conditions. However, if arrhythmia persists despite the treatment of underlying medical conditions it may be worth checking a complete blood count and serum chemistry for signs of infection, anemia, or electrolyte abnormalities such as hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia.

Other diagnoses that may present with similar findings on electrocardiogram that should be included in the differential diagnosis include sinus tachycardia with frequent premature atrial contractions (this would have regular PP intervals), atrial flutter with variable AV node conduction (this would have regular PP intervals and flutter waves), atrial fibrillation (this would not have discrete P-wave morphologies), and wandering atrial pacemaker which would have a heart rate less than 100 beats per minute).