The AHA/ACC/HRS 2015 guideline makes recommendations on the treatment of SVT. Regular SVT should be treated with Valsalva maneuver and if unsuccessful with adenosine. If these fail or the patient is hemodynamically unstable cardioversion should be performed. Ongoing treatment includes beta blocker, calcium channel blockers, and sodium channel blockers, amiodarone or digoxin depending on the kind of SVT. The only curative treatment is ablation.

The Sicilian Gambit proposes a rational approach to antiarrhythmic drug selection. In contrast to empiric drug choice, this approach tries to identify the underlying mechanism of arrhythmogenesis to target drug therapy. The common form AVNRT uses slow pathway in antegrade conduction and retrograde fast pathway excitation. First-line therapy is the vagal maneuver. Drugs of choice include adenosine, beta blockers such as esmolol, and calcium channel blockers such as verapamil or diltiazem. All these drugs affect the slow conduction pathway. To target the fast pathway sodium channel blockers and amiodarone can be used. In orthodromic WPW syndrome, the excitation travels the AV node antegrade and the accessory pathway Kent bundle retrogradely. The length of the excitable gap can be evaluated in electrophysiologic studies. If the reentry is associated with a short excitable gap, potassium channel blocking agents such as amiodarone can be used to lengthen the refractory period of the accessory pathway. If the reentry is associated with a long excitable gap a sodium channel blocker may be chosen.

Atrial flutter is based on a macro-reentry mechanism. Antitachycardic pacing is an option to treat atrial flutter. Stimulating the right atrium for 20 to 30 seconds with a rate of 10 beats per minute higher than flutter and up to 400 beats per minute can terminate the flutter circuit. Otherwise, ablation of a narrow part of the reentry pathway such as the cavotricuspid isthmus (CTI) can erase the reentry arrhythmia.

Liu et al. reported a case of multiple (in this case bilateral) accessory pathways and three different appearances of AVRT. Multiple accessory pathways are present in 15% of WPW cases. Different combinations of conduction result in different morphologies of AVRT in the same patient.

The definition of complex fractionated atrial electrograms (CFAE) is electrograms having two fractionated deflections or a short cycle length (less than 120ms). Once ablation of CFAE is complete, proper conduction pattern can reorganize. Due to the distinct distribution of CFAE, they can are targetable by RFA.

Narayan et al. reported that atrial fibrillation due to rotor activity underwent successful ablation by targeting the center of the spiral wave. This concept is called focal impulse and rotor modulation ablation (FIRM).

The development of a surgical approach to atrial fibrillation and the pathophysiologic mechanisms behind it are closely related. In 1980 the left atrial isolation procedure was introduced. 1982 the Scheinmann catheter fulguration of the His bundle for electrical dissociation of atria and ventricles (functional total AV block) was invented: a procedure that dictates the placement of a pacemaker. Cox and other surgeons (among them Damiano, Kosakai, and Sueda) developed and improved the Maze procedure for atrial fibrillation. It has three goals: permanent ablation of AF, restoration of AV synchrony, preservation of atrial transport function. The different Cox Maze procedures try to eliminate multiple wave reentry by creating multiple lesions in both atria. Takahashi proposes to treat paroxysmal AF with PVI and persistent AF with Cox-Maze procedure although the decision should preferably be made considering individual patient factors.