Internuclear ophthalmoplegia occurs due to a lesion in the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) by blocking the connection between the contralateral sixth nerve nucleus and the ipsilateral third nerve nucleus, thus affecting horizontal gaze. One of the most important functions of the medial longitudinal fasciculus is its role in saccadic eye movements. Saccades are initiated by the frontal eye field (FEF), which sends signals to the contralateral paramedian pontine reticular formation (PPRF) for horizontal saccades and the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus (riMLF) for vertical saccades.

The contralateral abducting eye may demonstrate a dissociated horizontal nystagmus. This is thought to be a compensatory response to overcome the weakness of the adducting eye explained by Herring’s law of equal innervation. Increased innervations to the medial rectus muscle are accompanied by an increase in innervation to its yoke muscle, the contralateral lateral rectus, resulting in nystagmus.

Although there is impaired adduction in the ipsilateral eye, some patients may have normal convergence. This is called dissociation of convergence and is an important sign which helps distinguish internuclear ophthalmoplegia from pseudo internuclear ophthalmoplegia (e.g., myasthenia gravis, third nerve palsy). It was initially thought that patients with medial longitudinal fasciculus lesion below the level of the oculomotor nucleus (posterior internuclear ophthalmoplegia of Cogan) had retained convergence and lesions above the oculomotor nucleus level (anterior internuclear ophthalmoplegia of Cogan) had absent convergence. However, recent studies have disproved this theory, and retained convergence is thought to reflect the innate ability to converge to near targets.