Various trials have been undertaken to understand the cardiovascular outcomes with antidiabetic medications. The LEADER (Liraglutide Effect and Action in Diabetes: Evaluation of Cardiovascular Outcome Results), was a double-blinded trial comparing the use of liraglutide, which is a GLP -1 agonist to placebo in around 10000 patients. After a follow-up period of about four years, liraglutide was shown to reduce mortality from cardiovascular causes as well as all-cause mortality. It also seemed to reduce the first occurrence of the first nonfatal myocardial infarction (MI) and stroke.

The EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial ([Empagliflozin] Cardiovascular Outcome Event Trial in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Patients) have shown considerable reductions in mortality and heart failure hospitalization risks in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D), by and cardiovascular disease with empagliflozin, a sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor.

The CANVAS trial (Canagliflozin Cardiovascular Assessment Study) subsequently reported a reduction in 3-point major adverse cardiovascular events and heart failure (HF) hospitalization risk. The proposed mechanism through which SGLT2 inhibitors work helps patients with heart failure is via the promotion of natriuresis and osmotic diuresis and reduced preload. SGLT2 inhibition is also associated with the preservation of renal function. Based on data from mechanistic studies and clinical trials, large clinical trials with SGLT2 inhibitors are now investigating the potential use of SGLT2 inhibition in patients who have HF with and without T2 diabetes mellitus.