Recovery or improvement of visual acuity during the initial treatment of central retinal artery occlusion with Hyperbaric Oxygen (HBO2) indicates retinal viability and the potential for return of vision despite the ischemic period suffered before treatment.

The retina may not survive after ischemia lasting longer than 90 minutes.

Animal models of retinal injury have shown a reduction in apoptosis from 58% cell loss to 30% in animals treated with HBO2 after experimental central retinal artery occlusion.

Acute obstruction of the central retinal artery even when treated promptly, typically results in severe, permanent vision loss.

Recent studies are looking at using thrombolytics and surgical removal of clots, and while this is promising, outcomes have been disappointing.

Supplemental O2 is a mainstay in the treatment of central retinal artery occlusion. Retinal blood flow may be reestablished in 72 hours via recanalization. However, if ischemia and hypoxia have resulted in cell death and necrosis of the inner retinal layers usually supplied by the retinal artery, vision may not return with recanalization. Tissue that is ischemic but capable of recovery within a certain timeframe is the ischemic penumbra.

Central retinal artery occlusion should be treated as a stroke of the eye and admitted to the hospital for close monitoring, testing, and risk factor modification.

Hyperbaric oxygen for central retinal artery occlusion is an American Heart Association level IIB recommendation. It is one of the only treatments we can offer to patients who suffer this debilitating condition.