Disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI) usually comprises two major clinical syndromes: the arthritis-dermatitis syndrome and localized purulent arthritis without associated skin lesions. There are, however, patients who present with symptoms that overlap between these two classic presentations. Although localized infection of the genitourinary tract, rectum, or pharynx by N. gonorrhoeae is a prerequisite for dissemination, patients with clinical manifestations of DGI often do not manifest symptoms of localized gonococcal infection.

- Arthritis-dermatitis syndrome: This is a form of DGI that usually comprises a triad of manifestations which include tenosynovitis, dermatitis, and polyarthralgia. It is also often associated with constitutional symptoms such as fever, chills, and body malaise. Approximately 60% developed a fever in one study in women with DGI. Tenosynovitis is a unique finding in gonococcal arthritis and is usually not seen in other forms of septic arthritis. It is demonstrated by tenderness along the flexor sheath and pain on a passive extension during a physical examination. It usually affects multiple tendons, more commonly the fingers, wrists, toes, and ankles. Polyarthralgia is typically asymmetric and may affect both large and small joints. Skin lesions occur in up to 75% of cases and are frequently seen in the trunk and extremities and usually spares the face. Although a large variety of skin lesions have been observed, DGI is most commonly associated with pustular or vesicular lesions. Other skin manifestations that occur less frequently include macules, papules, bullae, or nodules. Skin lesions are characteristically transient and may disappear after several days even without treatment.

- Localized septic arthritis: This syndrome usually presents as a monoarthritis or asymmetric oligo- or polyarthritis with pain and swelling of one or more joints. Most patients do not present with systemic symptoms such as fever or chills. Joints that are commonly affected include knees, ankles, wrist, and elbow.