# Continuing Education Activity

Loperamide is a medication used in the treatment of diarrhea. It classifies as an anti-diarrheal agent. The use of loperamide in high doses has been associated with a significant increase in morbidity and mortality. This activity reviews the indications, contraindications, activity, adverse events, and other key elements of loperamide abuse related to the essential points needed by members of an interprofessional team managing the care of patients with toxicity and its related conditions and sequelae.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanism of action of loperamide as it relates to toxicity.
- Identify the most common adverse events associated with loperamide toxicity.
- Summarize the management considerations, including the importance of monitoring, in patients with loperamide toxicity.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients with loperamide toxicity.

# Indications

Loperamide is an over-the-counter oral antidiarrheal agent made in 1969, first used medically in 1976, and became available without a prescription in 1988.

**Medical use:**The FDA approved loperamide for the treatment of various forms of diarrhea, including traveler’s diarrhea, irritable bowel syndrome associated with chronic diarrhea, acute nonspecific diarrhea in patients two years of age and older, and is indicated for reducing ileostomy output.

**Illicit drug use and self-medication use:**In recent years, there has been a noticeable incline in the use and abuse of loperamide as a means of self-management of opioid withdrawal and an inexpensive method to induce euphoria i.e., to achieve a euphoric state. Vakkalanka et al. found a 91% increase in reported loperamide exposures, including eight deaths, from 2010 to 2015 across Poison Control Centers in the United States.

# Mechanism of Action

Loperamide is a highly lipophilic synthetic phenylpiperidine opioid.

The peak plasma time is 4 to 5 hours, with a half-life of 7 to 19 hours.

Loperamide was also found to inhibit both the Na+ gated cardiac channels, which in turn prolongs the QRS complex, and the hERG channel, which increases the QTc interval.

# Administration

Loperamide is available in different formulations, most commonly as tablets, capsules, and orodispersible tablets that melt on the tongue. It is available as 2 mg tablets, capsules, and oral solution of 1 mg / 7.5 ml and 2 mg / 15 ml strengths. The oral solution needs to be shaken well before measuring to administer to the patient. Consider administering loperamide with plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration.

**Adult Dosing**

The usual initial recommended dose for acute diarrhea, such as traveler’s diarrhea, is 4 mg starting dose, followed by 2 mg dosing after each unformed stool but not to exceed 8 mg per day for over-the-counter use and 16 mg per day with prescription use. For chronic use, the suggested dose is 2 mg BID. Consider administering loperamide 30 minutes before food four times per day for patients with cancer-induced diarrhea to slow colic reflex.

- According to the Infectious Disease Society of America, use loperamide as adjuvant therapy with close monitoring and concomitant antibiotics in patients with suspected or known dysentery.C. difficile infection; however, some experts approve the use with close monitoring and concomitant antibiotics if the patient has major fluid losses and no contraindications (ileus/colonic distention).

Chemotherapy-induced diarrhea (off-labeled use): Initially administer 4 mg, followed by 2 mg every two to four hours or after each loose stool. For diarrhea persisting more than 24 hours, administer 2 mg every two hours (or 4 mg every four hours). Continue until 12 hours are passed without a loose bowel movement. Experts consider recommending alternative therapy for diarrhea persisting more than 48 hours, and doses more than 16 mg per day might not provide benefit.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Pediatric Patients**

According to the Infectious Disease Society of America, loperamide is not recommended for the management of infectious diarrhea in pediatric patients.

- 13 kg - 21 kg: 1 mg when first loose stool followed by 1 mg per dose after each subsequent unformed stool, but not more than 3 mg per day.

- 21 kg - 27 kg:  2 mg when first loose stool followed by 1 mg per dose after each subsequent unformed stool, but not more than 4 mg per day.

- 27.1 kg - 43 kg: 2 mg when first loose stool followed by 1 mg per dose after each subsequent unformed stool, but not more than 6 mg per day.

- Children 12 years and older: 4 mg when first loose stool followed by 2 mg per dose after each subsequent unformed stool, but not more than 8 mg per day.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

There are no adverse effects observed in animal studies. There is a lack of data on loperamide use in pregnant women, and the information is conflicting.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

Loperamide may be excreted into breast milk. The study on loperamide oxide (prodrug of loperamide) was conducted in breastfeeding women and found variable concentrations of loperamide and loperamide oxide into breastmilk.

**Patients with Renal Impairment**

According to manufacturer labeling, no dose adjustment is required in patients with mild to severe renal impairment. In addition, since it is highly protein-bound, no dose adjustment is needed for dialysis.

**Patient with Hepatic Impairment**

There is no dose adjustment provided in the product label; hence, use caution in patients with liver impairment.

# Adverse Effects

**Common Adverse Effects**

- Dry mouth

- Flatulence

- Abdominal cramps

- Nausea

- Ileus

- Constipation

- Urinary retention

- Dizziness

- Drowsiness

**Serious Adverse Effects**

- Toxic megacolon

- Necrotizing enterocolitis

- Stevens-Johnson syndrome

- Toxic epidermal necrolysis

- Syncope

- QT/QTc interval prolongation, torsades de pointed, ventricular tachycardia

- Other ventricular arrhythmias and/or cardiac arrest

**Drug Interactions**

It is extracted in the liver and metabolized mainly by CYP3A4, a cytochrome P450 enzyme.

# Contraindications

Loperamide is contraindicated in patients less than two years old, in patients with acute ulcerative colitis, bloody diarrhea, and diarrhea associated with bacterial infections.

# Monitoring

Currently, loperamide remains available over the counter in pharmacies with restricted access but without a prescription. Patients should be explained on maximum daily dosing when dispensing loperamide for any labeled or off-label indications. Monitor the clinical status of patients and loperamide efficacy by monitoring numbers of loose stools after each dose. When used in high doses, monitor ECG, signs/symptoms of CNS and respiratory depression.

# Toxicity

When loperamide is taken in large quantities and/or with other drugs that may alter its pharmacokinetic effects, such as p- glycoprotein inhibitors, loperamide produces opioid-like symptoms. These include a sensation of euphoria, miosis, central nervous system depression, and respiratory depression. Treatment of loperamide overdose and toxicity is primarily supportive. Naloxone, including an intranasal naloxone bolus, intravenous naloxone bolus, or naloxone infusion, may be used in patients with respiratory depression.

Taken in large quantities, loperamide can cause systemic effects similar to opioid toxicity (central nervous system depression, respiratory depression) as well as lethal cardiac conduction abnormalities.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Healthcare providers widely prescribe loperamide for different types of diarrhea. Even though it is available as an over-the-counter medication, its use still requires the attention and oversight of an interprofessional healthcare team. Pharmacists and clinicians need to survey the potential for abuse and educate the patient of its potential toxicity in large doses. Nurses can also provide monitoring and counseling in this area. In September 2019, the FDA approved a new package size limitations and unit-dose packaging for certain over-the-counter loperamide products in an effort to improve patient safety. When prescribing or recommending loperamide, the clinician should have the nurse and/or pharmacist reiterate all safety and dosing issues to ensure proper medication use and optimize patient safety, as patients may think that because of its OTC availability, it does not represent any potential for misuse. Interprofessional management of loperamide therapy will result in better patient outcomes with fewer adverse effects. [Level 5]