**Initial Management**

- Evaluate the ABCs (Airway, Breathing, and Circulation)

- Treat any life-threatening conditions immediately

- Supplemental oxygen

- Obtaining two large-bore intravenous (IV) lines

- IV fluid resuscitation (crystalloid is the initial fluid of choice)

- Apply direct pressure to any hemorrhage if possible

**Treatment**

- Packed red blood cells (pRBCs) are the primary treatment used in acute anemia to restore the blood lost. Each unit of pRBCs is expected to increase the hematocrit by 3 points

- For hospitalized hemodynamically stable adult patients, including critically ill patients, transfusion is not recommended until the hemoglobin concentration is 7 g/dLF
- However, in patients with acute coronary syndrome, transfusion should be considered when Hgb is equal or less than 8
- EXCEPTION: if the patient is actively bleeding, then transfuse as clinically indicated

- In cases of active hemorrhage, massive transfusion protocol should initiate immediately, and the patient is transfused more liberally to maintain hemodynamic stability until control of the source of bleeding

- Other treatment options include other components of blood: platelets, fresh frozen plasma (FFP), and cryoprecipitate

- Each unit of platelets has normal amounts of fibrinogen and coagulation factors and raises the platelet count by approximately 10,000/microliters.
- Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) contains all the coagulation factors.
- Blood products (i.e., red blood cells, plasma [clotting factors], and platelets) should be given in equivalent amounts (1:1:1 ratio)
- Cryoprecipitate contains fibrinogen, factor VIII, von Willebrand factor (vWF), and factor XIII, and is used to treat hemophilia

- Pharmacological options:

- Vasopressors: causes vasoconstriction by decreasing blood flow. Used for hypovolemic shock, variceal bleeding
- Gastric acid inhibitors (H2-receptor antagonists): aids healing of gastric and duodenal ulcers
- Glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone): treats idiopathic and acquired autoimmune hemolytic anemias
- Vitamin K: used in patients with liver disease to correct prolonged PT and factors VII, IX, and X

**Specific treatments:**

Sickle cell anemia

The decision to begin transfusion depends on the rate of fall of the hemoglobin and the patient’s clinical condition. Blood transfusion is necessary for aplastic crisis indicated by low reticulocyte counts. In the case of vaso-occlusive crisis, exchange transfusion is warranted to reduce the number of sickle cells and to lower the viscosity of the blood. Hydroxyurea can be used to reduce the incidence of sickle cell crisis.

Platelet disorders

Patients with thrombocytopenia with clinical evidence of bleeding should receive a platelet transfusion. Patients with platelet count lower than 10,000/microliter are at risk for spontaneous cerebral hemorrhage and thus require a prophylactic transfusion. Large-volume plasmapheresis with FFP replacement is the preferred treatment for HUS and TTP. Many patients will require daily plasmapheresis. Goals include increasing platelet count, decreasing lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and decreasing red blood cell (RBC) fragments, which will indicate a positive response to treatment. Many patients also receive high-dose glucocorticoids in addition to antiplatelet agents (e.g., aspirin). Patients with a poor response to plasmapheresis can receive with splenectomy or immunosuppression.

In atypical HUS (aHUS), the initial management is supportive and similar to the approach used for STEC-HUS. However, in patients with severe complement-mediated HUS who are at risk for death or ESRD, use of eculizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody to C5 is recommended. Evidence suggests that early initiation can improve renal and nonrenal recovery.

The goal in ITP is to provide a safe platelet count to prevent clinically significant bleeding rather than normalizing the platelet counts. Bleeding risk is highest when the platelet counts are less than 10,000/microL. For all patients with severe bleeding (e.g., intracranial, gastrointestinal) and a platelet count less than 30,000/microL, immediate platelet transfusion along with ITP-specific therapy including intravenous immune globulin (IVIG), glucocorticoids, and romiplostim is recommended.

Congenital bleeding disordersTreatment of von Willebrand disease is with desmopressin (DDAVP), recombinant von Willebrand factor (rVWF), or von Willebrand factor/factor VIII (vWF/FVIII) concentrates; Factor VIII and IX concentrates are used for the treatment of hemophilia A and B respectively, and the dosage is based on the site of the bleeding.

Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)

A primary principle in the management of DIC is the treatment of the underlying cause to eliminate the stimulus for ongoing coagulation and thrombosis; as long as the platelet count is greater than or equal to 10,000/microL, prophylactic transfusion of platelets and coagulation factors are not recommended. Treatment is justified in patients with severe bleeding, are at high risk for bleeding, or require invasive procedures. Antifibrinolytic agents, such as tranexamic acid (TXA), epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA), or aprotinin are generally contraindicated.