The relevant anatomy of a dental extraction will depend on the dental extraction site and is critical in considering appropriate anesthesia techniques and possible risks of a dental extraction.

**Maxilla**

The maxilla is the term given to the upper jaw. The maxilla makes up part of the mid-face, encasing the upper teeth at its inferior aspect and separating the oral cavity from the nasal floor and maxillary sinuses at its superior aspect. The cortical plates of the maxilla are thinner than those in the mandible, with the buccal cortices being thinner than the palatal cortices.

**Mandible**

The mandible refers to the lower jaw. The mandibular shape can often be simplified as a 'horseshoe' shape. The body of the mandible is the horizontally curved portion of bone that, with the symphyseal area anteriorly, holds the lower teeth. The body of the mandible ends posteriorly at the angle of the mandible, and the bone then continues vertically as the mandibular rami. The superior aspect of the mandible consists of the coronoid processes. The anterior aspect of the coronoids is a continuation of that of the ramus, and the posterior aspect of the coronoid makes up one side of the mandibular notch. Posterior to the coronoid processes, still on the superior aspect of the mandible, is the condylar heads that sit in the glenoid fossae of the temporal bones.

The mandibular bone has thicker cortices and trabecular bone and is less vascularised than the maxilla, tending towards more difficult extractions and slower healing response.

**Nerves**

Understanding the anatomy of the sensory network, which innervates the teeth, surrounding bone, and soft tissue is crucial in understanding how to make an extraction comfortable for a patient. The fifth cranial nerve (CN V), also known as the trigeminal nerve, divides into three main branches. The first branch (V1) is the ophthalmic nerve, which innervates the forehead, eyes, and nose. The second branch (V2) is the maxillary nerve, a sensory nerve that supplies sensation to much of the middle-third of the face and subdivides into the superior alveolar nerves, which provide sensation to the maxillary dentition.

The posterior superior alveolar nerve branches directly off the maxillary nerve and innervates the maxillary molar teeth and adjacent buccal gingivae.

The innervation of the hard palate is also supplied by branches of the maxillary nerve, specifically, the greater palatine and nasopalatine nerves, which branch further to supply sensation to the palatal bone. The anesthesia of these nerves and their subdivisions facilitates the extraction of an upper tooth. Common anesthesia techniques for maxillary teeth include buccal and palatal infiltrations and regional nerve blocks.

The mandibular nerve is the third branch of the trigeminal nerve (CN V3). The mandibular nerve gives sensory innervation to the lower face, including the mandible, the lower teeth, the oral mucosa, the anterior two-thirds of the tongue, the chin, and the lower lip. The mandibular nerve divides into an anterior and posterior trunk. The posterior trunk divides into the lingual and inferior alveolar nerves. The lingual nerve innervates the anterior two-thirds of the tongue but does not provide the sensation of taste. The inferior alveolar nerve innervates the mandibular teeth, their mucoperiosteum, and the lower lip and chin.

The inferior alveolar nerve enters the mandible via the mandibular foramen and travels within the bone in the mandibular canal. It exits the bone again via the mental foramen as the mental nerve. The anesthesia of the inferior alveolar nerve before it enters the bone via the mandibular foramen constitutes a successful inferior alveolar nerve block.

The lingual nerve enters the oral cavity separately from the inferior alveolar nerve, running anterior and inferior to the medial surface of the mandible and passing adjacent to the apices of the mandibular third molars.

**Maxillary Sinus**

Sinuses are air-filled spaces lined with mucosa. The maxillary sinuses (or antra) are one of four pairs of paranasal sinuses in the skull. The maxillary sinus communicates via its ostium with the middle meatus of the nasal cavity. The antral floor can lie adjacent to the apices of the upper posterior teeth, or the apices of the teeth can sit within the antrum itself. A possible sequela of the removal of upper posterior teeth is, therefore, the creation of an oro-antral communication (OAC), which, if left to epithelialize, can become an oro-antral fistula (OAF).

**Teeth**

The anatomy of the teeth themselves is a crucial consideration when planning a dental extraction. The root morphology of each individual tooth must be considered - including the number of roots, divergence or convergence, root length, root shape, communication of roots with adjacent structures, dilaceration of the roots, and any existing root filling or treatment. The crown must also be considered, especially when assessing caries, as this will affect the feasibility of removing the tooth as a whole. Finally, the condition of the surrounding bone must be assessed, as any resorption of this bone due to apical pathology or periodontal disease will be key in determining the complexity of a dental extraction.