The concentration of theophylline in acute toxicity is greater than 20 mcg/mL. Aminophylline toxicity can present with the following clinical features.

- Nausea and intractable vomiting

- Seizures

- Cardiac arrhythmias

- Multifocal atrial tachycardia

- Cardiac arrest

- Rhabdomyolysis

- Death

**Overdose Management**

- Institute supportive care, including establishing intravenous access, maintenance of the airway, and electrocardiographic monitoring.

- Serum electrolytes and glucose should be measured on presentation and at appropriate intervals indicated by clinical circumstances. Clinicians should promptly correct fluid and electrolyte abnormalities.

- Serum Theophylline Concentration Monitoring: Measure the serum theophylline concentration immediately upon presentation and every 4 hours to guide treatment decisions.

- Because of the increased morbidity and mortality associated with theophylline-induced seizures, treatment should be aggressive. Administer intravenous benzodiazepines such as lorazepam or diazepam. In addition, clinicians should consider phenobarbital for refractory seizures.

- Treat cardiac arrhythmias as per ACLS and PALS guidelines.

- Enhance clearance of theophylline with the use of multiple-dose oral activated charcoal.

- Extracorporeal Removal: Charcoal hemoperfusion is the most effective method of extracorporeal removal. Monitor for severe complications such as bleeding diathesis, hypotension, hypocalcemia.

- Hemodialysis is as effective as charcoal hemoperfusion for eliminating theophylline. Additionally, it has a lower complication rate than hemoperfusion.

- Clinicians should continue monitoring and treatment until the serum concentration decreases below 20 mcg/mL.