The chemical carrier of energy is called ATP. The synthesis of ATP takes place within an intracellular organelle bounded by an external membrane and an inner membrane. The dissociation of water to a molecule of hydrogen and a hydroxyl group that takes place in the inner milieu of the body is essential for the synthesis of ATP. The catabolic reactions, which this article will discuss later, release significant amounts of protons, most of which are transported to the mitochondria to produce ATP. These protons are transported through a series of complexes in the inner membrane of the mitochondria to activate an ATPase, using the energy released by the electron chain transport mechanism.

Organisms process the food they eat in three different stages. The first stage involves reducing complex molecules to simple molecules; this includes the breakdown of complex proteins to oligopeptides and free amino acids to facilitate absorption, the breakdown of complex sugars to disaccharides or monosaccharides, and breaking down lipids to glycerol and free fatty acids. These processes are called digestion and only make about 0.1% of energy production, which cannot be used by the cell. In the second phase, all these small molecules undergo incomplete oxidation. Oxidation means the removal of electrons or hydrogen atoms. The end-product of these processes is water and carbon dioxide, and three principal substances, namely: acetyl coenzyme A, oxaloacetate, and alpha–oxoglutarate. Of these, the most common compound is acetyl coenzyme A, which forms 2/3 of the carbon in carbohydrates and glycerol, all the carbon in fatty acids, and half the carbon in amino acids. The third and final phase of this process occurs on a cycle called the Krebs cycle, discovered by Sir Hans Krebs. In this cycle, acetyl coenzyme A and oxaloacetate come together and form citrate. In this stepwise reactions, occurs a liberation of protons, which are transferred to the respiration chain to synthesize ATP.

The imbalance between anabolism and catabolism can lead to obesity and cachexia, respectively. Metabolic energy is transported by high-energy phosphate groups like ATP, GTP, and creatine phosphate; or by electron carriers like NADH, FADH, and NADPH.