The initial workup must be aimed towards identifying the underlying etiology, manifestations of hyperbilirubinemia, and complications of hyperbilirubinemia. The presenting symptoms and signs are likely to be vague and vary according to the primary condition. They may include but not be limited to yellow skin discoloration, pruritus, altered mental status, fatigue, malaise, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, unintentional weight loss, weight gain due to edema, dyspnea, diarrhea, abdominal distention, abdominal pain, lower extremity swelling, bruising, subjective fever, myalgia, chills, hematemesis, dark urine, altered stool appearance, and menstrual disturbances.

**History of Present Illness**: Onset, duration, progression, severity, other associated symptoms, and exacerbating and alleviating factors of the above-mentioned presenting symptoms must be explored. Typically, the presence of fever with or without colicky abdominal pain suggests gallstone disease. Constitutional symptoms with recent weight loss may point to underlying malignancy or chronic infections. The presence of pruritus can indicate cholestatic disease secondary to biliary obstruction or intrahepatic cholestasis. If a patient has a concurrent illness, sepsis, hepatic ischemia, and opportunistic infections should be considered as well. Moreover, pregnancy can predispose patients to benign recurrent cholestasis or acute fatty liver of pregnancy.

**Past Medical and Surgical History**: Uncovering the history of underlying conditions that lead to hepatobiliary diseases is the mainstay of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia etiology identification. Accurately identifying associated findings is essential. Severe right-sided heart failure or tricuspid insufficiency with hepatomegaly may indicate hepatic congestion; AIDS cholangiopathy may be a sequela of AIDS. Infection, ischemia, or drugs may serve as secondary causes of bilirubin elevation in patients with chronic liver disease. The presence of diabetes mellitus, skin pigmentation, hypogonadism, arthritis, and dilated cardiomyopathy may suggest the presence of hemochromatosis. Obesity is often associated with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Inflammatory bowel diseases elevate the risk of primary sclerosing cholangitis and gallstones. Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency may lead to early-onset emphysema and liver cirrhosis. Celiac disease and thyroid disease are known to cause liver disease. Likewise, a history of blood transfusion can be a risk factor for viral hepatitis; transient elevation of bilirubin post blood transfusion may occur due to the rapid turnover of infused cells in chronic hepatic disease.

**Home Medications Including Illicit Drug Usage**: Detailed history of utilization of all medications including prescription, over the counter, herbal and illicit drugs, as well as dietary supplements, should be obtained to assess their potential hepatobiliary effects. The amount and duration of use must be noted. Many commonly accessed and utilized medications may induce liver injury. Numerous classes of drugs such as analgesics (acetaminophen), antibiotics, antiretrovirals, anti-tuberculosis, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory, anabolic steroids, anticonvulsants, oncologic, anti-TNF, halothanes, among others, carry a significant risk of such injury. Occupational or recreational hepatotoxin exposures, such as vinyl chloride from factories and amatoxin during mushroom picking fromAmanita phalloides and Amanita verna, may also lead to liver injuries. Furthermore, the use of salicylates in children and adolescents (<18 years) with viral illnesses has the potential to cause Reye syndrome.

**Family History**: Family history may be valuable while identifying any hepatobiliary diseases or associated genetic diseases leading to conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. For instance, a family history of jaundice may suggest inborn errors of bilirubin metabolism; a family history of early pancreatic cancers may increase its risk.

**Social History**: Intravenous drug use, unsafe sexual practices, and exposure to infected individuals are risk factors for viral hepatitis. Alcohol use is a pertinent finding; consumption of >210 grams of alcohol per week in men and >140 grams of alcohol per week in women for over two year period is considered significant alcohol consumption based on the American College of Gastroenterology, the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases and the American Gastroenterological Associations’ joint guideline on 2012.

**Physical Exam:**A brownish discoloration of urine may be evident in conjugated hyperbilirubinemia as hydrophilic conjugated bilirubin can be filtered through glomerulus. Yellowish to greenish pigmentation of skin, sclera, and mucus membranes may occur in the presence of an adequate increase in bilirubin. Thus, the physical exam must focus primarily on identifying these discolorations and determining their underlying etiology. Cholecystic, hepatic, pancreatic, or other abdominal tumors may be located through an abdominal exam. Hepatic tenderness may represent hepatitis or other liver-related disorders. Murphy sign may indicate acute cholecystitis; whereas, in cholangitis, non-specific pain may be present. Ascites often represent decompensated liver cirrhosis or malignancy with peritoneal spread. Inexplicable darkening of skin, diabetes, or heart failure may be present in hemochromatosis. Stigmata of chronic liver disease include palmar erythema, spider nevi, gynecomastia, and caput medusae. Additionally, the longstanding liver disease leads to temporal and proximal muscle wasting. Acholic or light gray stool may indicate biliary stasis or obstruction.