A neonate may require breastfeeding every 1-3 hours for 10-20 minutes on average. However, the frequency and duration of breastfeeding sessions decreases as the child gets older, as he can recieve more amount in less time. Two hormones are involved in the development of breast milk: prolactin and oxytocin.

Prolactin stimulates milk production. It increases during pregnancy to prepare the mammary tissue to start forming the milk by stimulating epithelial proliferation. However, due to high levels of progesterone and estrogen, prolactin is inhibited from forming any milk. After placental delivery, progesterone and estrogen levels fall, allowing prolactin to exert its effect and secrete the milk.

Oxytocin is known as the "let-down" hormone. It helps to contract myoepithelial cells present around the alveoli, causing ejection of the breast's already-made milk.

Initially, the amount of prolactin produced is positively related to the stimulation of the nipple. However, a few weeks later, the prolactin levels and quantity of milk produced are not tightly associated. But milk secretion stops if the mother stops breastfeeding. When breastfeeding is stopped, the Feedback Inhibitor of Lactation (FIL) collects and stops the cells from secreting more milk. When breast milk is removed during feeding or by the expression, FIL is also removed resuming the production of milk. Hence, FIL makes sure an adequate amount of milk is produced and prevents the breast from becoming too full.

Prolactin is beneficial to the mother as well. It causes a feeling of happiness and relaxation. Prolactin secretion also affects the release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Inhibition of GnRH decreases the release of follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone, which leads to a natural birth control mechanisms in the mother called lactational amenorrhea.