**Initial Management**

After stabilizing the child, the initial goal is to identify and drain a hydrocolpos, if present.

Early surgical management aims to divert the fecal stream with a descending colostomy with mucous fistula creation. Consideration should be given to the placement of the colostomy and length of the distal segment as this portion of the bowel will be used for the future pull through. A loop colostomy is not recommended as the distal limb remains in continuity with the urinary tract; thus any spillage of stool risks contamination of the urinary system and urinary tract infection.

**Treatment Planning**

Definitive surgical repair requires the identification and measurement of several pelvic structures, including:

- Length of the common channel

- Length of the urethra

- The presence and length of a vagina

- The presence of a hemivagina or longitudinal vaginal septum

- The presence of a cervix (or multiple cervices)

- Visualization of the height of the rectum and location of the rectal fistula relative to the pubococcygeal (PC) line.

The length of the common channel and urethra are critical for surgical planning (e.g., to decide whether to perform a urogenital separation or total urogenital mobilization). The 3 cm common channel is traditionally taught as the cutoff between simple and complex cloacas.

No standardized imaging protocols exist at present, but endoscopy and 3D cloacagram are two useful modalities to assess the patient’s anatomy.

**Definitive Treatment**

The definitive management of cloaca is surgical, with the goal of separating the gastrointestinal, gynecologic, and urologic structures and creating a perineal opening for each of the three structures for optimization of the function of each system, and to create a catheterizable urethra.

The surgical management of this condition has evolved significantly over the last several decades. In 1982, Pena first described the posterior sagittal approach for the repair of a cloacal malformation; an operation termed the posterior sagittal anorectovaginourethroplasty (PSARVUP).

In 1997, the total urogenital mobilization (TUM) was described as a technique to mobilize the vagina and urethra as a single unit, thereby obviating the need to mobilize the tissue between these two structures.

Definitive repair is typically performed between 6 and 12 months of age. The specific details of the repair are beyond the scope of this manuscript; it is performed through a posterior sagittal incision, with the addition of a laparoscopic or open approach to mobilize a high rectum or vagina as dictated by the patient’s anatomy.