Andexanet alfa is available as a lyophilized powder in 100 mg, single-use vials with no preservatives. Vials should be refrigerated at 2 to 8 degrees C. Reconstitute each 100 mg vial with 10 mL of sterile water for injection to make a concentration of 10 mg/mL. Dissolution takes approximately 3 to 5 minutes. The reconstituted drug is stable for 8 hours at room temperature and 24 hours at 2 to 8 degrees C in the vial. The reconstituted solution is also transferrable to polyolefin or polyvinyl intravenous bags, where it is stable for 8 hours at room temperature or 16 hours at 2 to 8 degrees C.

Two dosing regimens (low and high) have their basis on which factor Xa inhibitor requires reversal, when the patient received their last dose, and the size of the dose.

- The low dose protocol includes a bolus of 400 mg given at a rate of 30 mg/min, followed by an infusion of 4 mg/min for up to 2 hours.

- The high dose protocol is 800 mg administered at 30 mg/min and then an infusion at 8 mg/min for up to 2 hours.

- If the last dose of rivaroxaban was 10 mg or less and drug administration was less than 8 hours ago or unknown, give the low dose.

- If the last dose of rivaroxaban was more than 10 mg or of an unknown amount and drug administration was less than 8 hours ago or unknown, give the high dose.

- If the last dose of apixaban was 5 mg or less and drug administration was less than 8 hours ago or unknown, give the low dose.

- If the last dose of apixaban was more than 5 mg or unknown and drug administration was less than 8 hours ago or unknown, give the high dose.

- If the patient received the last dose of either drug 8 or more hours ago, give the low dose.

Andexanet alfa administration should be intravenous, using a 0.2 or 0.22-micron in-line filter. Administering more than one dose has not been tested.