The pathophysiology of hydranencephaly is still controversial, however, most studies suggest that the damage caused to the brain is related to bilateral internal carotid artery occlusion. As such, hydranencephaly is categorized into a group of circulatory developmental encephalopathies. Even though the most probable hypothesis behind the pathophysiology of hydranencephaly is a vascular anomaly, there have been autopsy reports where the internal carotid arteries were intact. An intact internal carotid artery does not exclude it as the key element for the development of hydranencephaly since it has been demonstrated that the internal carotid arteries could revascularize after the damage has already been done.

- The anomaly presenting in hydranencephaly follows the anatomic distribution of the brain supplied by the internal carotid artery. The structures supplied by the posterior circulation (cerebellum, brain stem, thalamus, basal ganglia, and choroids plexus) are preserved.

- Internal carotid artery anomalies demonstrated by angiographic studies and in autopsy reports.

Two different hypotheses to explain the severe brain damage that occurs in hydranencephaly are suggested.

- Encephaloclastic process (destructive theory): Hydranencephaly occurs most commonly during the 2nd trimester. At this point, the events occur after neural migration but before synaptogenesis. This means that the destruction of the brain occurs after the brain and ventricles have formed in utero due to this encephaloclastic process.

- Dysontogenic process: Disruption of the organogenesis at its early stages.

Although a predisposing molecular/cytogenetic anomaly has not been demonstrated to be linked to hydranencephaly, it cannot be excluded. Molecular dysfunction and cytogenetic anomalies, such as triploidy, could be involved in the development of hydranencephaly in some patients.

- Mutation in COL4A1: Reported in a patient diagnosed with porencephaly that resembled hydranencephaly.

- Mutation in PI3K-AKT3-mTOR: Specifically for neurodevelopmental anomaly such as megalencephaly.

- Triploidy: Had been reported to be the cause of hydranencephaly in some patients presenting with hydrocephalus.

The most accepted pathophysiology behind the development of hydranencephaly is a bilateral vascular insult to the internal carotid arteries early during the neurogenic phase. The pathogenesis mechanism itself may start as early as the 8th to 12th weeks of gestation, and the diagnosis of hydranencephaly has been reported as early as the 12th week (1st trimester).

Due to the absent development of the cerebrum, the intracranial pressure decreases, which leads to a collapse and accumulation of the skull which in turn leads to microcephaly. The fetal brain disruption sequence (FBDS) is the term used to describe this progression from hydranencephaly to microcephaly.