Monitoring for RTIs and HAART, in general, is essential due to the disastrous effects of medication noncompliance and suboptimal therapy. Monitoring mainly takes place through assessments like CD4 count and viral load.

The CD4 count is useful to measure due to this being the primary target of HIV. Patients with low CD4 counts can be expected to have severe immunodeficiencies leading to opportunistic infections. Viral load looks at how many copies of the HIV RNA are present in the patient. The greater the viral load, the greater the presence of the HIV infection.

Current IAS recommendations state that patients should have an HIV RNA level (viral load) within six weeks of initiating HAART to assess adherence and tolerability of therapy while noting that proper RNA level suppression can take up to 24 weeks. Once the viral load has fallen below 50 copies/mL, the recommendation is to repeat the viral load every three months until achieving one year of suppression. After a year of successfully suppressed viral load, the patient can have their HIV RNA levels measured every six months. IAS recommends checking the CD4 cell count every six months until levels are above 250/microliter for at least one year. After achieving these goals, CD4 count measuring can cease. Unless the patient is to undergo steroid or immunosuppressive treatments, or the patient experiences HAART failure, the CD4 count does not need to be measured. The definition of HAART failure is the IAS as an HIV RNA level above 200 copies/mL on at least two consecutive measurements. After diagnosing HAART failure, the recommendation is to reassess HIV genotype and drug susceptibilities and make changes to the patient's regimen.

When talking about HAART Failure, it is important to consider drug resistance as a causative agent. Drug resistance is a serious complication that must be considered and is associated with poor medication compliance. In addition, factors such as cost of treatment, accessibility to medications, and access to proper follow-up all play a significant factor in breeding resistance to standard HIV regimens. Studies have shown that low adherence and interruptions in treatment for more than two consecutive days in the first three months with NNRTI and NRTI-based regimens increased the risk of resistance within the first six months of treatment.

Studies have shown that while both measures help determine treatment efficacy, each variable offers different insights into the patient’s condition. CD4 count, when brought to a normal level through treatment, is associated with a reduced risk of mortality. When the viral load becomes undetectable, it means that the drug regimen that the patient is on is working at maximum efficacy. Also, viral load monitoring is considered a better predictor of HIV to AIDS progression than CD4 counts.