Paracoccidioides infection is acquired mainly via inhalation of conidia, and more rarely, by direct inoculation of the skin or oral mucosa (due to the use of twigs to clean teeth). Once the fungus invades the lungs in the yeast form, a non-specific inflammatory response is initiated. Neutrophils and alveolar macrophages will tend to form granulomas depending on the immunological state of the patient and the T helper (TH) lymphocytes' response. TH1 responses have been associated with a localized process that, in general, limits the infection. On the other hand, TH2 responses are associated with the disseminated form and a worse clinical outcome.

After the primary infection, the host will form granulomas. In children, adolescents, and immunocompromised patients, the infection could progress rapidly to systemic disease (acute/subacute infection). On the other hand, in the adult, the agent may disseminate through the lymphatic vessels and veins, usually after a period of several years (chronic infection), and depending on the host’s immunological response, can cause granulomas in multiple organs and tissues.

The chronic form usually results from the reactivation of latent pulmonary foci formed during the primary infection, but reinfections may also occur. PCM has an insidious course in which the lung is the most frequently affected organ, with lesser involvement of the reticuloendothelial and lymphatic systems. Pulmonary manifestations are observed in about 90% of the patients with chronic disease; however, respiratory complaints are seldom the main reason for medical consultation.

Unifocal pulmonary involvement occurs in only 25% of the cases. In most patients, medical consultation is sought only after dissemination to extra-pulmonary sites or multifocal disease.