# Introduction

Alkaline phosphatases are a group of isoenzymes, located on the outer layer of the cell membrane; they catalyze the hydrolysis of organic phosphate esters present in the extracellular space. Zinc and magnesium are important co-factors of this enzyme. Although alkaline phosphatases are present in different body tissues and have different physiochemical properties, they are true isoenzymes because they catalyze the same reaction. In the liver, alkaline phosphatase is cytosolic and present in the canalicular membrane of the hepatocyte.

Alkaline phosphatases are classified as tissue-specific and tissue-nonspecific types. Alkaline phosphatases found in the intestine, placenta, and germinal tissue are tissue-specific.

# Etiology and Epidemiology

Serum alkaline phosphatase levels will vary with age in normal individuals. Levels are high during childhood and puberty due to bone growth and development. The decrease in level in the 15 to the 50-year age group is slightly higher in men than in women.

In healthy individuals, the circulating enzyme is primarily derived from the liver and bone. In some individuals, this enzyme comes from the intestinal tract to a minimal extent.

# Pathophysiology

The human alkaline phosphatases (hALP) are found anchored on the cell membrane by glycosylphosphatidylinositol. They are released in the serum by the action of specific phospholipase.

The mechanism of the increase in alkaline phosphatase in hepatobiliary disorders has been a matter of debate. Research has convincingly shown that it is due to increased enzyme synthesis and not to reduced hepatobiliary excretion of the enzyme.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

Blood should be drawn after a fast of at least 8 hours. Serum and heparinized plasma give the same results. Slight hemolysis is tolerable, but gross hemolysis should be avoided. Certain sample storage conditions tend to increase serum ALP. There is a significant increase in activity after the warming of previously refrigerated or frozen sera.

# Diagnostic Tests

There are several clinical methods for the determination of serum alkaline phosphatase levels. They differ by substrate used, pH of the alkaline buffer, and the “normal” values generated. The tests, in principle, rely on the ability of the enzyme to hydrolyze phosphate esters.

Electrophoresis does not reliably differentiate the isoenzymes as the electrophoretic mobility of bone and liver isoenzymes is only slightly different. Electrophoresis on cellulose acetate, with the addition of heat inactivation, is a much more reliable test than electrophoresis alone. Polyacrylamide gel slab-based separation provides accurate identification of the liver, bone, intestinal and placental isoenzymes; this test is, however, not widely available.

# Testing Procedures

The alkaline phosphatase test is performed on semi-automatic or fully automated analyzers which are based on the principle of photometry. Photometry is the measurement of light absorbed in the ultraviolet (UV) to visible (VIS) to infrared (IR) range. This measurement is used to determine the amount of an analyte in a solution or****liquid. Photometers utilize a specific light source and detectors that convert light passed through a sample solution into a proportional electrical signal. These detectors may be photodiodes, photoresistors, or photomultipliers.

The liver fraction migrates the fastest, followed by bone, placental, and intestinal fractions. Because of the similarity between liver and bone phosphatases, there often is not a clear separation between them. Quantitation with the use of a densitometer is sometimes difficult because of the overlap between the two peaks. The liver isoenzyme can actually be divided into two fractions— the major liver band and a smaller fraction called fast liver, or α1 liver, which migrates anodal to the major band and corresponds to the α1 fraction of protein electrophoresis.

The difference in heat stability is the basis of a second approach used to identify the isoenzyme source of an elevated ALP.

The third approach to the identification of ALP isoenzymes is based on selective chemical inhibition. Phenylalanine is one of several inhibitors that have been used. Phenylalanine inhibits intestinal and placental ALP to a much greater extent than liver and bone ALP. With phenylalanine use, however, it is impossible to differentiate placental from intestinal ALP or liver from the bone ALP.

# Interfering Factors

ALP is inhibited by metal-complexing anticoagulants. They inhibit the enzyme by complexing Mg and Zn and should not be used. Hemolyzed and lipemic specimens should be rejected if they have a high background absorbance. Bilirubin at concentrations of up to 20 mg/dL does not interfere.

Serum ALP levels are affected by many drugs, physical conditions, herbal medicines, food intake, smoking, alcohol intake, and pregnancy. Some 1000 drugs, herbs, and physiological conditions that affect ALP activity have been documented. Clofibrate lowers serum ALP activity, reducing all ALP fractions except the liver; this may be caused by increased biliary clearance of ALP.

Verapamil, widely used in the treatment of cardiac arrhythmias, angina pectoris, and essential hypertension, increases serum ALP in hypertensive patients. When verapamil is administered to hypertensive patients for 2 months, total ALP activity increased significantly, and an increase in bone ALP in serum is subsequently observed. These results suggest that verapamil may affect bone metabolism which is secondary to the enhancement of parathyroid hormone secretion.

Alkaline phosphatase assays are susceptible to negative interference because alkali denaturation of hemoglobin may cause a negative offset in absorbance readings. Icterus exerts effects on chemistry tests primarily through spectrophotometric and chemical interferences. Bilirubin absorbs light between 400 and 540 nm, with a peak around 460 nm.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

When alkaline phosphatase is the only liver biochemical test that presents as elevated (i.e., when the serum aminotransferases are within normal limits), or when alkaline phosphatase is disproportionately elevated compared to other liver biochemical tests, evaluation of the patient should focus on identifying the cause and the source for the isolated or disproportionate alkaline phosphatase elevation. In asymptomatic patients with isolated elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase, it is essential to identify the primary source of abnormality.

One approach utilizes the measurement of the activity of those enzymes, which increase in concordance with the liver alkaline phosphatase such as 5’-nucleotidase (5NT) and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT). These enzymes are not elevated in disorders of bone and correlate well with hepatobiliary disorders. Serum GGT is very sensitive to biliary tract disease but is less specific for liver disorders.

# Clinical Significance

The principal clinical value of measuring serum alkaline phosphatase lies in the diagnosis of cholestatic liver disease—some of the highest elevations in alkaline phosphatases present in patients with cholestasis. Usually, four-fold of the upper limit of normal or greater elevation occurs in up to 75% of the patients with cholestasis, either intrahepatic or extrahepatic.

Moderate elevation (up to four times the upper limit of normal) of serum alkaline phosphatase is nonspecific as it can occur in a variety of conditions affecting the liver including cirrhosis, chronic hepatitis, viral hepatitis, congestive heart failure, and ischemic cholangiopathy.

Primary or metastatic cancer raises serum alkaline phosphatase levels by local bile duct obstruction and increasing leakage of the liver isoenzyme.

Abnormally low levels can be useful clinically as they are seen in Wilson's disease, especially when presenting in a fulminant form with hemolysis. Zinc is a cofactor of Alkaline phosphatase, which gets displaced by copper in Wilson's disease, a disorder of copper overload, thereby leading to low levels.

Transient very high levels of ALP (up to 30 times URL) have been recorded in children, but the clinical significance of this finding is unknown. This has been called transient hyperphosphatasaemia and may be either the bone or the liver isoenzyme.

An extensive evaluation is often not needed in those patients who have only a mild elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase (less than 50% elevation). Such patients may be observed clinically with periodic monitoring of serum liver biochemical tests. Whenever alkaline phosphatase levels are abnormally elevated, further evaluation should take place to determine whether the source is hepatic or non-hepatic.

Right upper quadrant ultrasonography is often the first imaging study ordered. If the bile duct has become dilated, either endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is done depending on the clinical indication. If the bile duct does not show dilation, testing for serum antimitochondrial antibody (AMA) is the suggested next step to evaluate for primary biliary cholangitis (PBC).

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

For non-waived tests, laboratory regulations require, at the minimum, analysis of at least two levels of control materials once every 24 hours. Laboratories can assay QC samples more frequently if deemed necessary to ensure accurate results. Quality control samples should be assayed after calibration or maintenance of an analyzer to verify the correct method performance. To minimize QC when performing tests for which manufacturers’ recommendations are less than those required by the regulatory agency (such as once per month),

Acceptable performance (accuracy) for alkaline phosphatase assays according to the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988 (CLIA-88) is the target value ± 30%, which is also the acceptability criteria used by the College of American Pathologists (CAP) in its surveys.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An alkaline phosphatase test may be ordered by a healthcare provider as part of a routine checkup or if the patient has symptoms of a bone disorder or liver damage. Proper evaluation and classification, by the patient's healthcare team, of any abnormal alkaline phosphatase levels and related findings result in better healthcare outcomes for the patient.