Clinical presentations of both Salmonella typhoid and Salmonella paratyphoid are similar, though arthralgia is more common with typhoid. Obtaining a history of permanent residence, travel history (travel to endemic and outbreak areas), immunization, socioeconomic status, lifestyle, onset and duration of illness, drug history (chemoprophylaxis of malaria, dose, and interval of the drug) are important to pave the way for diagnosis. Exposure history and related activities like impure drinking water, animal contact, insect bites, accommodations, undercooked food aid in excluding other infectious diseases. Typhoid is an infectious disease that presents with nonspecific symptoms. Patients complain of enterocolitis after 12 hours to 48 hours of inoculation. Often, they initially present with nausea, vomiting that progresses to diffuse abdominal pain, bloating, anorexia, and diarrhea (around 66%), which can vary from mild to severe diarrhea with or without blood, followed by a short asymptomatic phase that gives way to bacteremia and fever (about 96%) with flu-like symptoms.Salmonella typhi. Symptoms of enterocolitis generally last a few days and are self-limited without the need for medical intervention except in the old and very young. Immunocompromised patients with HIV, particularly those with low CD4 counts, more commonly present with severe diarrhea and tend to have more serious metastatic infections.

Physical examination findings can be nonspecific. In the first week, a documented fever may be accompanied by a decreased heart rate.  In the second week, findings are more common, including abdominal distention. When typhoid is complicated by ileal perforation, tenderness, rigidity, and guarding of the abdomen may be present. Visible rose spots (rose-colored macules on the abdomen) are associated with typhoid fever but occur only rarely. The patient looks pale, mildly distressed, and dehydrated with sunken eyes, dry skin, and lethargy. Some patients have jaundice with yellowish skin and sclera, pale stool, and dark urine when the patient has associated gallstones and other biliary pathology.

If the diagnosis is delayed until the third week, the patient is more toxic, anorexic, and with notable weight loss. Chances of bowel perforation increase with time, which worsens abdominal distension and peritonitis. The patient becomes tachypneic with crackles over the lung base on auscultation. Signs of metastatic complications appear. Dry cough due to pneumonia can also be present as well as neck rigidity due to meningitis, or rarely, chest pain due to myocarditis and pericarditis. Patients of endemic areas like India and Africa have more frequent neurologic manifestations like delirium, psychosis, insomnia, confusion, apathy, and in extremely rare cases, parkinsonism. Other unusual presentations are severe epigastric pain radiating to the back due to pancreatitis, bone pain because of osteomyelitis, and abscesses, which can occur anywhere in the body.