Contraindications for transposition flaps should be considered before their use in repairing a particular defect. Careful patient selection remains essential. Functional status should be assessed with close attention paid to comorbidities and the ability to care for the flap postoperatively. These procedures should be avoided in patients who are poorly compliant or cannot leave their surgical sites undisturbed. Additionally, patients who are unable to carry out post-surgical instructions due to disability or comorbidities (such as dementia) without access to other medical care should be considered poor candidates.

Other contraindications to the transfer of a flap include failure of tumor clearance and active infection involving the flap. Failure to fully clear the tumor, particularly the deep margin, can lead to recurrent tumors growing unrecognized for long periods of time along planes of undermining and ultimately cause a larger tumor burden. Local control via adequately excised margins or Mohs micrographic surgery can minimize this risk. Infected skin should never be used to fashion a flap, as this increases morbidity and complication rates, including the risk of flap failure.

Relative contraindications include smoking, bleeding diatheses, or predisposition to impaired vascular supply. Smoking increases the risk of flap necrosis, wound dehiscence, prolonged healing times, and infections. Recommending smoking cessation from two weeks prior to one week after surgery may help to minimize these complications. Patients with inherited bleeding diatheses or anticoagulation therapy are at increased risk of perioperative or postoperative bleeding and hematoma. Consultation with specialty physicians prior to operating on patients with known inherited bleeding diatheses is advised. Antiplatelet and anticoagulant medications, when appropriately managed, are generally continued during surgery to avoid the risk of thrombotic events. The use of tissue with impaired vascular supply, such as previously irradiated skin or scar, is generally avoided as it can decrease blood flow in the pedicle and adversely affect the viability of the flap.