The typical presentation of gait disturbances may be apparent on the clinic exam. However, it may be subclinical. Therefore the entire clinical picture must be taken into account. An extensive history of the patient is required. Social history, as well as medical history, is critical in the evaluation. Understanding how long the symptoms have been present is essential, as well as determining whether the onset was sudden or insidious. Merely taking a history of the patient's symptoms can help narrow down the etiology of the gait disturbances.

Clinical examination should include:

- Standing

- Posture

- Stance (narrow or wide)

- Initiation

- Walking

- Step length

- Speed

- Arm swing

- Freezing

- Turning

- Tandem gait

- Romberg's test

- Blind walk

- Backward walking

- Fast turning

- Heels walking

- Toes walking

- Running (if able to perform)

The examination can separate gait disturbances in two categories; musculoskeletal or neuromuscular (lower motor neuron and upper motor neuron).

**Musculoskeletal**

1. Antalgic Gait:

- Cause: pain

- Treatment: treat the underlying cause

2. Vaulting gait: It can be real or apparent. Is common in children with limb length discrepancy

- Cause: pelvic droop, decreased hip, and knee flexion, ankle plantar-flexion

- Treatment: shoe lift or surgery for difference longer than 2 cm; no treatment needed otherwise

**Neuromuscular**

1. Trendelenburg gait: pelvis drops to the unaffected side

- Cause: hip abductor weakness

- Treatment: gluteus medius strengthening

2. Posterior lurch gait: backward trunk lean with hyperextended hip during the stance phase of the affected limb

- Cause: hip extensor weakness

- Treatment: gluteus maximus strengthening

3. Knee buckling - genu recurvatum: posterior capsule locks affected knee joint, hyperextending knee by forwarding trunk leading

- Cause: knee extensor weakness

- Treatment: solid or hinged ankle-foot orthosis (AFO) and quadriceps strengthening

4. Steppage gait: unable to heel strike causing initial contact with toes (foot drop)

- Cause: ankle dorsiflexion weakness

- Treatment: hinged or posterior leaf spring AFO and electrical stimulator

5. Calcaneal gait: knee flexion movement with excess tibial motion over ankle during mid to late stance

- Cause: ankle plantar flexor weakness

- Treatment: hinged or solid AFO to prevent buckling at knee

6. Waddling gait: toe walking (posterior lurch and bilateral Trendelenburg)

- Cause: proximal muscle weakness

- Treatment: low-resistant strength training, aerobic exercise

7. Scissor gait (Crouched gait): Cerebral palsy

- Cause: prolonged neonatal hypoxia, Brain injury during birth

- Treatment: supportive care

8.  Ataxic gait: broad-based, unsteady

- Cause: cerebellar syndrome (alcohol, phenytoin, stroke, tumor, degenerative, inflammatory)

- Treatment: treat the underlying cause

9.  Sensory ataxic gait (stomping gait): Romberg’s test positive. Vitamin B12 deficiency. The patients use visual control to compensate for the loss of proprioception

10. Hemiparetic gait (hemispastic): gait is slow, with a broad base, knee, and hip are extended, during the swing phase, the paretic leg performs a lateral movement (circumduction)

- Cause: stroke, tumor, trauma, degenerative, inflammatory, vasculitis

- Treatment: treat the underlying causes and supportive care.

11. Festinating gait (Shuffling gait): short stepped, hurrying, with weak arm swing, or naturally very slow (parkinsonian), in some patients with freezing and slow turning

- Cause: Parkinson disease

- Treatment: dopamine agonist, dopamine precursors, and deep brain stimulation

12.  Apraxic frontal gait (Apractic or Bruns apraxia): gait ignition failure, or with walking difficulty (‘Marche à petit pas’). Bifrontal lesions

13.  Hyperkinetic gait: (chorea, dystonia, Wilson disease)

14.  Freezing gait: (Parkinson's disease) typically occur on turning or when approaching obstacles or narrow passages such as doors. Can fall easily

15.  Neurogenic claudication: (spinal stenosis) bending forward to relief pressure - flexed position

16.  Intermittent claudication: (peripherovascular disease), the patient stops walking

17.  Myelopatic gait: (spastic) stiff gait

18.  Propulsive gait: center of gravity anterior to the body

19.  Magnetic gait: NPH  slow and unsteady turns, slow, broad-based, short-stepped, "stuck to the floor," or "glued to the floor" words are often used

20.  Paraspastic gait: the gait may appear stiff and insecure, narrow-based, stiff, toe-scuffing (spastic paraparesis)

- Cause: bilateral stroke, tumor, trauma, degenerative, inflammatory

- Treatment: treat the underlying causes and supportive care

21.  Myoclonic gait: short-lasting, involuntary jerks that result in the movement of a joint

22.  Thalamic astasia: fall backward or to the contralateral side while sitting or standing caused by thalamic lesions or stokes

23.  Higher-level gait disorders:

24.  Psychogenic gait: rarely falls, bizarre walking, lack of persistence of a symptom or sign