**Primary Congenital Glaucoma**

The treatment of primary congenital glaucoma is largely surgical with a limited role for conservative or medical management. The surgeries are performed at the earliest to prevent irreversible optic nerve damage. Goniotomy under direct visualization in clear media has been an important surgical technique with a relatively good success rate.

Trabeculotomy is useful in cases with hazy media.

Some studies suggest that trabeculotomy is as effective as combined trabeculotomy and trabeculectomy.

**Iris Hypoplasia**

Glaucoma due to goniodysgenesis needs treatment.

**Axenfeld-Rieger Anomaly**

Half of these patients develop glaucoma over the long run. Surgical procedures like trabeculectomy and trabeculotomy are effective in controlling intraocular pressure.

**Peters Anomaly**

As per the phenotypic classification, the treatment algorithm has been simplified. The patients with type I mild disease need observation, whereas one with moderate disease and paraxial involvement requires optical iridectomy or pharmacological pupillary dilatation. In cases with severe type I Peters anomaly, penetrating keratoplasty is the treatment of choice.

In Peters type II with kerato-lenticular adhesion with small axial corneal opacity, mere optical iridectomy+ cataract extraction improves the vision; however, one with large corneal opacity requires penetrating keratoplasty with or without cataract extraction. Some studies favor selective endothelial removal for Peters anomaly (SEPA), which has been found to be effective in type I Peters anomaly.

**Aniridia**

An evaporative dry eye is secondary to meibomian gland disease (MGD) in patients with aniridia.

In cases with significant corneal opacity, corneal transplantation is an option. However, penetrating keratoplasty outcomes are dismal in cases of aniridia.

For glaucoma, surgical interventions are needed in most cases. Goniotomy, trabeculotomy, trabeculectomy with mitomycin C, combined trabeculotomy and trabeculectomy, and glaucoma drainage devices are the various surgical options.

Cataract surgeries need many considerations and modifications, from incision making to intraocular lens implantation (IOL). The surgical incision should be such that the limbal stem cell damage is minimal; preferably, a scleral incision is made. The continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis (CCC) should be less than 6mm.

A capsular tension ring is used to prevent future bag instability. Some prefer doing posterior continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis (PCCC) and anterior vitrectomy to avoid YAG capsulotomy in the future.

**CHED**

Penetrating keratoplasty and endothelial keratoplasty are the treatment modalities.

**Sclerocornea**

Depending upon the degree of corneal involvement, the treatment is planned. In cases with cornea plana and peripheral opacification, mere refraction and glasses help. However, in patients with severe corneal scleralization, limbus translocation is combined with penetrating keratoplasty with relatively good outcomes.

**Congenital Iris Ectropion**

Early intervention in the form of trabeculotomy and trabeculectomy is required.