It is difficult to determine accurate rates of decompression sickness secondary to aviation and altitude exposure, as there have been reports of potential cases that are not characterized as altitude-exposure decompression illnesses. One publication noted 63 cases of individuals who experienced decompression sickness from flying after a dive over a 4-year period. With that noted, in one study involving 2001 subjects, the rate of people experiencing any form of decompression illness following altitude exposure from an altitude chamber was 40%. Of individuals experiencing decompression sickness, the majority of symptoms were joint pain (72.8%) or paresthesias (12.6%). 3.4% of people who experienced decompression sickness secondary to altitude in that study experienced symptoms that were classified as neurologic or respiratory. 1.3% of individuals experienced recurrent symptoms. The studies revealed a low rate (3.4%) of individuals experiencing neurologic or respiratory symptoms though did not include paresthesias, which have been noted to be a neurologic symptom by others. When considering neurologic symptoms that include a headache and paresthesia, the rates may be closer to 14% to 34% of cases.

Individuals flying a military or private flight may be exposed to high-altitude situations predisposing them to a decompression illness. Approximately 30% of the time flying between 18,000 ft and 30,000 ft results in symptoms with a much higher percentage when flying at altitudes between 30,000 ft to 45,000 feet.

Aside from straightforward factors such as altitude or time from the last dive, other factors have been noted to affect the risk of decompression sickness. Gender has not been found to be a risk factor. Other risk factors for decompression illness include dehydration, fatigue, poor conditioning, higher body mass index, increased age, and presence of a right to left shunt such as a patent foramen ovale.