Alpha-Lipoic acid (ALA) is a caprylic acid-derived antioxidant. It is synthesized in the mitochondria and plays an essential role as a cofactor, assisting in the enzymatic nutrient breakdown.

ALA has recently gained a reputation as an antioxidant. In its reduced form, dihydrolipoate reacts and neutralizes ROS, such as superoxide radicals, singlet oxygen, and hydroxyl radicals. Thus, it is extremely beneficial in several oxidative-stress-associated conditions such as ischemia-reperfusion or radiation injury.

Secondly, numerous studies have strongly supported the role of ALA in treating diabetic neuropathy. It does so by enhancing nitric oxide-mediated endothelium-dependent vasodilation, thus improving microcirculation in patients with diabetic polyneuropathy.

Also, ALA possesses an excellent iron-chelation property. The thiol groups in ALA are responsible for chelating irons. By increasing the glutathione levels inside the cells, ALA and dihydrolipoate excrete various toxins, especially toxic metals, in the body. Lipoic acid preferentially binds to  Zn, Pb, and Cu. On the other hand, dihydrolipoate forms complexes with Fe, Zn, Hg, Pb, and Cu.

So far, ALA has the strongest evidence of its therapeutic effect in diabetic neuropathy and oxidative stress conditions. There is still a need for more studies on its benefit in other conditions such as HIV/AIDS, liver disease, and weight loss. According to the FDA, ALA is reported to be safe and effective, and that there are promising uses that can be explored in future studies.