Cleft palate arises from a failure of development during gestation. The primordial mouth, or stomodeum, begins to form around week four. The five facial prominences arise around the mouth: frontonasal prominence in the median, bilateral maxillary prominences, and bilateral mandibular prominences. The frontonasal prominence develops into medial and lateral nasal prominences. Over the next week, the two maxillary prominences grow toward the nasal prominences, meeting the lateral nasal prominences to develop into the nasolabial region and the medial nasal prominences to create the lip. The failure to merge around the end of week five yields a unilateral or bilateral cleft lip.

At this time, the development of the palate begins and is complete around week twelve. The medial nasal prominences fuse at the midline to form the median palatine process or the primary palate. The medial portions of the maxillary processes rotate from a vertical to a lateral position around week seven to form the lateral palatine processes, which fuse at the midline from anterior to posterior to form the secondary palate. Failure of midline fusion results in cleft palate.

CL/P and CPO are found in over 200 different congenital syndromes. The most commonly discussed are CHARGE (coloboma, heart defects, atresia choanae, growth retardation, genital abnormalities, and ear abnormalities) syndrome and velocardiofacial or DiGeorge syndrome (22q11.2 deletion). Cleft palate alone is more commonly associated with other congenital anomalies, about 50%, than CL/P, about 15%. The most commonly discussed anomalies associated with CPO is the Pierre Robin sequence of micro/retrognathia, glossoptosis, and cleft palate. This sequence is most commonly seen in Stickler syndrome but is also found with Treacher Collins, Nager’s, DiGeorge, and fetal alcohol syndromes.

There is significant heterogeneity in the molecular pathways associated with the development of CL/P and CPO. The pathways associated with the formation of the lip and palate include the sonic hedgehog pathway (Shh and Spry2 genes), which interacts closely with the bone morphogenic pathway (Bmp4 and Bmp2 genes), fibroblast growth factor pathways (Fgf10 and Fgf7), and TGFb receptors and ligands. Disruption of these pathways at various stages results in the variability of severity, laterality, and location of clefts.

Further, it has been shown that there is a clear environmental impact on the development of CL/P and CPO. Material risk factors for malformation including smoking, diabetes mellitus, and gestational diabetes, and teratogen exposure (valproic acid, phenytoin, retinoic acid, dioxin, thalidomide). There is a clear familial association for CL/P, and CPO as the presence of clefts in parents and siblings also increases the risk that a subsequent child will be affected. A child of an affected parent has a 3%-4% risk of CL/P and about 6% of CPO. For parents with one affected child, the risk of another is 4%, and with two affected children, 9% for CL/P and 2% and 1%, respectively, for CPO. The risk of either increases to 14% to 17% if both a parent and a child have a cleft.