Patients with penetrating head trauma require both medical and surgical management.

**Medical Management**

A low threshold for obtaining surgical consultation should be considered in cases of penetrating head trauma. Beware that many patients with penetrating head trauma will likely require operative intervention.

Indeed, do not remove any penetrating object from the skull in the emergency department until trauma and neurosurgical evaluation is obtained. Also, the protruding object should be stabilized, and provision should be made to protect it from moving during transportation of the patient, to prevent further injury.

Assess the need for endotracheal intubation.

- Inability to maintain adequate ventilation

- Inability to protect the airway due to depressed level of consciousness

- Neck or pharyngeal injury

Normalize PCO2. Avoid hyperventilation, because it leads to vasoconstriction and a subsequent reduction in the cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP). This may worsen long-term neurological outcome. Beware that hyperventilation is only a temporizing measure for the reduction of elevated intracranial pressure (ICP). Avoid hyperventilation during the first 24 hours after injury when cerebral blood flow (CBF) often is reduced.

Monitor intracranial pressure (ICP) particularly in patients with GCS less than 8. Consider head elevation to 30 degrees. This can improve venous drainage and may decrease ICP. The target is to maintain intracranial pressure (ICP) less than 20 mmHg to 25 mmHg and CPP greater than 70 mmHg. Since cerebral blood flow (CBF) is difficult to measure continuously, the CPP is measured as a surrogate. Treatment typically is indicated for ICP greater than or equal to 20 mmHg to 25 mmHg, with guideline goals of ICP less than 20 mmHg and cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) 50 mmHg to 70 mmHg.

**Surgical Management**

A major reason for surgical intervention is the presence of a hematoma. Large hematomas should be evacuated promptly. Early decompression with conservative debridement of the brain may be needed. In most cases, the removal of a deep-seated bullet may not be required. However, there are certain indications when removal should be considered. These are:

- Penetrating injury through pterion, orbit, or posterior fossa

- Presence of intracranial hematoma

- Presence of pseudoaneurysm at the time of initial exploration

A craniotomy is needed for low-velocity missile wounds in which the object is still protruding from the head. Some critical factors can determine the outcome for those who survive the initial injury; they depend on prompt and early surgical intervention as well as the ability to provide high-level neurocritical care.