In individual patients presenting with HM toxicity, the primary care physician (PCP) or the EM physician is usually the first contact health provider.

The PCP/EMP should have a high index of suspicion of HM as the etiology, especially if the clinical picture does not improve with treatment for usual conditions.

PCP often needs consultation from the clinical toxicologist who is an expert in these conditions and will advise on the tests and treatments.

The laboratory personnel should be provided with a good history so that they will select the specific containers to collect blood, urine, and other tissue specimens to enhance the accuracy of the tests. They will also guide the clinician in the proper preparation of the patient before the tests to avoid confounders from misleading the diagnosis. [Level 5]

In selected cases, care from other specialties/subspecialties may be needed to treat specific organ dysfunction, as discussed under consultations.

The clinical pharmacist plays a vital role in guiding the dosing and monitoring of chelation therapy.

One should not forget the role played by skilled nurses in the care of patients affected by HM toxicity from primary care in the ambulatory clinic through tertiary-care for complicated cases and in the occupational health clinics.

Finally, the roles of the occupational health consultant, community medicine physician, and environmental engineer are vital to control HM toxicity in the soil, water, industrial segment, and provide for a healthier society.

Proper coordination among all the above providers is essential to reduce the burden and prevent morbidity and mortality from HM toxicity.