**Benefits of PHR Platforms**

- A snapshot view of the individual’s health.

- Objective data points for vital signs, nutrition, physical activity, and disease course, which can allow individuals to follow their health in real-time and quantify the amount of effort and change that has occurred over time.

- Gamification of the health data collection and reporting process can serve as a source of motivation in achieving health goals such as weight loss targets, motivational videos, calorie registers, etc.

- Greater clarity of medications to be taken and better compliance with them, plus an improved assessment of the same

- Identification of successes and failures in the delivery of care and the underlying reasons for them

- Rapid emergency response with the availability of pertinent health data in the absence of a caregiver or bystanders

**Potential Pitfalls**

- PHRs may be developed as a one-size-fits-all approach that may sometimes fail to take into account individual variations.

- Certain advertised benefits of commercial PHR applications may not be supported by concrete evidence and can prove misleading to consumers.

- Anxiety may be provoked by an urge to record all personal data.

- Individuals may find patterns where none exist, leading to greater false positives and higher healthcare utilization.

- There may be bias in self-reporting health data.

- Lapses in security and confidentiality are a major concern, especially with cloud-based solutions.

- Misuse of health data by entities with commercial interests.