Packed red blood cells are provided in units of roughly 350 cc, and are more concentrated than whole blood with a hematocrit of 65-75%. The plasma and platelets are removed via centrifuge, and the remaining packed red blood cells are stored in a saline-based preservative such as citrate phosphate dextrose adenine (CPDA-1) for increased shelf life.  Packed RBCs (pRBCs) can be stored for up to 35 days at 2-4 degrees Celsius. One unit of pRBCs is thought to raise a patient’s hemoglobin level by 1g/dL. These products must be typed and matched for ABO and Rh compatibility with patient recipients.

Fresh frozen plasma is given in units of 200-250 cc each and contains all coagulation factors, with no red blood cells or platelets. For FFP to be therapeutic, it is required to be given at 10-20 cc/kg body weight, which would theoretically increase the body’s clotting factor levels by 20-30%. For an increased shelf life of up to 2 years, they are frozen within 8 hours of collection and stored at -40 to -50 degrees Celsius. They are then thawed and must be used immediately as their thawed shelf life is only 5 days before they begin to degrade. Frozen plasma (FP), which is less commonly used, and typically frozen within 24 hours of collection (FP24), has slightly reduced levels of factor 5 and 8 as compared to FFP. FFP is particularly useful for certain coagulopathies or in isolated clotting factor deficiencies. There is some speculation as to the benefit of FFP in patients with multiple clotting factor deficiencies or coumadin coagulopathy, but its standard use in the hemorrhagic shock patient remains valid.

Platelets are given in high concentration “6 packs” of platelets with one “6 pack” being equal to one apheresis Unit. 1 Unit is typically 250 cc, is stored concentrated in a small volume of plasma, and only has a shelf life of 5 days at 20-24 degrees Celsius. Unlike pRBCs, platelets lose what little shelf life they have when they are frozen, and so must remain fresh from collection to administration. One Unit of platelets is thought to increase the body’s platelet count by 30,000-60,000 platelets/uL. Roughly 20% of patients can develop antiplatelet antibodies after 10-20 transfusions.

Finally, one other commonly used blood product is cryoprecipitate, which is used in a similar fashion to FFP. Cryoprecipitate, or Cryo, is gathered by centrifuging plasma and gathering the precipitate, which contains large ratios of vWBF, factor 8, fibrin (factor 13), and fibrinogen. Like plasma, Cryo is frozen and can be stored for up to two years at -30 degrees Celsius. Cryo is typically provided in 10-15 cc units which are then given in 6-10 unit pooled increments.