Treatment of acquired diaphragmatic hernia in the acute setting requires appropriate patient resuscitation followed by surgical correction.

**Acquired diaphragmatic hernia (ADH) following trauma:**pre-operative antibiotic therapy with first-generation cephalosporins is recommended. Moreover, in patients with high suspicion of synchronized intestinal trauma, antibiotic therapy to cover the anaerobes. In patients with greater than 1500 blood loss, and in the uncommon circumstances of prolonged surgery for greater than 2 to 3 hours, prophylactic antibiotic therapy should be repeated.

Following adequate primary resuscitation, a long-midline laparotomy incision from the xiphoid to the pubis is used. Primary evaluation of the four quadrant abdominal cavities and retroperitoneum should be undertaken. Bleeding and gastrointestinal spillage control should be prioritized. According to some literature review, in a selected group of patients with documented pure traumatic diaphragmatic injuries without other organ injuries, a primary upper midline incision might be performed. However, extending the incision for an appropriate exposure in equivocal circumstances after laparotomy should be considered.

A thorough evaluation of the diaphragmatic surface should be included during the primary abdominal evaluation. Accordingly, the falciform ligament should be ligated and divided. Downward hepatic traction will assist the improved right hemidiaphragm evaluation. Additional exposure with mobilizing the liver from the coronary ligaments has not been described. To optimize the left hemidiaphragm visualization, gastric and splenic traction should be undertaken. The diaphragmatic central tendon and adequate firm attachments to the lumbar vertebrae should be confirmed.

In the presence of abdominal visceral herniation, gentle reduction to the abdominal cavity should be undertaken. In rare circumstances, splenic injury during the reduction could complicate the procedure. In these selected cases, a meticulous extension of the defect is recommended.

Chronic herniations differ from acute traumatic cases, where a hernia sac and severe dense adhesions are predicted. The hernia sac should be dissected, followed by the abdominal visceral reduction. It should be noted that any inadvertent injury, including serosal injuries, should be repaired promptly.

Next, the bulk of the trimmed diaphragmatic edges is held with Allis clamps. The edges are retracted caudally to allow adequate and versatile exposure, along with avoiding inadvertent injuries to the intra-thoracic organs. Thorax should be completely examined to ensure a bloodless, clean field. In case of any contamination, copious irrigation to avoid the risk of later empyema is recommended.

The diaphragmatic repair is then undertaken with either permanent or absorbable sutures. The repair with both running and interrupted fashions has been described.

**Minimally invasive approach:**For patients with an isolated diaphragmatic injury, laparoscopic repair should be considered. However, in patients, with a positive surgical history and potential for severe dense adhesions, the left upper quadrant 3 cm below the costal margin may preferably be avoided.

**Use of mesh**—using mesh repair should not be considered the standard repair method. However, in uncommon circumstances where the primary repair is not quite feasible considering a significant tissue loss, using a mesh might be considered. In these patients, nonabsorbable prosthetic materials (including, polytetrafluoroethylene, and polyethylene) can be applied. Importantly, in the presence of GI spillage and contamination, adequate abdominal irrigation and autologous flaps are recommended. The latter flaps are provided using either omental or latissimus dorsi flaps.