The retroperitoneal location of the duodenum within the “surgical soul” can make access and adequate visualization particularly difficult. The majority of the duodenum, including D1, D2, and the proximal portion of D3, can be visualized by a Kocher maneuver.

The Kocher maneuver is performed by incising the posterolateral peritoneal attachments of the duodenum and then retracting the duodenum and pancreatic head medially.

The management of duodenal trauma largely depends on the extent of injury and involvement of other associated structures. The majority of simple duodenal hematomas seen on CT can be managed non-operatively.

An upper GI contrast study can be considered every 5 to 7 days to evaluate progression. Surgical evacuation may be necessary if the obstruction fails to resolve after 2 or 3 weeks.

If a duodenal hematoma is identified intraoperatively, a Kocher maneuver should be performed, and the duodenum should be thoroughly inspected for signs of perforation. Without any signs of perforation, these hematomas are mainly managed conservatively. Evacuation of the hematoma found intraoperatively is indicated if there is a high suspicion of full-thickness injury or if there is > 50% luminal narrowing.

Traumatic duodenal laceration or perforation requires surgical intervention. The preferred treatment for the majority of duodenal lacerations is through a primary repair.

Primary repair may even be considered in some cases of complete transection with simple duodenal duodenostomy, as opposed to other areas of the small bowel that would be managed by larger resection. A primary repair requires minimal tissue loss with no tension or involvement of the ampulla. The use of a nasogastric tube to allow temporary protection of the repair can also be considered. Extraluminal drainage is a topic of debate with no level I evidence to guide practice.

After primary repair, if the duodenal injury is severe (grade III-IV) or there is concomitant pancreatic injury, a pyloric exclusion should be considered to protect the repair.

If there is significant tissue loss putting the repair under tension, or if the injury involves the ampulla, a roux-en-Y duodenal-jejunostomy should be considered. For massive injuries involving the head of the pancreas, the patient may require a pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure).

There are other historical options to mention that have generally fallen out of favor. These include duodenal diverticularization and triple-ostomy repair. Duodenal diverticularization involves performing an antrectomy and gastrojejunostomy to permanently bypass the primary repair.

A triple-ostomy repair involves a primary repair followed by gastrostomy, duodenostomy, and jejunostomy.