Currently, retinal dystrophies are not curable. However, supportive treatment can improve the quality of life. Major options to consider in all cases include refraction, cataract surgery when indicated, and referral for low vision aids.  Patients with cystoid macular edema benefit from topical or systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitors.

Patients with night vision problems benefit from night vision aid or commonly used devices like a flashlight. Cases with cone dystrophies with photosensitivity benefit from tinted lenses, particularly orange or red lenses, since rod photoreceptors are less sensitive to orange and red lights. Red tinted soft contact lenses are an alternative to glasses. Low vision aids may help in enhancing visual acuity.

**Gene therapy:**Retina is a good target for genetic manipulation due to various reasons: target cells (photoreceptors) are easily accessible for surgery and monitoring, the blood-retinal barrier provides an ocular immune privilege, and the cell population is static, which requires a small amount of therapeutics to be administered.

Subretinal injections are a preferred mode of delivery for gene therapy as the agent reaches RPE and photoreceptors more precisely. Compared to intravitreal injections, the immunological response is well controlled. Several clinical trials are ongoing. In 2017, the US FDA approved subretinal injection of voretigene neparvovec for RPE65 associated Leber congenital amaurosis.

**Stem cell therapy:**Human pluripotent stem cells were first cultured in 1998 and were seen to have the potential to differentiate into endodermal, mesodermal, and ectodermal lineages. For reasons similar to gene therapy, the retina is a good target for stem cell therapy. Moreover, the limited size of the retina requires smaller quantities of therapeutic tissue compared to other organs. Several trials are ongoing which mostly focus on diseases like age-related macular degeneration, Stargardt disease, glaucoma, and retinitis pigmentosa.

**Retinal prostheses:**These are devices that replace phototransduction within the eyes of individuals lacking photoreceptors in diseases such as retinitis pigmentosa. Normally photoreceptors contain light-sensitive pigments that trigger phototransduction, which generate neuronal signals in presence of light stimuli. These signals are processed by the middle layers of the retina before they reach ganglion cells. These retinal ganglion cells, that form the optic nerve, then transmit these signals to the visual cortex. In cases where the outer retinal layer/ photoreceptors are lost, retinal prosthesis transmits the signals to inner layers for the phototransduction pathway to be completed.

In 2013, USFDA approved Argus II retinal prosthesis for late-stage retinitis pigmentosa. Currently, many other retinal prostheses are under trial worldwide with an aim at exploring use in conditions like severe age-related macular degeneration, cone-rod dystrophy, choroideremia. Argus II is composed of 60 electrodes that are implanted epiretinally. It has three external and three internal components. External components include a video camera mounted on a pair of glasses, a visual processing unit, and a coil attached to the sidearm of glasses. Internal components are an internal coil, internal processing unit which is within a casing which is sutured to the sclera.

Currently, it is indicated in cases of retinitis pigmentosa who are > 25 years of age, with light perception or worse vision and a previous history of useful form vision. Patients must also be highly motivated for post-op clinic follow up and rehabilitation. Complications reported include retinal detachment, choroidal effusion, hypotony, endophthalmitis, and implant dislocation.

As new therapies continue to be discovered, there is an ever-increasing need for the clinicians to recognize the clinical characteristics to determine whether the patients may benefit from a certain treatment.

**Genetic consultation:**Once the diagnosis of retinitis pigmentosa or other retinal dystrophies is suspected, genetic counseling must be arranged. The consultation aims to confirm the diagnosis and mode of inheritance. It involves history taking and clinical examination in addition to clinical investigations and molecular genetic diagnosis. A detailed pedigree is essential for a complete workup. Once the mode of inheritance is known, tailored genetic testing must be done. Currently, 270 genes associated with retinal dystrophies can be tested.

Counseling must address the risk of progression and the current changes in lifestyle required. Patients must be made aware of the risk of transmission of the disease in future generations. Pedigree charts help in assessing the mode of inheritance. For instance, in autosomal recessive families, in which both parents are carriers, each child has a 25% risk of inheritance. An individual with the autosomal recessive disease has a small risk of transmitting the disease to his offsprings, depending on the carrier state of a population. In such circumstances, consanguineous marriages must be avoided.

All patients must be offered a referral to support services. This is particularly important when dealing with issues like vocational rehabilitation training and schooling of a visually impaired child.