There are various methods of performing autotransfusion with different techniques within the operating room and emergency department. The goal of autotransfusion remains the same, to maintain a sterile field, prevent clotting of the collected blood, filtration of the blood, and administration to the patient. The procedure should not take more than a few minutes to prepare, and the typical intent is an alternative or interim to alternative treatments. It is essential to familiarize oneself with the equipment provided at the treating facility to minimize the risks of infection and other complications.

Following are the steps of the procedure:

- Assemble collection system.

- Add anticoagulant into the autotransfusion bag prior to collecting the blood (this could vary based on the institution's protocols).

- Connect the patient's drainage system to the collection bag either directly or through a water-seal system.

- Before removing the filled collection bag for infusion, get a new collection bag ready.

- Close clamp on the new collection bag.

- Close the clamp on the chest drainage system.

- Remove the filled bag from the patient system, ensuring sterility at all times.

- Attach the previously prepared new collection bag to the water-seal unit or the chest or drainage tube.

- Ensure all connections are secured and open clamps on the patient drainage tubing and the autotransfusion bag.

- Prime the blood-administration tubing system with normal saline.

- Add the microfilter to the blood portion of the tubing and connect the filled collection bag.

- Start the infusion of the shed blood.

- Repeat this process as needed based on a reassessment of the patient following the initial transfusion.

- Discard supplies and equipment and remove personal protective equipment.