Contraindications to rhinoplasty follow general guidelines for any elective surgery. The patient must be sufficiently healthy and motivated to undergo elective rhinoplasty surgery, typically under general anesthesia. The surgeon should also consider any adverse psychological features that may portend a poor outcome, such as unrealistic expectations, severe depression, or body dysmorphic disorder.  A good method to assess patient expectations is to ensure that the patient's and the surgeon's goals for the operation are clearly defined and agreed upon before an operation is planned.  The liberal use of digital photography and computer imaging improves communication regarding surgery goals and allows the surgeon to proactively manage expectations and screen for potential problems. That said, it should be emphasized that digital photograph manipulation is a useful tool for creating a shared understanding of surgical goals rather than a guarantee of post-operative appearance.

The additional complexity of secondary or revision cases should be respected as the risk of complications increases significantly in these cases.

Another potential relative contraindication for rhinoplasty is smoking.  Many surgeons refuse to perform rhinoplasty on patients who are actively smoking and require that surgical candidates stop all tobacco product use for a certain period of time before and after surgery to reduce the risk of wound complications.  An increasingly large body of literature suggests that wound complications or poor functional outcomes are no more likely in patients who smoke than those who do not, possibly due to the robust blood supply of the face.