Among the most common congenital defects in the United States is cleft lip or palate, which may occur together or separately. A cleft lip occurs when the upper jaw or gum contains an abnormal opening. Clinical presentation varies; in severe cases, the gum may be completely divided.  However, minor cases may only involve a small notch where the jawbones are separated. Lip formation occurs during weeks four through seven.  Similarly, cleft palate involves an abnormal opening in the roof of the mouth. It occurs due to the failure of midline fusion of the lateral palatal shelves by week ten.  Treatment involves surgical repair.

Omphalocele is a rare birth defect often associated with other congenital anomalies, such as trisomies 13, 18, and 21. Recall that the midgut herniates through the umbilicus during weeks six to seven. By week ten, the midgut returns to the abdominal cavity. Failure of the midgut to return to the abdomen results in a congenital malformation known as omphalocele. An omphalocele presents clinically in a neonate with abdominal contents protruding through the umbilicus. They may appear as intestinal loops or involve other abdominal organs such as the liver. A thin, transparent sac surrounds the abdominal contents.

In contrast, gastroschisis is a birth defect that occurs due to a failure of fusion of the lateral folds of the anterior abdominal wall. Gastroschisis also presents at birth, but the abdominal contents protrude through an abdominal wall defect next to the umbilicus rather than through the umbilicus. Also, the protruding abdominal contents are not covered by a sac in gastroschisis.