**Surgical Resection**

Patients with Barcelona-clinic liver cancer (BCLC) classification of very early (0) and early-stage (A) are ideal candidates for surgical resection. Very early (0) stage has preserved liver function, European cooperative oncologic group performance status (ECOG-PS) score of 0, and solitary nodule of 2 cm. For patients with early-stage (A) with preserved liver function and ECOG-PS score of 0 and with a solitary nodule of more than 2 cm are appropriate surgical resection candidates.

Patients with Child–Turcotte–Pugh A and without clinically significant portal hypertension have favorable surgical resection outcomes. Patients with small HCC (tumors less than 5 cm) and Child-Pugh A have survival rates of 70% and 35% at 5 and 10 years, respectively, and recurrence-free survival rates of 36% and 22%.

**Liver Transplantation**

Liver transplantation is associated with the removal of tumors and the potential for cure. Milan criteria for liver transplantation is a single nodule less than or equal to 5 cm in diameter or not more than three nodules, with none large than 3 cm in diameter without macrovascular invasion and extrahepatic spread.

**Tumor Ablation**

Patients with BCLC classification of very early (0) and early-stage (A) who do not meet surgical resection criteria are appropriate for ablation.

**Transarterial Therapies**

Transarterial therapies are considered for patients with BCLC intermediate stage (B). Intermediate stage (B) has preserved liver function, ECOG-PS 0, and multinodular without macrovascular invasion or extrahepatic spread. Transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) is the intraarterial infusion of cytotoxic agents and subsequent embolization of the feeding artery to the tumor. TACE is contraindicated in patients with decompensated cirrhosis. Metanalysis revealed an objective response rate of 52.5% and overall survival of 70.3%, 40.4%, and 32.4% at 1, 3, and 5 years respectively.

**Systemic Chemotherapy**

Sorafenib is the first-line treatment for the patient with BCLC advanced stage (C) with preserved liver function, ECOG-PS score of 1-2, and macrovascular invasion or extrahepatic spread. Sorafenib is a multikinase inhibitor. Sorafenib hepatocellular carcinoma assessment randomized protocol (SHARP) trial demonstrated a median survival of 10.7 months for patients receiving sorafenib as compared to 7.9 months in the placebo group.