Postherpetic neuralgia occurs in a subset of the population suffering from an episode of acute HZ. Well-established risk factors for an acute HZ episode progressing to PHN include age, severe immunosuppression, the presence of a prodromal phase, severe pain during zoster outbreak, allodynia, ophthalmic involvement, and diabetes mellitus.

A meta-analysis of the risk factors for the development of PHN published in 2016 noted that approximately 13% of patients older than or equal to 50 years of age with HZ would develop PHN.

One month after the onset of shingles, 9 to 14.3% of patients develop postherpetic neuralgia, and at three months, this percentage becomes 5%. At one year, 3% of patients continue to have severe pain.

Family history has also been considered a risk factor for herpes zoster. In a case-control study by Hicks et al., comprising 504 patients and 523 controls, it was observed that the blood relatives of patients were more likely to have herpes zoster than the control group (39% vs. 11%, p< .001). Moreover, this risk was more significant in patients with multiple blood relatives having herpes zoster than those with a single blood relative having herpes zoster.

A study from Iceland reported variations in the risk of postherpetic neuralgia associated with various age groups. Patients younger than 50 years were not found to have severe pain at any time. Severe pain was observed in patients older than 60 years: 6% at one month and 4% at three months from the onset.

There is no sex predilection for postherpetic neuralgia.