Patients with open fractures have a reported history of trauma that is most commonly high velocity in nature. The patient should be adequately undressed to evaluate for other significant, life-threatening injuries per advanced trauma life support protocol. The initial focus should be on assessing the status of the patient's airway, breathing, and circulation, and resuscitation measures should be implemented as necessary. Once the patient has been stabilized, open fractures should be addressed emergently. These injuries are associated with symptoms of pain, deformity, swelling, and a wound that may be bleeding. It should be noted that the wound may not lie directly over the fracture site. The movement and neurovascular status of all involved limbs should be assessed to ascertain whether or not there is a possible nerve or vascular injury associated with the fracture.

The wound should be examined thoroughly and characterized according to the Gustilo-Anderson classification system for open fractures as this will dictate initial treatment. Gustilo-Anderson type I open fractures is a low energy injury with wounds less than 1 cm with minimal soft tissue damage. Type II fractures are low to moderate energy injuries with wounds that are greater than 1 cm with moderate soft tissue and muscle damage. Type III fractures are high-velocity injuries have wounds greater than 10 cm.  Type IIIa injuries have severe crushing soft tissue damage, type IIIb have a significant loss of tissue coverage, and type IIIc have significant loss of tissue with an associated vascular injury.