# Continuing Education Activity

Hand infections comprise a broad spectrum of pathology, dependent upon which superficial or deep structures are involved. Given the anatomical complexity of the hand and its delicate function, prompt recognition and treatment are required to optimize patient outcomes. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of various hand infections and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the features of the history of present illness that are most important in guiding decision making for hand infections.
- Explain the common physical exam findings associated with a spectrum of common hand infections.
- Summarize the scenarios and disease patterns in which hand infections commonly require surgical management.
- Outline the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team when treating hand infections to ensure prompt evaluation of patients who may require inpatient admission, surgical intervention, or specialist consultation for antimicrobial selection.

# Introduction

A broad spectrum of hand infections is commonly encountered by hand surgeons, primary care physicians, and emergency medicine practitioners.

Superficial infections are more common and may include the skin, nail fold, fingertip pulp, or subcutaneous tissues.

# Etiology

Infections of the hand may arise in a myriad of ways, but most frequently occur due to direct inoculation and contiguous spread to adjacent structures after a traumatic injury.

Numerous bacterial and fungal pathogens have been isolated from infections of the hand. Staphylococcus aureus is cited as the overall most common microorganism causing infections of the hand, followed by Streptococcus species.Staphylococcus aureus is increasingly being identified, especially in urban communities, with some studies suggesting it may account for around 50% of hand infections in this setting.Eikenella corrodens and Pasteurella multocida are identified frequently in human and animal bites, respectively.Group A, B-hemolytic Streptococcus, is cited as being the most common, single organism isolated in cases of necrotizing soft tissue infections.Candida albicans.

Atypical infections with nontuberculous mycobacterial species, such as Mycobacterium marinum or Vibrio spp may cause soft tissue infections of the hand after injury occurring in aquatic environments.Mycobacterium avium, can cause infection in both immunocompromised and immunocompetent patients. Frequently these infections are insidious, and diagnosis is delayed.

# Epidemiology

Superficial hand infections are commonly encountered by hand surgeons, primary care physicians, and emergency medicine practitioners. As many superficial infections are managed conservatively in an outpatient setting, determination of the exact incidence of various infections is challenging. One study estimated 70% to 85% of hand infections are located within the skin, nail fold, fingertip pulp, or subcutaneous tissues.

Certain populations of patients have been determined to be at greater risk for hand infections. Manual laborers are more predisposed to superficial trauma, which can lead to the development of infection.

# History and Physical

Acquiring a detailed history and physical exam is necessary to determine the correct diagnosis and necessary treatment. It is important to determine the patient’s age, handedness, and occupation. Knowledge of occupation may provide the physician insight into risk factors for certain exposures, and give a better understanding of the patient’s individualized needs when considering treatment and rehabilitation strategies. A full understanding of the patient’s comorbidities and past medical history should be obtained as certain medications, and medical conditions may place the patient in an immunocompromised state. A targeted review of systems should allow the physician to evaluate the patient for signs of hematogenous spread or systemic illness. Patients should also be queried regarding previous injuries or surgeries to their hands.If known by the patient, it is important to establish the time of onset and nature of the inoculation event. Understanding the chronicity and the setting of inoculation will help to guide empiric antibiotic coverage. This is especially important in the cases of penetrating trauma or bite wounds, as specific microorganisms have classical associations for particular types and settings of injury.

A complete investigation into the patient’s presenting symptoms should always be undertaken to create and narrow differential diagnosis. Location and characterization of pain, erythema, effusion, and discharge may help to determine the particular pathology present. Patients should also be assessed for signs of nerve compression. In all cases, a full inspection of the hand and upper extremity should be performed to examine for erythema or other discoloration, effusion, deformity or malalignment, and lacerations or open wounds. Erythema should be outlined with a marking pen to help determine the progression of the infectious process, which may help to differentiate superficial cellulitis from a necrotizing soft tissue infection.

The existence of an abscess may also be suggested by the failure of apparent cellulitis to resolve upon initiation of antibiotic treatment. The location of the abscess should be noted if one is present, as they may occur superficially, in the webspace between digits, or the midpalmar, thenar, or hypothenar spaces.

A patient with osteomyelitis oftentimes has risk factors predisposing them to this condition, and on a physical exam may demonstrate localized erythema, bony pain, and edema. In some cases of osteomyelitis, a draining sinus tract will also be present.

# Evaluation

The remainder of the objective patient assessment should include an examination of a patient’s vital signs to evaluate for fever or other abnormalities suggesting a systemic illness. Laboratory evaluation should include assessment of the white blood cell count. Other inflammatory markers, such as the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein test (CRP) can be collected to assess the systemic inflammatory response. It certain instances, it may be helpful to evaluate the CRP serially as a marker of the acute phase reaction, in order to monitor the patient’s response to therapy.

If they are determined to be clinically indicated, standard radiographs or other advanced imaging modalities may be used for diagnosis or therapy. Radiographs can be assessed for osteolysis or periosteal reaction if osteomyelitis is suspected.

# Treatment / Management

Although the treatment of hand infections is specific to the particular pathology, several basic tenets of management exist. Conservative management of infections includes splint immobilization, soaks, and elevation in addition to adequate antimicrobial coverage. Broad-spectrum antimicrobial coverage should be started while awaiting objective culture data, and with consideration to preliminary gram stain results and epidemiologic clues.

The typical treatment for chronic paronychia is the avoidance of predisposing factors and the application of topical antifungals and steroids. In certain cases, additional oral antibiotics may be included in the management of chronic paronychia to cover for potential secondary bacterial infections.

Deeper infections more frequently require intravenous antibiotic treatment and prompt surgical management. In certain cases of flexor tenosynovitis, a trial of intravenous antibiotics under close inpatient observation may be attempted, provided the patient presents within 24 hours of symptom onset.

Given their location and deep anatomic connections, infections of the flexor tendons, web spaces, and deep spaces of the hand require incision and drainage to eradicate the infection and prevent further contiguous spread.

# Differential Diagnosis

While the presence of infection can usually be determined based on the history and physical exam in conjunction with laboratory analysis, several non-infectious inflammatory conditions can mimic the appearance of different infectious conditions. Osteoarthritis exacerbations, crystalline arthritis, or inflammatory arthropathies may appear similar to septic arthritis but can be differentiated based upon synovial fluid analysis, gram stain, and culture.

# Prognosis

The prognoses of hand infections differ significantly depending upon the pathology present and the acuity with which it is recognized and treated by the physician. Provided the infection is promptly recognized, and appropriate antimicrobial coverage is initiated early, superficial infections typically resolve with good functional outcome. In cases of infections involving deep structures, the prognosis depends upon the chronicity of infection, the respective structures involved, and the adequacy of surgical and antimicrobial treatment. With deeper infections, postoperative care, and structured hand therapy are paramount to minimize tendon adhesions and digital stiffness.

# Complications

Prompt evaluation and treatment are paramount to resolving the infection and optimizing outcomes for patients. If unrecognized or inadequately treated, infections may progress to involve contiguous structures, resulting in greater morbidity to patients. Functional limitations and neurovascular compromise may arise as a result of mismanagement. Other complications include stiffness, tendon rupture, joint destruction, osteomyelitis, nerve compression, and wound complications requiring amputation or flap coverage.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Given the risk for complications, patients should be educated regarding the signs and symptoms of hand infections and be encouraged to acquire an evaluation from a physician in the setting of any concerning findings. Prompt recognition and treatment of infections can prevent the progression of a more minor infection into one that requires surgical management. If appropriate, counseling for appropriate wound care, soaking, and dressings should be given once they are initiated.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

While some simple, superficial patterns of hand infections may be managed by primary care or emergency physicians in an outpatient setting, it is essential to recognize that certain pathology may require an interdisciplinary approach. There should exist a low threshold for the primary care or emergency medicine physician to provide referral or consultation to a hand surgeon for further management. Furthermore, depending upon the etiology of the infection and microorganism susceptibilities, consultation with an infectious disease specialist may help determine the optimal antimicrobial regimen. In cases of immunocompromised patients or in dealing with drug-resistant organisms, an interprofessional approach may be necessary to ensure appropriate patient care.