Each hair is made up of two separate structures:

The hair **shaft**, which comprises the visible part outside of the skin.

The **follicle**which lies underneath the surface of the skin.

- Inner root sheath

- Outer root sheath

Hair is also made both of living and non-living components below and above the level of the epidermis. Above the level of the epidermis, the hair shaft is a thin, flexible cylinder of non-living, keratinized epithelial cells. Below, it is part of a living hair follicle which enlarges at the base and forms the hair bulb.

The **hair shaft**is made up of a cortex, surrounding cuticle cells, and sometimes a central medulla which is found in thicker hair. The bulk of this hair fiber belongs to the cortical layer which plays an important role in determining the physical and mechanical properties of the hair, such as strength, texture, and color. It is composed predominantly of macrofibrils, which are rods of microfibrils meshed together in a matrix.

The **follicle**is the primary structure from which hair can grow. The histological arrangement of the follicle is divided into outer and inner root sheaths.

The **outer root sheath**(ORS) has been recognized as a ready supply of multipotent stem cells which differentiate into several cell types including melanocytes and keratinocytes. More specifically,                 these stem cells are thought to reside in a distinct bulge area located between the insertion of the arrector pili muscle and the ductal opening of the sebaceous gland.

The **inner root sheath**(IRS) consists of theHenle layer, the Huxley layer, and the previously mentioned cuticle layer which also helps affix the growing hair shaft to the follicle, a task bolstered by the production of keratins and trichohyalin by the IRS cells. The **cuticle**is made up of flat overlapping cells that cover the hair shaft from the root until it exits from the epidermis. The cuticle is of considerable cosmetic importance as it is responsible for lending the hair an untangled appearance and shape.

The **hair bulb**is the region of the follicle which actively produces hair. It extends into the dermal layer of the skin and surrounds the dermal papilla, an important structure derived from mesenchyme, made of rich stroma, associated nerve fibers, and a loop of the capillary that supplies nutrients. The papilla is believed to be a primary orchestrator in the hair growth process, conducting the precise signals that determine the size and color of the hair shaft via a complex mix of essential growth factors including insulin-like growth factor, stem cell factor, keratinocyte growth factor, and bone morphogenetic protein. The hair bulb itself is divided into two regions by the**Auber line**. Below this line, cells are still undergoing differentiation. The immature cells below the Auber line comprise the germination center or matrix of the follicle where all cells are mitotically active and move in an upward direction where they enlarge, elongate vertically, and integrate into the hair shaft.

Nerve supply to the hair follicles is similar to that of the surrounding network of dermal nerves in that it is composed of both sensory afferents and autonomic sympathetic nerves. Sensory information from hair stimulation enhances tactile ability. Autonomic nervous innervation primarily provides control of the **arrector pili muscle**. Contraction of these tiny muscles makes the hair “stand on end.” This is likely a vestigial function related to fur; erecting the shafts served to trap air and conserve heat in cold climates as well as cut a larger silhouette in an attempt to intimidate rivals or would-be predators.

Vascular supply is provided by small arterioles originating in the subcutaneous fat. The vessels are responsible for nourishing the hair follicle by delivering oxygen and nutrients, eliminating waste, and promoting growth. Subtle hair loss on the lower extremities can sometimes hint at the underlying peripheral arterial disease.

Hair that is darker and visible to the human is called **terminal hair**. Areas of the body that appear to be hairless, but have shorter, finer hairs that lack the medulla layer are called**vellus hair**. Neonates can be born with**lanugo hair**, fine hairs that get shed in utero or within the first weeks of life.**Club hair**is fully keratinized hair that is fully formed in the telogen stage of the hair cycle. The only parts of the external surface of the body that are truly hairless are the palms and soles of the hands and feet, lips, labia minora, and glans penis.