# Continuing Education Activity

Though the most common manifestation of human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) is the rash exanthema subitum, also called roseola infantum, HHV-6 has been known to establish a more threatening infection in immunocompromised individuals. Interprofessional team members should recognize that further evaluation for this condition is warranted when an immunocompromised patient presents with behavior changes with or without a rash. Early recognition will lead to expedited treatment, improved patient care, and prevention of adverse outcomes. This activity reviews the diagnosis, management, and treatment of human herpesvirus 6 and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of human herpesvirus 6. 
- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with human herpesvirus 6.
- Summarize treatment guidelines for patients affected by human herpesvirus 6 infection. 
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients infected with human herpesvirus 6, especially those at risk for a more severe infection.

# Introduction

Human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) was initially discovered in blood lymphocytes of adults with lymphoproliferative diseases or AIDS and was labeled human B-lymphotropic virus.  Further research identified HHV-6 in CD4+ lymphocytes and as a member of the herpesviruses.  As it was the sixth herpesvirus isolated, it was then subsequently renamed human herpesvirus 6. Typical of a herpes virus, HHV-6 has been known to establish acute, incessant and permanent infection.

HHV-6 is the collective name for the double-stranded DNA viruses HHV-6A and HHV-6B. HHV-6A and HHV-6B, are officially recognized as distinct viruses instead of variants within the herpesvirus family. While much less is known about HHV-6A, it occurs more frequently in the immunocompromised host. In contrast, research has identified HHV-6B as the etiologic agent of the childhood illness exanthema subitem (roseola infantum).

# Etiology

HHV-6A, HHV-6B, and HHV-7 all share some level of homology with human cytomegalovirus (CMV), the only other human beta-herpesvirus.

By adulthood, more than 95% of the population is seropositive for HHV-6A, HHV-6B, or both variants. Present serologic methods are ineffective in isolating one variant from the other.

# Epidemiology

Researchers have identified HHV-6B as the etiologic pathogen responsible for most HHV-6 infections presenting with symptoms. While research supports that a majority of people have been infected with HHV-6 at some point in their life, primary infection with HHV-6 occurs within the first 2 years.  In this age group, it is usually associated with an undifferentiated febrile illness, albeit a subset of children will exhibit the classic manifestations of roseola infantum.

HHV-6 is a ubiquitous virus found worldwide. In a large prospective study of North American children, the peak age of HHV-6 acquisition was between 6 and 9 months of age.

# Pathophysiology

Overall, primary HHV-6 infection is among the most prevalent causes of acute febrile illness in young children. It is also a significant cause of visits to the emergency department, hospitalizations, and febrile seizures.Roseolovirus genus. The virion particle has the characteristic structure of a herpesvirus, with a central core containing the viral DNA, a capsid, and a protein-rich tegument layer that is surrounded by a membrane.

The principal target cell for HHV-6 is the mature CD4+ T cell.

While the exact mechanism of HHV-6 transmission is still under investigation, several studies have elucidated the viral transmission via saliva. It appears that transfer via saliva from mother to infant is the most common route. Several early reports described infectious HHV-6 as being present in saliva from nearly every person tested.

# History and Physical

Though the various clinical features and diseases associated with HHV-6 are still under investigation, research already well documents that HHV-6 plays an extensive role in central nervous system diseases and immunocompromised individuals including transplant recipients.

HHV-6B is the causative agent in exanthema subitum (also known as roseola infantum), a childhood disease characterized by high fever and a mild skin rash, and accounts for up to 10 to 17% of acute febrile Emergency department visits in children up to 36 months of age.

The diagnosis of roseola infantum is clinical. It is often precipitated by abrupt onset of high fever with temperatures reaching 40°C (104 F) for three to five days. During the initial febrile phase, some children will have periorbital edema, conjunctivitis or inflammation of the tympanic membranes while many others will be active and well.

Physical examination findings are usually consistent with the symptoms previously described. In children, with defervescence of the fever, there is often an eruption of a blanching maculopapular rash that is rose-pink and approximately 2 to 5mm with a surrounding halo. The rash typically persists for one to two days and often spreads centrifugally. However, there are documented cases of fever without a rash.

# Evaluation

Human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) can be diagnosed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), serology or viral cultures, with PCR being the predominant method used.

Laboratory studies in HHV-6 may show leukocytosis, leukopenia, and anemia.

Indication for radiological imagining is dependent on the clinical presentation, especially in immunocompromised individuals. Chest radiography can be obtained to rule out other etiologies in adults including pneumonia and pneumonitis. The need for imaging is less frequently the case in children. Computed tomography (CT) of the head with and or without contrast can be obtained to search for other treatable diseases. In cases where the central nervous system is afflicted, a lumbar puncture can be performed. HHV-6 infection of the CNS often has a mild pleocytosis with elevated protein. CSF can be sent for HHV-6 PCR studies to confirm the diagnosis.

# Treatment / Management

Currently, there is no approved compound exclusively for the treatment of HHV-6, and there is no vaccine available.

HHV-6 infections in immunocompetent children are self-limiting and do not require treatment. Treatment of infants with roseola infantum is usually supportive.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis includes:

- Infectious mononucleosis

- Cytomegalovirus infection

- Viral hepatitis

- Herpes simplex virus infection

- meningitis

- Rubella

- Viral pneumonia

- Drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS syndrome)

In children with classic roseola infantum, HHV-6 is the etiologic pathogen. However, several other diseases can cause fever and rash. More severe, less benign, causes of such symptoms requires exclusion. In immunocompetent adults, infection with HHV-6 manifests similarly to mononucleosis. Thus EBV and CMV should be excluded. Immunocompromised patients, especially those receiving organ transplants and those with AIDS are generally symptomatic. This cohort of individuals with HHV-6 disease are often concomitantly infected with CMV, and antiviral treatment should commence promptly. HHV-6 correlates with several other diseases including hepatitis, herpes simplex, meningitis, rubella, viral pneumonia, and DRESS syndrome.

# Prognosis

Generally, primary infection with HHV-6 is self-limiting, and those who are immunocompetent survive without sequelae. In immunosuppressed individuals, reports have described more severe illness. Documentation exists of pneumonitis, hepatitis, and organ rejection in transplant patients, with death reported in patients with encephalitis and meningoencephalitis.

# Complications

Universally, HHV-6 primary infection is benign with spontaneous resolution in 5 to 7 days. The most common complication of roseola infantum is febrile seizures. Additional complications are often due to HHV-6 neurotrophic effects, as highlighted in cases where the central nervous system becomes compromised, for example, in cases of meningoencephalitis and encephalopathy. In these cases, the virus occupies the brain during primary infection and can remain dormant in brain tissue.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

In an otherwise healthy infant with roseola infantum, parent education is crucial in alleviating anxiety about fever and the possible febrile seizure. The importance of supportive care with antipyretics and the futility of antibiotics requires explanation. In immunocompromised individuals, the complex symptoms and other secondary viral illnesses that may accompany HHV-6 infection are counseling points with emphasis on seeking early medical attention when symptoms arise.

# Pearls and Other Issues

It is generally accepted that HHV-6B is the causal variant responsible for most primary infections while HHV-6A is acquired after HHV-6B, through asymptomatic infection.

HHV-6 infection correlates with more severe diseases including mononucleosis, colitis, myocarditis, and hepatitis, in addition to the documented central nervous system complications of encephalitis and meningoencephalitis. Early recognition and treatment of neurological complications are integral in preventing adverse outcomes. Children and adults that have cancer, who are recipients of allogeneic transplants and those with immunosuppression disorders are at risk for reactivation of HHV-6. In such cases, individuals may present with a fever, rash, and a decrease in circulating granulocytes and erythroid cells.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

HHV-6 commonly presents with a rash in children presenting to the emergency room and pediatricians alike. While defining rashes can be challenging, isolating specific cofounding symptoms is imperative to differentiate between more toxic versus benign illnesses. The majority of HHV-6 infections are asymptomatic, transient, and do not require antiviral treatment. [Level II] Pediatric consultation is the recommendation for infants with roseola infantum who have febrile seizures. There are known complications from HHV-6, and those individuals with more ominous signs and symptoms including changes in mental status and organ failure would benefit from an interprofessional approach. In such cases insight from neurology and infectious disease physicians are imperative. When HHV-6 associated heart failure is suspected, early cardiology consultation is critical in managing infectious myocarditis in immunocompetent adult patients.

Coordinated care from skilled nurses is prudent to monitor for deterioration and changes in vital signs. Similarly, laboratory assistance in expediting the preferred methods of viral detection in blood or CSF by PCR, or viral antigen in tissue by immunohistochemistry should not be discounted. (Level II) Lastly, the pharmacist is integral in providing ganciclovir and foscarnet anti-viral treatment in HHV-6 associated encephalitis.