# Introduction

The upper limb includes the scapula, clavicle, humerus, radius, ulna, carpals, metacarpals, and small bones of the hand. Innervation originates in the neck and travels down to allow muscle action of flexion, extension, pronation, supination, and rotation necessary to achieve activities of daily living.

# Embryology

Nerves are of ectodermal origin. Bones, blood vessels, and muscles are of mesodermal origin. The limbs are anatomically positioned at birth through the interaction of several growth factors. Essential growth factors include sonic hedgehog (SHH), fibroblast growth factor (FGF), and the homeobox (Hox) genes. SHH is activated for appropriate growth and development of the limbs. It is activated at the zone of polarizing activity, and interacts with FGF, to ensure normal limb development.FGF and Wnt-7 genes are localized at the apical ridge and contribute most to lengthening and dorsal-ventral positioning, respectively. Hox genes are responsible for segmental development in the craniocaudal direction. Mutations in the Hox genes result in limbs positioned in the wrong places. Hox gene is mutated in the Antennapedia Drosophila fly. In this instance, the Hox mutation resulted in legs growing from the fly's head instead of antennas.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Blood supply arises from the arch of the aorta via the left subclavian and the brachiocephalic artery which provides the branch of the right subclavian artery. Both subclavian arteries become axillary arteries after passing below the first rib into the axilla. The axillary artery passes below the pectoralis minor and branches into the posterior and anterior circumflex, which go on to supply the shoulder region. The subscapular artery also arises from the axillary artery after passing below the pectoralis minor muscle and provides blood supply to the subscapular muscle and other muscles of the back and thoracic region. After the axillary artery crosses the lower border of the teres major muscle, it becomes the brachial artery, the main blood supply to the arm. It gives rise to the deep branch of the brachial artery, which supplies the deep muscles of the arm and becomes a network of vessels around the elbow. The brachial artery travels with the median nerve into the cubital fossa where it bifurcates into the ulnar and radial arteries. These arteries provide blood supply to the remainder of the upper limb. Lesions of specific nerves which run with these arteries are of clinical and surgical significance. The following nerves and arteries are of vital importance: (1) the radial nerve, which runs with the deep branch of the brachial artery at the radial groove; (2) the axillary nerve, which runs with the posterior humeral circumflex artery and can be seen at the quadrangular space.

# Nerves

The nerves of the upper limb arise from a network called the brachial plexus, which originates in the neck from anterior divisions of the spinal nerves C5-T1.

The five branches are the last segments of the brachial plexus. The terminal branches include the following nerves: musculocutaneous, axillary, radial, median, and ulnar. Each nerve has a distribution that coincides with the muscles they innervate. The musculocutaneous nerve (C5-C6) innervates the brachialis, brachioradialis, and coracobrachialis muscles. To remember these muscles, use the mnemonic "BBC." As the name states, the musculocutaneous nerve also has a cutaneous component, the cutaneous nerve of the forearm, which provides lateral sensation to the antebrachium. The axillary nerve also comes from the ventral roots of C5 and C6 and innervates the deltoid and teres minor muscles.

# Clinical Significance

As stated, the muscles distal to the lesion will be affected for all nerves described above. The example described pertained to the Guyon canal and the ulnar nerve. Another example is the compression of the median nerve. The median nerve is the only nerve that passes through the carpal tunnel, and as previously stated, will lead to sensory and motor deficits upon compression or lesion. However, we must keep in mind that the median nerve also innervates the muscles of the forearm. Before the median nerve enters the carpal tunnel, it has already innervated muscles of the forearm, including the flexor digitorum superficialis, flexor pollicis longus, pronator teres, flexor carpi radialis, the lateral component of the flexor digitorum profundus, and the pronator quadratus. Pronation of the forearm and flexion of the phalanges will be intact, except for the distal interphalangeal joints of the medial two phalanges. However, the thenar muscles will express motor deficits. Prolonged compression of the median nerve will lead to atrophy of the thenar muscles, hindering the movements of the thumb, and deficiencies in the action of the lateral two lumbricals, preventing flexion at the lateral two metacarpal joints and extension of the lateral interphalangeal joints. The sensation on the lateral aspect of the palmar surface of the hand will still be intact because the palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve arises before entry into the carpal tunnel. The palmar digital cutaneous branch travels through the carpal tunnel; this is why people with carpal tunnel sensation experience numbness and tingling in their fingers. Overall, this concept of lesions with the distal manifestation of deficits applies to all nerves. It is best to know the action of each muscle and the nerve which provides innervation. If there is a lesion, those actions will not occur in a typical fashion.