**Syphilis  **

Syphilis is caused by a spirochete known as Treponema
pallidum that can be sexually transmitted (vaginal, anal, or oral contact) or passed through the placenta, causing congenital syphilis. It has an incubation period of approximately 20 to 40 days. The host for T. pallidum is humans, and it has no animal reservoir.

**Gonorrhea**

Gonorrhea is a sexually transmitted disease caused by gram-negative cocci called Neisseria
gonorrhoeae. N. gonorrhoeae mainly affects mucous membranes causing urethritis in men and cervicitis in women.

Oral or pharyngeal gonorrhea, although uncommon, is more prevalent in females or in men who have sex with men (MSM). Oropharyngeal gonorrhea is known to be rare because the saliva is a hostile environment for N. gonorrhoeae. The disease may be transmitted through oral sex and kissing, even in an asymptomatic infected person.

**Tuberculosis (TB)**

Tuberculosis is a granulomatous disease caused by aerobic acid-fast bacilli, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, triggering a primary pulmonary infection.

Oral tuberculosis results from a secondary infection via blood dissemination.M. tuberculosis occurs through aerosols generated by coughing, sneezing, or speaking. The bacteria can remain airborne within tiny droplets for hours and infect susceptible individuals. The risk of TB transmission in a dental practice appears low, however possible, primarily through patients from high-risk areas of the world or with reactivated TB infection.

**Scarlet Fever**

Scarlet fever is a bacterial infection that develops in patients suffering from bacterial pharyngitis - strep throat - and occasionally from streptococcal skin or wound infections. The causative agent is Streptococcus pyogenes, which belongs to the gram-positive A beta-hemolytic streptococci group (GABHS). Humans are the primary reservoir for this bacterium, with approximately 2 to 5 days of incubation.

Scarlet fever, also known as scarlatina, can spread directly from person to person via infected saliva or nasal secretions. There is a higher risk of transmission in crowded conditions such as daycare centers and schools.