Obtaining a history from the patient should focus on the onset of pain, presence or absence of radicular symptoms, and any inciting injuries or traumas.  The clinician should thoroughly investigate the presence (or absence) of the following clinical parameters:

- Postural-specific influences on back pain/symptoms (e.g., flexing forward, lying supine)

- Quantify ability to ambulate without symptoms

- History of prior symptoms, injuries, or surgeries

- Presence of weakness and/or numbness/tingling

- Systemic symptoms, illnesses, unintentional weight loss, or recent travel locations

Radiating pain as the main issue has a much more predictable surgical outcome compared to a presentation of non-specific lower back pain that likely is related to muscle fatigue and strain. A mechanical component to the back pain (i.e., the pain only with certain movements) may indicate instability or a degenerative fracture of the pars at L5.

Evaluating the patient’s gait is critical to understand better the daily impact this pain/deficit is causing. Having the patient arise from the chair, walk on his or her heels and toes, and then sit on the examination table for testing of strength, reflex, and straight leg testing is one systematic order. All physical examinations will include an evaluation of the neurologic function of the arms, legs, bladder, and bowels. The keys to a thorough exam are organization and patience. One should evaluate not only strength but also sensation and reflexes. It is also important to inspect the skin along the back and document the presence of tenderness to compression or any prior surgical scars. The straight leg test consists of a supine patient having his/her fully extended leg passive stretched from 0 to about 80. The onset of radiating back pain in either leg supports a diagnosis of a stenotic canal.

A disc herniation at the L5/S1 level can have two overlapping presentations:

- L5 at the L5/S1 level, a disc herniation **far****laterally**into the left/right neural foramen would compress the L5 nerve, resulting in weakness of hip abduction muscles, ankle dorsiflexion (anterior tibialis muscle), and/or extension of the great toe (extensor hallucis longus muscle).

- S1 at the L5/S1 level, a disc herniation **centrally**into the canal would compress the S1 nerve, resulting in weakness of ankle plantar flexion (gastrocnemius muscle).