Hemolysis, icterus, and lipemia are the most common specimen integrity issues that can interfere with laboratory tests and may lead to erroneous results and interpretations and, ultimately, to inappropriate medical decisions. Oxygenated and deoxygenated hemoglobin have slightly different absorbance spectra but show maximal absorbance around 415 nm, with significant absorbance between 320 and 450 nm and 540 and 580 nm. Colorimetric assays that use absorbance measurements in one or more of these ranges are, therefore, susceptible to interference. Examples include iron, lipase, albumin, and g-glutamyl transferase.

Alkaline phosphatase assays are susceptible to negative interference because alkali denaturation of hemoglobin may cause a negative offset in absorbance readings. Icterus exerts effects on chemistry tests primarily through spectrophotometric and chemical interferences. Bilirubin absorbs light between 400 and 540 nm, with a peak around 460 nm. Colorimetric assays taking primary or secondary absorbance measurements at these wavelengths may be affected. The unconjugated and conjugated forms of bilirubin may exert different effects on certain assays. Conjugated bilirubin has been found to cause a greater degree of interference with most assays.

Lipemia causes light scattering, differential partitioning of analyte between the polar and aqueous phases of the sample, and interaction of the lipoprotein particles with assay reagents may all cause interference in results. Lipaemia causes light scattering across the visual spectrum (300 to 700 nm). Colorimetric assays taking absorbance readings at the shorter wavelengths of the visual spectrum are, therefore, most susceptible to interference. As a result, assays that utilize changes in NAD(P)H concentration, measured around 340 nm, are susceptible to lipaemia interference. ALT levels can increase due to certain drugs, which should be avoided before testing.

Drug hepatotoxicity can be nonidiosyncratic (predictable) or idiosyncratic (unpredictable). Also, drug-associated hepatotoxicity can classify as immune-mediated and non-immune-mediated. The incidence of drug-induced liver injury is 19 cases per 100,000 persons. The most common drug causing drug-induced liver injury is amoxicillin/clavulanate.

Other factors which can affect ALT include African-American race (15% higher than Caucasians), body mass index (40 to 50% higher with high body mass index), and exercise (20% lower in those who exercise).