# Continuing Education Activity

Patients frequently present to the emergency department with a variety of external ear complaints ranging from traumatic injuries (lacerations and avulsions) to auricular collections that require drainage (hematomas and abscesses) and embedded foreign bodies (earrings and earring backings). Typically, oral and parenteral medications do not provide adequate pain relief, and procedural sedation has a sizeable risk burden, particularly for pediatric patients. Injections directly into the external ear are painful and have a high risk of provider needlestick. On the other hand, a peripheral nerve block is typically a well-tolerated method to achieve analgesia for a procedure. This activity reviews how to perform an ear block, its indications and contraindications, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the nerves involved with ear innervation.
- Describe the technique of performing an ear nerve block.
- Summarize the complications of an ear nerve block.
- Review how an interprofessional team approach can help manage ear problems with a nerve block and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Patients frequently present to the emergency department with a variety of external ear complaints ranging from traumatic injuries (lacerations and avulsions) to auricular collections that require drainage (hematomas and abscesses) and embedded foreign bodies (earrings and earring backings). Typically, oral and parenteral medications do not provide adequate pain relief for such local procedures, and procedural sedation has a sizeable risk burden, particularly in pediatric patients. Injections directly into the external ear are painful and have a high risk of provider needlestick.

On the other hand, if a larger area of analgesia for the ear is needed, a peripheral nerve block is typically a well-tolerated method. Multiple nerves innervate the external ear and originate from both cranial nerves and the cervical plexus. Historically, the ring block was the most common method of peripheral nerve block used to anesthetize the external ear. With the increased availability and use of ultrasound in the emergency department, the literature shows that ultrasound can help localize the great auricular nerve and the lesser occipital nerve for nerve block.

# Anatomy and Physiology

External ear anatomy includes the external auditory canal, auricle (or pinna - comprised of the helix, antihelix, and lobule), the antitragus, the tragus, and the concha. The sensory innervation arises from the great auricular and lesser occipital nerves, both branches of the second (C2) and third (C3) branches of the cervical plexus, the auriculotemporal nerve from the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve, and the auricular branch of the vagus nerve known as Alderman's or Arnold's nerve. More specifically, the great auricular nerve is derived from the cervical plexus (C2, C3), coursing around the posterior aspect of the sternocleidomastoid muscle and becomes most superficial at the level approximately 6 to 7 cm below the external auditory meatus. It arborizes into an anterior and posterior branch toward the front and underside of the ear, respectively. The lesser occipital nerve (C2, C3) courses around the posterior edge of the sternocleidomastoid at the level approximately 4 to 5 cm below the external auditory meatus and heads toward the backside of the ear. The auriculotemporal nerve originates from the 3rd branch of the trigeminal nerve, the mandibular nerve. The nerve ascends in front of the ear anterior to the tragus. The auricular branch of the vagus nerve exits the temporal bone at the tympanomastoid suture, deep to the concha.

Sensory innervation to the auricle is regional. The helix, concha, and lobule receive their innervation from the great auricular nerve. The antihelix, antitragus, tragus, and concha are innervated by mainly the great auricular nerve and, to a lesser degree, by the auricular branch of the vagus nerve. The superomedial helix (the crus and spine) is innervated primarily by the auriculotemporal nerve. The back side of the auricle is innervated by three nerves: the great auricular nerve, the lesser occipital nerve, and the auricular branch of the vagus nerve. Variable sensory distributions and patterns between these nerves have been described. These regional distributions overlap to a greater degree in the more medial aspects of the EAC, and achieving necessary anesthesia in this area is challenging with directed nerve blocks alone. If anesthesia in the medial EAC is required, topical application of concentrated lidocaine or a formal 4-quadrant subcutaneous injection may be necessary.

# Indications

In the emergency department, a nerve block of the external ear is most suitable for but is not limited to, several clinical situations.

- Analgesia to allow for a more thorough exam

- Patients with contraindications to general anesthesia and procedural sedation

- Incision and drainage, followed by packing of an auricular hematoma

- Incision and drainage of abscesses and cysts

- Laceration repair

- Foreign body removal

- Red ear syndrome

- Great auricular neuralgia

# Contraindications

- Known anesthetic agent allergy

- Uncooperative patient

- Cellulitis or erythema overlying the injection site (relative contraindication due to the theoretical risk of spreading the infection)

- Coagulopathy

# Equipment

**Ring Block requires the following:**

- Sterile gloves

- Surgical mask with eye protection/goggles

- Anesthetic agent: 0.5% bupivacaine or 1% lidocaine with or without epinephrine*

- 25 or 27 gauge 1.5-inch needle

- 10 mL syringe

- Chlorhexidine 2%

- Sterile 4 x 4 gauze

**Ultrasound-guided greater auricular nerve block requires the following:**

- Sterile gloves

- Surgical mask with eye protection/goggles

- Anesthetic agent: 0.5% bupivacaine or 1% lidocaine with or without epinephrine*

- 25 or 27 gauge 1.5-inch needle

- 10 mL syringe

- Chlorhexidine 2%

- Sterile 4 x 4 gauze

- Ultrasound machine with a high-frequency linear probe

- Sterile ultrasound gel

*Historically, the addition of epinephrine to local anesthetic injected into the auricle was contraindicated, but recent literature demonstrates its safety without the risk of ischemic necrosis

# Personnel

The procedure requires medical professionals, including physicians, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners, who are trained and experienced in performing peripheral nerve blocks and skilled in ultrasound-guided procedures. One nonsterile person for assistance as needed.

# Preparation

Explain the risks and benefits of a peripheral nerve block to the patient and obtain written informed consent if the patient is able. Lay the patient in a lateral decubitus position with the affected side up. This can also be performed with the patient supine and with the head rotated away from the physician. Set the ultrasound machine on the opposite side of the stretcher from where you will be standing. Sterilize the linear ultrasound probe and place it in a sterile probe cover. Cleanse the area of the auricle (both anterior and posterior surfaces), the postauricular area, including the mastoid process, the front of the ear, and the lateral neck along the sternocleidomastoid muscle with 2% chlorhexidine. Drape the patient with sterile towels with the prepped area exposed. Let the chlorhexidine dry completely before beginning the procedure. Apply sterile ultrasound gel to the site.

# Technique or Treatment

**Ring Block**

-  Insert the 1.5-inch needle subcutaneously below the earlobe in line with the external auditory meatus

-  Aspirate before injecting to ensure that vascular injection (specifically the posterior auricular and superficial temporal arteries) does not occur

-  Inject 1 mL of the anesthetic agent into the spot of needle entry

-  Direct the needle behind the ear towards and over the mastoid process 2 to 4 mm deep and advance it parallel to the skin nearly the full length of the needle, and inject approximately 2 mL of anesthetic  as the needle is withdrawn

-  Stop short of taking the needle out of the skin when back to the first position

-  Direct the needle anterior to the external ear towards the area just in front of the tragus, aspirate, then inject another 2 mL as the needle is withdrawn completely

-  Insert the needle subcutaneously directly above the ear again in line with the external auditory canal

-  Repeat steps 2 through 6 but with the needle facing caudally towards and over the mastoid process and immediately anterior to the tragus

At completion, typically, the total amount of local anesthetic is approximately 10 to 12 mL, and the trajectory of the injections will look like a V (for the inferior ear block) and an upside-down V (for a superior ear block) encircling the ear. This technique will often only incompletely anesthetize the external auditory meatus.

**Ultrasound-guided Great Auricular and Lesser Occipital Nerve Block**

- With the linear ultrasound probe in the transverse orientation, place it at the middle of the sternocleidomastoid and track slowly upward towards the earlobe along the posterior edge of the sternocleidomastoid until you see two hypoechoic nerve structures approximately 4 to 5 cm inferior to the ear lobule

- Insert the needle in-plane so that you can visualize the tip of the needle on the screen

- Advance the needle slowly until it is almost at the nerve - do**not**inject it into the nerve

- Aspirate and then inject 1 to 2 mL into the space between the needle tip and the nerve

**NOTE:**To quickly access the great auricular nerve as it courses across the sternocleidomastoid muscle using external topographic landmarks, the great auricular nerve is located at the junction of the upper one-third and lower two-thirds of the muscle between the mastoid process and clavicle.

**NOTE:**To obtain complete anesthesia of the external ear, particularly the superior-medial helix minus the external canal, the clinician will have to perform steps 7 and 8 of the ring block (to include the auriculotemporal nerve distribution) with the great and lesser occipital nerve block.

**NOTE:**The ring block provides analgesia for the external ear, with the exception of the external auditory canal.

# Complications

- Pain/inadequate anesthesia

- Bleeding

- Infection

- Allergic reaction to the anesthetic agent

- Hematoma formation

- Injury to surrounding vasculature

- Systemic anesthetic toxicity

- Diffusion of anesthetic to the facial nerve leading to temporary facial paralysis

# Clinical Significance

Peripheral nerve block of the external ear is a valuable procedure utilized in many settings, including the operating room, office, and emergency department. It is a well-tolerated, relatively quick procedure that can be used independently or as an adjunct to other forms of analgesia.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Expeditious, humane, and safe care of patients should always guide us in our practice. Peripheral nerve block of the external ear is a valuable procedure to become familiar with as it can expedite analgesia, which will then accelerate the completion of procedures and decrease patient discomfort, whether suturing a laceration, draining an abscess, or removing a foreign body. By utilizing the peripheral nerve block, patient-centered care is at the forefront as it minimizes pain quickly and more safely than injecting directly into the external ear.

The peripheral nerve improves safety with fewer needle sticks to health professionals compared to direct local injection and shorter overall procedure duration utilizing fewer staff members compared to moderate sedation or general anesthesia. Using ultrasound improves locating the nerves, avoids vasculature, and decreases the amount of anesthetic required. However, interprofessional teamwork between the clinician and nursing staff during and following the procedure will improve patient outcomes.