**Lithium:**Lithium may cause tremors, weight gain, or lead to hypothyroidism. Due to lithium's excretion via the kidneys, adverse effects manifest in the form of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and, more rarely, chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis. About 20 to 40% of patients taking lithium chronically develop polyuria and polydipsia. Fortunately, the nephrogenic diabetes insipidus that occurs due to lithium therapy is managed similarly with thiazide diuretics, NSAIDs, and a low salt diet.

**Valproic Acid:**Valproic acid's adverse effects include weight gain and GI disturbances such as nausea and vomiting, as well as alopecia, tremor, and easy bruising, most probably owing to its effects on coagulation. About 5 to 10% of patients placed on a long-term valproic acid regimen develop transaminitis, although a substantial amount of cases resolve on their own without necessity for discontinuing the regimen. Other more serious forms of valproic acid toxicity include encephalopathy secondary to hyperammonemia, hepatotoxicity, and acute pancreatitis. The risk of teratogenicity (especially when using valproic acid as monotherapy) is a discussion topic below.

**Carbamazepine:**Carbamazepine has both systemic and neurological side effects. The systemic adverse effects are dual-faceted, including GI and integumentary systems. GI upset is characterized by nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and hyponatremia. The integumentary issues characteristically are pruritis and rash. The neurologic defects associated with carbamazepine therapy include headache, dizziness, vision changes (blurry or diplopia), lethargy, and drowsiness.

**Lamotrigine:**Lamotrigine therapy has a similar adverse effect profile as carbamazepine in that it involves rash and nausea as prominent side effects. Neurologic side effects include diplopia, dizziness, and tremor.

The adverse effects of the different mood stabilizers appear in further detail under the 'Contraindications' and 'Toxicity' headings below.