The primary result of tricuspid stenosis is right atrial pressure elevation and right-sided congestion. Tricuspid stenosis results in elevated gradients between the right atrium (RA) and right ventricle (RV) during diastole. This is exaggerated during inspiration and exercise and reduced with expiration. With the increasing severity of TS, there is a failure to augment cardiac output with exercise. Clinically, TS results in signs and symptoms of systemic congestion.

The valves consist of an outer layer of valve endothelial cells (VECs) surrounding three layers of the extracellular matrix, each with a specialized function and interspersed with interstitial valve cells (VICs).

The rheumatic TS is characterized by diffuse fibrous thickening of the leaflets and fusion of 2 or 3 commissures. Leaflet thickening usually occurs in the absence of calcific deposits, and the anteroseptal commissure is most involved.

Tricuspid stenosis in carcinoid syndrome is caused by the deposition of fibrous plaques through vasoactive substance-mediated reactions, mainly serotonin. The deposition of endocardial plaques results in plaque distortion, which can lead to both TS and tricuspid regurgitation (TR). Methysergide and serotonin share common chemical properties. Methysergide, which is a synthetic ergot alkaloid, causes fibrotic thickening and structural deterioration of the tricuspid valve.

Incompletely developed leaflets, shortened or malformed chordae, a small annulus, or an abnormal number or size of papillary muscles may also result in tricuspid stenosis.