In premenarchal children, there is often no specific evaluation that needs to take place beyond thorough history and physical exam. Depending on suspicion for other etiologies, diabetes screening, thyroid studies, bleeding studies, hemoglobin/platelets, and exam under anesthesia may be warranted.

In postmenopausal women who are hemodynamically stable, blood work should only be ordered as indicated or suggested by history and exam. However, postmenopausal women with vaginal bleeding should undergo a transvaginal ultrasound and be referred for an endometrial biopsy to assess for endometrial cancer.

A pregnancy test should always be performed in women of childbearing age, regardless of their history of sexual activity. In stable non-pregnant women with menorrhagia, there is no indication for other tests in the emergency department setting; however, outpatient workup can be extensive. Outpatient studies often consist of tests to assess for anemia and blood dyscrasias (ferritin, coagulation studies, complete blood count, and bleeding studies), tests to assess for thyroid disease (TSH and free T4), tests to assess for liver disease, and even advanced procedures (hysteroscopy) to look for anatomical causes of bleeding.

In stable non-pregnant women with menometrorrhagia, although there is no absolute indication for emergency blood tests, outpatient workup often includes a complete blood count, fasting glucose, HgAIC, ultrasound (to assess for polycystic ovaries), FSH/LH, thyroid studies, prolactin level, and even endometrial biopsy.

In women with vaginal bleeding in the first trimester of pregnancy, a transvaginal ultrasound should be performed to determine the location of the pregnancy to rule out ectopic pregnancy. A blood type should also be performed to determine the need for RhoGAM administration. In later trimesters of pregnancy, transabdominal ultrasound to determine the location of the placenta is important. These patients should be admitted to obstetrics for cardiotocographic monitoring.