**Anatomy**

When discussing ECMO weaning and decannulation, we must first establish the correct anatomical placement and removal of the ECMO circuit. The anatomical placement of the ECMO cannulas is determined by the type of ECMO that will be necessary to provide the correct type of support to the patient. Cannulas can be placed either via percutaneous placement or by surgical cutdown to the vessels. The percutaneous approach is the most commonly used technique, with the Seldinger technique being the most common approach for placement of the cannulas.

Regarding respiratory failure with the patient maintaining cardiac output, the patient will be able to undergo venovenous cannulation.  Venovenous cannulation can occur by two different cannulas into either the jugular veins or into the femoral veins. A single, dual-lumen cannula can be inserted into the right internal jugular vein, which will allow drainage and reinfusion through the same cannula. A single, dual-lumen cannula into the right internal jugular vein will allow the patient to be out of bed to ambulate and require less sedation.

Venoarterial ECMO is most needed when the cardiac system cannot provide enough output to perfuse the organs in the body. VA ECMO cannulation occurs either through the open technique with placement into the femoral artery and either the jugular or femoral vein. It can be performed via the percutaneous approach. VA ECMO cannulation can also occur via central cannulation into the aorta and the right atrium/superior and inferior vena cava.

**Physiology**

Every life form on Earth needs oxygen for survival except a few forms of bacteria. We rely on the exchange of oxygen for energy sources for the cells. The physiology of the ECMO circuit acting as an artificial lung and heart is very complex. We will briefly discuss the oxygenation and removal of carbon dioxide from the patient with attention to the patient's physiology during weaning.

ECMO is basically a circuit that oxygenates the blood and decarboxylates its contents. The blood is then returned to the patient, fully saturated with oxygen via a venous line near the heart or an arterial line. The VA function of ECMO provides both cardiac and lung support, while VV only provides respiratory support. Running an ECMO circuit is not only an art but undertaking human physiology as we know it.

During the exchange of gases, oxygen must be added while carbon dioxide is removed. The oxygenator on the ECMO circuit is where gas exchange occurs. This area is a long microporous tube that allows the sweep gas to flow through the lumen of the membrane while the patient’s blood can flow on the outside of the membrane. This area is the oxygen exchange of the artificial lung. In a normal functioning human lung, the alveolar-capillary membrane exchange area is much larger, and the membrane for exchange is much thinner for the gases to travel. With the ECMO circuit being a fixed thickness and surface area, the only factor the perfusionist must modify is the patient’s blood flow and the sweep flow through the circuit to help modify the oxygen and carbon dioxide is delivered to the patient. One of the most important parameters is the pressure gradient between the patient's blood flow and the sweep gas flow to maintain physiological normalcy.

When the normal lung can no longer oxygenate the blood, but the patient's normal cardiac function remains, VV ECMO can be initiated. The poorly oxygenated venous blood is returned to the ECMO circuit and reoxygenated. The blood is then transferred back to the patient via a venous line placed near the heart in the caval system. The returned blood, which is oxygen-rich, is then mixed with the poorly oxygenated blood. This will improve the arterial concentration of oxygen and allow the heart to distribute oxygen-rich blood throughout the body. The majority of oxygen is transported throughout the body on hemoglobin. Therefore hemoglobin concentration is essential when discussing the oxygenation of a patient on ECMO.

The partial pressure of the gradient between the patient’s blood and the sweep gas when running through the circuit is set by the FiO2, which determines the partial pressure of oxygen in the sweep gas. As mentioned earlier, when the blood flow increases in the circuit, this will also allow a greater increase in the patient's arterial oxygenation. When running on VV ECMO, not only will oxygenation be important, you must think about the patient's cardiac output. Higher cardiac output will cause increased tissue demands, increasing your use of oxygen from the ECMO circuit.

The goal of VV ECMO support is to allow the patient’s injured lung to rest and be exposed to lower lung volumes, peak end-expiratory pressures, and lower FiO2 support. A great deal of thought must go into the physiology of VV ECMO and the ventilatory management of the lungs while on VV ECMO, as all these settings will affect the ECMO circuit all the way down to the size of the cannulas that are placed.

VA ECMO oxygenation is very similar to VV ECMO, but the cannulas are positioned differently, with VA ECMO having an arterial catheter. The oxygenation of all extremities must be watched. This is performed best when a right radial arterial line is placed to monitor right-sided O2 concentration. Left ventricular function and venting require close monitoring. Other interventions may be necessary when these functions become impaired, potential placement of an intra-aortic balloon pump or other left heart support devices. This discussion is beyond the scope of this article.

We must understand the oxygenation of the tissues and understand one of the most important factors- removing carbon dioxide from the patient. Carbon dioxide removal during ECMO support replaces the normal ventilatory function of the human lungs. When comparing the removal of carbon dioxide to oxygenation of the patient, removal of carbon dioxide is a much easier task to achieve. Carbon dioxide removal with VV ECMO is utilized when acute respiratory distress syndrome causes lung injury. The patient may have hypercapnia during a COPD exacerbation, or CO2 may need to be removed while the patient is on a bridge to lung transplantation. The patient's CO2 removal is easily acquired through the low flow on the ECMO circuit.

The amount of blood flow through the ECMO circuit has little effect on CO2. The removal rate is relatively independent of the flow. The sweep gas flow rate is one of the major ways to remove CO2. Since the sweep gas flow can remove CO2, the patient’s tidal volumes and respiratory rate on the ventilator can be turned down to allow the lungs to recover and have minimal involvement when the lungs are at their most severe state. When it is time to wean the patient, the lungs can then be recruited, and you can titrate the sweep gas flow to see how well the lungs can ventilate. Regarding VA ECMO, the lungs are basically a physiologic dead space since the heart’s ejection fraction is decreased and can’t perfuse the lungs through the pulmonary artery. The lungs will be less ventilated during VA ECMO but will still require some amount of PEEP to avoid complete atelectasis.