In cases of direct exposure, the presentation is quite straightforward.  Exposure involving direct contact with the caterpillar and/or airborne setae or hemolymph can result in the development of urticaria, conjunctivitis, bronchospasm and localized pain.

The rash may appear as erythematous, raised, vesicular or ecchymotic skin depending on the species involved.  Systemic manifestations of lonomism, which can occur from two minutes to two hours after envenomation, can present as nausea, vomiting, headache, dizziness, agitation, tachycardia, lymphadenopathy, muscle spasms and altered mental status (AMS) in severe cases.  In general, systemic symptoms resolve within 24 hours.

Stings from Saturniidae species caterpillars (Lonomia) have fibrinolytic enzymes in their venom.  This venom can cause diffuse bruising and bleeding from affected sites, which can include hematuria from urinary system involvement and gingival bleeding with oral involvement. There have also been case reports of intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) and AKI.  These systemic symptoms can persist up to 6 months after exposure.

Certain species leave pathognomonic skin patterns, such as an "M" shape seen with opercularis stings, often with a gridlike pattern matching the caterpillar's spine distribution.

Severe, life-threatening presentations of anaphylaxis can occur but are quite rare following caterpillar venom exposure.  Symptoms are prototypical for severe allergy: hypotension, urticaria, severe bronchospasm, altered mental status, and profound cardiopulmonary shock.