The diagnosis of cardiac tamponade can be suspected on history and physical exam findings. ECG may be helpful, especially if it shows low voltages or electrical alternans, which is the classic ECG finding in cardiac tamponade due to the swinging of the heart within the pericardium that is filled with fluid. This is a rare ECG finding, and most commonly the ECG finding of cardiac tamponade is sinus tachycardia. In severe cases, one may note electrical alternans.

A chest x-ray may show an enlarged heart and may strongly suggest pericardial effusion if a prior chest radiograph with a normal cardiac silhouette is available for comparison. CT chest can also pick up pericardial effusion.

Echocardiography is the best imaging modality to use at the bedside, whether it is a point-of-care echo or a cardiology echo study. Echocardiography can not only confirm there is a pericardial effusion, but determine its size, and whether it is causing compromise of cardiac function (right ventricular diastolic collapse, right atrial systolic collapse, plethoric IVC). The medical literature is replete with studies that show clinicians (non-cardiologists) with limited training using point-of-care echo can perform focused echocardiograms to answer specific questions such as whether there is a significant pericardial effusion.

Blood work that may assist with the diagnosis include creatine kinase levels, renal profile, coagulation profile, antinuclear antibody tests, ESR, HIV testing and PPD skin test.