**Imaging**

Imaging plays a crucial role in diagnosing MCNs. Imaging is done to determine the specific cyst type and to establish features of malignant transformation.

1. Transcutaneous ultrasound may be useful occasionally, but a deep-seated pancreas is not always visualized in its entirety.

2. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is preferred to CT where available, as it is more sensitive for demonstrating ductal communication and internal architecture. A contrast-enhanced CT (pancreatic protocol) can also provide information and typically shows a septated cystic lesion or rarely a unilocular lesion as an initial assessment.

Typically, on MRI, MCNs appear as oligocellular, micro, or macrocytic and occupying the body and tail region of the pancreas. Since MCNs contain fluid in their cystic cavities, T2-weighted images are hyperintense. MRI also demonstrates if any ductal communication exists.

Features suggesting malignant transformation include:

- Thickened wall

- Internal solid component or mass

- Possible calcification of the cyst wall.

3. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) gives a better evaluation of the cyst wall and evaluates for any nodules. EUS can also be used for aspirating cyst fluid for analysis. Suspicious features include diameter >3 cm, mural nodules, thick and irregular walls, and an obstructed pancreatic duct.

4. The role of F-18 FDG positron-emission tomography is still not defined in MCNs and is still being investigated.

**Cystic Fluid**

1. Fluid CEA levels >192 ng/mL has up to 79% accuracy in differentiating mucinous from non-mucinous cystic neoplasms.

2. Aspirated fluid from the cyst has to be sent for cytology to evaluate for the presence of dysplasia or cancer, more so when imaging features are inconclusive.