The nuances in imaging techniques and the improved outcomes associated with optimum therapy have caused the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) to reevaluate the staging process. This tumor is stagged according to the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC), and the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system. The 7th edition of the UICC/JNCC staging system was replaced by the 8th edition (last update) in 2016. As per the last update of classification, the TNM staging has been explained as the following criteria (Table 1 summarize the staging groups, Table 2 summarize the UICC/AJCC 8th edition staging of NPC):

**T: which refers to the local size or extent of the tumor**

- **TX**: Not assessable.

- **T0**: EBV-positive cervical lymph node,**WITHOUT**identified tumor. This stage was introduced in the latest update of the staging.

- **T1**: Naso- or oropharynx or nasal cavity with**sparing**of parapharyngeal spaces.

- **T2**: Parapharyngeal extension, adjacent soft tissue involvement (medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid, prevertebral muscles). This muscular specific description was revised in the 8th edition of the AJCC staging system.

- **T3**: Bony structures (skull base, cervical vertebra) and/or paranasal sinuses.

- **T4**: Intracranial extension, cranial nerve, hypopharynx, orbit, extensive**soft tissue involvement**(beyond the lateral surface of the lateral pterygoid muscle, parotid gland). The "soft tissue" description here replaces the "infratemporal fossa and masticator space" in the previous edition.

**N: refers to the regional lymph node metastasis.**

- **NX**: Not assessable.

- **N0**: No metastasis to lymph nodes

- **N1**: Unilateral cervical, unilateral or bilateral retropharyngeal lymph nodes, above the caudal border of cricoid cartilage; not more than 6 cm

- **N2**: Bilateral metastasis in lymph node(s), 6 cm or less in greatest dimension, above the caudal border of the cricoid cartilage

- **N3:**>6 cm and/or below the caudal border of the cricoid cartilage (regardless of laterality). This stage was different from the previous staging edition, and they merged the N3a and N3b into one category N3

**M: refers to distant metastasis.**

- **M0:**No distant metastasis

- **M1**: Distant metastasis

**Staging groups:**The 8th edition of AJCC update in groups involve the fourth group only, previous IVA and IVB groups were merged together in the new IVA group, and subsequently, the old IVC group was upgraded to be the new IVB as the following:

- **I:**T1 N0 M0

- **II:**T2 N0–1 M0, T0–1 N1 M0

- **III:**T3 N0–2 M0, T0–2 N2 M0

- **IVA:**T4 or N3 M0

- **IVB:**Any T, any N, M1