According to the FDA drug labeled guidelines, the most common adverse effects in topically administered tretinoin are the following: pruritus, skin pain, skin/subcutaneous irritation, erythema, and pharyngitis.

According to the FDA drug labeled guidelines of orally administered tretinoin, most patients will experience drug-related toxicity, such as headaches, weakness, fever, and fatigue. Interruption of therapy is rarely required as these adverse effects are rarely permanent or irreversible.

**Serious Reactions**

- RA-APL syndrome

- Cardiovascular disorders

- Arrhythmias

- Hypertension

- Pseudotumor cerebri

- Renal tubular necrosis

- Hypercalcemia

- Gastrointestinal disorders

- Pancreatitis

- Hallucinations

- Depression

- Myositis

- Erythema nodosum

- Genital ulcer

- Vision changes

- Hearing loss

- Thrombosis

- Thrombocytosis

- Vasculitis

**Common Reactions**

- Headache

- Fever

- Edema

- Bone pain

- Xeroderma

- Dry mucous membranes

- Hyperlipidemia

- Liver function tests elevated

- Dyspnea

- Nausea/vomiting

- Abdominal distention/pain

- Neurologic disturbances

- Weight changes

- Chest discomfort

- Cardiovascular disorders

- Mucositis

- Vision changes

- GI disorders

- Anxiety/agitation

- RA-APL syndrome

- Otalgia

- Diarrhea

- Arrhythmia

- Flushing

- Pruritus

- Diaphoresis

- Dizziness

- Constipation

- Paresthesia

- Alopecia

- Myalgia

- Hypotension

- Insomnia

- Depression

- Hypertension

- Confusion

- Dysuria

- Fluid imbalance

- Hallucinations

- CNS depression

- Renal tubular necrosis

- Prostate hypertrophy

- Photosensitivity

- Rash

- Ocular abnormalities

- Genital ulceration

**Retinoid Toxicity**

- Frequently reported adverse effects most are similar to vitamin A toxicity and include the following: headache, nausea/vomiting, bone pain mucositis, rash, fever, pruritus, skin/mucous membrane dryness, visual disturbances, increased sweating, ocular disorders, alopecia, skin changes, bone inflammation, changed visual acuity, visual field defects. Do not administer tretinoin with vitamin A due to symptoms of syndrome of hypervitaminosis A.

- Pseudotumor cerebri/intracranial hypertension may also occur, especially if given in combination with other medications that increase intracranial hypertension.

**FDA Boxed Warnings**

- **Retinoic Acid (RA-APL) Syndrome:**
- Retinoic Acid (RA-APL) Syndrome: acute respiratory distress, dyspnea, fever, weight gain, pleural and pericardial effusions, edema, pulmonary infiltrates on chest X-ray, and multiorgan failure. (especially renal and hepatic)
- Myocardial contractility impairment, along with episodic hypotension, was observed with or without leukocytosis.
- Death due to progressive hypoxemia and multiorgan failure.
- Most commonly occurs during the first month of treatment; however, some cases have been reported after the first dose.
- Management: patients should receive high-dose steroids if there is any clinical suspicion as a means to reduce morbidity and mortality related to the syndrome.

- **Leukocytosis**
- There is an increased risk of devastating complications in 40% of patients if the baseline white blood cells (WBC) >5000; high dose steroids should start immediately if retinoic acid-APL syndrome is suspected; addition of chemotherapy may decrease the occurrence of retinoic acid-APL syndrome if WBC baseline is >5000 or if there is a baseline leukopenia with a rapid increase in WBC count on tretinoin treatment.

- **Teratogen**
- There is an increased risk of severe fetal deformities with oral tretinoin.
- Pregnant women or those of child-bearing age are at an increased potential of fetal risk and contraception failure risk.
- Patients must be on two (2) dependable forms of contraception throughout treatment, followed by one (1) month after discontinuation of tretinoin.
- Patients must have a negative pregnancy test less than one (1) week before starting tretinoin, or if unable to delay treatment, may start with two forms of contraception, as previously mentioned.
- Pregnancy testing and counseling on contraception should continue every month during treatment. There is no FDA boxed warning for topical tretinoin.

**Interaction Characteristics**

- CYP3A4 substrate

- Ototoxicity

- Photosensitivity

- Thrombogenic effects