The etiology of chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is controversial, complicated, and incompletely understood. Controversy exists about single versus multiple causations. Many theories exist regarding the involvement of infections, the immune system, and genetics in this complex interplay.

**Genetics**

Increasing evidence supports the role of genetic susceptibility in patients with CFS. Many studies have reported the role of family history in the development of CFS or similar fatigue-like symptoms.

**Infection**

Various infectious etiologies, including the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), the human herpesvirus (HHV)-6, and the human parvovirus B19, are hypothesized to trigger the disease.

Speculations are that in a few patients, the acquisition of viral infections like infectious mononucleosis triggers the onset of the disease process.

Researchers have detected anti-HHV-6 IgM antibodies and HHV-6 antigens more commonly in the peripheral blood of patients with chronic fatigue syndrome than in the general population, indicating higher prevalence and higher reactivation of the virus in this cohort.

Parvovirus B19, both with and without viremia, has been implicated in developing and triggering chronic fatigue syndrome.

**Alterations in the Immune System**

It has been observed that alterations in the levels of CD 21+ CD19+ and activated CD5+ cells in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome.

There is also a reported decrease in transitional B cells and plasmablasts and an increase in the population of CD24+ B cells in these patients.