Historically, anterior nasal packing was accomplished using a 6-foot length of petrolatum gauze packed using bayonet forceps into the affected naris to fill that side of the nasal cavity and tamponade the bleeding. However, this method has fallen out of favor with the advent of ready-made nasal packing devices.

Nasal pack devices of polyvinyl alcohol shaped like tampons with strings at the base are available in multiple sizes; 5.5 and 7.5 cm for adult anterior packs, 4.5 cm for children, and 9 cm for anterior-posterior packing. These devices expand on contact with moisture and apply pressure directly to the nasal mucosa. Multiple tampons may be placed simultaneously if the nasal cavity is large.

Another nasal pack device is an inflatable balloon with a covering of carboxymethylcellulose, which serves the double purpose of applying direct pressure and facilitating platelet aggregation.

Sedation and general anesthesia are typically avoided during nasal packing as they inhibit baseline airway-protective reflexes.

The initial steps in nasal packing with any agents are nearly identical and are outlined above. Nasal packing can begin after ensuring a patent and secure airway and achieving anesthesia with a vasoconstriction agent.

Nasal tampons may need to be soaked in water for 30 seconds before insertion; this requirement is device-specific. Next, generously coat the tampon with antibiotic ointment or petroleum jelly. Insert the tampon into the affected naris by applying firm, steady pressure directed along the nasal floor, parallel to the ground; avoid insertion in a superior direction. While packing expansion frequently begins shortly after insertion, injecting approximately 10 mL of normal saline, 0.05% oxymetazoline, or tranexamic acid will expand the tampon and may help achieve hemostasis.

Inflatable balloon devices should also be generously coated with antibiotic ointment or petroleum jelly. Next, insert the deflated balloon into the nasal cavity as described above. Once the device is appropriately placed and following device-specific instructions, inflate the balloon with approximately 20 mL of air. It is critical to use air rather than water or saline because air is compressible and less likely to cause pressure necrosis of the nasal mucosa.

Monitor the patient for another 10 to 60 minutes to ensure hemostasis. The packing will likely turn pink as it absorbs the blood. If the patient continues to have active bleeding that turns the packing bright red or blood is visualized dripping out past the packing, or if the patient is still swallowing blood after 30 to 60 minutes, the filling has failed, and additional intervention, such as anterior-posterior packing, embolization, or surgery may be required.

Additional packs may be placed into the same naris as necessary to increase the amount of applied pressure. However, all attempts should be made to leave the initial pack in situ when adding additional packs. Pack placement and removal increase nasal mucosal trauma, worsening epistaxis, especially in patients with coagulopathies. Alternatively, the non-bleeding side may be packed to facilitate the application of pressure to the nasal septum. Contralateral nasal packing should be executed cautiously; excessive pressure on the nasal septum adversely affects the perichondrial microvascular circulation and may cause cartilage necrosis with resulting septal perforation.

Patients with anterior epistaxis successfully treated with nasal packing in the emergency department may be discharged and directed to follow up with the otolaryngologist in 24 to 48 hours for reassessment. Nasal packing may become a nidus for infection, and oral prophylactic antibiotics may be prescribed at the discretion of the clinician; antibiotic prophylaxis is not standard practice as no strong evidence suggests their administration prevents sinusitis or toxic shock syndrome.

**Patients With Underlying Coagulopathy**

Patients with anterior epistaxis who are anticoagulated or coagulopathic pose a unique challenge to achieving hemostasis. Primary hemostasis is more difficult to achieve, and the risk of rebleeding with pack removal is increased even if removal is postponed for 72 hours. Correction of any concurrent bleeding disorders at the time of pack placement contributes to more effective hemostasis. Emergency medicine providers can ultimately achieve hemostasis in most of these patients; occasionally, it is necessary to consult the otolaryngology department or interventional radiology for further management.

In the emergency department, additional attempts to cauterize bleeding or repacking the naris with the addition of tranexamic acid typically results in successful hemostasis.