Although exact pathophysiology has not been fully defined, one of the widely accepted theories involves a weakening of the anterior abdominal wall fascia, including the Spigelian fascia. These changes in the structure or arrangement of the abdominal wall can lead to focal weaknesses, which predispose patients to herniation.

The Spigelian fascia is located lateral to the rectus abdominis muscle along the linea semilunaris, or semilunar line. This layer is comprised of aponeuroses located between the rectus abdominis medially and the semilunar line laterally. This type of hernia typically involves herniation at or inferior to the linea arcuata, or arcuate line. The arcuate line is most notably known for being a transition point for the layering of the anterior and posterior rectus sheaths. This line demarcates the termination of the posterior layer of the rectus sheath containing transversus abdominis aponeurosis as the rectus muscles are bound posteriorly solely by transversalis fascia. The intersection of the semilunar line and arcuate line creates an interesting physiologic weakness as the posterior rectus sheath is no longer present, allowing for herniation lateral to the rectus. Additionally, the weakness results from attenuation of transversus abdominis and internal oblique aponeuroses as they traverse laterally from their coalescence to create two distinct layers. It is at the separation of these two aponeuroses that herniation most commonly occurs. Of note, due to the overlying layer of the external oblique aponeurosis at this point along the abdominal wall, there is an increased chance of intramuscular dissection of the hernia. This is defined as an interparietal hernia. This can lead to occult hernias, which are often difficult to palpate and diagnose. In these cases, imaging studies are inherently necessary if there is suspicion of an underlying hernia.