Patients with a stone disease will most commonly present with acute, severe flank pain that will often radiate to the abdomen and the groin, testicle, or labia. It is often sharp and severe in nature. It may also be colicky. The pain is often associated with nausea and vomiting due to the embryological origins of the urogenital tract.

Renal colic usually peaks within 90 to 120 minutes, and the pain radiation follows dermatomes T10 to S4. The first phase may wake the patient up from sleep, and the pain is steady, followed by waves of excruciating pain. The second phase is characterized by constant pain and may last 3 to 4 hours. The third phase is associated with mild pain relief, but waves of pain may persist. This phase may last 4 to 16 hours.

Patients may also present with fever, chills, or other systemic signs of sepsis if infected. This condition, called pyonephrosis or obstructive pyelonephritis, is potentially severe and life-threatening, requiring emergency decompression surgery.

Patients often present with hematuria, as 85% of patients demonstrate at least microscopic hematuria on urinalysis.

The physical exam may reveal costovertebral tenderness and hypoactive bowel sounds. The testis and pubic area may also be tender to touch. Fever is rarely seen in renal colic, but the presence of fever, pyuria, and leucocytosis may be indicative of pyelonephritis.

High-risk factors include:

- Bone disorders

- Chronic diarrhea, malabsorption

- Diabetes, obesity (especially in women)

- Family history of kidney stones

- Gastrointestinal disease

- GI bypass surgery (especially Rous-en-Y)

- Gout

- Hyperparathyroidism

- Prior stones

- Renal tubular acidosis

- Sarcoidosis