There are twelve sets of ribs in the human body. Anteriorly, these are attached to either the sternum, costal cartilage of adjacent ribs, or no anterior attachment. Posteriorly, the twelve sets of ribs are attached to the spine at the costovertebral articulations.****The ribs are further broken down into true ribs, false ribs, and floating ribs. Ribs 1 through 7 are considered true ribs as they attach anteriorly to the sternum. Ribs 8 to 10 are known as false ribs as they attach to the cartilage of ribs 1-7 and not directly to the sternum, and ribs 11 to 12 are considered floating ribs are they do not have an anterior attachment.

The motion of the ribs also varies slightly based upon their attachment. The first five ribs are considered pump-handle and move in an anterior-posterior motion, increasing during inhalation and decreasing during exhalation. Ribs 5 to 10 are considered bucket-handle ribs and move transversely with increased diameter during inhalation and decreased diameter during exhalation. Finally, ribs 11 to 12 are considered caliper or pincer-type ribs and move in a down and out motion during inhalation and up and in during exhalation.

Ribs are connected to specific muscle groups, which are essentially the target for muscle energy. Each rib or set of ribs moves into inhalation vs. exhalation based on the contraction of specific muscles or muscle groups. The origin of the anterior and middle scalene is on the cervical vertebrae (CII-CVII), while the insertion is to the first rib. The posterior scalene inserts at Rib 2. The pectoralis minor muscle originates on ribs 3 to 5 near the costochondral junction and inserts at the medial border and superior surface of the coracoid process of the scapula. The serratus anterior originates at ribs 6 to 9 and inserts at the costal aspect of the medial margin of the scapula. Finally, part of the origin of the latissimus dorsi is from ribs 10 to 12, while the insertion is at the intertubercular groove of the humerus.