Temporal lobe lesions can be categorized into 3 based on their MRI features.

- Unilateral volume loss

- Mesial temporal sclerosis
- Old infarction
- Remote brain injury
- Prior surgery

- Bilateral pathology

- Alzheimer disease
- Fronto-temporal dementia
- Age-related volume loss
- Mesial temporal sclerosis (10%)
- Limbic encephalitis
- Postradiation changes

- Space-occupying lesions

- Cystic neoplasia
- Solid neoplasm
- Encephalitis
- Abscess
- Vascular malformations
- Acute infarction
- Acute trauma

Uncontrolled damage to the temporal lobe poses a significant threat to the quality of a patient's life. A review of 56 localized lesions to the temporal lobe showed widespread effects on patients' lives. The most common symptoms observed are mental disturbances generally categorized as a confused state. The secondary ailment of temporal lesions is personality changes, which ranges widely from slight emotional changes to homicidal tendencies. Of lesser frequency but still reported include symptoms of muscular pareses, somatic seizures, psychical seizures, autonomic seizures, visual field defects, and speech disorders.

Wernicke aphasia is one clinical presentation of damage to the temporal lobe. It is seen often in patients who have suffered an ischemic stroke to the temporal lobe. Less frequently, it affects patients with infections, trauma, tumors, central nervous system infections, and other degenerative brain conditions. Wernicke aphasia, also known as receptive aphasia, impairs language function. Patients presenting with this aphasia can still speak with normal rate and tone but will often misuse words and form nonsensical sentences. This aphasia is in contrast to Broca aphasia in which patients cannot talk with normal fluency and tone.

Damage or dysfunction to the hippocampal region, amygdala and/or their interconnections can cause posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), Alzheimer disease and temporal lobe epilepsy.