In 1996, Seymour et al. postulated the theory of genetic predisposition for the etiopathology of DIGO.

The common mechanism of action at the cellular level of all these three categories of dissimilar drugs appears to be inhibition of cation influx, particularly sodium and calcium ions. Gingival overgrowth is multifactorial.

**Gingival Fibroblasts and Cellular Folate Uptake**

Inducing drugs act as a trigger for the activation and proliferation of gingival fibroblasts, causing an increased production of GAGs (glycosaminoglycans) in the connective tissue. These drugs decrease cellular uptake of folate by genetically predispose fibroblasts. Reduced intracellular folate translates into a decrease in the synthesis or activation of MMPs (matrix metalloproteinases), which are required to convert inactive collagenase to active collagenase, allowing an excess of connective tissue build up. Brown et al. (1991) postulated that bacterial plaque contributes to gingival inflammation, which completes the vicious cycle.

**Matrix M****etalloproteinases**

These are more than 20 enzymes that bring about the degradation of connective tissue and tissue remodeling. These include collagenases, gelatinases, and stromelysins. Inhibition of activation of these can result in the accumulation of extracellular matrix and collagen and cause DIGO.

**Inflammatory Cytokines**

Inflamed gingival tissue exhibits higher levels of interleukin-1 beta (IL-1beta), a proinflammatory cytokine. Likewise, IL-6 causes fibroblastic proliferation and increased production of collagen and GAG synthesis.

**Na+/ Ca2+ ion Flux Drug Mechanisms**

Fugi and Kobayashi (1990) reported inhibition of Ca2+ uptake within gingival fibroblasts by PHT and several calcium channel blockers (CCBAs). Thomas and Petrou (2013) reported a reduction in Na+ channel availability and, therefore, a decrease in the action potential amplitude. This causes reduced Ca2+ entry, and a decrease in Ca2+ activated K+ channels. All three types of DIGO-inducing drugs act on Ca2+ flux similarly.

**Plaque Buildup**

The concentrated drug in crevicular gingival fluid or bacterial plaque exerts a direct toxic effect on the gingival tissue. Dental plaque induces inflammation, which causes gingival overgrowth. Inflammation causes the upregulation of transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-beta 1). Hence, control of dental plaque is needed in the treatment and prevention of DIGO over time.