# Continuing Education Activity

Geographic tongue is a benign chronic relapsing recurring inflammatory condition of the oral cavity of unknown etiology. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of geographic tongue and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating this condition. This activity reviews in detail the clinical and histopathological, pathogenesis, etiology, evaluation, associations, treatment, and management of geographic tongue.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of geographic tongue. 
- Review the appropriate evaluation of geographic tongue. 
- Outline the management options available for geographic tongue. 
- Describe the interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance geographic tongue and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

First described by Rayer in 1831, geographic tongue is a benign chronic relapsing recurring inflammatory condition of the oral cavity of unknown etiology.

# Etiology

The etiology of geographic tongue remains largely unknown; however, a few theories have been proposed.

# Epidemiology

Geographic tongue usually begins in childhood and has an overall global prevalence of approximately 1% to 2.5% of the population. The prevalence in the pediatric population ranges from 0.37% to 14.3%. The greatest prevalence occurs in the age group of 20 to 29 years of age at about 39.4%. Geographic tongue has a slightly greater predilection for women than men.

# Pathophysiology

The pathogenesis of geographic tongue remains unknown to this date; however, several theories have been proposed.

Due to clinical, histopathological, and immunohistochemical similarities between geographic tongue and psoriasis, some experts believe geographic tongue to be an oral manifestation of psoriasis.

Hormones have also been proposed to play a role in the pathogenesis of geographic tongue.

Oral contraceptive pills that cause hormonal fluctuation have been associated with geographic tongue, further indicating a possible hormonal role in this disorder.

Vitamin D, B6, B12, folic acid, iron, and zinc deficiency have also been proposed to play a role in the pathogenesis of geographic tongue.

Tobacco use has been shown to play a protective role in the pathogenesis of geographic tongue.

# Histopathology

Microscopic examination of the white area of geographic tongue shows subepithelial infiltrates with a predominance of neutrophils forming microabscess, epithelial acanthosis associated with an elongation of the rete ridges, acantholysis, parakeratosis, glycogen deposits in the epithelial cells, and exfoliation of necrotic cells in the surface layer. The histopathology of the erythematous area of the lesion may show mononuclear subepithelial infiltrate (predominantly CD4+ T-lymphocytes), suprapapillary hypertrophy, and vascular ectasia.

# History and Physical

Clinical presentation of geographic tongue is variable.

# Evaluation

Geographic tongue is usually diagnosed by its characteristic history and clinical features.

# Treatment / Management

Geographic tongue usually does not require any treatment if asymptomatic. Patients can be reassured of its benign self limiting nature.

# Differential Diagnosis

Geographic tongue is usually diagnosed by its characteristic history and clinical features. In cases of atypical lesions, differential diagnosis of geographic tongue includes erythroplakia, lichen planus, candidiasis, contact stomatitis, leukoplakia, trauma, and aphthous ulcer.

- Erythroplakia

- Lichen planus

- Candidiasis

- Contact stomatitis

- Leukoplakia

- Trauma

- Aphthous ulcer

- Squamous cell cancer

- Plaque psoriasis

# Prognosis

Geographic tongue is a benign usually asymptomatic condition with a good prognosis.

# Complications

Geographic tongue usually does not have any complications.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Geographic tongue is a harmless inflammatory condition affecting the surface of the tongue. Treatment is not necessary.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional team that provides a holistic and integrated approach to diagnosing and treating geographic tongue can help achieve the best possible outcomes. Health care staff of primary care and emergency departments play a vital role in diagnosing and referring patients with tongue lesions to dermatology or otolaryngology that look like geographic tongue. This will aid in better patient satisfaction and quality of life.

Collaboration, shared decision making, and communication are key elements for a good outcome. The interprofessional care provided to the patient must use an integrated care pathway combined with an evidence-based approach to planning and evaluation of all joint activities. The earlier signs and symptoms of geographic tongue are identified; the better is the patient outcome and satisfaction.