**Infection**

As with any indwelling catheter in the body, there is always the risk of infection. This can result in cellulitis, abscesses, or bacteremia and systemic infections. The most common organisms associated with hospital-acquired CRBSIs (in order of most to least common) are coagulase-negative Staphylococci, Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococci, and Candida.

The cumulative incidence of CRBSIs for PICCs is 1.1 per 1000 PICC-days. However, it is found to be higher in the inpatient setting (2.1 per 1000 PICC-days). This could be because patients managed on an outpatient basis are healthier in general, and their catheter is accessed less frequently. There is still question whether PICCS or centrally inserted venous catheters (CICCs) have lower infection rates. Though past studies have argued for lower infection rates with PICCS among critically ill patients, recent publications, in including a 2016 study comparing 200 PICCs and 200 CICCs, have shown no difference.

Infection rates are higher for PICCs placed in the antecubital fossa compared to those placed in the upper arm (i.e., basilic vein). Other factors that increase the risk of infection are those that are not tunneled and those with multiple lumens.

Prophylactic antibiotics have not been consistently proven to prevent infections, in fact, their use is not recommended. However, devices impregnated with antimicrobial or antiseptic devices have been proposed to reduce the incidence of catheter-related infections. Although it may seem obvious to change catheters to prevent infection routinely, this is not the case for PICCs. In fact, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends against the regular replacement of PICCs to prevent CRBSIs.

Exit-site and tunnel infections, septicemia, fungemia, septic thrombosis, endocarditis, osteomyelitis and sepsis with signs of shock, and/or end-organ dysfunction are all indications for device removal.

**Catheter Malposition/Migration**

PICC malposition is common. They can be misplaced in the jugular vein, brachiocephalic vein, or azygous vein. Causes include vascular abnormalities, a patient’s position during insertion or changes in venous pressure inside the chest if a patient coughs or vomits. When malposition occurs upon insertion, it is referred to a primary malposition.

Migration is a change in the length of catheter extruding from the insertion site. When the catheter tip migrates spontaneously after initial placement in a proper location, it is referred to as secondary malposition. This can occur with high-frequency ventilation, extreme physical activity and rapid infusion/forceful flushing of fluid. Migration interferes the ability to withdrawal blood. However, it can also cause cardiac tamponade via erosion of the catheter through the RA or ventricle. This is a medical emergency and must be addressed immediately.

Catheter malposition and migration can be assessed using chest radiographs as well as by administering contrast die to determine the path of veins. Repositioning can be successfully achieved by trained nurses using simple bedside techniques (i.e., having patient turn head, hold breath). Securing catheters at the insertion site can prevent tip migration.

**Mechanical Malfunction**

Another major complication is device malfunction, with anywhere between 10% and 27% of PICCs developing mechanical failure. Catheter “pistoning” in the vein can increase the possibility of phlebitis. They can embolize during placement if sheared by needles or surgical instruments. Fractures of the internal portion of the catheter are also possible, which would possibly require removal through surgeons or interventional radiologists.

**Phlebitis/Infiltration**

Phlebitis and infiltration are complications that occur in 2.2% to 23% of patients with PICCs. It is a result of mechanical damage from the catheter itself or chemical irritation (medications). Phlebitis may occur within the first week after insertion and can be treated using non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents or with the warm compress. Removal of the catheter is not necessary. If chemical irritation causes it, diluting medications or administering them at a lower rate can decrease inflammation.

**Air Embolism**

Air emboli are extremely uncommon with PICCs. However, they can occur. They are caused by an inability to maintain a closed system between the catheter and vasculature. Catheter damage, line disconnection, or lack of occlusive dressings are all capable of disrupting this closed system. Other causes of air emboli are lack of line flushing or improper flushing technique. Like a cardiac tamponade, this is a medical emergency and requires immediate attention.

**Cardiac Arrhythmias**

Arrhythmias are caused by the catheter tip being positioned “too low” into the RA or ventricle due to primary or secondary malpositioning, resulting in conduction abnormalities. It can be easily corrected by withdrawing catheter to its correct position and securing it to prevent migration.

**Catheter Occlusion**

Catheter occlusion can occur as a result thrombotic and non-thrombotic causes.

A blood clot is the most common cause of catheter occlusions. Thrombosis can occur in any one of the veins catheterized (including the SVC) or the catheter itself. The positioning of the catheter tip high in the SVC has an increased risk of thrombosis (up to 78%) compared to placement in the distal SVC/RA (16%). Septicemia also greatly increases the incidence of thrombosis. In fact, one study reported a relative risk of 17 for developing clinical signs of thrombosis after an episode of central venous catheter-related infection. Other risk factors include more than one insertion attempt, vessel wall damage from previous catheter placement, ovarian cancer, left-sided insertion, and triple lumen catheters.

Other causes of occlusion can be non-thrombotic. Malpositioning, such as catheter abutment against the wall of a vessel or kinking, can cause occlusion. Additionally, drug precipitation among incompatible medications/solutions can block the catheter. Common drugs known to precipitate are etoposide, calcium, diazepam, phenytoin, heparin and total parenteral nutrition.

It is important to properly flush catheters before and after blood collections and medication administration. Ensuring drug and solution compatibility can also prevent precipitation of medications. Finally, repositioning a patient or the catheter itself can resolve occlusions from catheter kinking or abutment.