# Definition/Introduction

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) inhibitors, or GABA antagonists, are drugs that inhibit the action of GABA, the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter of the central nervous system. They predominantly work at the GABA receptor. GABA receptors categorize into the GABA-A receptor and GABA-B receptor subtypes.

Examples of GABA-A receptor antagonists include flumazenil, bicuculline, picrotoxin/picrotoxinin, gabazine, suramin, sepranolone, salicylidene salicylhydrazide (SCS), bilobalide, RU5135, and 4-(3-biphenyl-5-(4-piperidyl)-3-isoxazole (3-biphenyl-4-PIOL).

Examples of GABA-B receptor antagonists include 4,5,6,7-tetrahydroisoxazolo[5,4-c]pyridin-3-ol (THIP).

# Issues of Concern

**Mechanism of Action**

The mechanism of action of GABA receptor antagonists depends on the drug itself. Bicuculline is a competitive antagonist at GABA-A receptors; it binds to GABA-A receptors and thus inhibits the binding of GABA. Picrotoxinin, the active component of picrotoxin, acts as a non-competitive antagonist at GABA-A receptors, binding to GABA ionophores.

Flumazenil acts as a specific benzodiazepine antagonist at GABA-A receptors. However, research has shown that flumazenil also has partial positive allosteric modulatory activity at GABA-A receptors containing the alpha-6 subunit.

# Clinical Significance

GABA receptor antagonists produce convulsant and stimulant effects and mainly have a use for research purposes. For example, bicuculline and gabazine are frequently used to dissect GABA-A receptor components in neurons functionally. These GABA receptor antagonists act as subtype-selective compounds and help to study the behavioral effects of the different GABA-A receptor subtypes.

Not all GABA-A receptor antagonists are convulsants, however, such as the drug bilobalide, derived from Ginkgo biloba. Bilobalide instead acts as an anticonvulsant and neuroprotectant by reducing the release of L-glutamate and reducing excitation, as well as inhibiting GABA synthesis via inhibition of glutamate decarboxylase.

Some GABA receptor antagonists, such as flumazenil, are used for the management of suspected benzodiazepine overdoses and reversal of benzodiazepine sedative effects associated with general anesthesia. Flumazenil is a benzodiazepine GABA-A receptor antagonist, preventing benzodiazepines from binding to the benzodiazepine binding site on GABA-A receptors and preventing the influx of chloride ions and resulting hyperpolarization, thus preventing the GABA-ergic inhibitory effects.

There has been further research in the clinical indications of flumazenil, with one study finding that flumazenil may improve the features of Parkinson disease.

Suramin is an anti-parasitic drug used to treat African human trypanosomiasis or sleeping sickness. However, research has shown that suramin may be used in the treatment of autism by normalizing the hyperactive response of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis by antagonizing GABA-A receptors.

One study found that sepranolone, a GABA-A receptor modulating steroid antagonist to the progesterone metabolite allopregnanolone, significantly reduced negative mood in women with premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD).

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Given the full range of clinical applications of GABA receptor antagonists, interprofessional communication, and care coordination is essential when using these medications. For example, physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other health professionals all must be knowledgeable about treating benzodiazepine overdoses with flumazenil. However, flumazenil’s effects are inconsistent, and not all patients may respond. Additionally, anesthesiologists carry a significant responsibility to be well-versed with GABA receptor antagonists as they may be used to reverse the effects of anesthesia. Further, as research into different GABA receptor antagonists continues to expand their clinical utility, all health professionals must keep up to date on the literature to provide the highest quality of care to their patients. An interprofessional team that prioritizes communication, collaboration, and shared decision-making through an integrated, patient-centered approach can enhance outcomes and team performance, which leads to improved patient safety. Each member of the interprofessional team is responsible for identifying complications with the treatment of GABA receptor antagonists and responding appropriately and promptly to ensure the best possible prognosis and outcome.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

In a healthcare setting, when a patient receives intravenous benzodiazepines, a nurse dedicated to the monitoring of the patient is essential. Also, resuscitative equipment, including flumazenil, must be available in the room even before starting the procedure.