It is the fastest spreading mosquito-borne viral disease globally, affecting greater than 100 million humans annually. Dengue also causes 20 to 25,000 deaths, primarily in children, and is found in more than 100 countries. Epidemics occur annually in the Americas, Asia, Africa, and Australia. Two transmission cycles maintain the dengue virus: 1) mosquitos carry the virus from a non-human primate to a non-human primate, and 2) mosquitos carry the virus from human to human. The human-mosquito cycle occurs primarily in urban environments. Whether the virus transmits from human to mosquito depends on the viral load of the mosquito’s blood meal.

The primary vectors of the disease are female mosquitoes of the species Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus. Although A. aegypti is associated with most infections, A. albopictus’ range is expanding, tolerates cold environment better, is an aggressive feeder but feeds less frequently, and may be associated with increasing numbers. These species of mosquitoes tend to live indoors and are active during the day. Transmission by perinatally, blood transfusions, breast milk, and organ transplantation have been reported.

After 2010, the mean age of patients was 34 years compared to 27.2 years from 1990 to 2010. The dengue viral serotype causing disease outbreaks have varied with time, as has the occurrence of severe dengue fever.

Transmission of dengue generally follows two patterns - epidemic dengue and hyperendemic dengue. When a single strain of DENV is responsible for introduction and transmission it is referred to as epidemic dengue. Dengue epidemics were more common prior to World War II. During an epidemic, all age groups are affected, but the incidence of dengue hemorrhagic fever is relatively low. Hyperendemicity refers to the co-circulation of various serotypes of DENV in a community. Periodic epidemics in an area are linked to the emergence of hyperendemicity.