It is important to differentiate the trapped lung from lung entrapment so as to identify active processes that require specific treatment and to avoid unnecessary diagnostic and therapeutic pleural procedures in patients with trapped lung. Lung entrapment may result from either pleural or non-pleural causes while the trapped lung is caused only by pleural causes. Non-pleural causes that cause lung entrapment include conditions that increase elastic recoil pressure of the lung. They include endobronchial obstruction due to bronchogenic carcinoma or interstitial diseases like lymphangitic carcinomatosis

The pleural fluid analysis is usually consistent with exudate in lung entrapment while patients with trapped lung have a transudate or a protein-discordant exudate with a mononuclear cell predominance. Furthermore, these entities can be differentiated by the particular patterns of pleural elastance. Unlike trapped lung, pleural manometry in lung entrapment shows normal elastance during initial pleural fluid removal, but the lung doesn't expand fully as more fluid is removed and the slope of the elastance curve increases. While most cases of lung entrapment resolve with resolution of the inflammatory process, the resolution is incomplete in a trapped lung. Therefore, a trapped lung and lung entrapment can represent a continuum of the same process.

Other differentials include pneumothorax ex-vacuo (particularly right upper lobe collapse), cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, chronic pulmonary consolidations, and bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia.