Major complications after rhinoplasty (hematoma, infection, pulmonary complications, venous thromboembolism) are rare, affecting less than 0.7% of patients. More common postoperative complications after rhinoplasty include epistaxis, ecchymosis, edema, and patient dissatisfaction secondary to persistent or new functional and/or cosmetic deficits.

Specific cosmetic complications include

- Tombstone deformity: occurs if a shield tip graft is too rigid, creating a noticeable graft under the nasal soft tissue envelope

- Rocker deformity: occurs when lateral osteotomies proceed too far superiorly into the nasofrontal angle, causing the superior nasal bone to be pushed outward when the inferior nasal bones are medialized.

- Inverted-V deformity: occurs following hump reduction due to a lack of continuity between the upper lateral cartilages and the nasal bones, creating a visible triangular (inverted-V) shadowing. Routine placement of spreader grafts after hump removal should mitigate this complication.

- Polly beak deformity: occurs from either over-resection of the bony dorsum, under-resection of the cartilaginous dorsum, or relative deprojection of the lower nasal third, creating tip/supra-tip fullness with no discernible supra-tip break

- Ski slope deformity: occurs from excessive hump reduction, creating an overly “scooped” nose. This complication can be prevented by using cold compresses and frequently palpating of the soft tissue envelope during surgery, allowing for a more accurate evaluation during the dorsal hump resection.

- Saddle nose deformity: occurs from loss of septal support, creating middle vault depression, columellar retrusion, tip overrotation, tip deprojection, and nasal shortening. A saddle nose deformity is preventable by preserving the 1.5 cm septal L-strut (dorsal and caudal septum). Treatment varies depending on the degree of deformity, varying from straightforward dorsal inlay grafts to complete nasal reconstruction using rib grafts.

- Nasal bossae: occurs from asymmetries in the cartilaginous framework creating a knoblike protuberance of the alar cartilages.

- Open roof deformity: occurs from greenstick/incomplete lateral osteotomies (prevents complete closure of the open roof), creating a palpable or visible separation of the nasal bones over the dorsum

The need for revision rhinoplasty in a primary open rhinoplasty is low (3%).