Core temperature is a balance between heat produced by the body and heat loss to the surrounding environment. The normal average temperature of an individual is 37+/-0.5 C.  Heat loss occurs through four mechanisms: radiation, conduction, convection, and evaporation. Radiation occurs when electromagnetic energy transfers between each other. Conduction occurs when the heat gets transferred between two objects that are in contact with one another. Convection is heat loss that occurs when air molecules move past an object.  Evaporation is an endothermic reaction that causes a liquid to form a gas. While radiation is the most common form of heat loss, the most common mechanism of developing accidental hypothermia is by convective heat loss to cold air and when in cold water or wet clothing via immersion or excessive sweating.

Body temperature regulation is by the hypothalamus and gets maintained by a variety of autonomic mechanisms. The hypothalamus receives input from central and peripheral thermal receptors. In response to increased cold stress, the hypothalamus will work to raise its metabolic heat production through a variety of mechanisms. Initial muscle tone and basal metabolic rate increase, which can double heat production.  Shivering can also increase the heat production rate 2 to 5 times from baseline.  There will also be an increase in thyroid activity, catecholamines, and adrenal response.  The body will also try to avoid further heat loss through sympathetically mediated cold-induced vasoconstriction of peripheral vessels where cooling and heat loss are often the greatest. Additional heat production results from behavioral changes such as adding more clothing, seeking shelter, starting a fire, and exercising.

The body initially increases metabolism, ventilation, and cardiac output in an effort to maintain bodily function during drops in temperature. Eventually, the heat loss overwhelms the body, and shivering ceases. Multiple organ systems, including neurologic, metabolic, and cardiac, will stop functioning and ultimately lead to death.

Newborns lack the shivering mechanism. The lack of shivering is due to an immature nervous system. Brown fat helps create heat in the newborns. Brown fat makes the inner membrane of the electron transport chain permeable. The permeability is produced by the thermogenin in the brown fat. The permeability causes the leakage of hydrogen ions. The leakage of hydrogen ions from the electron transport chain will dissipate as heat instead of producing ATP.