TPN is a mixture of separate components which contain lipid emulsions, dextrose, amino acids, vitamins, electrolytes, minerals, and trace elements.

**Lipid Emulsions**

- It provides calories and prevents fatty acid deficiency. Essential fatty acid deficiency may develop within three weeks of fat-free TPN.

- 25% to 30% of the total calories are in the form of lipids.

**Proteins**

- A solution that contains essential and non-essential amino acids except arginine and glutamine

- Healthy adult requirements are 0.8 to 1 gm of protein/kg/day.

- This change is based on the condition of the patient. Critically ill patients require 1.5 gm/kg/day, patients with chronic renal failure are given 0.6 to .0.8 gm/kg/day, and patients with acute hepatic encephalopathy need temporary protein restriction to 0.8 gm/kg/day, patients on hemodialysis need 1.2 to 1.3 gm/kg/day.

**Carbohydrate**

- Provided through dextrose monohydrate in a variety of concentrations, most commonly 40,50, and 70%

- Glucose utilization maximum rate is 5 to 7 mg/kg/min.

- Excess carbohydrate supplementation can result in hyperglycemia and hypertriglyceridemia.

**Electrolytes, Trace Elements, and Vitamins are Micro-nutrients**

- Trace elements and vitamin dosing can be according to recommended daily requirements.

- Electrolytes recommendation per liter of parenteral nutrition:

- Sodium: 100 to 150 mEq
- Magnesium: 8 to 24 mEq
- Calcium: 10 to 20 mEq
- Potassium: 50 to 100 mEq
- Phosphorus: 15 to 30 mEq

Total nutrition is an admixture, a 3-in-1 solution of the three macronutrients (dextrose, amino acids, lipid emulsions).

- A 3-in-1 solution and intravenous lipid emulsions) mixed with electrolytes, trace elements, vitamins, and water. Parenteral solution with only dextrose and amino acids with a separate intravenous lipid emulsions infusion, the 2-in-1 solution, has also been previously used.

The currently used TPN amino acid mixture continues to be incomplete, with only 19 amino acids.

The pharmaceutical perspective of parenteral nutrition and Y site incompatibility:

- Parenteral nutrition(PN) mixtures should be physicochemically and microbiologically stable. In addition, the preparation of TPN requires analyzing their composition and any interactions that might occur during preparation, storage, and administration.

- Hospitalized patients requiring parenteral nutrition (PN) need intravenous medications. In one study, researchers evaluated the physical compatibility of various drugs with neonatal total parenteral nutrition (TPN) solution during Y-site administration. In this study, amiodarone, phenobarbital, and rifampin formed visible precipitation with neonatal TPN and should not be coadministered via Y-site injection.

- Clinicians should refer to individual compatibility of drugs with parenteral nutrition to avoid potential hazards such as crystal formation.