# Continuing Education Activity

The wheat allergy is either IgE-mediated or non-IgE-mediated allergic reaction to wheat proteins. The result can be life-threatening and can lead to an anaphylactic reaction. Celiac disease is an example of a non-IgE-mediated wheat allergy. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of wheat allergy and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in educating patients about their condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the history and physical exam findings associated with a wheat allergy.
- Describe the evaluation of a patient with a wheat allergy.
- Explain the treatment considerations for patients with a wheat allergy.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by wheat allergy.

# Introduction

Bread wheat, also known as Triticum aestivum, is one of the commonly grown crops worldwide.

# Etiology

The etiology of a wheat allergy is either IgE-mediated or non-IgE-mediated allergic reaction to wheat proteins.

# Epidemiology

The prevalence of confirmed (via food challenge), IgE-mediated food allergy to wheat is unknown. The prevalence of wheat-based food allergy is likely in the range of 0.2% to 1%.

# Pathophysiology

Wheat allergy is the manifestation of mediator release, such as histamine, platelet activator factor, and leukotrienes, from mast cells and basophils.

Celiac disease is characterized by a specific autoantibody against tissue transglutaminase 2 (anti-tTG2), endomysium, and deamidated gliadin peptide.

# History and Physical

Providers should obtain a comprehensive history, including whether the patient has had a prior food allergic reaction to wheat or had a respiratory allergy to wheat flour.

Symptoms consistent with a wheat allergy would include urticaria, angioedema, asthma, allergic rhinitis, abdominal pain, vomiting, acute exacerbation of atopic dermatitis, or exercise-induced anaphylaxis.

Patients with wheat dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis (WDEIA) usually have symptoms that include pruritus, urticaria, angioedema, flushing, shortness of breath, dysphagia, chest tightness, profuse sweating, syncope, headache, diarrhea, nausea, throat closing, abdominal pain, and hoarseness that occurs during intense physical exercise following wheat intake in the prior four hours before symptom onset.

Those with celiac disease will present with diarrhea, constipation, bloating, abdominal pain, anorexia, flatulence, weight loss, poor growth in childhood, anemia, dermatitis herpetiformis, fatigue, and even osteoporosis.

# Evaluation

As above, anyone who develops an allergic reaction to wheat exposure should be checked for IgE specific to wheat via a skin prick test or serum IgE.

For those being worked up for WDEIA, SPT or specific IgE to wheat, gluten, and omega-5-gliadin should be ordered.

For patients being evaluated for baker's asthma, the lower limit with a positive predictive value of 100 percent was 2.32 kU/L for specific wheat IgE and 5.0 mm for wheat on SPT with wheat flour extracts.

For celiac disease, measurement of serum immunoglobulin A antibody to tissue transglutaminase (anti-tTG) should be the first screening test ordered.

# Treatment / Management

Primary treatment and management of wheat allergies is avoidance of both food and inhaled wheat allergens.

In cases of exposure and an anaphylactic reaction, the administration of epinephrine is the lifesaving treatment. Epinephrine comes in either a 0.15 or 0.3 mg intramuscular injection and is typically injected into the lateral thigh. All patients should go to the emergency room for further evaluation and antihistamines, glucocorticoids, and beta-agonist are additional secondary treatment options.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnoses for a wheat allergy are broad and include:

- Non-IgE-mediated food allergy (food protein-induced enterocolitis)

- Flush syndrome (carcinoid, postmenopausal, chlorpropamide-alcohol, autonomic epilepsy)

- Restaurant syndromes (sodium glutamate, sulfites, scombroid)

- Non-anaphylactic shock (hemorrhagic, cardiac, endotoxic, monoclonal gammopathy)

- Syndromes with excessive endogenous production of histamine (idiopathic angioedema, mastocytosis, urticaria pigmentosa, basophil leukemia, promyelocytic acute leukemia, hydatid cyst)

- Nonorganic syndromes (panic attack, Munchausen, vocal cord dysfunction, hysteric bolus, anorexia nervosa)

- Hereditary angioedema

- Anaphylaxis due to progesterone

- Urticarial vasculitis

- Pheochromocytoma

- Hyper IgE syndrome

- Seizure

- Stroke

- Pseudo-anaphylaxis

- Redman syndrome

- Irritable bowel syndrome

# Prognosis

IgE-mediated food allergy and wheat-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis (WDEIA) are associated with impaired quality of life and significant morbidity. IgE-mediated wheat allergy in adults is usually benign. For those with celiac disease, adherence to a gluten-free diet might prevent morbidity and mortality associated with celiac disease.

# Complications

Conditions associated with celiac disease include type 1 diabetes, autoimmune thyroid disorders, autoimmune hepatitis, and neurological disorders such as epilepsy.

- Anemia

- Anxiety

- Arthralgia

- Arthritis

- Dental enamel hypoplasia

- Delayed puberty

- Depression

- Fatigue

- Infertility

- Osteoporosis

- Pancreatitis

- Peripheral neuropathy

- Short stature

- Other complications of celiac disease can include enteropathy-associated intestinal T-cell lymphoma, small bowel adenocarcinoma, and non-Hodgkin lymphoma

# Consultations

Important consultation for a wheat allergy includes an allergy and immunology provider, gastroenterologist, and nutritionist. If a patient is having gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, a gastroenterologist can help determine differential diagnoses, conduct further testing, and determine the etiology of the symptoms. An allergist can do skin and blood testing to make the diagnosis and guide treatment options, such as immunotherapy. Additional consultations that would be helpful would be a nutritionist who can guide dietary changes that need to be made to avoid wheat from one's diet.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients who have signs or symptoms of a wheat allergy should see a doctor as soon as possible as it can be a life-threatening disease. Those who are already diagnosed should make sure they avoid wheat and always carry epinephrine. A medical identification bracelet that describes the allergy should be worn all the time whenever a patient leaves home and needs emergency care can help if he/she experiences anaphylaxis and can't communicate. Parents of children who have a wheat allergy must make sure that anyone who takes care of the children, including the principal, teachers, and nurse at school or child care, knows about the allergy and the signs of wheat exposure. Following up with an allergist can offer treatment options such as immunotherapy. Those with celiac disease should maintain a gluten-free diet to avoid symptoms and follow up with a gastroenterologist.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A wheat allergy can be life-threatening, and it is vital that patients carry epinephrine. Patients should follow up with an allergist for treatment goals. Patients will also benefit from a gastroenterology follow-up as patients frequently have GI symptoms, especially if they have celiac disease. Wheat allergies are just one of the many allergic reactions that a patient can face. An interprofessional allergy clinic can improve families' ability to manage allergies and reduce allergic reactions.