Initial treatment should be supportive. This includes resting the affected knee, elevating it whenever possible, simple analgesia, and icing the knee. Patients are highly likely to require walking aids, such as crutches. Having a knee brace early can also help support the knee before the consideration of surgery.

Surgical intervention is directed at underlying injuries rather than the Segond fracture itself. There is no evidence that Segond fractures need to be fixed. Furthermore, evidence suggests that ACL reconstructions are not at greater risk of failure with the presence of a Segond fracture.

Direct repair of Segond fractures by repairing the anterolateral ligament is an option, as some suggest that it may restore rotational stability to the knee. Segond fractures can be repaired by either direct suture repair, suture anchor techniques, or screw fixation dependant on the size and characteristics of the fracture. Surgical repair of Segond fractures has shown good results with minimal complications, however, these were not compared to a control group.

All surgical interventions should be undertaken following shared decision making with the patient and following informed consent. The decision to proceed with surgery is often largely swayed by the patient’s co-morbidities, activity levels, the patient’s expectations, and their likelihood of a favorable outcome.

Regardless of whether a patient elects for operative versus non-operative management, all patients need some form of rehabilitation from an interprofessional team approach. They will need to see a therapist for rehabilitation and may benefit from bracing to add stability and comfort to the knee.