Electrodiagnostic studies are a vital part of the workup of peripheral nerve injuries, especially closed injuries. The use of both nerve conduction studies (NCS) or electromyography (EMG) in different stages post-injury can yield different clinically relevant information. In the first week post-injury, NCS help localize the lesion due to conduction block across the lesion despite the preservation of conduction through the distal stump. EMG can determine if the injury was complete or incomplete as preserved voluntary control of motor unit action potentials (MUAPS) in the target muscle indicates an incomplete injury. After the first week, nerve conduction studies can distinguish a conduction block due to neurapraxia from one due to axonotmesis or neurotmesis, as the distal stump would stop conducting at that point if there was an anatomical interruption. However, testing beyond the first week is traditionally done at 3 to 4 weeks when EMGs can also indicate denervation by detecting fibrillation potentials. Further testing at 3 to 4 months is carried out to help assess evidence for early innervation and guide further management decisions.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has become increasingly useful in the assessment of PNIs, and this is particularly true in brachial plexus injuries where it is used to classify injuries based on their anatomical location along the plexus.

Although promising, a stand-alone MRI cannot yet reliably differentiate between the different degrees of nerve injuries. It can, however, show evidence of muscle denervation as early as four days post-injury, particularly in the short tau inversion recovery (STIR) sequence. This fact means it can detect muscle denervation before EMG. Furthermore, animal studies have shown that the use of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and diffusion tensor tractography (DTT) has the potential to diagnose and monitor the recovery in PNIs, but this is yet to be proven reliable for humans.