Ibuprofen is indicated and FDA-approved for use in the treatment of inflammatory diseases and rheumatoid disorders. The discovery of ibuprofen was spurred by finding an alternative non-corticosteroid pharmacotherapy for rheumatoid arthritis. The disease was the initial impetus for creating what would eventually become known as ibuprofen; Dr. Stewart Adams OBE was the researcher whose work would lead to the discovery of the drug. Initially patented as 2-(4-isobutylphenyl) propionic acid in 1961 by Dr. Adams and John Nicholson, ibuprofen has become one of the most widely used NSAIDs worldwide.

Ibuprofen is also FDA-approved for use in mild to moderate pain. It is also available as an over-the-counter medication for pain, usually mild. Some common over-the-counter uses for ibuprofen are muscle sprains or strains, joint aches, pain from migraine, sore throat, and pain from cold or cases of flu. Some of the current research into the use of ibuprofen as a treatment for various sources of pain typically focuses on comparing treatment efficacy with other NSAIDs, with an emphasis on COX-2 inhibitors or novel treatment methods. A study comparing COX-2 inhibitors with ibuprofen after third molar removal showed no statistically significant differences in pain relief after 6, 8, and 12 hours, but a significant increase in rescue analgesia was used in the ibuprofen group 24 hours. Researchers also noted a greater instance of nausea and vomiting in the ibuprofen group.

Postoperative pain is an area where ibuprofen has had demonstrated efficacy: In a randomized, double-blind study comparing IV ibuprofen and IV acetaminophen use for postoperative pain treatment in patients who underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomies, IV ibuprofen was shown to have lower pain scores and reduced opioid use in the first 24 hours following procedure compared to acetaminophen.

Ibuprofen is also an FDA-approved antipyretic used for fever reduction in adults and children. The use of NSAIDs in treating fever is much more commonplace in pediatric patients, and much contemporary research centers around creating more efficacy in using ibuprofen in treating pediatric fever. A literature review in 2017 showed little evidence to suggest superior efficacy between either ibuprofen or acetaminophen (paracetamol) in the treatment of fever. Six studies evaluated in the review showed a marginal difference with ibuprofen, but data remained insufficient to state ibuprofen as producing better outcomes.

Dysmenorrhea is a medical condition involving pain during menstruation, which may vary in quality and timing. Dysmenorrhea may be either primary, which is usually mediated by prostaglandin production during ovulation, or secondary from another disease such as endometriosis or pelvic inflammatory disease.

Ibuprofen and other NSAIDs are also FDA-approved to treat osteoarthritis, often after non-pharmacological measures such as weight loss and strengthening exercises are used. Adjunct medication usage has been explored, with a study showing promise with enhanced outcomes using acupuncture alongside topical ibuprofen compared with topical ibuprofen alone in patients with chronic knee pain due to osteoarthritis.

The use of ibuprofen for treating gout attacks or flares has been long-researched, with Schweitz et al. in 1978 demonstrating the rapid improvement and symptom resolution in 10 patients with acute gouty arthritis after being treated with 2400 mg of ibuprofen.

NSAIDs and colchicine are also often used to treat pericarditis, owing to NSAIDs’ anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties. Ibuprofen is one of the more well-documented NSAIDs in treating pericarditis, with research into its effectiveness in treating and preventing multiple recurrences of idiopathic pericarditis compared with aspirin done in the CORP and CORP-2 trials starting in 2011. Findings showed no significant difference between the treatment or prevention of idiopathic pericarditis between the two drugs.

Intravenous ibuprofen has been FDA-approved for the closure of patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) in premature infants and has been demonstrated to be as effective as indomethacin in treating PDA. Differences exist in the amount of systemic vasoconstriction and renal toxicity; likely due to less COX-1 selectivity, ibuprofen has been shown to have decreased rates of both outcomes.

Since 2007, the USPSTF has recommended using aspirin and NSAIDs to prevent colorectal cancer in specific populations. In 2016, they updated this statement and their 2009 statement for aspirin and NSAID use in preventing cardiovascular disease.

Similarly, Wawro et al. have shown a potential indication for NSAID use, particularly aspirin and ibuprofen, during cancer treatment in patients with colorectal cancer who undergo vincristine monotherapy. The purported role of NSAIDs is primarily in preventing chemoresistance by inhibiting the proliferation of cancer-associated fibroblast formation. Vincristine stimulates the growth of cancer-associated fibroblasts via the secretion of tumor growth factors beta and interleukin-6; the researchers saw an inhibitive effect on this process with aspirin and ibuprofen usage. Their research purports that the likely mechanism behind this involves NSAIDs affecting the microtubule polymerization rate.