Due to the benign nature of PLEVA, pharmacologic therapy is unnecessary but may quicken the recovery process and provide relief if the patient is symptomatic. Data regarding treatment for the disease is limited, although various retrospective series and case reports recognize systemic antibiotics and/or phototherapy as first-line therapies in conjunction with corticosteroids.

Systemic antihistamines may also offer relief from pruritus. Furthermore, large ulcerations of PLEVA may benefit from local wound care.

Antibiotics known for their anti-inflammatory properties are most commonly utilized, such as doxycycline or minocycline, and erythromycin for children.

Ultraviolet B light (UVB) is the most common and first-line phototherapy used, with no significant difference between narrow and broadband UVB. Although the long-term effects of phototherapy are unknown, children who received treatment did not experience any early side effects. In adults, therapy is directed by preference and other existing diseases.

Corticosteroids are commonly utilized as adjunctive therapy, and for patients with refractory disease, methotrexate may be an option.

In contrast to the self-limited course of PLEVA, febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann disease is a life-threatening disease that presents therapeutic challenges. Many case studies have shown patients with different responses to the same therapeutic approaches, preventing a gold standard treatment from developing.

FUMHD may be treated with TNF-a inhibitors such as infliximab due to elevated TNF-a levels reported in a previous pediatric case and success in an adult case.