The management of SFN should involve treatment of the underlying etiology in patients with an identified cause of neuropathy. Diabetes should be managed not only with glycemic and lipid-lowering agents but also with lifestyle modifications focusing specifically on nutrition and exercise. Since walking and running may be difficult for SFN patients due to pain, alternative exercises, including aqua therapy, swimming, and stationary cycling, may be pursued.

In cases of Vitamin B12 deficiency, parenteral rather than oral supplementation is often recommended as the deficiency is more often due to reduced absorption rather than low dietary intake. A suggested regimen may consist of intramuscular or subcutaneous methylcobalamin 1,000 μg injection given once daily for one week, followed by once weekly for one month, followed by a monthly maintenance dose for the next 6 to 12 months.

As per anecdotal case reports, painful SFN and dysautonomia secondary to Sjögren syndrome have been treated successfully with corticosteroids, intravenous immune globulin (IVIG), and other immunosuppressants.

SFN associated with sarcoidosis may also be treated with IVIG as well as with infliximab and combination therapy.

Pain management is important in the treatment of SFN, as neuropathic pain may be debilitating and cause a decrease in function and depression. Pain secondary to SFN is often best managed with a multidisciplinary team, which may involve a primary care physician, a pain management specialist, a neurologist, as well as a psychiatrist. Medications used in the treatment of SFN include anticonvulsants, antidepressants, topical anesthetics, narcotics, non-narcotic analgesics, and antiarrhythmics, while nonpharmacologic treatments such as heat, ice, massage of painful areas, and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) may also be used.

First-line medications are the anticonvulsant medications gabapentin and pregabalin, the tricyclic antidepressants amitriptyline and nortriptyline, the semisynthetic opioid analgesic tramadol, and a 5% topical lidocaine patch. These medications may be used either alone or in combination. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors may also be used; however, they are often less effective than the previously mentioned drugs. The voltage-gated sodium channel blocker Mexiletine, typically used as an antiarrhythmic medication, may help with refractory pain related to sodium channel dysfunction.

Opioid medications should be reserved only for refractory cases; given the potential for addiction, however, they may sometimes be necessary for patients with debilitating pain who do not respond to other medications. Regimens that combine medications with different mechanisms may be most effective. A study that evaluated a treatment regimen combining gabapentin and nortriptyline found such treatment to be more effective than either drug alone in treating neuropathic pain.

Treatment with inhaled cannabis was found to reduce pain in patients with diabetic neuropathy and HIV; however, side effects including somnolence, euphoria, and cognitive impairment were noted.

In many cases, neuromodulation has proven effective in treating the painful symptoms of SFN. Treatments include traditional dorsal column stimulation, dorsal horn stimulation, and dorsal root ganglion stimulation.