**Conservative:**Avoidance of painful stimuli is one of the most important components of treatment. For instance, if cycling causes pain, the patient should use proper padding or cease the activity. Other activities to avoid might be hip flexion exercises, jogging, rowing, gymnastics, skiing, and snowboarding. Similarly, patients who present with pain on prolonged sitting should adopt lifestyle modifications to minimize that activity, such as using a standing workstation. Roughly 20% to 30% of patients will see relief from conservative measures alone.

**Physical Therapy:**Pelvic floor physical therapy works best for patients in whom pain results from muscle spasms such as levator ani syndrome and similar myofascial disorders. Physical therapy helps in the relaxation of pelvic floor muscles by releasing spasms and muscle lengthening. A course of 6 to 12 weeks is commonly recommended. Adding transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) to physical therapy appears to be helpful.

**Cognitive Behavioral Therapy:**Behavioral therapy has been useful for various types of chronic pelvic pain syndromes, even though it has not been specifically tested for pudendal nerve entrapment.

**Pharmacologic therapy**: The drugs used are analgesics, muscle relaxants, and anticonvulsants. There are no randomized trials to study and evaluate the efficacy of these drugs or which combinations might be most effective. Often, several medications from different drug classes are used. A typical combination would be a tricyclic antidepressant (amitriptyline), an SSNRI (duloxetine), and a neurotransmitter analog (gabapentin and/or pregabalin). Opioids are avoided as much as possible. Commonly used medications include:

- Amitriptyline, starting at 10 mg HS and gradually increasing to 50 mg.

- Duloxetine (a selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor) starting at 30 mg daily for seven days, then increasing to 60 mg daily. No benefit is seen from further dosage increases

- Gabapentin (with or without pregabalin), starting at 300 mg TID and gradually increasing up to a maximum of 900 mg TID

- Pregabalin (with or without gabapentin), starting at 75 mg BID and gradually increasing up to 300 mg BID

- Clonidine 0.1 mg HS not only helps with pain but is useful as a sleep aid

**Pudendal Nerve Block:**Infiltration with a local anesthetic or steroid in an area encircling the pudendal nerve is a mainstay of pudendal nerve pain. The block can be given unguided or with the aid of ultrasonography, fluoroscopy, or computed tomography (CT). The most consistently reported technique is the use of a CT scan.

**Surgical Decompression:**Surgery to directly free the pudendal nerve in Alcock's canal is considered the most effective long-term treatment and potential cure for pudendal nerve entrapment. The four different approaches are transperineal, transgluteal, transischiorectal, and laparoscopic.

Erdogru described a new modification (the Istanbul technique) of laparoscopy using an omental flap in 27 patients. The outcome measurement was defined in terms of pain scores and quality of life. Approximately 80% of patients reported more than an 80% reduction in pain after six months which is quite impressive.

**Sacral Neuromodulation**: This minimally invasive treatment includes using a peripheral nerve stimulator, which causes neural regulation of the pudendal nerve in the ischioanal fossa. The first case report of this technique by Valovska mentioned the successful management of a patient with pudendal neuralgia with minimally invasive transforaminal sacral neurostimulation.

Sacral neuromodulation has often been used as a treatment of last resort when patients have failed all other treatments, including surgical decompression. In such cases, about two-thirds will respond favorably to neuromodulation.

**Pulsed Radiofrequency Ablation:**Pulsed radiofrequency ablation is a relatively new method of pudendal neuromodulation. It is considered safer than continuous radiofrequency treatment by reducing heat-related complications. It uses pulsed electromagnetic radiation to cause neuromodulation and appears to be potentially useful for chronic refractory neuropathic pudendal neuralgia.

**Cryotherapy:**Early reports using cryotherapy in small series appear promising, which would be expected based on results from its use in other neuropathies.

**Lipofilling:**This is a relatively new experimental treatment of pudendal neuralgia. Venturi first described this technique in fifteen female patients. It requires an autologous injection of adipose tissue along with stem cells into Alcock's canal. Ten patients showed significantly decreased pain and a better quality of life at the end of six months.

(For a more detailed and comprehensive description of all the various therapies, medications, and procedures for pudendal nerve entrapment, please see our companion article on Pudendal Neuralgia.)