As the development of the vertebrae is a complex process and is also vital for the proper development of organs and limbs, many congenital defects correlate with errors in proper vertebral development.

VACTERL

VACTERL stands for vertebral anomalies (V), anal atresia (A), cardiac malformation (C), tracheoesophageal fistula (TE) with or without esophageal atresia, renal dysplasia (R) and limb abnormalities (L). VACTERL is a purely clinical diagnosis that is made by patients having three or more of the listed anomalies. The most common defect found in VACTERL patients is vertebral anomalies – found to be reported in 60-95% of VACTERL patients. Vertebral anomalies seen include failure of formation and/or segmentation of vertebrae. The exact genetic causes of VACTERL syndrome are not fully understood, but some studies have shown a possible association with aberrant expression of Hox/SHH genes.

Spina bifida

Spina bifida is a congenital anomaly in which the vertebral arch fails to fuse, leaving an area of the spinal cord that is open. The different forms of spina bifida are dependent on whether there is also herniation of meninges and/or spinal cord. Spina bifida occurs most often in the lower spinal region.

Spina bifida occulta occurs when there is a vertebral arch deficit, but no involvement of meninges or spinal cord and the overlying skin stays intact. Spina bifida occulta is typically asymptomatic, and the defect is often incidentally found on a physical exam because it is associated with an overlying skin indentation or tuft of hair. Diagnostic confirmation can be via X-ray, showing no associated problems. No further treatment is necessary if this is the case.

Spina bifida myelomeningocele occurs when there are a vertebral arch deficit and meninges, and spinal cord herniate through the associated defect. Patients with spina bifida myelomeningocele usually have a motor and sensory deficits at and below the level of the lesion. Other related problems that often occur include bowel and bladder incontinence as well as herniation of the hindbrain (also known as Chiari II malformation).

Congenital scoliosis

Abnormalities of vertebral formation and/or segmentation can result in scoliosis at birth. X-ray, CT scan, and MRI are all imaging used to diagnose. Scoliosis that presents at birth is different than scoliosis that develops in adolescence and often requires monitoring and/or surgery from birth.

Klippel-Feil syndrome

Klippel-Feil syndrome is the result of the fusion of two or more cervical vertebrae due to the failure of segmentation in the embryological period.

Congenital spondylolisthesis

Spondylolisthesis occurs when a vertebra or vertebrae slip forward about the vertebral column. An embryological defect that results in elongation of the pars interarticularis, most commonly at the lumbosacral junction, can predispose to spondylolisthesis that can result in neurological symptoms that require urgent surgery.