Prenatal screening guidelines have been issued by several major organizations, including the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, and the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends that prenatal screening should be done for aneuploidy, and follow-up diagnostic testing should be offered to all patients regardless of maternal age or risk factors. Such testing should be discussed early in the pregnancy, and patients should be counseled on the individual risk factors, screening sensitivity, and the importance of diagnostic tests.

Ultrasound findings are considered soft markers and should not be used exclusively to screen for aneuploidy.

Carrier screening should ideally be offered preconceptionally. Patients may be offered ethnic-specific, pan-ethnic, or expanded carrier screening according to their provider’s preferences. If a woman is found to be a carrier, her partner should also be offered to screen.

The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) recommends that patients should be educated on the availability of cell-free fetal DNA as a screening method for Down syndrome, Edwards syndrome, and Patau syndrome as well as its utility in screening for sex chromosome aneuploidy.

Further screening should not be offered to women who have a previous negative screening test, as this increases the likelihood of a false-positive result. Diagnostic testing is universally recommended in the occurrence of a positive screening test regardless of screening modality.