Once a hematoma is diagnosed the next step is determining whether treatment should occur in the operating room or at the bedside. It is important to discuss with the patient the risks, benefits, and alternatives to treatment. If the hematoma occurred in an acute setting < 48 hours, an attempt at drainage is appropriate. Keep in mind that patients can opt for no treatment which is acceptable as long as the patient knows the risks and possible poor cosmetic outcome of non treatment.

**General Procedure Steps for Auricular Hematoma Drainage:**

1) Gather the necessary equipment and make sure there is appropriate lighting.

2) Ensure adequate exposure and place patient in the supine position with the head of the bed elevated.

3) The patients head should be turned so that the unaffected ear is facing towards the stretcher and the affected ear is towards the ceiling.

4) Supplies should consist of an 11 blade or 15 blade scalpel and/or an 18-gauge needle with a 10 cc syringe, suction canister, tubing and suctioning instrument (Frasier), a hemostat, toothed forceps, suture supplies with scissors, bolster material, local anesthetic, and local skin cleansing material.

5) Appropriate hand hygiene should be practiced and gloves should be worn during the procedure. Application of sterile gloves, gowning, headlamp use, and or Loupes to optimize vision are optional.

6) After the patient is positioned properly, the ear is cleaned with a local cleansing agent such as povidone-iodine.

7) Local anesthesia should then be injected or applied topically to the site where the incision or aspiration will be performed (e.g., lidocaine, bupivacaine, LET gel).  For best results, the anesthetic can be injected in an auricular block pattern or directly into the site of the auricular hematoma. Several minutes after injection the level of local anesthesia should be assessed. This can be performed by grabbing the tissue of the planned incision with toothed forceps to determine if the area is numb. There are two methods that can potentially be used to drain the auricular hematoma. You should choose the method you will utilize prior to start of the procedure.  One method is to incise and drain the hematoma using a scalpel the other is needle aspiration

**Incision and drainage:**

I.  First complete steps 1 through 7 listed above under general procedure steps.

II. Next make a linear incision can be made on the skin overlying the swelling or hematoma.

III. After the incision is made, hemostats and suction can be used to evacuate the hematoma.

IV.  Once all the hematoma is removed, the site can be irrigated with normal saline.

V.   A bolster dressing is applied.  The bolster serves to close the dead space or potential space where the hematoma formed. When using dental rolls as a bolster, two rolls should be used. Each roll should be placed so it to runs parallel with the incision line on either side of the ear. Two vertical mattress sutures should be placed through the dental rolls to secure the bolster.

VI.  Bacitracin can be applied to the incision site post procedure.

VII. It is important to remove all instruments and dispose of sharps appropriately once the procedure is deemed complete. Proper wound care instructions, follow-up, and disposition should be explained to the patient and/or family.

**Needle Aspiration:**

I.  First complete steps 1 through 7 listed above under general procedure steps.

II. The alternate procedure utilizes an 18-gauge needle to aspirate the hematoma. Some studies suggest that an 18-gauge needle may be acceptable for auricular hematoma evacuation when the hematoma is under 2 cm.

III.   A bolster dressing is applied.  The bolster serves to close the dead space or potential space where the hematoma formed. When using dental rolls as a bolster, two rolls should be used. Each roll should be placed so it to runs parallel with the incision line on either side of the ear. Two vertical mattress sutures should be placed through the dental rolls to secure the bolster.

IV.  Bacitracin can be applied to the incision site post procedure.

V.   It is important to remove all instruments and dispose of sharps appropriately once the procedure is deemed complete. Proper wound care instructions, follow-up, and disposition should be explained to the patient and/or family.

**Bolster Options Post Hematoma Evacuation:**

There are several variances in the type of bolster used, however, the goal is the same: eliminate the potential space for fluid to accumulate.