Pathophysiology: Triphasic waves are not seen in a normal awake state and are only seen in patients with altered levels of consciousness. It is hypothesized that they occur due to structural or metabolic abnormalities affecting the thalamocortical relays.

EEG Characteristics: These waveforms have 3 phases with a total duration of 300 to 600 milliseconds. They are high amplitude, sharply contoured waves, with the duration of each phase longer than the next. The first phase is always negative; the second wave is positive, displaying the highest amplitude (greater than 70 microvolts), with a third slow negative deflection. The triphasic waves usually repeat periodically at a rate of 0.5 Hz to 2 Hz. They are seen diffusely with synchronous bifrontal and central predominance and display a fronto-occipital time lag.

Atypical triphasic waves: Distinguishing triphasic waves from ictal EEG patterns has always been a topic of discussion and concern for experts. This led to reports by different authors of typical and atypical (likely epileptic) triphasic waves. Atypical features include localization (bifrontal/frontopolar, parietal, and temporal predominance in epileptiform triphasic waves as opposed to frontocentral with typical triphasic activity), contour (a more blunt contour with typical triphasic activity) and duration (around 300 milliseconds with typical triphasic and less than 200 milliseconds with epileptiform or atypical triphasic activity). Typical triphasic waves can be altered by external stimuli (EEG reactivity) and usually display a fronto-occipital delay.

Etiology: The most common cause of triphasic waves is encephalopathy, which could be related to metabolic, toxic, or other etiologies illustrated in the list below.

- Ictal or postictal state

- Serotonin syndrome

- Maple syrup urine disease

- Naproxen overdose

- Lithium toxicity

- Antibiotics such as cefepime

- Hyperthyroidism

- Hypothyroidism

- Hepatic encephalopathy

- Hypernatremia

- Hyponatremia

- Hypercalcemia

- Hypoglycemia

- Pregabalin toxicity

- Hyperosmolar state

- Azotemia

Structural abnormalities can also cause triphasic waves. These were first described by Aguglia in 1990.

- Cerebral abscess

- Thalamic gliomas

- Craniopharyngioma

- Pontine stroke

- Cerebral carcinomatosis

- Multifocal cerebral lymphoma

- Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD)

- Alzheimer and other neurodegenerative diseases

- Head trauma

- Subdural hematoma

- Carcinomatous meningitis

Differential Diagnosis: Multiple EEG abnormalities can mimic triphasic waves. Despite the presence of certain EEG characteristics that can help differentiate typical triphasic waves from other waveforms, EEG and clinical expertise are warranted. Typical triphasic waves may be difficult to be clearly differentiated from nonconvulsive status epilepticus (NCSE), especially if the frequency is higher than 1 Hertz.

The following are some of the normal and abnormal EEG waveforms that could mimic triphasic waves:

- Nonconvulsive status epilepticus (NCSE)

- Interictal epileptiform discharges (IED)

- Generalized spikes and waves

- generalized periodic discharges (GPDs)

- Lateralized periodic discharges (LPDs)

- Bilateral independent periodic discharges (BIPDs)

- Diffuse slowing

- 6 Hz spike and wave (phantom spike and wave)

- Wicket waves (Wicket Rhythm)

- Rhythmic mid-temporal theta of drowsiness (RMTD)

- Subclinical rhythmic electroencephalographic discharges of adults (SREDA)

Workup: Neuroimaging, preferably a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, is warranted when no clear evidence of encephalopathy is established. A hyperintense T1 signal in globus pallidus can be found in patients with hepatic encephalopathy. As described above, non-metabolic etiologies can lead to triphasic EEG waves and should be suspected in the absence of metabolic encephalopathy. Additional workup must be directed towards possible underlying etiologies. A complete blood count and a comprehensive metabolic panel will be very helpful to evaluate for renal and liver functions and infectious and electrolyte abnormalities. When appropriate, a toxicology screen to evaluate for toxic metabolites contributing to encephalopathy must be obtained. Blood levels of home medications must be considered, specifically the antiepileptic and antipsychotic medications. Repeat EEG is often recommended, especially in the absence of clinical improvement. Long-term video EEG monitoring is considered particularly in the setting of atypical triphasic waves or when considering medical treatment with BZD or NSASM if an NCSE is suspected (with NCSE, both clinical and electrographic improvements or appearance of previously absent, normal EEG background activity, should be documented prior to confirmation of the diagnosis). Differentiating GPDs with triphasic morphology from GPDs without triphasic morphology is sometimes difficult, but the interrater agreement between competent electroencephalographers is very high. A longterm EEG is needed at times in such cases.

Prognosis: Sutter et al. conducted a 9-year cohort study to evaluate the significance of triphasic EEG waves in patients with acute encephalopathy presenting to Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center. High odds of death were found in the presence of non-reactive EEG patterns, which is a new finding not reported previously. A trend suggested that patients with reversible conditions did better than patients with underlying structural brain pathologies. Most of the studied patients turned out to have more than one underlying condition, with a third displaying a neuroradiological finding.

Treatment: Typical triphasic waves do not require treatment, but rather treatment must be directed toward the etiology. With hepatic encephalopathy, treatment must be directed toward identifying and treating precipitating factors that cause hepatic encephalopathy. In addition, medications like lactulose to lower ammonia are important as it draws the ammonia into the colon and promotes excretion.