The structures passing through the adductor canal are susceptible to multiple pathologies.

- Peripheral Arterial Disease

- A common manifestation of atherosclerosis is peripheral arterial disease (PAD). PAD is defined as an obstruction to blood flow in the arteries (excluding cerebral and coronary vessels). The proximal popliteal and superficial femoral arteries are the most common sites of lower extremity atherosclerosis. Additionally, the superficial femoral artery is the second most common site of the femoral artery aneurysm (about 14% of cases).

- Adductor Canal Compression Syndrome

- Adductor canal compression syndrome, ACS, is an extremely rare cause of arterial insufficiency of the lower extremity. It generally affects patients who are young, healthy, and physically active.The pathophysiology of ACS is non-atherosclerotic. Instead, it is caused by chronic and repeated compression of the superficial femoral artery as it passes through the adductor canal. Due to the sparsity of case reports, an exact cause of compression remains unidentified. Reports indicate that at least some cases are due to anomalous embryologic musculotendinous fibrous bands. They are thought to arise from the adductor magnus muscle and become symptomatic alongside hypertrophied adductor magnus or vastus medialis muscles. The treatment is surgical.

- Venous Disease

- Isolated deep venous thrombosis (DVT) in the adductor canal is rare and is more likely to coexist with DVTs in other, more common locations.
- One study hypothesized that femoral vein compression and/or venous valve dysfunction within the adductor canal might contribute to lower extremity venous stasis. However, no additional studies demonstrate this.