Administration of Doxycycline Hyclate:

**Bacterial Infections**

- For mild to moderate infections, Doxycycline hyclate should be taken in doses of 100 mg every 12 hours on the first day and then 100 mg/day onwards. For pelvic infections, the dose is 100 mg twice a day for one week.

- The maximum dosage is 300 mg/day, except in the case of acute gonorrheal infection, which is often treated with 600 mg/day for five days.

- The drug is best on an empty stomach at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after eating. Take medication with at least 8 ounces of water.

- For optimal gastrointestinal absorption, the medication should be taken 2 to 3 hours before or after consuming any supplements or drugs with magnesium, zinc, calcium, aluminum, iron, or sodium bicarbonate.

**Anti-inflammation**

- Doxycycline hyclate can be taken at sub-acute doses of 40 mg daily for anti-inflammatory effects. The anti-microbial mechanism will not be in action at this sub-antimicrobial dose, sparing healthy bacteria and maintaining the body's microbiome.

**Malaria Prevention**

- Must be taken at 100 mg dose once daily for malaria prophylaxis. Highly recommended to be taken with an adequate amount of fluids and food. The first dose should be taken 1 to 2 days before traveling, and the regimen should continue while traveling in high-risk areas and four more weeks after returning. Doxycycline hyclate should be used in conjunction with chloroquine.

The course of prescribed doxycycline hyclate should be finished in its entirety, even if symptoms disappear sooner.