# Continuing Education Activity

Social anxiety disorder (SAD) includes the essential feature of marked fear or anxiety of one or more social situations during which the individual may or may not be under scrutiny by others. Exposure to such a social situation almost always provokes fear or anxiety in the affected individual, and the individual experiences concern that they will be judged negatively. These individuals often avoid the social situations that they fear or endure with intense anxiety, which results in impairment in social, occupational, or other realms important to function in society. This activity describes the evaluation and treatment of social anxiety disorder and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of social anxiety disorder.
- Explain how to evaluate for social anxiety disorder.
- Outline the management options available for social anxiety disorder.
- Review some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to educate patients and professionals about social anxiety disorder and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Social anxiety disorder (SAD) is characterized by excessive fear of embarrassment, humiliation, or rejection when exposed to possible negative evaluation by others when engaged in a public performance or social interaction. It is also known as social phobia. Over fifty years ago, in 1966, social phobia was first differentiated from agoraphobia and specific phobias. Since that time, the concept has transformed from being a relatively rare and neglected condition to one that is recognized as prevalent throughout the world.

# Etiology

Family and twin studies suggest that genetic factors' role as an etiological factor in social anxiety disorder is believed to be largely dependent on environmental factors.

# Epidemiology

Epidemiological studies have shown that social anxiety disorder has a worldwide prevalence of 5 to 10% and a lifetime prevalence of 8.4 to 15%.

# Pathophysiology

Studies in the past have found that persons with performance-type social anxiety disorder may have a greater response of the autonomic nervous system, including elevated heart rate.

# History and Physical

The majority of individuals with social anxiety disorder will report the onset of symptoms before 20 years old when obtaining a history. Many will report symptoms beginning in early childhood. Social anxiety is a chronic disorder, typically lasting for 6 months or more. Individuals with SAD are more likely to be less educated, unmarried, and have lower socioeconomic status. Additionally, many patients with SAD may not seek treatment because they believe the social anxiety to be part of their personality structure and therefore does not require treatment.

# Evaluation

Evaluation of social anxiety disorder must include its diagnostic criteria as classified in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Criteria include pronounced fear or anxiety around one or multiple social situations where a person is possibly exposed to the possible scrutiny of others. The person fears they will act a certain way that may be evaluated negatively. The social situation, for the most part, provokes anxiety or fear. The situations are either endured with anxiety or fear or avoided entirely. This fear or anxiety is disproportionate to the threat actually posed by the situation. The avoidance, fear, or anxiety lasts typically for at least 6 months and causes significant impairment or distress in an important area of functioning. The fear must not be attributable to the effects of a substance or medical condition or the symptoms of a different mental disorder.  Additionally, the anxiety, avoidance, or fear is excessive or unrelated if a separate medical condition is present. There is a performance only specifier if fear is restricted exclusively to performing or speaking in public.

A core feature of SAD is the fear of negative evaluation. Instruments that assess for SAD include but are not limited to Social Phobia Inventory (SPIN), Mini-SPIN, Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS), Liebowitz Self-Rated Disability Scale, Disability Profile, Brief Social Phobia Scale (BSPS), and Social Phobia Safety Behaviors Scale and Self Statements During Public Speaking Scale.

# Treatment / Management

There is a large amount of evidence supporting the efficacy of medications and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) in social anxiety disorder.

# Differential Diagnosis

Social anxiety disorder must be differentiated from other disorders, including neurodevelopment disorders such as autism spectrum disorder, panic disorder and agoraphobia, depressive disorders, substance-related and addictive disorders, body dysmorphic disorder, and personality disorders such as schizoid personality disorder and avoidant personality disorder. As indicated in the DSM-5 criteria, to make a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder, the individual's symptoms must not be better explained by symptoms of another mental disorder.  Other diagnoses to rule out include hikikomori, an extreme form of social withdrawal lasting more than 6 months, occurring among 1.2% of adults in Japan, and schizophrenia.

# Prognosis

Left untreated, social anxiety disorder is recognized as a debilitating and highly prevalent disorder that may result in lower educational attainment, worse occupational performance, hampered social interaction, lower-quality relationships, and decreased quality of life. SAD is associated with suicidal ideation, low self-esteem, lower socioeconomic status, unemployment, financial issues, and being unmarried. Many individuals with SAD are not aware of their mental health problems and, therefore, do not seek treatment.

# Complications

Comorbid psychiatric disorders occur in up to 90% of patients with SAD. SAD's presence is a predictor for the development of major depression and alcohol use disorder. Patients who have comorbid psychiatric disorders have an increased likelihood of greater severity of symptoms, treatment resistance, decreased functioning, and increased rates of suicide.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Many patients with social anxiety disorder do not realize they have a treatable illness and, therefore, do not seek treatment. Patient education, including educating the public, is an essential part of treating and preventing this disorder.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

As discussed previously, the education of patients and the public is a vital part of the management and prevention of social anxiety disorder. Recognition of SAD is poor and requires more effort from healthcare professionals to recognize it, as individuals with the disorder are unlikely to self-report it due to their symptoms. SAD is the third most common mental illness affecting a significant proportion of the general population in their lifetimes. An important role of a primary care physician is to recognize the illness and either treat the disorder themselves or refer to a mental health specialist who has experience with the condition.