The most commonly discussed pathology relating to the sebaceous gland is acne vulgaris. Some estimate that up to 80% of people will experience acne at some point during their lifetime, and 20% of those will exhibit severe forms involving painful cysts, sinus tract formation, and permanent scarring. The pathogenesis of acne is complex, with the sebaceous gland playing a prominent role. During puberty, high levels of androgen production stimulate sebaceous glands to increased sebum production. This activity results in the formation of sebum plugs, which, combined with other factors, results in the characteristic open (blackheads) and closed (whiteheads) comedones of acne. Many individuals present with a form of acne at birth. Acne neonatorum, which presents within the first four weeks of life, occurs in up to 20% of newborns. Additionally, childhood acne is strongly correlated with the development of persistent acne later in life.

The sebaceous gland commonly takes on an enlarged appearance as patients age. This benign condition is known as sebaceous hyperplasia. While these small lesions are a purely cosmetic annoyance, they can appear similar to basal cell carcinoma and prompt unnecessary biopsy to the inexperienced practitioner.  However, sebaceous glands can occasionally give rise to tumors, which are known as sebaceous adenomas. Muir-Torre syndrome, a rare, autosomal dominant condition, is characterized by sebaceous neoplasms as well as visceral malignancies. According to some studies, the high potential for metastasis and death in this syndrome (up to 25%) necessitates surgical removal of these lesions with a wide margin to reduce the risk of recurrence.

Interestingly, the sebaceous gland also seems to be linked to androgenetic alopecia or pattern baldness, a genetic disorder involving the gradual diminishment in size, quality, and number of scalp hairs. Histologic examination of affected areas demonstrates a marked increase in the size of the associated sebaceous gland, suggesting that overgrowth of the gland and relative preservation of the follicular stem cells could be important factors in the etiology of this condition.