Clinicians should arrive at the diagnosis of EoE only after positive findings on clinical, endoscopic, and histopathologic examinations. Patients who present with food impaction, dysphagia, and history of atopy should undergo an upper endoscopy evaluation with esophageal biopsy to diagnose EoE.

Upper endoscopy with esophageal biopsy also should be done on patients with a presumed diagnosis of GERD who are resistant to optimal proton pump inhibitor (PPI) dose (20 to 40 mg orally twice daily) and duration (8 to 12 weeks). Esophageal biopsies normally should be taken from the proximal, mid, and distal esophagus. During the endoscopy, biopsies also should be taken from the antrum and duodenum to rule out other possible causes of eosinophilia.

Endoscopic findings of EoE include corrugated mucosa, longitudinal mucosal furrows, fixed esophageal rings or trachealization, whitish mucosal plaque or exudate, stricture, superficial mucosa tear upon passing endoscope, diffusely narrow lumen, and mucosal friability giving the appearance of crepe paper. Clinicians also should note that some patients may have normal esophagus in upper endoscopy.

The pathological diagnosis of EoE is made when eosinophils are present greater than or equal to 15 per high power field (HPF). Other histological findings suggestive of EoE include basal cell hyperplasia, elongation of papillae, superficial layering of eosinophils, extracellular eosinophilic granules, and fibrosis of sub-epithelium.

There is no diagnostic laboratory test available for EoE, but a mildly elevated serum IgE level is present in patients with EoE. Another common nonspecific finding would be a barium swallow study. Findings can show different types of strictures or a ringed esophagus that could be caused by EoE.

An allergist and immunologist should evaluate patients with a history of atopy or food allergy and a diagnosis of EoE.