Initially, ECG, temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure should be assessed. Further diagnostic testing can be useful, although unreliable in some aspects of antihistaminic toxicity. Many common over-the-counter antihistamines produce false negatives for amphetamines. Methadone and phencyclidine in urinary drug screens may lead practitioners down the wrong diagnostic pathways. Extensive testing such as gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GC/MS) or liquid chromatography/mass spectroscopy (LC/MS) can be reliable in determining antihistamine concentrations but are not commonly ordered due to the long diagnostic time. Creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) should be assessed to evaluate kidney function, as well as beta-hCG or other serum pregnancy tests.

If patients are experiencing seizures or demonstrate extreme agitation, laboratory testing for creatinine kinase should be routinely obtained. IV benzodiazepines should be administrated immediately and with repeated dosing, as needed. If hyperthermic, close monitoring and possible cooling efforts via evaporative methods are indicated. If hypotension occurs, treatment with isotonic fluids should be a sufficient measure, and these should also be administered in the context of rhabdomyolysis. With the findings of worsening QRS complexes or QT intervals, antiarrhythmic medications are indicated to prevent fatal arrhythmias. Administration of 50 mEq of sodium bicarbonate, 2 mg of epinephrine, and IV glucose should be attempted.

Lastly, if anticholinergic symptoms become severe, physostigmine is indicated. This medication is not currently available, so some authorities recommend the use of oral rivastigmine or intravenous pyridostigmine. These are not FDA-approved for this indication. These medications function by inhibiting cholinesterase, which degrades acetylcholine within the postsynaptic cleft. Contraindications for physostigmine include widened QRS, asthma, other pulmonary diseases, and bradycardia.