Treatment is primarily supportive. Airway control, respiratory support, cardiac monitoring, decontamination, and administration of antidotes are the cornerstones of management in the treatment of acute nerve agent exposures. It is essential for all healthcare personnel to don personal protective equipment as dermal exposure is a significant route of toxicity. Atropine is a competitive antagonist of ACH at the neuromuscular junction and is the primary antidote in nerve agent poisoning. The dose is 1 to 3 mg intravenously (IV) every 5 minutes until tracheobronchial secretions attenuate. Oximes like pralidoxime displace organophosphates from acetylcholinesterase and help reactivate the enzyme. This is recommended early in the treatment of nerve gas toxicities to prevent the aging process. The recommended dosage is 30 mg/kg IV bolus followed by an infusion of 8 mg/kg per hour and continued for 24 to 48 hours. Death from nerve agents primarily occurs from respiratory failure secondary to paralysis and thus supportive care with definitive airway control and mechanical ventilation when necessary is key. Along with their respiratory status, patients should be continually monitored from a cardiac standpoint. Excessive ACH stimulation can cause bradycardia and QTc prolongation leading to ventricular tachycardia. Ventricular tachycardia should be treated with cardioversion when necessary. If the patient is hemodynamically stable, antidysrhythmics like amiodarone can be used.  If QTc interval prolongation is seen, IV magnesium should be administered

Patients with excessive secretions may require intubation. In the case of intubation, succinylcholine should not be used. AChE metabolizes succinylcholine, and its inhibition will lead to an extended duration of action of the drug. Rocuronium or other nondepolarizing paralytics are preferred for rapid sequence intubation. Seizures are also commonly seen with nerve agent poisoning. The first-line treatment for seizures in organophosphate poisoning is benzodiazepines. Ativan 2 mg push is a good first-line choice. Antiepileptics like levetiracetam and fosphenytoin are generally less effective but can be used when benzodiazepines are not abating seizures.