Managing patients with HV deformity is best with an interprofessional team that includes primary care doctors, radiologists, physical therapists, pharmacists, pain specialists, and surgeons. The patient may present to their primary care doctor for swelling or pain. The diagnosis is typically made through a physical exam. Further imaging can help assess the severity of the deformity and guide the treatment. Conservative treatment should always be the first step in the management of this condition. If this approach is ineffective, the patient should receive a referral to a surgeon for evaluation for surgical management. If surgery is performed, rehabilitation should follow to maximize post-surgery functionality. A pain specialist and a pharmacist can be used to help manage post-surgical pain, with a focus on minimizing the use of opioids. Orthopedic nurses can assist at every step of the process, from conservative treatment to helping during surgery and post-op, as well as coordinating with therapists for post-surgical rehab. Patients should have long-term follow up to ensure they are meeting their recovery milestones. Open communication between members of the interprofessional treatment team is invaluable for improved outcomes.

This research was supported (in whole or part) by HCA Healthcare and/or an HCA Healthcare-affiliated entity. The views expressed in this publication represent those of the author and do not necessarily represent the official view of HCA healthcare or any of its affiliated entities.