Mycobacterial lymphadenitis can result in fistula formation and repeated need for surgical intervention. Excision of preauricular nodes risks paralysis of the facial nerve as it courses through the underlying parotid gland. Repeated surgical procedures and scarring from the skin and soft tissue infection can result in cosmetic disfiguration. Since most lymphadenitis cases occur in the neck and facial region lymph nodes in young children, careful consideration of the psychosocial consequences of cosmetic disfiguration from repeated surgical procedures must be weighed against the chances of improved outcomes. The curative rate with antibiotics alone ranges from approximately 66% to 73%, which increases to around 95% with surgical intervention.

The ability of patients with advanced age and multiple comorbidities to tolerate the prolonged combination of antibiotic therapy or possible surgical intervention required to treat pulmonary disease necessitates the discussion of chronic suppressive therapy vs. curative therapy. Clarithromycin can cause gastrointestinal upset and may need to be divided into twice-daily dosing. Azithromycin can prolong the QT interval and might have to be avoided due to other medications previously prescribed to patients. Rifabutin can cause leukopenia and uveitis. Ethambutol can cause optic neuritis, and patients should be screened for decreases in visual acuity and color blindness. Severe pulmonary infection resulting in lobectomy can result in chronic respiratory complications even when the intervention is curative.