Swallowing is a highly regulated and coordinated physiological act. Starting in the oral cavity with the tongue, the genioglossus, hyoglossus, and styloglossus are supplied by CN XII while the palatoglossus muscle receives supply from the vagus nerve (CN X). The mylohyoid muscle is also involved and receives its innervation via CN V3. Each of these muscles helps the tongue carry out its wide range of potential movements involved in swallowing and are integral components to the oral stage of swallowing.

Before a food bolus can be propelled toward the pharynx signaling the start of the pharyngeal stage, the muscles of mastication must be recruited to help break down the ingested food. The masseter, temporalis, lateral and medial pterygoid muscles complete this task via innervation from CN V3.

The pharyngeal stage of swallowing utilizes the most muscles with coordination from multiple nerves and nerve plexuses. It starts with the tensor veli palatini (CN V3), which tenses the soft palate — tensing of the soft palate assists the levator veli palatini (CN IX, X, and the pharyngeal plexus) with the elevation of the soft palate to occlude and prevent the entry of ingested food particles into the nasopharynx. The palate must be tense to provide a steady base so that the pharynx may elevate during swallowing. The suprahyoid muscles assist with elevating the hyoid bone during swallowing and include the digastric (CN V3 and VII), stylohyoid (CN VII), geniohyoid (CN XII), and the mylohyoid (CN V3).