The incubation of hantavirus has an average of 3 weeks. The main abnormality caused by hantavirus is vascular endothelial damage. This is associated with vascular permeability leading to loss of plasma, hypotension, hemoconcentration, and eventually coagulation abnormalities. There is also an aggressive activation of the immune system, which can lead to a cytokine storm and further complications. Overall, the pathogenesis is due to viral, immune, and host genetic factors:

- ****Viral factors:****The virus attacks endothelial cells, the virus then gains access through beta-3 integrins receptors. Once inside, it seems to take over and induce cytoskeletal reorganization, decreasing the integrity of the endothelial cell barrier; this leads to dysfunction of glomerular filtration and capillary leakage. No cytopathic effects have been recorded, and overall the disease is thought to be immunopathologic**.**

- **Immune factors**: Activation of innate and adaptive immunity starts to clear the infection; however, in severe cases, it has been noted that overproduction of inflammatory cytokines causes most of the damage in this disease. This also suggests that a cytokine storm might play a vital role in disease pathogenesis. The concentrations of IL-6, IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha, IL-18, and others have been associated with disease severity.

- **Host factors:**Male gender has noted to be a factor in some studies and is associated mostly with males doing more outdoor activities. Age is also a factor as it has been reported that most deaths occur in older patients >70 yo. Genetics has also been noted to play a role; the HLA-B8-DR3 haplotype, along with others, has been associated with high mortality rates.