To truly understand the pathophysiology of pulsus paradoxus, we must explore the normal respirophasic effects of chest mechanics on blood pressure. In healthy individuals, there are normal phasic changes in cardiac output that occur with respiration. During inspiration, there is a small decrease in systemic arterial pressure of less than 10 mm Hg. As we inhale, intrapleural pressure drops; there is a decrease in intrathoracic pressure that promotes venous inflow into the chest increasing right heart filling. However, this does not equate to an increased filling of the left heart during inspiration. This is because, as one inhales, the lungs expand and pull radial traction on the pulmonary vasculature increasing its capacitance, momentarily sequestering blood in the chest, and dropping blood flow to the left heart, decreasing pre-load and consequently cardiac output. The opposite occurs during expiration, thus systolic pressure normally decreases during inspiration and increases during expiration. So why does the term pulsus paradoxus imply the drop in blood pressure during inspiration is paradoxical? The term pulsus paradoxus was coined by historic German physician Adolph Kussmaul who was referring to the palpated pulse of affected patients being of variable strength despite regular precordial activity.

The pathophysiology of pulsus paradoxus is complex and varies depending on the etiology; there are several mechanisms involved. In cardiac tamponade resulting in pulsus paradoxus, the physiologic drop in cardiac output is exaggerated for several reasons; however, the most significant is enhanced ventricular chamber interaction, often referred to as ventricular interdependence. The increased pericardial pressure limits the ability of the right ventricular free wall to expand and accommodate the inflow of blood during inspiration. The result is increased bowing of the ventricular septum into the left ventricle as blood fills the right heart, resulting in a lower left ventricular end diastolic volume, a lower stroke volume and resulting lower systolic pressure. In more simple terms, in a non-compliant pericardial space, for the right heart to fill more in inspiration, the left heart must fill less. As pericardial pressure increases, the compliance of the ventricles decreases until, under extreme pressure, the effective compliance of all chambers meets that of the pericardial space. In advanced tamponade, intrapericardial pressure will be the key factor determining diastolic cardiac pressures. This is the reason that a clinician will see an equalization of chamber pressures during diastole in cardiac tamponade.

In constrictive pericarditis, a separate mechanism may be involved. During normal inspiration, both intrapleural and intrapericardial pressure fall in tandem to roughly the same degree, and this pressure drop is transmitted to the cardiac chambers. In constrictive pericarditis, the thickened pericardium will prevent the normal decrease in pressure from reaching the ventricles; thus, the normal drop in filling pressures will be blunted by the thick pericardium. This is important because in the pulmonary veins (which are extrapericardial), the pressure drop will be greater than left ventricular diastolic pressure drop (intrapericardial), and the gradient for left ventricular filling will be decreased, resulting in decreased left ventricular filling. The opposite occurs during expiration.

Another mechanism to consider is the effect of inspiration on left ventricular transmural pressure. The left ventricular transmural pressure is the sum of the intracavitary pressure minus the negative intrathoracic pressure generated during inspiration. As the left ventricle contracts during inspiration, it must do so against negative intrathoracic pressure. This increases left ventricular wall stress and afterload and effectively decreases systolic aortic pressure. This mechanism is exaggerated in severe pulmonary disease that requires significant negative intrathoracic pressures during inspiration such as COPD, asthma, and obstructive sleep apnea.