**Diet**

Most cases of dumping syndrome are successfully treated with dietary adjustments. The suggested division of meals recommended is at least six times per day. Liquids should be withheld until 30 minutes after the meal. In addition, simple sugars and milk products should be avoided. Protein and fat calories should be increased to compensate for the decreased carbohydrate intake. Fiber-rich food is encouraged and has shown to promote a longer transit time in the bowel.

**Medications**

In a patient who continues to demonstrate symptoms despite dietary modifications, drug therapy may be considered. Several options include tolbutamide and propranolol.

Octreotide is a somatostatin analog which inhibits several GI hormones. The therapeutic effects occur with delayed gastric emptying, decreased the release of GI hormones, prolonged small intestine transit time, decreased insulin release, and splanchnic vasoconstriction. Multiple studies have shown that octreotide was alleviating symptoms of dumping syndrome both as short and long-term therapy.

Acarbose is a competitive inhibitor of intestinal brush border α-glucosidase that has a higher affinity to the enzyme compared to the normal substrate. However, since it is a reversible interaction, the breakdown of oligosaccharides to monosaccharides is slowed. This delayed conversion helps prevent the adverse effects of late dumping. Studies have demonstrated a reduction in symptoms of postprandial hypoglycemia.

**Surgery**

Surgical interventions are reserved for patients who fail conservative measures. There are several options, including stomal revision, Billroth II to Billroth I anastomoses, pyloric reconstruction, jejunal interposition, and Roux-en-Y conversion.

Stomal revision encompasses the narrowing of the gastrojejunal stoma, which delays gastric emptying. However, complications such as gastric outlet obstruction and strictures are seen. This intervention no longer has a role in Dumping syndrome.

The Billroth II to Billroth I conversion anastomosis resumes the transit of food to the duodenum. It is a simple intervention with minimal complications. The risk of gastric outlet obstruction is avoided here as well.

Pyloric reconstruction is useful in patients who have dumping syndrome after pyloroplasty. The pyloroplasty scar is cut, and the sphincter muscle is then approximated.

Jejunal interposition involves the interposition of the isoperistaltic jejunal loop. One study demonstrated improvement of the early dumping syndrome, however further studies did not reproduce the same results.

The Roux-en-Y conversion into Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy delays gastric emptying and the transit through the Roux limb. Even though the mechanism for improved symptoms of Dumping syndrome is not known, favorable outcomes have been demonstrated.