Evaluation for secondary causes of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) always should be pursued prior to making the diagnosis of idiopathic DCM. Workup is focused on identifying any possible reversible causes. Recommended laboratory testing includes thyroid function tests, HIV serology, electrolytes, and iron studies (to rule out hemochromatosis). Urine toxicology screen and alcohol level can be checked when substance abuse is suspected. In certain familial cases, genetic testing should be considered. Serum B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels may be obtained in cases where the diagnosis is unclear. Low levels of BNP are useful in ruling out CHF.  In addition, levels of BNP are useful for prognosis.

One should also rule out hypothyroidism and anemia.

Chest X-ray may show cardiomegaly and evidence of pulmonary effusions and venous congestion. Electrocardiogram (EKG) may show nonspecific ST segment and T wave abnormalities. ECG may also reveal atrial fibrillation.

Oxygen consumption per minute of less than 14 ml/kg/min indicates a poor prognosis.

Echocardiography is crucial in making the diagnosis of DCM and provides an objective assessment of ventricular size, function, and any associated valvular abnormalities. Echocardiography also can identify the presence of a mural thrombus. Finally, echocardiography can help in differentiating DCM from hypertrophic and restrictive cardiomyopathy.

Coronary angiography should be performed in those without a known history of CAD to further define coronary anatomy and rule out occult ischemic disease as the cause of DCM. Very rarely, a myocardial biopsy is needed for the evaluation of storage diseases or infiltrative causes when suspected. As mentioned, histologic findings of idiopathic DCM are nonspecific, and biopsy exposes patients to unnecessary risk.