The clinical presentation****of any perforating injury of the stomach is often very dramatic. Depending upon the size of the wound, the loss of blood, and the presence or absence of concomitant injuries, clinical symptoms may range from mild localized pain to signs of peritonitis and shock.

**History**

A careful history is important in evaluating patients with neck, chest, and abdominal pain. It should include questions about prior bouts of abdominal or chest pain, prior instrumentation (nasogastric tube, endoscopy), prior trauma, prior surgery, malignancy, possible ingestion of foreign bodies, medical conditions (PUD), and medication (NSAIDs, glucocorticoids)

**Signs and Symptoms**

Signs and symptoms can include refusal to feed, vomiting, and decreased activity. The most common presenting manifestation is a sudden onset of abdominal distension and pain; less common presenting symptoms are ileus, respiratory distress, fever, emesis, hematemesis, or hematochezia.

Patients with perforation invariably complain of acute onset of severe abdominal pain or chest pain; patients often note the exact time of onset of pain. Severe chest or abdominal pain following instrumentation should be viewed with a high degree of suspicion for gastric perforation. Patients on immunosuppressive or anti-inflammatory agents may have an impaired inflammatory response and some may have less pain and tenderness. Many of them will seek medical attention with the onset of pain but a few will present in a delayed fashion (may present with sepsis). Irritation of the diaphragm may occur leading to pain radiating to the shoulder. Sepsis can be the initial presentation of perforation. The ability of the peritoneal surfaces to wall off a perforation may be impaired in patients with severe medical comorbidities particularly frail, elderly, and immunosuppressed patients, resulting in sepsis.

**Physical Examination**

Should include vital signs, a thorough examination of the abdomen. The majority of patients will have tachycardia, tachypnea, fever, and generalized abdominal tenderness. Bowel sounds may be absent and rebound and guarding are likely to be present.