Healthcare professionals must consider drug-induced esophageal injury while evaluating patients who present with retrosternal pain and dysphagia. The interprofessional healthcare team should also be aware of the importance of prevention strategies, such as recommending the patient to take the medication with an adequate quantity of water and in an upright position. They should create awareness and suggest the patients not to assume the recumbent position after taking drugs. Generally, healthcare professionals such as clinicians and nurses do not always give necessary advice about medicines that can cause esophagitis.

The pharmacist should always be aware of the patient's list of medications and have a suspicion of drug-induced esophagitis in those who present with chest pain. However, because the differential diagnosis of chest pain is large, the first step is to refer the patient to a clinician to rule out an MI and other lung-related disorders. If the workup is negative, the patient should be referred to a gastroenterologist to confirm esophagitis. The pharmacist should educate patients on how to take medications, how much water to drink, and the importance of maintaining an upright position for at least 30 minutes when taking pills. Because there is always the risk of esophageal perforation or bleeding, all clinicians looking after the patient should promptly make the appropriate referral to a surgeon when the pathology is suspected. Nursing staff should always inquire about the patient's medication compliance and ask if there are any issues; this may open the door to finding out about the problem. All members of the interprofessional team must be vigilant to work together to uncover drug-related esophagitis promptly, before it becomes a more significant concern, and prevent it from subverting patient pharmacotherapy through non-compliance. [Level 5]