A chest CT scan is a modality that is most likely to pick up a solitary pulmonary nodule (SPN). It is also used as the first-line when observing the nodule as it can detect changes in the size of 1 to 2 mm, which is often an integral part of determining nodule etiology. If the SPN is larger (>8 mm)or the patient is at higher risk for malignancy, a Positron emission tomography scan may be used for further evaluation. Chest x-rays are not the best imaging modality to pick up an SPN, but they are the most commonly performed. They, therefore, can identify a large number of asymptomatic patients with an SPN. MRIs are more expensive than CTs and do not have any increased use when evaluating a solid SPN. If the nodule is cystic or ground glass in appearance, then the MRI may be of more use.

Whenever a patient is found to have an SPN, it is essential to determine the patient's risk for malignancy. Lung imaging reporting and data system (Lung-RADS) is a classification tool used to evaluate findings on a low dose CT scan when screening for lung cancer. A category 0 (incomplete) is used if there is prior CT imaging that is not available for comparison or if the lungs are not completely imaged. Category 1 (negative) is when there are no lung nodules found or nodules carrying high favorability to be benign (complete/centra/concentric ring/popcorn calcifications or fat-containing nodules.) This carries a less than 1% chance of malignancy. Category 2 (benign appearance) is for solid nodules <6 mm, new solid nodules <4 mm, subsolid nodules <6 mm, or ground glass nodules <30 mm and carries a <1% chance of malignancy. Category 3 (probably benign) is for solid nodules >6 mm but <8 mm, new solid nodules >4 mm but <6 mm, subsolid nodules >6 mm with solid component <6 mm, new subsolid nodules <6 mm, or ground glass nodules >30 mm and carries a 1% to 2% chance of malignancy. Category 4A (probably suspicious) is for solid nodules >8 mm but <15 mm, growing nodules <8 mm, new solid nodules 6mm to <8 mm, subsolid nodules >6 mm with solid component >6 mm but <8 mm, new/growing subsolid nodules with a <4 mm solid component, or an endobronchial nodule and carries a 5 to 15% chance of malignancy. Category 4B (suspicious) is for solid nodules >5 mm, new or growing solid nodules >8 mm, subsolid nodules with solid component >8 mm, or new/growing subsolid nodules with >4 mm solid component and carries a >15% chance of malignancy. Category 4X (suspicious) is either category 3 or 4 with other features suspicious for malignancy, including spiculation, ground-glass nodules that double in 1 year, and enlarged regional lymph nodes.

In addition to the Lung-RADS classification system, two calculators help to determine the malignancy probability. The Mayo Clinic Calculator (1997) utilizes certain criteria to help estimate the malignancy risk. These are increased age, upper lobe location of the nodule, nodule diameter in mm, spiculation, smoking, and extra-thoracic cancer >5 years. Another risk calculator is the Brock University calculator (2013), which takes a few more variables into account. It still uses increased age, upper lobe location, nodule diameter in mm, and speculation, but it also adds emphysema, ground-glass opacity, subsolid nodule, female sex, number of nodules, and family history of lung cancer. Notably, it does not take into account smoking status.