Albuterol comes in a variety of dosing forms and strengths. An aerosol metered-dose inhaler gives 90 mcg (base)/actuation, which is equivalent to 108 mcg of albuterol sulfate. The powder metered-dose inhaler form gives the same values as the aerosol metered-dose inhaler. Albuterol also is offered in 2 mg and 4 mg tablets. Extended-release tablets are available in 4 mg and 6 mg strengths. As a nebulized solution, albuterol is available in 0.083%, 0.5%, 0.63 mg/3mL, and 1.25 mg/3 mL dosage forms. There is also an available oral syrup in a 2 mg/5 mL concentration.

Several forms of albuterol are accepted for the treatment of bronchospasm. A nebulized solution of 2.5 mg two or three times a day as needed is acceptable for quick relief of symptoms. Dosing of 1.25 to 5 mg every four to eight hours as needed of the nebulized solution is also effective for quick relief of symptoms. For the powdered and aerosol metered-dose inhaler, the advice is to use one or two puffs of 90 mcg every four to six hours depending on the patient, but it is advised not to exceed 12 puffs within 24 hours. For tablet and syrup formulations, 2 to 4 mg every 6 to 8 hours is recommended with the advisory not to exceed 32 mg in one day. The extended-release tablets are taken in either 4 mg or 8 mg doses (depending on the patient’s need) every 12 hours with a limit of 32 mg per day.

For the treatment of acute or severe bronchospasm, it is advisable to use a nebulizer solution with a concentration of 2.5 to 5 mg every 20 minutes for three cycles, followed by repeat nebulizer treatments of 2.5 to 10 mg every 1 to 4 hours as needed. Treatment can be maintained with continuous nebulizer treatments every 10 to 15 minutes. If treating with a metered-dose inhaler, 4 to 8 puffs of 90 mcg every 20 minutes for up to 4 hours is a standard practice followed by 4 to 8 puffs every 1 to 4 hours as needed.

For exercise-induced bronchospasm, the recommendation is to treat with an aerosol or powder metered-dose inhaler before exercise. Two puffs of 90 mcg (for a total of 180 mcg) taken 15 to 20 minutes prior to exercise may help prevent symptoms.

For the treatment of pediatric patients, age becomes a significant factor in the course of treatment. For children under two years old, nebulizer solution with dosing by weight of 0.2-0.6 mg/kg/day divided into either a 4- or 6-hour cycle. For children two years old and older, a nebulizer solution dosing of the 2.5 mg/0.5 mL solution is given every 6 to 8 hours with a maximum of 10 mg given in any 24 hours.

The use of aerosol metered-dose inhalers in the pediatric population under the age of 4 years old has not had research conducted. The dosing recommendation for four years and older is 90 to 180 mcg (1 to 2 puffs) every 4 to 6 hours.

The use of powder metered-dose inhalers in the pediatric population under the age of 4 years old has not been studied. Dosing recommendation for four years and older to take 180 mcg (2 puffs) every 4 to 6 hours not to exceed 12 puffs within 24 hours.

The dosing of albuterol tablets in pediatric patients under six years old is 0.3 to 0.6 mg/kg/day divided into three treatments given every 8 hours throughout the day. It is advised not to exceed 12 mg/day. For those ages 6 to 12, 2 mg every 6 to 8 hours is the recommended dosage with a daily maximum of 24 mg per day. For pediatric patients over the age of 12, 2 to 4 mg is given every 6 to 8 hours with a daily maximum of 32 mg.

Extended-release albuterol tablets are not recommended for those under the age of 6. For pediatric patients between 6 and 12 years of age, the recommendation is for a dose of 4 mg every 12 hours is given, not to exceed 24 mg in 24 hours. For pediatric patients over the age of 12, 8 mg taken every 12 hours is the recommended dose.

The syrup formulation has not been studied in children under the age of 2. For patients between the ages of 2 and 6, the dose is 0.1 mg/kg every 8 hours. This dosing can increase if needed, to 0.2 mg/kg every 8 hours. For those 6 to 14 years of age, 2 mg taken every 6 to 8 hours should suffice. For pediatric patients over the age of 14, 2 to 4 mg taken every 6 to 8 hours is the recommended dose with a daily maximum of 32 mg/day.

Teper A. et al. conducted a double-blinded randomized study in asthmatic children (N = 50) to compare the bronchodilating effects of nebulized albuterol in normal saline solution or 3% hypertonic saline solution. The mean age was 12 +/- 3 years and there were 29 boys and 21 girls. The children had mild to moderate asthma with a predicted FEV1 of 40 to 79%. The bronchodilating effects of albuterol were determined 30 minutes after administration of the two dosage forms. The bronchodilating effects of FEV1 were 41.2% and 17.3% for 3% hypertonic saline and normal saline solutions, respectively. The maximum mid-expiratory flow was 130% and 69.8% for 3% hypertonic saline and normal saline solutions, respectively. Teper A. et al. concluded that the 3% hypertonic saline dosage form of albuterol produced a greater bronchodilating effect.