**Supportive Care**

In patients with mild-to-moderate dehydration, oral rehydration solution (ORS) should be initiated. In patients with moderate-to-severe dehydration or patients who do not tolerate ORS, intravenous (IV) rehydration with normal saline or lactated Ringer solution may be used. Once rehydrated, maintenance fluids should replace ongoing losses. Antimotility drugs should not be administered to patients under 18 years of age and should be avoided if inflammatory diarrhea is suspected. Antiemetics may be used as an adjunct in patients greater than 4 years old.

**Antimicrobial Care**

Metronidazole has been the first-line treatment for Giardia enteritis; however, a recent study has concluded that treatment with tinidazole is superior and may offer a shorter treatment course and fewer side effects

Abstinence from alcohol during metronidazole treatment should be stressed to avoid a disulfiram-like reaction. Adverse effects include reddish-brown urine, headache, nausea, vomiting, metallic taste, and abdominal pain. Other 5-NIs (ornidazole and secnidazole) and the benzimidazoles (albendazole and mebendazole) have been studied and may offer comparable efficacy and decreased adverse effects as well, but there are conflicting results. Paromomycin and quinacrine are reserved for refractory cases.

The two drugs recommended to treat women with giardiasis during pregnancy are paromomycin during the first trimester and paromomycin or metronidazole during the last two trimesters. It is reasonable to delay treatment in the first trimester as long as the woman's symptoms are mild.

If initial treatment fails, a second course of the same medication, a course of a different medication, or co-therapy with medications from two classes may be used.