Drugs are the most common reason behind gingival enlargements. DIGO is a side effect seen in patients taking anticonvulsants, immunosuppressants, or calcium channel blockers. It is associated with the patient's genetic predisposition and the presence of existing plaque or gingival inflammation.

**Anticonvulsants**

Phenytoin (PHT, or 5,5-diphenylhydantoin), sodium valproate, phenobarbitone, vigabatrin, primidone, mephenytoin, and ethosuximide are some of the drugs that cause gingival hypertrophy. However, phenytoin is the anticonvulsant most associated with gingival enlargements.

Drugs like PHT, phenobarbitone, and primidone are metabolized to 5-(4-hydroxyphenyl) 5-phenyl hydantoin (4-HPPH), responsible for overgrowth gingival tissue.

At times, multiple anticonvulsants are given together, acting synergistically and aggravating the condition.

**Immunosuppressants**

Immunosuppressants are prescribed after organ transplantation to prevent organ transplant rejection, such as renal transplants, and treat some autoimmune diseases, like rheumatoid arthritis.

Cyclosporin, sirolimus, and tacrolimus are immunosuppressants linked to gingival enlargement. Cyclosporin is the most frequently prescribed immunosuppressive drug after an organ transplant, and the incidence of gingival overgrowth has been found in nearly 53% of patients taking cyclosporin after renal transplants.

**Calcium Channel Blocker**

Calcium channel blockers are indicated for treating hypertension, angina pectoris, and peripheral vascular disease.

Renal transplant patients taking immunosuppressants like cyclosporin show a greater propensity to develop gingival hypertrophy when put on nifedipine or diltiazem. However, the extent of hypertrophy is more significant with cyclosporin.