Patients who present with SE should undergo an initial laboratory workup, including a complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic profile, creatine kinase, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, calcium, magnesium, and phosphorus levels. Urine and blood toxicology screen (alcohol, amphetamine, cocaine, fentanyl, benzodiazepines, heavy metals, synthetic cannabinoids, ecstasy, and bath salts) should be sent on admission.

**Laboratory**

A lumbar puncture should be performed if no clear etiology can be found on initial testing. Routine CSF studies, including cell count, protein, glucose, lactate, markers of inflammation (oligoclonal bands and IgG index), gram stain, bacteria culture, and cytology should be sent. Additional CSF studies should include fungal stain and cultures for M. tuberculosis, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for HSV-1/2, Epstein Barr virus (EBV), Varicella zoster virus (VZV), HIV-1/2, Chlamydia pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and VDRL in selected cases when the etiology remains unknown.

Both CSF and serum should be tested for autoimmune anti-NMDA receptor, anti-VGKC (LGI1 and Caspr2), anti-AMPA, anti-GABA, and paraneoplastic antibodies (Anti-Hu, anti-CRMP5, anti-amphiphysin, anti-VGCC). An autoimmune panel (ANA, ANCA, Anti Ro, Anti La, Antithyroid antibodies, anti-Scl-70) should be sent for further testing. Viral serologies, most commonly HSV-1/2, VZV, EBV, enterovirus, and HIV-1/2, should be ordered in all patients with NORSE.

**Neuroimaging**

All patients with NORSE and FIRES should have a brain MRI with contrast, including venography and angiography, to evaluate structural or focal abnormalities. In approximately 60% of NORSE cases, symmetrical or asymmetrical abnormalities can be seen on the brain MRI.

**Electroencephalography (EEG)**

All patients should have continuous EEG monitoring (cEEG) to assess seizure type and frequency, rule out non-convulsive status epilepticus (NCSE) and monitor therapy response. The neurocritical care society guidelines recommend initiating cEEG in all patients within 1 hour of onset of SE.

The most common seizure noted in one series was focal onset followed by bilateral independent, generalized, and multifocal seizures. Seizures are brief and infrequent at the onset, associated with focal fast beta activity with a gradual evolution to SE characterized by rhythmic spike and wave complexes or beta-delta activity.