# Definition/Introduction

X-rays are a form of electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths ranging from 0.01 to 10 nanometers. In the setting of diagnostic radiology, X-rays have long enjoyed use in the imaging of body tissues and aid in the diagnosis of disease. Simply understood, the generation of X-rays occurs when electrons are accelerated under a potential difference and turned into electromagnetic radiation.

Once the high kinetic energy electrons finally reach the anode target, this initiates the process of X-ray production. Tungsten is often the usual anode target, although other material targets are also employed. Electrons come extremely close to the nucleus of the target, causing a deceleration and change in direction, converting the kinetic energy to electromagnetic radiation in a process known as “breaking radiation” or bremsstrahlung.

Before understanding the final production of an X-ray image, it is essential to understand the interaction of X-rays with individuals exposed to X-rays. There are three important types of interactions that occur between X-rays and the tissues of our body. The “classical” or “coherent” interaction occurs when an X-ray strikes an orbital electron and subsequently bounces off and changes direction.

Image detectors come in the form of digital and analog film detectors.

# Issues of Concern

Effective dose refers to the amount of radiation received by the whole body, and measurement is in millisievert (mSv). Generally speaking, various procedures entail different effective radiation doses based on site and use of contrast. For example, a radiograph of the spine has an approximate effective dose of around 1 mSv.

# Clinical Significance

Although adequate coverage of the full range of uses of conventional radiographs cannot is beyond the scope of this article, the use of radiography frequently plays a critical role in assessing the various osseous structures of the body. Evaluation of the lungs is also possible, and the use of contrast can also help to examine soft tissue organs of the body, including the gastrointestinal tract and the uterus, such as in the setting of hysterosalpingography. Radiography is useful in performing various procedures including catheter angiography, stereotactic breast biopsies as well as an intra-articular steroid injection. Radiography helps in the evaluation of multiple pathologies, including fractures, types of pneumonia, malignancies, as well as congenital anatomic abnormalities.