**Radiation Toxicity**

In general, postmastectomy radiation therapy is very well tolerated, and patients can continue their normal routine. Postmastectomy radiation therapy does not lead to decreased immunity nor feelings of illness, and patients are not radioactive; therefore, they are safe to be around other people. Adverse effects or toxicity associated with postmastectomy radiation therapy will be discussed in terms of acute and chronic.

**Acute Toxicity**

Acute toxicity is generally defined as occurring during and within 3 months of radiation treatment. The most common adverse effects include fatigue, temporary sore throat, and radiation dermatitis.  Radiation dermatitis gradually develops as more radiation treatments are delivered and can include skin erythema, hyperpigmentation, rash, and dry followed by moist desquamation. Skin toxicity may peak in intensity 1 to 2 weeks after the end of treatment. Patients are advised to keep their skin moisturized during the course of radiation to help with the daily healing of healthy skin tissue. Other topical agents like aloe, hydrocortisone, or silver sulfadiazine can help with burning, itching, and desquamation of the skin, respectively. If a patient develops large confluent areas of moist desquamation, hydrogel or hydrocolloid dressings can be applied. The skin should be monitored regularly for signs and symptoms of infection. A skin bolus is typically removed in the event of brisk erythema or moist desquamation. Generally, by 2 to 4 weeks after treatment, the skin is well healed, although some patients will have residual long-term skin hyperpigmentation and or subcutaneous fibrosis throughout the treatment field.

**Chronic Toxicity**

Common chronic, or long-term, toxicity associated with postmastectomy radiation therapy includes hyperpigmentation and fibrosis of the chest wall affecting cosmetic outcome after reconstruction (breast implant). Other potential long-term toxicities include minor risks of radiation pneumonitis (higher when treating comprehensive lymph nodes), rib fracture, arm lymphedema, radiation-induced heart disease (RIHD) (particularly for left-sided treatments), hypothyroidism (if treating supraclavicular region), and an extremely low risk of secondary malignancy. The management of arm lymphedema and the risk of RIHD will be discussed in more detail below.

Chronic arm lymphedema is a very challenging complication of postmastectomy radiation therapy, and thus prevention and/or early intervention is key. Early signs of lymphedema include swelling, limb heaviness, aching, tightness, and fatigue. The risk of lymphedema after axillary RT ranges from 11% to 15% at 1 to 5 years post-treatment and is significantly higher in the setting of prior axillary dissection

The most worrisome late side effect of postmastectomy radiation therapy is the increased risk of cardiac disease. Data to support dose-volume constraints for normal tissues are limited. General dose-volume constraints are recommended by the ongoing national randomized trial, RADCOMP.  An early landmark trial by Darby et al. demonstrated a linear correlation between dose to the heart and rate of major coronary events. In this analysis, for every 1 Gy increase in mean dose to the heart, the relative rate of major coronary events increased by 7.4% and was observed as early as 5 years and continued up to 20 years after treatment

Proton beam therapy may reduce dose to the heart and lung, particularly when treating comprehensive lymph nodes. There have been several dosimetric comparison studies between 3D conformal, IMRT, and proton beam therapy, along with comparisons of passive scatter and pencil beam technology