Patients with a 17-hydroxylase deficiency do not present with signs and symptoms of adrenal crisis, as is seen with classical CAH due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency induced by the retained aldosterone synthesis pathway. As a result, patients will typically present later than those with CAH due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency, which in the classical form presents with adrenal crisis early in life or virilization of females at birth. In particular, patients with a 17-hydroxylase deficiency may present with hypertension and hypokalemia in childhood or adulthood due to the mineralocorticoid excess that develops in the presence of excess ACTH. The additional presenting features will differ based on genotypic sex and are associated with deficient sex hormone production, which will typically not manifest until puberty.

**46XX Patients**

If genotypically female patients do not develop hypertension or hypokalemia before puberty, they will have no complaints or physical exam findings before the typical age of puberty when the deficiency in sex hormones becomes apparent.

They will generally present with complaints of delayed puberty, primary amenorrhea, and lack of secondary sexual characteristics. Female external and internal genitalia will be present and will show a prepubertal uterus and sometimes cystic ovaries but are otherwise normal on the exam.

**46XY Patients**

The presentation in male patients is typically under masculinization and can range from phenotypic females to ambiguous or small male genitalia.

Phenotypic female 46XY patients may present with a history of abdominal hernia or inguinal mass due to undescended testes. If undetected until puberty, they will present with similar complaints to 46XX patients of delayed puberty, amenorrhea, and lack of secondary sexual characteristics. On physical exam, they will have a blind pouch instead of a vagina and lack internal female genitalia. The testes are undescended or located in the inguinal canal on imaging studies.

Males with ambiguous or small male genitalia may present with undescended testes or other complaints related to lack of virilization at puberty. Gynecomastia has been reported in these patients as well.