A melanoacanthoma is an epithelial lesion. Staining with hematoxylin and eosin stain shows not only shows thickening of the stratum corneum (hyperkeratosis), but also the thickening of the entire epidermis (acanthosis); this corresponds to the raised papule, plaque or nodule morphology of the lesion. Cellular atypia of the keratinocytes is absent. The undulation of the epidermis (papillomatosis) may also be present; this corresponds to the verrucous surface that is observed on some of the lesions. Throughout all layers of the epidermis, there is hyperpigmentation; this results from melanocytes with pronounced dendrites that can be found not only in the lower layers but also in the upper layers of the epidermis. Keratin-filled pseudocysts may also be present in the epidermis. In the underlying dermis, perivascular lymphocytic inflammation may be present.

Some researchers consider melanoacanthoma to have two histologic variants. The first variant, the diffuse subtype, has melanocytes unevenly scattered throughout the entire epidermis. The second variant, the clonal subtype, shows melanocytes and keratinocytes, each individually clustered into small nests within the epidermis.

Dopa and Fontana-Masson silver stains can highlight melanin and melanocytes. Therefore, they can be used to distinguish a melanoacanthoma from seborrheic keratosis. In a melanoacanthoma, both of these stains highlight melanin and melanocytes will show positive staining throughout all layers of the epidermis. However, in seborrheic keratosis, the positive staining is only found in the lower layers of the epidermis.

A unique patient with a clear cell melanoacanthoma was reported by Pierard in 1986. He described a 47-year-old patient (whose gender was not stated) who presented with a black globular tumor of a few years duration that was located on the anterior area of the leg. The clinical diagnosis entertained was a nodular melanoma. Microscopic examination showed an epithelial lesion consisting of two distinct compartments. One compartment, associated with the pilosebaceous appendages, consisted of normal epidermal cells. The second compartment consisted of a mixture of large glycogen-filled pale keratinocytes practically devoid of melanin and large dendritic melanocytes; the latter cells were abundantly packed with melanin and distributed throughout all layers of the epidermis. Correlation of the pathologic findings and the clinical presentation established the diagnosis of a clear cell melanoacanthoma; no recurrence was observed during 3 years of follow-up after the lesion was excised.

Immunoperoxidase staining may help determine whether a lesion is a melanoacanthoma when the diagnosis is suspected. Cytokeratin stains, such as cytokeratin 7 (CK7), stain keratinocytes positive. Therefore, which shows positive staining of the keratinocytes in a melanoacanthoma will stain positive with CK7. Hence, immunoperoxidase staining for cytokeratin can be used to assist in differentiating melanoacanthoma from melanoma.

Melanocytic markers S100 and melan-A, also known as melanoma antigen recognized by T-cells (MART-1), will stain melanocytes in melanoma, benign nevi, and also melanoacanthoma. Therefore, to establish the diagnosis of melanoacanthoma, other features noted on hematoxylin and eosin staining are important.

If a brown chromagen is used to identify the positive-staining cells when immunoperoxidase stains are performed, it may be difficult to differentiate the brown staining melanocytes from the brown appearing melanin-laden keratinocytes. However, if a red chromagen is used, this problem is resolved since only the melanocytes will show the red staining.

Electron microscopy not only confirms the presence of highly dendritic melanocytes were present but also reveals that the transfer of melanin from these melanocytes to the adjacent keratinocytes was defective. Also, except in the basal layer, Langerhans cells were present throughout the epidermis.