The aging process is a natural phenomenon that occurs due to a variety of loosely understood mechanisms. Via a combination of telomeric shortening, which triggers pro-apoptotic pathways when sensed in the cell cycle, which subsequently triggers inflammatory mediators and the release of damaging reactive oxygen species, our bodies and their ability to maintain physiologic homeostasis degrade with time. Moreover, so does the body's ability to regenerate or reproduce healthy cells and tissues as we age. The aging process brings phenotypical changes that clinicians must understand and consider when caring for aging patients.

It is essential to recognize that aging involves a great deal of interplay between lifestyle and genetics. An individual who maintains a healthy lifestyle, has access to adequate, routine medical care and screenings, and enters into late adulthood with a clean bill of health will experience a vastly different aging process than someone who is sedentary, makes poor diet and lifestyle choices, and has lived with chronic disease before and upon entry into late adulthood.

Aging is relevant to clinical care and management because it often implies underlying derangements of normal physiology. For example, this article mentioned earlier that urinary tract infections are more common in the elderly. Some patients may experience an increased frequency of falls due to the weakness imposed by their urinary tract infection or their bladder urgency forcing them to attempt to hurriedly make it to a toilet. Clinicians must remain vigilant of the manifestations of disease in aging and, likewise, the presentation of physiologic derangements that pose a potential health risk, like falls and urinary tract infections.