There are various pressure measurements and hemodynamic parameters that can be obtained when performing a right heart catheterization. The common parameters that are evaluated and the hemodynamic profiles of commonly encountered scenarios are described in the following sections.

Normal mean right atrial pressure is between 1 to 5 mm Hg. Normal right ventricular systolic and diastolic pressures are 15 to 30 mm Hg and 1 to 7 mm Hg, respectively. Normal pulmonary artery systolic and diastolic pressures are 15 to 30 mm Hg and 4 to 12 mm Hg, respectively. Mean pulmonary artery pressure is usually around 15 mm Hg. Normal pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is 4 to 12 mm Hg.

The measured pressures can be used to calculate cardiac output, cardiac index, pulmonary vascular resistance, systemic vascular resistance, stroke work index, right ventricle stroke work, pulmonary artery pulsatility index (PAPi), the Gorlin equation to calculate mitral and aortic valve areas, and the Hakki equation to calculate aortic valve area.

**Right Atrial or Pulmonary Capillary Wedge Pressure Waveforms**

The right atrial pressure waveform consists of three positive upstrokes and two descents. The first positive upstroke is the “a” wave that correlates with atrial systole. This is followed by the “x” descent that signifies atrial relaxation. The next wave is the “c” wave that indicates tricuspid valve closure. The next wave is a positive upstroke “v” wave that represents passive atrial filling during right ventricular contraction. The “v” wave is followed by the ‘y” descent that represents atrial emptying after the tricuspid valve opens in ventricular diastole. The pulmonary capillary wedge waveform is similar to the right atrial pressure waveform and consists of three positive upstrokes and two downstrokes.

In the setting of atrial fibrillation, there is a loss of the “a” wave due to the loss of the atrial contribution to the waveform. Tall “a” waves can occur due to an increase in atrial pressure that can occur in tricuspid or mitral stenosis. Cannon “a” waves are very large “a” waves that are caused by any condition that can cause atrioventricular dissociation such as complete heart block, ventricular tachycardia, AV nodal reentrant tachycardia. Large “v” waves occur due to increased ventricular volume during right ventricular contraction like tricuspid or mitral regurgitation, right or left ventricular failure, severe non-compliance of right or left ventricle, ventricular septal defect. Also, mitral stenosis, post-operative or rheumatic changes of the atrium, can produce large atrial “v” waves.

**Right Ventricle Systolic and Diastolic Pressures**

Right ventricular and pulmonary artery systolic pressures are elevated in pulmonary embolism, pulmonary hypertension.

There is an increase in and equalization of end-diastolic pressures, pulmonary capillary wedge pressures in constrictive pericarditis, restrictive cardiomyopathy, and cardiac tamponade. However, in constrictive pericarditis, there is ventricular interdependence that is best identified by simultaneous right and left heart catheterization. Interdependence results in discordance of right and left ventricular pressures, which are evidenced by a reduction in the right ventricle systolic pressure tracing when there is an increase in the left ventricle pressure tracing and vice versa with respiration. In restrictive cardiomyopathy, there is no interdependence, and therefore there is a concordance of right and left ventricular pressures on simultaneous measurement. Concordance is evidenced by concordant right ventricle and left ventricle systolic pressure tracings with respiration. This is mathematically calculated as the systolic area index, which is defined as the ratio of the right ventricle to the left ventricle area in inspiration versus expiration. A systolic area index greater than 1.1 has a greater than 95% sensitivity in identifying constrictive pericarditis. Even though various parameters have been developed in the past to distinguish between constrictive pericarditis and restrictive cardiomyopathy, the systolic area index appears to have the best predictive accuracy. While the clinical presentation of constrictive pericarditis and restrictive cardiomyopathy is mostly chronic, cardiac tamponade physiology is frequently acute.

**Cardiac Output**

Cardiac output by right heart catheterization is generally calculated by using the indirect Fick principle and the thermodilution technique. Adolf Fick created the Fick principle in 1870, who observed that by determining the amount of oxygen carried in the systemic and pulmonary circulation, the blood volume required to carry that amount of oxygen could then be deduced. For this method, the hemoglobin levels, central arterial and venous oxygen saturation, maximum oxygen consumption values are required. The maximum oxygen consumption is assumed to be 250 ml/minute, or 125 ml/min/method involves direct measurement of oxygen consumption using exhaled air. This is cumbersome and requires specialized equipment. Therefore indirect Fick method that uses the assumed maximum oxygen consumption value is widely used. However, it has been shown that cardiac output derived by the indirect Fick method varies from the direct Fick method by roughly 25% in up to 25% of individuals. These differences appear to be marked in individuals with a body mass index greater than 40 kg/m.

For thermodilution, 10 cc of saline is injected using the proximal blue port of the pulmonary artery catheter. This mixes with the right atrial blood and causes a slight drop in temperature, which is then detected by the thermistor at the tip of the catheter. However, there are pitfalls to the thermodilution technique. The Thermodilution technique is not considered accurate when cardiac output is low. The area under the curve is small in this scenario, and anything that causes the area under the curve to become smaller can underestimate cardiac output. Similarly, in severe tricuspid or pulmonic valve regurgitation, there is a recirculation of blood and can falsely underestimate cardiac output. In the setting of intracardiac shunts, it can do the opposite and falsely overestimate cardiac output. It is important to know the pitfalls associated with these measurements and that Fick and thermodilution techniques can produce variable results within the same patient.

**Cardiac Index**

The cardiac index is calculated by indexing the cardiac output for body surface area. Normal cardiac output can be variable based on body mass and size. But a normal cardiac index is greater than 2.5 liters per minute per meter squared. Cardiogenic shock is defined as an index lesser than 2.2 liters per minute per meter squared with a pulmonary capillary wedge pressure greater than 15 mm Hg.

**Cardiac Power Index**

Cardiac power output is calculated in Watts and is obtained by dividing the product of mean arterial pressure and cardiac output in liters per minute by 451. The cardiac power index is the cardiac power output that is indexed to the body surface area. Cardiac power output lesser than 0.6 Watts strongly correlates with in-hospital mortality in patients with shock. In the setting of cardiogenic shock, cardiac power output has a greater correlation with adverse outcomes compared with cardiac index, ejection fraction, pulmonary artery systolic pressure, and mean arterial pressure.

**Systemic and Pulmonary Vascular Resistance**

The equation calculates systemic vascular resistance,

[(Mean arterial pressure – right atrial pressure) x 80 / cardiac output]

It is measured in Wood units or dynes per second per cm squared. The normal range is 700 to 1600 dynes per second per cm or 10 to 20 Wood units.

Similarly, pulmonary vascular resistance is calculated by the equation,

[(Mean pulmonary artery pressure – pulmonary capillary wedge pressure) x 80/ cardiac output]

It is measured in Wood units or dynes per second per cm squared. The normal range is 20 to 120 dynes per second per cm or less than 2 Wood units.

**Pulmonary Artery Pulsatility Index**

Pulmonary artery pulsatility index or PAPi is the ratio between pulmonary artery pressure and right atrial pressure. It is calculated as [(Systolic pulmonary artery pressure – diastolic pulmonary artery pressure)/right atrial pressure].

PAPi of less than 0.9 has very high sensitivity and specificity in predicting right ventricular failure and in-hospital mortality in acute inferior wall myocardial infarction.

PAPi less than 1.85 is also used to predict if patients will experience right ventricle failure and thereby require right ventricular hemodynamic device support after placement of left ventricular assist devices.