The bruit typically implies stenosis at or proximal to the area of auscultation. The auscultated sound is usually the result of turbulent, non-laminar blood flow through a stenotic area. The turbulent flow creates vibrations in the arterial wall that then transmits to the body surface, where stethoscopic auscultation is possible. Critical stenosis, however, does not occur until the cross-sectional area decreases to 70%, which corresponds to a reduction of lumen diameter by half.  Kurtz previously described the basic science of bruits: “ As stenosis increases, therefore, potential energy ( pressure ) proximal to the stenosis changes to increasing kinetic energy ( velocity ) within the stenosis. With increasing flow velocity, laminar flow through a stenosis eventually changes to turbulent flow, producing vibrations, and a bruit.  Thus, velocity through the stenotic segment and the subsequent character of the bruit depend on the degree of stenosis and the resulting pressure gradient.”  Kurtz further explained that the auscultatory quality and timing of the bruit changes with the degree of stenosis and pressure gradients. When the lumen is about 50% narrowed, a soft early systolic murmur is audible. This sound can become high-pitched, more intense, and holosystolic when the stenosis approaches 60%. When the diameter reduces to 70%-80%, a bruit can is audible during systole and early diastole. As the occlusion becomes very severe, blood flow turbulence becomes insufficient to cause vibratory sounds, and a bruit may disappear.