# Introduction

The caudate nucleus (CN; plural “caudate nuclei”) is a paired, “C”-shaped subcortical structure which lies deep inside the brain near the thalamus. It plays a critical role in various higher neurological functions. Each caudate nucleus is composed of a large anterior head, a body, and a thin tail that wraps anteriorly such that the caudate nucleus head and tail can be visible in the same coronal cut. When combined with the putamen, the pair is referred to as the striatum and is often considered jointly in function. The striatum is the major input source for the basal ganglia, which also includes the globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, and substantia nigra. These deep brain structures together largely control voluntary skeletal movement. The caudate nucleus functions not only in planning the execution of movement, but also in learning, memory, reward, motivation, emotion, and romantic interaction.

# Structure and Function

The two caudate nuclei lie near the thalamus in the center of the brain. The head of the caudate nucleus forms the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle, its body lies lateral to the body of the lateral ventricle, and the tail of the caudate nucleus lies above the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle.

The anterior portion of the caudate nucleus is connected with the lateral and medial prefrontal cortices and is involved in working memory and executive functioning. One can think of the head of the caudate nucleus as the cognitive and emotional portion.

The caudate nucleus and putamen connect to the substantia nigra and one another.

Association learning is another important function of the caudate nucleus. It plays a role in connecting visual stimuli with motor responses as well as learning with feedback. Lesions of the anterior caudate nucleus result in abnormal behavior, which does not correspond to rewards.

Lesions to the caudate nucleus and resulting deficits can further elucidate caudate nucleus function. Lesions to the caudate nucleus can result in abulia, or absence of will, an interesting outcome when considered in conjunction with evidence of its role in goal-directed behavior and motivation.

# Embryology

The ventral telencephalon gives rise to the lateral and medial ganglionic eminences, which are the source of neurons in the striatum and cortical interneurons, respectively. Many precisely timed molecular signals must take place to ensure proper development of the caudate nucleus to occur. Differential gene expression in neurons destined to comprise the striatum include ASCL1, DLXs, LHXs, and GSX2.

The dentate gyrus and olfactory bulb are the two widely accepted sites of neurogenesis in adult mammals.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The caudate nucleus receives blood supply from the anterior cerebral artery, middle cerebral artery, and anterior choroidal artery. The majority of the head of the caudate nucleus receives blood supply from the anterior cerebral artery, though there is some normal variation among individuals. The superior head and body of the caudate nucleus receive vascular supply via the perforating lenticulostriate branches of the middle cerebral artery. Finally, the tail of the caudate nucleus receives blood from the perforating anterior choroidal artery.

The only organ system lacking a lymphatic system is the central nervous system, which was previously believed to lack lymphatic drainage completely. However, in the CNS, a glymphatic system removes waste from the CSF and allows it to drain to the periphery rather than a lymphatic system. One way by which this occurs is by aquaporin-4-mediated fluid movement and waste clearance. Aquaporin-4 expresses on astrocyte processes, and aquaporin-4 knockout mice have decreased ability to clear solutes.

# Physiologic Variants

Volumetric variations in the caudate nucleus have been linked to many neurologic and psychiatric disorders, as outlined in the clinical significance section. Normal, nonpathological differences in the caudate nucleus occur along the lines of age and genetic and environmental exposures. No gender differences in volumes of the caudate nucleus are typically detectable in healthy adults.

The caudate nucleus of those who speak multiple languages are larger than those who speak only one language, and the left caudate nucleus changes morphologically with multilingual expertise.

Patients with prenatal methamphetamine exposure can show reduced caudate nucleus volume. This change can be detected in the neonate and remain present in adulthood.

Polymorphisms in the DRD2.ANKK1 Taq1A gene can also influence caudate nucleus volume: those with the A allele have smaller caudate nucleus volumes at advanced ages than non-carriers, which are not detectable before old age.

# Surgical Considerations

The caudate nucleus lies near many vital deep brain structures, and caution is necessary during any surgical manipulation of the area. One surgery in the region of the caudate nucleus is the implantation of electrodes used for deep brain stimulation in the area. Deep brain stimulation in the ventral caudate nucleus is successful in the treatment of treatment-resistant obsessive-compulsive disorder and major depression, resulting in remission of depression and obsessive-compulsive symptoms around one year after implantation.

Lesions of the caudate nucleus, such as hemorrhages or strokes, can have widespread effects depending upon their extent and the potential involvement of other nearby tissues. The caudate nucleus is not a common site of hemorrhage, but patients with caudate nucleus hemorrhage present with symptoms suggestive of subarachnoid hemorrhages such as headache, emesis, and nuchal rigidity.

Caudate nucleus stroke presents with nonprogressive symptoms, which stabilize in severity less than one hour after onset.

# Clinical Significance

The caudate nucleus has implications in several neurocognitive impairments and dementia pathologies. The degree of dementia and neuropsychological performance in Parkinson’s disease has correlations to the degree of loss of dopaminergic neurons projecting to the caudate nucleus. While the putamen is more severely affected in Parkinson disease than the caudate nucleus, early deficits in working memory are tied to lower levels of caudate nucleus activity in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Similarly, the degree of caudate nucleus atrophy and caudate nucleus D2 receptor binding potentials of those with Huntington disease (a condition resulting in striatum atrophy) correlate with performance on executive tasks.

The caudate nucleus also implications in various psychiatric conditions, including multiple disorders involving impulse-control and hyperactivity. The activity of the caudate nucleus increases in the left head during manic states in bipolar disorder.

Other interesting clinical correlations include speech disturbances, chorea-acanthocytosis, and migraine with aura. Research shows that children who stutter have lower right caudate nucleus volume as compared to controls.