The mechanisms by which levetiracetam exerts its antiepileptic effects are not clearly defined. However, the most relevant mechanism of action is believed to be binding to a unique synaptic vesicle protein 2A (SV2A). SV2A protein is a part of secretory vesicle membranes that mediates calcium-dependent vesicular neurotransmitter release. The binding of levetiracetam to SV2A appears to decrease the rate of vesicle release.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption: Levetiracetam is rapidly absorbed and has very high (96%) bioavailability. Peak plasma concentration is achieved about an hour after oral administration. Food may delay the time to maximum concentration by about half an hour, but it does not affect the extent of absorption. The intravenous formulation is used when patients are unable to take oral medications. Peak plasma concentration is reached in 5 to 15 minutes with intravenous use. Otherwise, the pharmacokinetic profile is the same as an oral formulation.

Distribution: Levetiracetam is less than 10% protein-bound, so it does not compete with other drugs for protein binding sites. It is not extensively metabolized, and almost 66% is excreted unchanged by kidneys.

Metabolism: The main metabolic pathway is the enzymatic hydrolysis of the acetamide group. Metabolites have no pharmacological activity and are renally excreted. The hepatic cytochrome P450 system plays only a small part (2.5%).

Excretion: Glomerular filtration with partial tubular reabsorption is a major mechanism of excretion that correlates with creatinine clearance. The plasma half-life is about 6 to 8 hours in adults but can be increased by 2 to 3 hours in the elderly as the creatinine clearance decreases with age. Dose adjustment is necessary for patients with renal impairment. Pharmacokinetic interactions are fewer as levetiracetam is not metabolized by the liver and has no significant protein binding. Levetiracetam has linear pharmacokinetics over a dose range of 500 to 5000 mg, which means that serum concentration is proportional to the dose. A steady-state is achieved after two days of twice-daily dosing. Toxic and therapeutic concentrations are not defined, but measuring serum levels can help assess compliance.