The medial pterygoid nerve has been implicated in the temporomandibular joint syndrome and jaw pain. Excess stimulation of the nerve has also been shown to cause trismus. The pain of temporomandibular joint syndrome or trismus may receive therapy with muscle relaxants, analgesics, muscle stretches, or heat. The compression of the nerve to medial pterygoid can induce symptoms of neuropathy.

Fracture of the skull may lead to the unilateral lesion of the branchiomotor fibers supplying the muscles of mastication, which results in a flaccid paralysis with subsequent atrophy of the muscles of mastication of the ipsilateral side. Thus, the effect on the motor fibers to the medial pterygoid muscle via medial pterygoid nerve disrupts its normal functioning, impairing chewing on the lesion side due to muscle paralysis. Damage to the motor fibers that innervate the tensor tympani muscle results in hyperacusis and impaired hearing (particularly difficulty in hearing sounds that are low pitched) on the ipsilateral side.

Neoplastic and infectious processes of the infratemporal fossa can either arise from this area or spread to it from other areas. Symptoms experienced may include trismus and any manifestation of mandibular nerve compression such as paresis of masticatory muscles.

Extrinsic carcinomas or any lesion resulting in obstruction of the foramen ovale result in clinical consequences. Such patients may either present only with the sensation of an enlarged mass on the affected side of the face or may report with facial pain and signs of atrophy of the masticatory muscles.

Lesions in the cavernous sinus can also affect the trigeminal nerve and may lead to asymmetry of the jaw on opening or difficulty during mastication.