Patients usually present with shortness of breath, which may be acute in onset (from minutes to hours) or gradual in onset occurring over hours to days, depending upon the etiology of pulmonary edema.

Acute pulmonary edema will have

- Excessive shortness of breath worsening on exertion or lying down

- A feeling of the sinking of heart and drowning/anxiety worsening on lying down

- Gasping for breath

- Dizziness and excessive sweating

- A cough may be associated with worsening edema

- Blood tinged/pink colored frothy sputum in very severe disease

- Chest pain (myocardial infarction and aortic dissection)

- Cold, clammy skin

Chronic pulmonary edema will have:

- Shortness of breath on exertion

- Orthopnea

- Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea

- Swelling of the body/lower extremities

- Weight gain

- Fatigue

Ortner syndrome, which refers to hoarseness due to compression of recurrent laryngeal nerve because of an enlarged left atrium, may also be occasionally present in some patients.

**Physical Examination**

On examination, the positive findings include:

- 
General appearance

Confusion, agitation, and irritability may be present, associated with excessive sweating, cold extremities, and upright posture (sitting upright), cyanosis of the lips.

- JVP/JVD

Usually raised.

- 
Blood Pressure

Hypertension is more often present, but if hypotension prevails, it is an indicator of severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction, and cardiogenic shock must be ruled out. Cold extremities are a feature of low perfusion and shock.

- 
Respiratory Rate

Tachypnea is usually present, with the patient gasping for breath.

- 
Pulse

Tachycardia (increased heart/ pulse rate) and associated finding of the cause in the pulse.

- Pedal Edema

Usually co-exists with pulmonary edema in chronic heart failure.

- 
Respiratory Findings

Dyspnea and tachypnea are usually present, may be associated with the use of accessory muscles of respiration. Fine crackles are usually heard at the bases of lungs bilaterally, and progress apically as the edema worsens. Ronchi and wheeze may also be presenting signs.

- Cardiovascular Findings      

- Tachycardia and hypotension may be present along with jugular venous distention. Auscultation of the heart helps to differentiate between the various causes of valvular lesions causing pulmonary edema.
- Auscultation typically reveals an S3 gallop in volume overload states, which may be associated with accentuation of the pulmonic component of S2.
- Several different types of murmurs can be heard depending upon the cause of the valvular lesion.
- Mitral stenosis produces a low pitched, rumbling diastolic murmur associated with an opening snap at the apex which becomes accentuated on expiration and produces loud S1.
- Mitral regurgitation produces a blowing, high pitched pan-systolic murmur best heard at the apex, radiating to left axilla and accentuating on expiration, produces soft S1.
- Aortic stenosis produces a harsh crescendo-decrescendo ejection systolic murmur at the aortic area, increasing on expiration usually radiating towards the right side of the neck.
- Aortic regurgitation produces a high pitched blowing early diastolic murmur best heard during expiration heard of the aortic area.

- 
Gastrointestinal System

Tender hepatomegaly may be a feature in cases of right-sided cardiac failure, which may worsen to hepatic fibrosis and hepatic cirrhosis in chronic congestion. Ascites may sometimes be present.