There are no recommended empiric regimens towards preventing cardiac disease in pregnancy. Those who have a prior history of cardiac disease should merit increased vigilance, and these individuals should continue their prior regimen. If such regimens contain teratogenic drugs, a qualified provider should substitute these medications. Treatment modalities for cardiac disease of pregnancy vary based upon the disease process occurring and required an individualized approach. The following discusses some common cardiac disorders and their appropriate recommended treatment regimens:

- Ventricular dysfunction of pregnancy: Many females enter pregnancy with previous heart failure. These individuals may be aware or unaware of these before pregnancy based upon the level of function. The physiologic changes of pregnancy can prove challenging for these patients to compensate. By the time these physiologic changes of pregnancy (increased heart rate, increased circulating volume) are in full effect in the second trimester, these pregnant patients may experience a severe exacerbation of their underlying disease. Besides angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers, other medications used to treat heart failure can be resumed. ACE’s and ARB’s which are often a mainstay of treatment in heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, are known to be teratogenic with reported effects of renal dysplasia, renal failure, oligohydramnios, and intrauterine growth retardation.

- Peripartum cardiomyopathy is a dilated cardiomyopathy that presents in the last 4 weeks of pregnancy or up to 5 months postpartum will require a similar treatment regimen to those with ventricular dysfunction of pregnancy.

- Mitral stenosis: The obstructive nature of mitral stenosis results in high morbidity and mortality in pregnant patients.

- Aortic stenosis: Although aortic stenosis in pregnancy is less common, it is often more challenging to treat. Just as in aortic stenosis in non-pregnant individuals, there are no medications that reverse the disease or are mainstays of treatment. Beta-blockers are not as effective as they are mitral stenosis in reducing trans-valvular gradient. Ace inhibitors are contraindicated in pregnant patients. Diuretic therapy necessitates caution because of the potential of reduced diastolic filling and further diminished cardiac output.

- Tachyarrhythmias: Tachyarrhythmias require treatment on an individualized basis. However, drugs that appear to be safe to use in pregnant women with tachyarrhythmias include adenosine, verapamil, digoxin, flecainide, and beta-blockers.

- Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection (SCAD): This is an atypical cause of acute MI. Its incidence, however, increases in pregnant women. Spontaneous coronary artery dissection should be considered in any pregnant female presenting with symptoms consistent with acute coronary syndrome.

- Acute coronary syndrome: ACS and MI are uncommon in pregnant women; however, given the increasing average age of that women are becoming pregnant, it is becoming more common. Advanced age allows the risk factors towards developing ACS to develop. These risk factors include diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension. Exposure to fluoroscopy for a pregnant mother is not ideal; however, given the high mortality with acute coronary syndromes, PCI should be attempted with a lead covering the mother. Thrombolysis is also an option; however, it must be administered under close monitoring, given the documented reports of maternal hemorrhage, spontaneous abortion, subchorionic hematomas, and uterine bleeding.
- Morphine (Risk Category C)
- Beta-blockers(Category B: metoprolol; Category C: atenolol)
- Calcium channel blockers: (Category C)
- Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) (Category C in the first trimester and Category D in the second and third trimester)
- Statins (Risk Category X)
- Unfractionated heparin (Category C)
- Low-molecular-weight heparin ( Category B)
- Aspirin (Category C)
- Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (Category B: eptifibatide, tirofiban;  Category C: abciximab)

- Those who present with blood pressure greater than 160/100 should receive antihypertensive therapy with close monitoring in the clinic or even in the hospital-based on severity. 
- Methyldopa (oral)
- Labetalol (oral/IV)
- Nifedipine (oral)
- Hydralazine (oral/IV)
- Nicardipine (IV