Although the term "CHRPE" exclusively suggests hypertrophic cellular changes, histological analysis shows various morphologic cellular changes of CHRPE and its variants.

RPE cells in typical CHRPEs exhibit various degrees of cellular hypertrophy (increase in cell size) – normal, cuboidal RPE cells are vertically elongated and columnar in shape. Multiple studies, however, have found that cells also undergo hyperplasia (increase in cell number), resulting in thickening of the RPE layer. These changes disrupt the ability of the RPE to support the overlying photoreceptors, resulting in cell loss and thinning. Without photoreceptors, there is no production of lipofuscin - waste products secondary to the normal RPE-mediated phagocytosis of photoreceptor outer segments.

Areas of atrophy, known as lacunae, may also occur throughout the lesion and correlate with depigmented funduscopic appearance. Compared to normal cuboidal RPE cells, affected RPE cells are vertically elongated and range from cuboidal to columnar in shape. They possess large, spherical intracytoplasmic melanin granules in much higher density than normal RPE cells. The adjacent Bruch's membrane is thickened.

As opposed to its solitary counterpart, GPR has been found to contain histologically normal cells, with no difference in cell size or density compared to normal RPE cells. Instead, its hyperpigmented appearance results from the increased density of melanin granules, which are large and ellipsoid in shape. Bruch's membrane is normal in these cases.

Lastly,****PO-FLs have been shown to be histologically similar to typical lesions, with both hypertrophic and hyperplastic RPE cells and thickening of the adjacent Bruch's membrane.