In 1997, a significant milestone was established in health care delivery for children in the United States of America. The United States Congress made a special provision in the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. The Act established the State Children Health Insurance Program (CHIP), which is Title XXI of the Social Security Act.

This legislation was deemed at the time as the single most important investment in children’s health care. The Children Health Insurance Program (CHIP) does not provide universal health coverage for every child, but rather it opened up insurance coverage for a large pool of uninsured children.

The program by Title XXI of the Social Security Act provides over forty billion dollars available as federal grants to states over ten years.

To be eligible to get the federal fund, individual states must contribute a specified amount to the fund.

The State Children's Health Insurance Program SCHIP sets forth methodologies and rules on funding for individual states, commonwealths, and territories for each federal fiscal year (FFY) under title XXI of the Social Security Act.

The rule specifies that the process grant application, allotment, and payment by the Federal Government for expenditures under the State Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) and other Medicaid program individual state allotment has as its basis a statutory formula that divides the total available appropriation among all states who have approved child health plans.

The program was established after the comprehensive health care reform proposed by the then president Bill Clinton failed. The late Massachusetts Senator Ted Kennedy and Senator Orin Grant Hatch were co-sponsors of the bill with significant support from Hillary Clinton.

President George Bush vetoed two attempts to expand the program further. He argued that effort at expansion would "steer the program away from its core purpose of providing insurance for poor children and toward covering children from middle-class families."

In Nov 2008, Barak Obama was elected as the 44th President of the United States. In 2009, he signed the Children's Health Insurance Reauthorization Act of 2009 into law. This law provided health care coverage for an additional 4 million children and pregnant women, including ‘lawfully residing immigrant’ pregnant with no waiting period. It received further extensions under provisions within the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010.

The provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 provided:

- Review the key features of CHIP as it has evolved over 15 years

- Summarize the effect of CHIP on participants in terms

- Coverage

- Access

- Disparity

- Health status

- Identified the challenges still faced in providing coverage for uninsured children

- Offer recommendations on ways to expand and strengthen the program to provide health insurance coverage to vulnerable children regardless of the means to pay

As of February 2018, the CHIP has been authorized to continue until 2027.