It is worth mentioning that there is no pharmacological intervention for an overdose of inhaled anesthetics. In an overdose incident, the primary treatment method is supportive, with optimal ventilator settings and alveolar clearance. Several rare acute and chronic toxicities can occur with inhaled agents. Acute toxicities include carbon monoxide poisoning (CO2), nephrotoxicity, and hepatotoxicity. Chronic toxicities include hematotoxicity, teratogenic effects, and carcinogenic toxicities.

The dose of Nitrous Oxide necessary used in a routine anesthetic can cause diffusion hypoxia. As gas exits the bloodstream into the lungs, the nitrous oxide displaces air and oxygen from the alveoli. This can be ameliorated by using supplemental oxygen to displace and dilute the nitrous oxide.

Hepatotoxicity and hepatic failure is rare but has associations with patients who have suffered exposure to halothane.

Nephrotoxicity occurs most commonly with sevoflurane as its metabolism occurs at a much faster rate than other gases. This faster rate of absorption causes high levels of inorganic fluoride, which correlates with renal impairment. While this observation has largely occurred in research studies, the clinical recommendation remains to avoid sevoflurane in patients who have known renal dysfunction.

Carbon monoxide toxicity with inhaled anesthetics occurs most commonly with desflurane as it is the largest producer of CO.

Hematotoxicity is a chronic complication that can occur with prolonged exposure to nitrous oxide; this is due to a reduction in the recycling of vitamin B12.

Halothane produces a decrease in cardiac output with increasing dosage. Care should be taken using this anesthetic with patients known to have a low cardiac ejection fraction.

Neurologic and carcinogenic complications from volatile anesthetics or the choice of the anesthetic technique have not been reliably reproduced in human studies in randomized controlled studies.

Increasing awareness has been growing regarding chlorofluorocarbon waste from volatile anesthetic gases as a source of pollution. Their impact on the environment, and costs and benefits of volatile anesthetics, and their alternatives will continue to be a topic of debate for the foreseeable future.