Classification of vestibular dysfunction as peripheral or central is the first step to narrowing the differential diagnosis. Central nervous system etiologies should be considered when patients present with vertigo and dizziness, where the examination shows a pattern of nystagmus that is persistently vertical or purely torsional and does not change with repositioning or visual fixation. A history of neurological disorders or symptoms or risk factors for stroke also shifts the balance of probability in favor of a central etiology of the vertigo. Common examples of CNS pathology include cerebellar, brainstem or medulla infarction, cerebellar tumor, Chiari malformation, multiple sclerosis, vestibular migraine, mal de debarquement syndrome, and degenerative ataxia disorders, such as Parkinson disease.

Peripheral vestibular dysfunction should be suspected in the presence of nystagmus that is responsive to repositioning maneuvers, particularly when it is horizontally oriented. The most common conditions to consider are BPPV, Ménière disease, vestibular neuritis, and labyrinthitis. Other less common causes include cerebellopontine angle tumors, such as acoustic neuromas, perilymphatic fistula, semicircular canal dehiscence, vestibular paroxysmia, Cogan syndrome, vestibulotoxic medications, and otitis media. Associated symptoms and timing will help to differentiate clinical entities. When accompanied by hearing loss, vertigo may be due to Ménière disease, Cogan syndrome, or ototoxic medications, but tinnitus and pressure would indicate Ménière disease, vision loss would suggest Cogan syndrome, and a history of aminoglycoside administration or another drug would point towards toxicity. Similarly, vertigo triggered by pressure changes would raise suspicion for a third window effect, such as perilymphatic fistula or semicircular canal dehiscence; these conditions are often accompanied by increased sensitivity to conducted sounds, such as their own voices, footfalls when walking, and even the sounds of their eyes moving in their orbits with gaze changes.

In patients without true vertigo, lightheadedness or unsteadiness may be described as "dizzyness" without being caused by either a peripheral vestibulopathy or central nervous system pathology. Common etiologies of lightheadedness include hypotension, particularly orthostatic, diabetes (due to peripheral neuropathy or hypoglycemia), dehydration, anxiety, and cardiovascular diseases, such as aortic stenosis or cardiomyopathy. When considered altogether, the differential diagnosis for dizzyness is incredibly broad and far exceeds the scope of practice of any single clinical specialty.