# Introduction

The corticospinal tract, AKA, the pyramidal tract, is the major neuronal pathway providing voluntary motor function. This tract connects the cortex to the spinal cord to enable movement of the distal extremities.

# Structure and Function

The corticospinal tract originates primarily from the frontoparietal cortices, including the primary motor cortex, secondary motor area, and somatosensory cortex.

After leaving the brainstem and entering the spinal cord, the fibers run down through the anterior and lateral corticospinal tract. When they get to their target level, the fibers of the anterior corticospinal tract decussate through the anterior white commissure before synapsing to a neuron in the anterior horn of the gray matter. The lateral corticospinal tract fibers have previously decussated at the level of the pyramid and synapse at a neuron on the anterior horn when they get to the appropriate level. These neurons, known as anterior horn cells, then project to the limbs and axial muscles to provide voluntary motor function.

# Embryology

During embryologic development, there is an overgrowth of axons distributed throughout the cortex, which incorporate into the corticospinal tract, and as development progresses, many of these axons are eliminated. Gray matter development begins a few weeks after the corticospinal tract axons reach the spinal cord. As growth continues, the corticospinal tract axons will reach the lower part of the cervical spinal cord by 24 weeks gestation.

# Physiologic Variants

Due to the complex nature of the corticospinal tract, many physiologic variants exist. The collateral pathway known as the aberrant pyramidal tract has been observed in some patients as traveling through the medial lemniscus from the midbrain to the pons until it reached the medulla where it rejoined the corticospinal tract.

# Clinical Significance

Knowledge of the corticospinal tract is of the utmost importance in many clinical scenarios. Preservation and recovery of the corticospinal tract are necessary for the recovery of impaired motor function following a brain injury.

Damage to the corticospinal tract has correlations with neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and multiple sclerosis (MS). Both autoimmune diseases involve an inflammatory process that causes extensive damage to neurologic structures involved in the corticospinal tract resulting in extensive neurologic disability, including optic neuritis and transverse myelitis.

Compromise of the corticospinal tract during development presents may present as a tract that is completely absent, hypoplastic, or malformed. Disorders with the absence of corticospinal tracts include anencephaly, where there is a failure of the rostral neural tube to close; congenital aqueduct stenosis with a narrowing of the cerebral aqueduct; and microcephaly, which is a defect in proliferation. Underdeveloped corticospinal tracts present in lissencephaly, a defect in migration leading to absent gyration, Walker-Warburg syndrome, migration deficiencies yielding cerebro-ocular dysplasia with muscular atrophy; holoprosencephaly, and the failure of the brain hemispheres to separate. Corticospinal tract malformations usually involve diffuse brain malformation and are most often associated with an abnormal trajectory of the pathway.