The important differential diagnoses of multifocal motor neuropathy are ALS, CIDP, and hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP). The other diagnoses that can be considered are radiculopathy, entrapment neuropathies, mononeuritis multiplex, hereditary motor neuropathies, porphyria, and lead intoxication.

**1. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis**

Both ALS and MMN present with progressive pure motor weakness, but the progression is typically slow in MMNCB as compared to ALS. Further, the absence of upper motor neuron findings as well as sparing of respiratory and cranial muscles differentiate MMN from ALS.

The muscle weakness in MMN typically is in the distribution of motor nerves and does not follow myotomes, as explained above. Muscle atrophy is less marked early in the disease. Electrodiagnostic studies reveal a demyelinating pattern with conduction blocks.

In ALS, the entire myotome is usually affected at the same time. Muscle atrophy and fasciculation are prominent. Split hand sign may be present and is typical for ALS. Pseudobulbar affect may be present. Nerve conduction studies are normal. Needle EMG may reveal signs of denervation.

**2. Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy**

CIDP presents with chronic muscle weakness with reduced or absent deep tendon reflexes, and conduction block may be present on electrodiagnostic studies, but the muscle weakness in CIDP is often symmetrical, and legs are affected more than the arms. Sensory involvement is common in CIDP (unlike MMN), but purely motor variants of CIDP are also uncommonly encountered, making it difficult to differentiate from MMN. In CIDP, CSF studies reveal raised protein and marked cytoalbuminologic dissociation. Anti-GM1 antibodies are often absent. The patients with CIDP also respond favorably to corticosteroids and plasmapheresis.

Multifocal acquired demyelinating sensory and motor neuropathy (MADSAM) is an uncommon CIDP variant that affects single nerves and resembles MMN. However, marked sensory signs and symptoms, as well as electrodiagnostic studies revealing the involvement of sensory nerves in MADSAM, distinguish it from MMN.

**3. Hereditary Neuropathy with Liability to Pressure Palsies**

HNPP presents with asymmetric motor weakness in the distribution of multiple motor nerves and the presence of conduction block on electrodiagnostic studies, but the conduction blocks are typically at known nerve entrapment sites (e.g., the median nerve at the wrist and ulnar nerve at the elbow). Further, the sensory symptoms are prominent in HNPP. Affected persons often have a positive family history as it is inherited as an autosomal dominant condition. HNPP occurs due to the deletion of peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP-22) gene and can be confirmed by genetic tested. Treatment is supportive, and most patients recover spontaneously.