During the third week of development, the trilaminar embryonic disc is formed. Three layers, the endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm, are differentiated. The notochord is formed from mesoderm, and the overlying ectoderm becomes the neural plate. During the fourth week, the upper and lower limb buds begin to form. Muscle, bone, blood vessels, and lymphatics are all formed from the mesoderm, while the peripheral nerves are differentiated neural crest cells.

Thirty bones in total make up the structure of the upper extremity. They act as a framework for the muscle, blood vessels, nerves and lymphatics to work upon. There is one bone in the upper arm region, the humerus. The forearm contains two bones, the radius and the ulna. When picturing the upper extremity in a standard anatomical position with the palm of the hand facing forward, the radius is located laterally and the ulna medially. However, because the forearm allows rotation around a central axis, the terms radial and ulnar provide a better description when describing direction or location in the forearm, wrist, and hand. The wrist and hand contain 27 bones. There are eight carpal bones, organized into a proximal and distal row. The proximal bones, from radial (thumb side) to ulnar are the scaphoid (navicular), lunate, triquetrum, and pisiform. From radial to ulnar, the distal row consists of the trapezium, trapezoid, capitate, and hamate.  There are five metacarpal bones, each associated with a group of phalanges. There are also 14 phalanx bones. Fingers two to five have a proximal, intermediate, and distal phalanx, while the thumb has only a proximal and distal phalanx. Although many bony injuries can result, the most clinically significant are injuries to the humerus and scaphoid bones. Injuries at the neck of the humerus can result in axillary nerve injury. Midshaft fractures will damage the radial nerve, and supracondylar fractures can damage the median nerve (a common mnemonic is "ARM"). Another common clinical pathology is an injury to the scaphoid. Not only is it the most commonly injured carpal bone, but it also is a common site of avascular necrosis due to its retrograde blood supply. This commonly occurs in fall on an outstretched hand (FOOSH) injuries.