Multiple organ systems are involved in producing blood and regulating blood volume. These systems communicate with one another to optimally control blood volume.

The renal system, and more specifically the kidney, is primarily responsible for regulating blood volume. The kidney's primary function is to modify the solutes and water content of the blood through filtration, reabsorption, and secretion. As blood passes through the glomerulus of the kidney, solutes, and water are filtered out depending on a variety of signaling molecules. Then, as the filtrate passes through the tubules, some of the filtrates are reabsorbed along with water. The amount of water and solute reabsorbed is what primarily regulates blood volume. If blood volume is too low, more filtrate reabsorbs; if blood volume is too high, less filtrate reabsorbs. The kidney is also responsible for the secretion of erythropoietin. Erythropoietin is the protein that signals the bone marrow to produce red blood cells. Therefore, the kidney is responsible for both the regulation and partial production of blood volume.

While blood is a component of the cardiovascular system, this system is hardly responsible for its regulation. Instead, the cardiovascular system maintains arterial pressure for the adequate perfusion of all bodily tissues. This system detects changes in blood volume and reflects it through increasing or decreasing arterial pressure. Reduced blood volume leads to collapsing vessels, reduced pressure, and subsequently reduced perfusion pressure. The cardiovascular system combats low blood volume by constricting blood vessels until the body reaches a blood pressure that restores proper perfusion pressure. Blood volume and blood pressure are interconnected through the renal and circulatory system, specifically the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS).

As mentioned earlier, the skeletal system is responsible for producing blood cells that comprise blood volume. When signaled by erythropoietin, the bone marrow creates erythrocytes which are eventually released into circulation. Leukocytes, which form a small portion of total blood volume, are also produced by the bone marrow when stimulated by colony-stimulating factors released from mature leukocytes. Lastly, the nervous system aids in regulating blood volume by interacting with all three other systems. It is responsible for some of the stimulus at the level of the glomerulus and the constriction of blood vessels through sympathetic nerve activity.