Nurses play a critical role in the healthcare team regarding cochlear implants. Whether a preoperative nurse, an intraoperative nurse or post-operative nurse, there are numerous tasks where nurses play a vital role. Preoperatively, nurses play a crucial role in prepping the patient for surgery. A basic review of the patient's history should be obtained in addition to vitals. If there are any red flags to surgery such as recent ear infections, concerns for an unstable patient (heart attack, stroke), change in medical history, or abnormal vitals, then the surgeon should be updated promptly. Patients must be healthy enough to withstand surgery for cochlear implants to be successful.

Intraoperatively, nurses help set up the patient and prepare the room with the necessary equipment. Every surgeon will have a different preference in how they approach cochlear implant surgery. Communication is key between the surgeon and the nursing staff. Having a general knowledge of otologic instruments can save the surgeon a lot of time and make the surgery more efficient, which is especially crucial for young children undergoing anesthesia. Nurses need to know the general steps of surgery and the necessary equipment to have ready for the surgeon.

Postoperatively, nurses will monitor patients. Appropriately attending to the patient's needs is imperative, in addition to gathering accurate vitals. It is essential to monitor the patient's alertness, change the mastoid dressing as instructed, and monitor for any bleeding or purulent drainage from the incision site, and to update the surgical team with any concerns. Typically, after a cochlear implant patient will have mild to moderate pain, experience dizziness, be sleepy from anesthesia (and possibly nauseation), and may have constipation due to pain medications. It is abnormal to have facial weakness, a sudden change in mental status, bleeding that soaks through a mastoid dressing, severe pain not controlled with opioids, or abnormal vitals. These concerns mandate updating the surgical team for evaluation.

The nursing staff is critical in successful cochlear implant surgery.