**Preparation**

**Interfacility**

In addition to utilizing pre-arranged agreements and obtaining acceptance from a receiving physician, the most important preparation step for interfacility transfers is adequately stabilizing the patient. This should include performing any invasive procedures that the patient needs immediately or could be anticipated to need during the transfer. As mentioned earlier, it can be difficult to perform many procedures after the helicopter lifts off. Airplanes are typically less restricted in this manner but will often have multiple transfers that take a significant amount of time, meaning the sending provider must anticipate farther into the future. Providing an accurate weight and anticipated needs (ventilator, the number of drips, the presence of a family member, among others) can be very helpful to the incoming flight crew.

**Scene
**

The most important steps of scene preparation for flight operations are choosing a safe landing zone and communicating the location of any hazards that may present a danger to the aircraft. These situations generally involve HEMS, as most airplanes require a dedicated landing strip. Recommendations for landing zones include a minimum 100 feet by 100 feet flat area that can be secured and avoids flying debris from rotor wash. Minimizing and communicating hazards such as overhead power lines, trees, cell towers, and cranes, and direct radio communication between the pilot and landing zone team are paramount to crew safety. Ideally, GPS coordinates should be supplied. Additional helpful information includes patient weight, type of call, need for specialty resources, and how the landing zone will be marked. Again, it is ideal to have pre-established landing zones, even for scene flights. The use of a hospital landing pad as a rendezvous point for ground and air EMS units is a legitimate strategy for maximizing flight safety and does not trigger EMTALA unless the patient or EMS crew specifically asks for hospital assistance. In those instances, the hospital staff should be instructed to stay clear of the area and not interfere with the patient transfer unless asked to assist.

In the event that multiple aircraft are requested to a scene (or to a hospital), all agencies must be explicitly told of all other responding aircraft to help prevent a mid-air collision. Most localities have no air-traffic controller responsible for medical aircraft, and the pilots need to know to communicate with each other to avoid disaster.

**Medical Direction**

Aeromedical transportation services in the United States require physician medical direction. These doctors are responsible for supervising all aspects of the medical care provided by the medical crew and must have final authority over all clinical aspects of care. Most medical directors have a background in emergency medicine, though this is not always necessary. The requirements for medical directors vary based on state regulations and organizational policies. The NAEMSP position statement on the topic has over 30 recommendations regarding requisite knowledge and duties of medical directors for flight programs. The recommendations include knowledge of applicable laws, ground EMS, advanced resuscitation, effects of altitude, safety, dispatching, disaster management, and adult education. The medical director should approve all operational protocols, safety procedures, and biomedical equipment in addition to participating in the initial and continuing education of all air medical personnel.

Physician presence as part of the flight crew is relatively rare in the United States but is often the standard internationally. These physicians can offer real-time medical direction in addition to an expanded skill set. For crews without a flight physician, real-time medical direction can be challenging as communication via cell phones is often prohibited in flight, making protocols and training even more important.

Aeromedical programs are charged with providing regional education regarding indications for flight requests, landing zone preparation, aircraft safety, and other perceived needs. Programs should also participate in regional trauma and medical care groups and track statistics regarding outcomes and overtriage rates. Proactive integration into EMS systems of care is highly encouraged. The medical director plays a key role in forging and maintaining these various relationships.

**Efficacy/Outcomes**

There is limited evidence regarding the outcomes of aeromedical versus ground transport. It would be difficult, perhaps impossible, to conduct randomized controlled trials comparing air and ground EMS care. As a result, most studies are retrospective and suffer from significant selection bias. Many studies do demonstrate higher skill success for aeromedical crews, especially with advanced airways and RSI. Research that examines patient-oriented outcomes is rare. However, there is a trend towards morbidity and mortality benefit of HEMS in time-critical trauma cases. It is generally accepted that there are many patients who are not sick enough or are too sick and cannot benefit from aeromedical transportation. Thus, the exact benefit of air transportation remains largely undefined.