Itraconazole can be administered intravenously (10 mg/mL), in a capsule (100 mg), or as an oral solution (10 mg/mL) that allows administering the drug in the inpatient or outpatient setting. The absorption of the itraconazole via the capsule is highly variable—this variability results from intestinal epithelial damage and varying gastric acid environments from person to person. However, the newer formulations of the drug, intravenous and oral solutions, which contain hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin, have shown better absorption and bioavailability.

Dosing by indication (FDA-approved) is as follows:

- **Onychomycosis of the Fingernails**
- 200 mg orally twice daily (capsules) for seven days, followed by 21 days off. Give two courses for immunocompromised patients.

- **Fungal Infections**
- 200 mg by mouth daily or twice daily (capsules); start 200 mg twice daily for three days in life-threatening infections. The maximum dose is 600 mg daily. Divide doses over 200 mg daily; give with food.

- **Onychomycosis of the Toenails**
- 200 mg orally (capsules) each day for 12 weeks

- **Candidiasis**
- Oropharyngeal: 20 mL orally for one to two weeks; swish and swallow. Alternately, dose 10 mL orally twice daily for 2 to 4 weeks.
- Esophageal: 20 mL orally twice daily for 14 to 21 days.

- **Blastomycosis**
- 200 mg orally daily (capsules); maximum dose 400 mg per day. Pulmonary and extrapulmonary disease can increase dosing by 100 mg increments if there is no therapeutic response; divide doses above 200 mg daily. The maximum dose is 600 mg daily.

- **Histoplasmosis**
- 200 mg orally daily (capsules), maximum dosage of 400 mg per day. Can increase dosing by 100 mg increments if there is no therapeutic response; divide doses above 200 mg daily.

- **Invasive Aspergillosis**
- 20 mL orally every 12 hours; alternatively, 200 to 400 mg daily (capsules) - give the patient the oral solution without food and the capsules with food; divide doses above 200 mg daily.

Off-label indications and dosing:

- **Mycoses, superficial:**100 mg orally daily or twice daily Maximum dose 600 mg per day; divide doses above 200 mg.

- **Coccidioidomycosis:**200 mg every 12 hours.

- **Cutaneous or lymphocutaneous sporotrichosis:**200 mg daily by mouth; can be increased to 200 mg twice daily - continue therapy until two to four weeks after the resolution of lesions. The oral solution preparation is preferable.

The capsules and the oral solution are not bioequivalent; the oral solution has higher bioavailability, so caution is advised when switching between formulations.

Renal dosing: CrCl under 10; reduce dose by 50%. In peritoneal and hemodialysis patients, dosing is 100 mg every 12 to 24 hours, with no supplement.

Hepatic dosing is undefined, but clinicians should exercise caution.