Serum TSH level is used to screen for primary hypothyroidism in most patients. In overt hypothyroidism, TSH levels are elevated, and free T4 levels are low. In subclinical hypothyroidism, TSH levels are elevated, and free T4 levels are normal.

Central hypothyroidism is of pituitary or hypothalamic origin. TSH produced can be biologically inactive and can affect the levels of bioactive TSH, hence the diagnosis of central hypothyroidism should be based on free T4 rather than TSH.

Labs should include evaluation for autoimmune thyroid diseases with levels of anti-thyroid antibodies such as the thyroid peroxidase antibodies.

Patients with subclinical hypothyroidism and thyroid peroxidase antibody positivity have a greater risk of developing overt hypothyroidism

Hospitalized patients should undergo TSH testing only when thyroid dysfunction is suspected.

Laboratory workup may reveal hyperlipidemia, elevated serum CK, elevated hepatic enzymes, and anemia.

Imaging studies (ultrasound) of the neck are not routinely recommended for hypothyroidism.

**Screening for Hypothyroidism**

While there are no universal guidelines on screening the public for thyroid disease, the American Thyroid Association recommends that screening should commence at the age of 35 and should continue every five years. Individuals at high risk for hypothyroidism include the following:

- Women over the age of 60

- Pregnancy

- Patients with a prior history of head and neck irradiation

- Patients with autoimmune disorders and/or type 1 diabetes

- Positive thyroid peroxidase antibodies

- Family history