Alpha-blockers produce their pharmacological effects through alteration of the sympathetic nervous system.

There are two types of alpha-adrenergic receptors: alpha-1 and alpha-2. Most of the alpha-1 adrenergic receptors are located on the vascular smooth muscle (in the skin, sphincters of the gastrointestinal system, kidney, and brain) and cause vasoconstriction when activated by catecholamines such as epinephrine and norepinephrine (NE). The vasoconstriction causes an increase in both systemic arterial blood pressure and peripheral resistance. Norepinephrine has a higher affinity for this receptor than epinephrine. Alpha-2 adrenergic receptors are located on peripheral nerve endings and inhibit the release of NE when activated; this provides a feedback mechanism for NE to inhibit its release.

Nonselective alpha-adrenergic antagonists cause vasodilation by blocking both alpha-1 and alpha-2 receptors. The blockage of alpha-2 receptors will increase the NE release, which will reduce the force of the vasodilation induced by the blockade of the alpha-1 receptors. These medications work best when there is increased sympathetic activity such as during stress or when there is an increase in circulating catecholamines, making these medications useful for patients with pheochromocytoma.

Selective alpha-1 adrenergic antagonists cause vasodilation by preventing NE from activating the alpha-1 receptor, resulting in a lowering of the blood pressure, allowing alpha-1 blockers to be used for hypertension. Alpha-1 blockers also cause relaxation of smooth muscle in the prostate, which can enable the urine to flow more freely thru the urethra, making the medications useful for the management of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).

Selective alpha-2 adrenergic antagonists inhibit negative feedback of NE, stimulating the sympathetic nervous system. However, there are limited findings on the significance of this mechanism of action in human medicine.