The major contraindication to the use of rufinamide is familial short QT syndrome. As discussed above, rufinamide was associated with significant ventricular arrhythmia, including cardiac death in patients with a history of short QT syndrome. Other contraindications include hypersensitivity to the drug or any components of the formulation.

Minor contraindications include concomitant use of rufinamide with other potential drugs that shorten QT interval and the presence or history of the short QT interval; therefore, the recommendation is to check the QT interval in these patient populations routinely. Other contraindications include hypersensitivity to rufinamide and/or triazole derivatives.

Warnings /precautions include central nervous system (CNS) effects, including cognitive and coordination dysfunction. Therefore, caution is necessary regarding participating in tasks that require mental alertness. Other warnings/precautions include multi-organ hypersensitivity reactions (like DRESS as discussed above), dermatological reactions such as Steven Johnson syndrome (SJS), leukopenia, and suicidal ideation.

Hepatic impairment: Rufinamide is not recommended for use in severe hepatic impairment; however, caution is advised in mild to moderate hepatic impairment.

Rufinamide is a Pregnancy Category C drug, so clinicians need to weigh the risk vs. benefit of using rufinamide during pregnancy; it is likely to be excreted in human milk. However, there is no contraindication to breastfeeding with rufinamide use.