Osteoclasts serve a vital role in bone metabolism and turnover, being the cells responsible for bone resorption. As a result, they have two essential functions: maintaining strong and healthy bone architecture and maintaining normal plasma calcium levels.

- Osteoclast Formation and Osteoclast Migration

- Mononuclear osteoclast progenitors express receptor activator nuclear factor-kB (RANK), which interacts with receptor activator nuclear factor-kB ligand (RANKL) on osteoblasts and stromal cell stems, to cause the differentiation and formation of osteoclasts (known as osteoclastogenesis), with the help of the expression of macrophage-colony stimulating factor (m-CSF) by osteoblasts and stromal cell smells. Additionally, mononuclear osteoclast precursors have dendritic cell-specific transmembrane protein (DC-STAMP), which helps them fuse to form osteoclasts. Osteoclast stimulatory transmembrane protein (OC-STAMP) also plays a role in precursor fusion, but its impact on fusion is not as much as DC-STAMP.
- Osteoclasts are theorized to migrate to the bone matrix via chemoattractants such as osteocalcin, type I collagen peptides (such as alpha-2-HS glycoprotein), and stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1), which are all produced by osteoblasts. Additionally, it has been hypothesized that living osteocytes in the bone matrix inhibit bone resorption.

- Bone Mineral Attachment and Formation of the Actin-Ring and Sealing Zone

- For resorption to occur in a precise and efficient manner, osteoclasts create a sealed microenvironment over the area which needs to be resorbed, preventing the leakage of any osteolytic proteins or ions. Osteoclasts attach to the bone matrix via integrin alpha-V-beta-3, which activates the non-receptor tyrosine kinase (NRTK) c-Src. Activation of the c-Src leads to a cascade that results in the polymerization of F-actin in a circular fashion, which forms the actin-ring that has small actin processes called podosomes. The podosomes directly attach to the bone matrix and create the sealing zone, within which bone resorption takes place.

- Ruffled Border Formation

- The ruffled border of an osteoclast is the folded membrane facing the side of the sealed zone. Since it faces the sealed zone, it plays a vital role in bone resorption. The ruffled border has a high concentration of vesicles, which help acidify and secrete enzymes into the microenvironment formed by the sealed zone. The NRTK c-Src helps form the ruffled border through mediating trafficking of those vesicles.

- Release of Collagenolytic Enzymes and Degradation of the Bone Matrix

- Once all of the structures that form the microenvironment are assembled, then a proton pump-ATPase, coupled with a chloride ion channel, pumps protons and chloride ions into the microenvironment. They combine to form HCl, which dissolves the solid mineral hydroxyapatite [Ca(PO)]Ca(OH) into its constituent ions, degrading the mineral component of the bone matrix. The organic component of the bone matrix, especially type I collagen (the most abundant protein in the extracellular matrix (ECM)), is mainly degraded by cathepsin K. Additionally, cathepsin B, D, and L are also proteinases that degrade the organic bone matrix, but their effect is not as prominent as cathepsin K. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), especially MMP-9, are enzymes that degrade the ECM proteins of bone as well.

- Disposal of Resorptive Byproducts

- The byproducts of resorption are endocytosed from the resorption microenvironment into the osteoclast. The endocytic vesicles fuse to the functional secretory domain (FSD), which is a part of the plasma membrane that is separate from the ruffled border, and the materials are released into the extracellular space. This process is called transcytosis. This results in the increase of plasma calcium levels (from the breakdown of hydroxyapatite), which is essential for many bodily functions.

Upon completion of those five steps, the osteoclast detaches from the bone matrix and finds another spot to perform bone resorption, or it undergoes apoptosis.