The design of the flap depends on the location of the tissue defect and the donor site. It is necessary to anticipate the location of the pivot point and the required length of the flap pedicle. The flap surface should generally be larger than the tissue defect to avoid tension and necrosis of the distal end of the flap.

The incision is carried right through the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and fascia. The dissection of the subfascial plane to the muscle is more accessible than a dissection of the suprafascial planes, which should be protected to avoid damage of the perforating vessels running to the skin. It is not necessary to identify the perforating vessels to raise the flap. The retrograde dissection is done according to the length needed from the pedicle.

The skin surrounding the defect is excised, and tile edges of the wound undermined. The fasciocutaneous flap is then rotated or placed into position, and the fascia is sutured beneath the undermined skin. Only a few tacking sutures are needed to keep the flap in place: fine sutures are used to coapt the skin edges. When rotating huge flaps, a "dog's ear" is unavoidable and should be left for correction later. The secondary defect can be covered immediately with a split skin graft. However, the surface is usually irregular, and it's preferable to wait for granulation tissue. The area is bandaged with moderate pressure, and if possible, the distal part of the flap is left open for inspection. If bleeding is troublesome continuous suction drainage can be used for 24 hours or more.