Electrodiagnostic studies can play a vital and ancillary role in the diagnosis and prognosis of AIDP.

**Nerve conduction studies (NCS)**can help to evaluate large myelinated sensory and motor fibers. Small myelinated fibers in the autonomic and spinothalamic tracts need specialized studies for neuropathy evaluation. The NCS will not pick these up (e.g., quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test-QSART, useful to diagnose type II diabetes mellitus polyneuropathy). NCS should be performed in ideal conditions, including room temperature, as it can affect measurements such as latency, duration, and amplitude. NCS is an electrodiagnostic study that measures the summated actions potentials of sensory (SNAPs) and motor muscle fibers (CMAPs) and has multiple measurements that are important to review.

- Conduction velocity: the speed of the fastest conducting motor axon and tends to be prolonged in demyelinating disorders.

- Amplitude: voltage difference from baseline to maximal negative peak with depolarization, a reflection of intact, non-diseased muscle fibers that can depolarize

- Latency: reflects the speed of neurotransmission and is defined as the time from stimulus to initial CMAP deflection from baseline.

- Duration: reflects the synchronous transmission of action potentials; it can give a global evaluation of the motor fiber conduction, with a large number of fibers slowing conduction affecting the duration of action potentials. The measurement is the time from an initial deflection from baseline to the first crossing.

**Electromyogram (EMG)**measures the integrity of the nerve-muscle connections when electrical stimulation is applied, with an anatomical evaluation of nerves, roots, and plexuses. It predominantly evaluates motor unit action potentials of type 1 muscle fibers and does not pick up type 2 fibers. EMG will evaluate the insertional, spontaneous, and exertional activity of motor units.

- Insertional activity: muscle fiber action potentials burst provoked by the irritation of the needle electrode.

- Increased activity in neuropathy and myopathic processes
- Decreased activity in muscle necrosis

- Spontaneous activity: can be silent (in normal tissue) or show abnormal waves.

- Fibrillations and positive waves: rhythmic firing of individual muscle fibers representing subacute (7 to 10 days) denervation or muscle inflammation
- Fasciculations: the irregular popcorn-like firing of muscle fibers representing acute muscle-nerve denervation
- Complex repetitive discharges- rhythmic, frequent, complex, and rumbling running motor-like firing of motor unit action potentials (MUAPs)
- Myotonic discharges- waxing and waning diver bomber-like firing of muscle fibers

- Exertional activity: MUAP activity, recruitment, firing rate, etc., during muscle contraction 

- Recruitment- number of firing motor units firing x force applied during voluntary contraction

- Early recruitment in myopathy
- Delayed recruitment in neuropathic and axonal disorders


- Firing-rate: frequency of discharges during voluntary contraction
- Innervation of muscle fibers: polyphasic versus single motor unit innervation

- Single motor unit innervation can be a sign of reinnervation from chronic neuropathic lesions.


- Amplitude: similar to NCS definition

- High amplitude can present in neuropathic lesions


- Duration: similar NCS definition 

- Increased duration can present in neuropathic/axonal injury

For AIDP, NCS, and EMG studies should take place no earlier than three weeks after the onset of clinical symptoms to avoid false negatives and increase the specificity of the studies. Electrodiagnostic testing can also rule out other superimposed or isolated neuromuscular disorders in the differential, which can include cervical/lumbar radiculopathies or myelopathies, myopathies, neuronopathies, small or large fiber peripheral neuropathy, motor neuron disease, and neuromuscular junction disorders. The categorical definition of these differentials follows as a refresher.

- Myopathy: Diseased muscle fibers

- Motor neuron disease: Diseased motor neuron unit within the upper or lower motor spectrum.

- Neuromuscular junction disorder: Diseased connection or neurochemical process between the nerve and muscle at the synapse

- Myelopathy: Diseased or damaged spinal cord

- Neuronopathy: Diseased cell body; it can be sensory, motor, sensorimotor, or related to ganglions.

- Neuropathy:  Diseased cell body, axon, or myelin