Treatment for a presumed PCP should not be withheld while diagnostic measures are pending. Treatment should be initiated in patients with known risk factors and when clinical suspicion of infections exists. Most studies for PCP treatment have been performed in HIV-infected versus HIV-uninfected patients. Treatment in mild cases can be performed with oral therapies on an outpatient basis unless, of course, the patient cannot tolerate oral MEDICATIONS, has a moderate or severe case that requires corticosteroids, or the patient requires a drug regimen that may only be given intravenously.

Due to its efficacy, the first-line treatment choice for HIV-infected and uninfected patients is 21 days of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX).**or**TMP-SMX DS, two tablets three times per day. For moderate to severe cases (e.g., PaO ≤ 60 mmHg, respiratory rate > 25), TMP 15 to 20 mg/kg/day and SMX 75-100 mg/kg/day are given intravenously (IV) every 6 to 8 hours with a switch to oral when the patient shows clinical improvement. In patients with a mild allergy to TMP-SMX, desensitization should be attempted as this is the most effective drug of choice. In patients with severe allergies to TMP-SMX, desensitization is no longer recommended, and choosing a different drug regimen is more appropriate.

Alternative drug regimens for the treatment of PCP in those with sulfa allergies and mild to moderate disease include:

- Atavaquone 750 mg, orally twice daily for 21 days (must be taken with food).

- Trimethoprim 15 mg/kg/day by mouth twice daily plus dapsone 100 mg by mouth every day

- Primaquine 30 mg daily, plus clindamycin by mouth 450 mg every 6 hours or 600 mg every 8 hours.

Alternative treatments for moderate to severe cases include:

- Pentamidine 4 mg/kg IV once daily over 60 minutes

- Primaquine 30 mg by mouth every day plus clindamycin IV 600 mg every 6 hours or 900 mg every 8 hours.

Primaquine can only be orally administered, and patients who cannot tolerate oral medications should be given IV pentamidine, but caution should be used due to its increased toxicity and side effects when compared to primaquine. In addition, caution must be used in patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency if dapsone or primaquine are used, as they can cause an increased risk of hemolytic anemia.

In HIV-infected patients with moderate or severe disease, current recommendations suggest the addition of glucocorticoids to the treatment regimen, as their use has been shown to improve clinical outcomes and mortality. In addition, HIV-infected patients with a room air arterial blood gas partial pressure of oxygen less than or equal to 70 mm Hg, an alveolar-arterial (A-a) gradient greater than or equal to 35 mm Hg, or hypoxia on pulse oximetry should receive steroids.

Corticosteroids also may be recommended in HIV-uninfected patients with PCP due to the potential for high mortality and fulminant course of illness, but data are limited on whether there are benefits or a decrease in in-hospital mortality. Dosing for prednisone should be started as soon as possible or within 72 hours of starting treatment for PCP and is as follows: 40 mg by mouth twice per day on days 1 through 5, 40 mg by mouth daily on days 6 through 10, and 20 mg orally daily on days 11 through 21. IV methylprednisone can be given at 75% of the prednisone dose if oral therapy cannot be tolerated. HIV-infected patients who are not already on them should have antiretroviral therapy (ART) initiated within two weeks of Pneumocystis treatment or as soon as they are stable enough to begin treatment. Patients usually show slightly worsening clinical signs around days 3 to 4 due to the host's inflammatory response to dying organisms and then improvement afterward.

Prophylaxis treatment guidelines have been established for certain patient populations. Patients who are immunocompromised, such as those with malignancy and who are taking glucocorticoid doses greater than 20 mg daily for one month or longer, patients who have received bone marrow suppressive therapies or antineoplastic therapies, and those who have undergone hematopoietic cell or solid organ transplantation should receive primary prophylaxis for Pneumocystis. Prophylaxis is generally not required if the patient receives pyrimethamine-sulfadiazine to suppress or treat toxoplasmosis.

- First-line prophylaxis treatment is trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, one double-strength tablet by mouth daily or one single-strength tablet by mouth daily.

- For those with sulfa allergies, recommended prophylaxis includes:

- Dapsone 100 mg by mouth daily or 50 mg by mouth twice each day
- Dapsone 50 mg by mouth daily plus pyrimethamine 50 mg plus leucovorin 25 mg by mouth weekly
- Dapsone 200 mg plus pyrimethamine 75 mg plus leucovorin 25 mg by mouth weekly
- Atovaquone 1500 mg by mouth daily
- Atovaquone 1500 mg plus pyrimethamine 25 mg plus leucovorin 10 mg by mouth daily
- Aerosolized pentamidine 300 mg monthly via Respigard II nebulizer.

HIV-infected individuals should receive prophylaxis with the same medications recommended above when a CD4+ count is below 200 cells/microL or CD4+ less than 14%, the presence of oropharyngeal candidiasis, and a CD4+ of 200-250 cells/microL when ART cannot be started or if monitoring of CD4+ counts every three months is not possible. In pregnant patients, the same chemoprophylaxis for PCP should be given. However, aerosolized pentamidine or oral atovaquone should be avoided during the first trimester due to some concerns of possible teratogenicity.

The treatment prognosis depends on many factors, including the degree of hypoxia at presentation, age, prior PCP, elevated serum LDH, low CD4+ count, and the presence of other opportunistic infections, such as cytomegalovirus (CMV). The presence of any of the factors mentioned above carries a higher risk of mortality and poor outcome. Mild to moderate disease has overall mortality rates as high as 65%. Patients with severe disease and respiratory failure who require mechanical ventilation and intensive care unit (ICU) admission have mortality rates as high as 84%.

Patients should be monitored for adverse reactions and signs of treatment failure when started on antimicrobial therapies. Monitoring should include vital signs (most notably oxygen saturation), labs such as complete blood counts, liver function enzymes, renal function, glucose, and electrolytes. Treatment is considered failed if the patient does not show signs of clinical improvement after 4 to 8 days. No definitive studies exist regarding the guidelines for treatment failure management, but most studies agree that combination treatment with primaquine plus clindamycin may be the most effective regimen for salvage therapy. It is important to also search for concurrent infections that may be causing illness besides Pneumocystis and treat those accordingly.