IgM antibodies secreted by B cells participate in both neutralization and clearance of pathogens in addition to initiating inflammatory reactions against pathogens through the complement pathway. IgM is the predominant antibody during a primary challenge to an antigen, and for some non-peptide antigens, IgM may be the only isotype of antibody secreted on subsequent encounters with the antigen. The primary humoral immune response to a novel pathogen typically requires close to a week before substantial amounts of IgM appear in the blood, and the innate immune response is necessary to fight the infection until the creation of T cells and antibody-secreting plasma cells clonally expanded against the pathogen in sufficient numbers. Neutralization refers to the ability of antibodies to protect against infection by binding pathogen antigens critical for adherence to host tissues. The ability of antibodies to neutralize pathogens is a major protective benefit of vaccines, as it prevents pathogens from initiating infection by binding to host cells. IgM can neutralize pathogens, though not as effectively as IgG or IgA isotypes, most likely due to the increased flexibility of these isotypes provided by a hinge region.

IgM predominantly serves as a potent activator of the classical complement pathway in the circulatory system.Neisseria sp. and erythrocytes, in particular, are susceptible to death by MAC-mediated lysis. By serving as a potent activator of complement, IgM serves as a powerful activator of complement and helps activate inflammation, opsonization, and destruction of pathogens that have gained access to the circulatory system. IgM is especially important for eradicating encapsulated bacteria, such as S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Due to its large size, IgM cannot readily leave the circulatory system and enter tissues compared with IgG, IgE, and monomeric IgA. Although IgM is predominantly associated with the protection of the vasculature, IgM also has the ability to protect mucosal surfaces, although not normally to as great an extent as IgA. Both pentameric IgM and dimeric IgA can be transported across mucosal epithelial layers through the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (poly-Ig receptor). The poly-Ig receptor is located on the basolateral surface of mucosal epithelial layers and binds to either pentameric IgM or dimeric IgA through interaction with the J chain, resulting in transcytosis across the mucosal epithelial layer and release of the antibody from the apical surface. IgA is the predominant antibody used to protect mucosal surfaces such as the gut or lungs. Yet, mucosal IgM secretion also occurs and can be dramatically upregulated if IgA secretion is insufficient, which explains why many individuals with selective IgA deficiency do not suffer severe deleterious effects due to the increased secretion of other isotypes across mucosal surfaces such as IgM. The primary mechanism of antibody protection in the lumen of the gut or lungs is neutralization. Finally, IgM can serve as an opsonin, albeit not as powerful an opsonin as C3b, IgG1, or IgG3, and IgM appears to possess additional properties. IgM appears to facilitate the clearance of apoptotic cells and serve other immunomodulatory properties through two additional receptors for IgM, the FcμR (FCMR) receptor specific for IgM (FCMR), and an Fc receptor that recognizes both IgM and IgA, Fcα/μR.