The clinical history is most helpful in distinguishing benign from suspicious or pathologic nipple discharge. The patient's age is very important, as women greater than 40 years of age are at higher risk of having pathologic discharge. Postmenopausal women with nipple discharge are rarely benign.

History of present illness should include the onset of discharge, association with the menstrual cycle, persistence, and the character and color of the discharge. A patient's reproductive history is important (e.g., the age at menarche, age at menopause, and history of pregnancies including age at first full-term pregnancy). Other relevant histories, including a history of any breast problems, including breast biopsies, and surgical history (e.g., hysterectomy and whether ovaries were removed) are required for diagnosis. In premenopausal women, obtain the pregnancies/births history, history of breastfeeding, and the use of oral contraception or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Family history should contain information about cancers, especially breast/ovaries, and the menopausal status of close relatives. Medications history is of paramount importance, as many medications can cause nipple discharge as a side effect. One must not miss the presence of fever (mastitis or breast abscess), symptoms of hypothyroidism (weight gain, cold intolerance, constipation, amenorrhea), symptoms of liver disease (ascites, jaundice), and symptoms of a pituitary tumor (visual changes, amenorrhea, headache) to narrow down the differential diagnosis of nipple discharge.

The patient should be examined for the presence of any breast masses, asymmetry, and skin changes. After the inspection, palpation should include all four quadrants of each breast and bilateral axillae, supra- and infraclavicular areas to look for masses, swelling, tenderness, and lymphadenopathy. If no spontaneous discharge is visible, the examiner should attempt to extract the discharge by applying even pressure from the periphery toward the nipples (so-called, pressure point exam).

Physiologic discharge is usually bilateral, with clear fluid, involves multiple ducts, and is non-sticky. Pathologic discharge is usually unilateral, spontaneous, varied in appearance, and depending on the cause, involves a single duct. Abnormal discharge is frequently associated with other abnormalities, such as a mass, swelling, redness, dimpled skin, or retracted nipple.