Symptoms of a hemiplegic migraine can be scary and distressing. Establishing a correct diagnosis and initiating proper treatment is essential to help manage and prevent attacks. Treatment of hemiplegic migraines involves pharmacological treatment with abortive and preventive medications. Severe attacks may need hospitalization and additional measures.

Patients with a hemiplegic migraine may be managed with the same abortive and preventive medications used for a typical migraine with aura except for agents that may exacerbate ischemia. Treatment of acute episodes is mainly with NSAIDs and antiemetics. Intranasal ketamine given at the onset of attack has shown benefit in patients with familial hemiplegic migraine. The use of triptans for a hemiplegic migraine is controversial.

Verapamil has been used as a prophylactic and abortive agent for hemiplegic migraine. Other drugs that have been used for prophylactic treatment include flunarizine, ketamine, lamotrigine, and naloxone. Nonrandomized studies have suggested acetazolamide may be effective as a preventive medication for familial hemiplegic migraine.

Triptans and ergotamines are usually contraindicated in a hemiplegic migraine because of concern for potential cerebral vasoconstriction. Some specialists also recommend avoiding beta-blockers as preventive therapy for patients with hemiplegic migraines, like migraines with brainstem aura.

Methylprednisone at 100 mg daily for five days resolved symptoms of a child with hemiplegic migraine and severe symptoms.

Triggers for a hemiplegic migraine headache should be identified and avoided if possible.