Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women around the world. It is presented as the second cause of cancer deaths after lung cancer. The incidence of this aggressive disease, with around 17,000,000 new cases each year, becomes worrying and alarming.

According to US breast cancer statistics, 42,170 women in the US were expected to die of breast cancer in 2020. Cancer mortality is not related to the primary tumor but often to recurrence or general metastasis.

After a mastectomy, reconstruction should be offered to all breast cancer patients. These are the recommendations of the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE), but the type of reconstruction used is currently at the surgeon's and patient's discretion. About 10% to 20% of patients experience acute postoperative pain, which may progress to chronicity, known as postmastectomy pain syndrome.

The improvement of anesthesia factors has a positive significance for promoting the rehabilitation of patients. Effective pain management is crucial in enhanced recovery after surgery; thus, proper follow-up with a pain physician could benefit those presenting with postmastectomy pain syndrome.

Several recent studies have shown decreased postoperative pain when regional anesthesia techniques are combined with general anesthesia during breast reconstruction surgery.

This article will describe the main techniques of locoregional anesthesia involved in breast reconstruction surgery. These are paravertebral block, intercostal nerve block, erector spinae plane block (EPSB), pectoralis nerve block (Pecs), and serratus anterior plane blocks.