Understanding cochlear anatomy is essential to understanding its physiology. The inner ear is comprised of a bony and membranous labyrinth. The bony labyrinth is a cavity within the temporal bone consisting of the vestibule, semicircular canals, and cochlea. The cochlear tube is formed by three membranous and fluid-filled chambers that run parallel to each other; the scala vestibuli (SV) or vestibular duct, the scala media (SM) or cochlear duct, and the scala tympani (ST) or tympanic duct. The SV and ST are filled with perilymph, while the SM is filled with endolymph.

The composition of perilymph resembles that of extracellular fluid, with sodium as the primary cation, and, via the perilymphatic duct, serves as a connection to the CSF of the subarachnoid space. The perilymph contains proteins, such as enzymes and immunoglobulins, which are important for metabolism and the immune response.

The composition of endolymph resembles that of intracellular fluid, with potassium as the primary cation. As there is a higher potassium concentration than sodium, the endolymph's electrical potential is approximately 80-90 mV more positive than perilymph.

The helicotrema is the apex of the cochlea and is where the ST and SV meet.

The organ of Corti is a cellular layer sitting on top of the BM in which sensory hair cells are found. As previously mentioned, these sensory hair cells are activated by the potential difference between the perilymph and the endolymph. These hair cells are topped with hair-like structures called stereocilia. There is one single row of inner hair cells (IHC) and three rows of outer hair cells (OHC), separated by the tunnel of Corti.