In the case of pneumothorax, either due to trauma or rupture of blebs, the intrapleural pressure equalizes with the atmosphere and goes from -4 mmHg to 0 mmHg. The TPP is abolished, as alveolar pressure (0 mmHg) minus intrapleural pressure (0 mmHg) equals 0 mmHg. As mentioned above, TPP is the pressure difference holding the lungs open. When TPP is eliminated, the lung collapses. Since the intrapleural pressure is 0 mmHg, the CWP is also eliminated, and the chest wall recoils outward. In respiratory distress syndrome of the newborn, prematurity leads to inadequate surfactant production and therefore increased alveolar surface tension, alveolar collapse, and decreased lung compliance. As a result, breathing is strenuous for the neonate and can lead to respiratory failure and death. As per the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, to prevent such cases, a course of glucocorticoids should be administered to women between 24 and 34 weeks of gestation who are at risk of delivery within seven days. Acutely, mechanical ventilation and administration of surfactant may be necessary.

In the case of a pleural effusion, fluid accumulation in the pleural cavity leads to an increase in intrapleural pressure as excess fluid limits inspiration. Inspiration becomes more difficult as the lungs must overcome the increase in intrapleural pressure and resistance to expansion. In cases of obstructive lung disease, such as emphysema, chronic bronchitis, and asthma, there is air trapping, which leads to difficulty in expiring air. During forced expiration, the intrapleural pressure becomes positive, resulting in airway compression and further worsening the air trapping. As air accumulates within the lung due to airway obstruction, lung compliance increases to accommodate the increase in air volume. However, due to airway obstruction, the alveolar pressure remains the same, therefore decreasing the transpulmonary pressure gradient causing lung expansion and air retention. On spirometry, this is evidenced by decreased FVC, decreased FEV1, decreased FEV1/FVC, and an increased functional residual capacity.

In cases of restrictive lung disease, such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis or infiltrative lung diseases, increased effort is necessary for lung expansion due to pathologic lung remodeling. The decrease in lung compliance leads to an overall reduction in lung volumes. For these reasons, transpulmonary pressure becomes increased. On spirometry, this shows as decreased lung compliance, decrease in all lung volumes, including functional residual capacity. Since the reduction of FVC is more significant than the decline in FEV1, the overall FEV1/FVC ratio increases in this setting.