Managing the administration of foscarnet to immunocompromised individuals infected with HSV, CMV, or VZV viruses requires an interprofessional team effort by health care professionals comprised of physicians, nurses, lab technicians, infectious disease specialists, pharmacists, and social workers. Such a team would be able to enhance the optimal outcomes in the administration of this drug. Prompt action in the diagnosis of infection and administration of the drug is fundamental to the optimal efficacy of this therapy.

In addition, since this is a drug that is not available orally and is administered most commonly via intravenous routes, it is of utmost importance to have the team involved with consistent monitoring of the drug’s effect on the patient’s condition, especially during dosing changes.

Compliance and overdose are two aspects of the medication that require emphasis in patient education of this drug. The education should come from all team members, such as physicians, specialists, nurses, and pharmacists. Since appropriate dosing of this drug is very crucial, the physician, nurse, and pharmacist must always be on the same page with the individualized aspect of therapy: the patient’s past medical history, inpatient and outpatient medication list, and changes in dosages of the foscarnet therapy regimen should always be available and consistent between all of them. With renal dysfunction being one of the major concerns of this drug, the interprofessional team needs to monitor renal function.

Upon completion of the treatment regimen, the patient’s primary care physician or infectious disease physician must schedule follow-up visits to assess remission status versus recurrence; this is a crucial part of treatment as it catches any early recurrence of disease and prevents the need to reinitiate therapy (thereby exposing the patient to more side effects).