Netarsudil is approved for primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) and ocular hypertension. Glaucoma is irreversible, progressive optic neuropathy with progressive visual field loss, for which the primary proven treatment is to decrease the intraocular pressure (IOP).

Currently available therapeutic options mainly increase uveoscleral outflow or decrease aqueous humor production to lower IOP instead of directly targeting the trabecular meshwork pathway. Interestingly, netarsudil lowers IOP directly through the relaxation of the trabecular meshwork, leading to an increase in aqueous outflow through the trabecular meshwork pathway. Netarsudil is a novel drug that is a potent Rho-associated kinase (ROCK) inhibitor and the norepinephrine transporter (NET) inhibitor. In preclinical studies, after ocular instillation of netarsudil, the highest concentrations were found in the cornea and conjunctiva. In human corneal tissue, the half-life of netarsudil was 175 minutes.

Studies have also shown that netarsudil is metabolized to active metabolite netarsudil-M1, demonstrating a fivefold higher activity than netarsudil against Rho-associated kinases. Rho-associated kinase (ROCK) is a naturally occurring kinase that enhances the assembly of actin fibers and focal adhesions within the trabecular meshwork. Inhibition of the norepinephrine transporter increases adrenergic transmission, leading to decreased aqueous humor production.

Netarsudil inhibits rho kinase and norepinephrine transporters found in the trabecular pathway, increasing trabecular outflow, reducing aqueous humor production, and lowering intraocular pressure.

For the patients who require more rigorous IOP control, a fixed-dose combination of netarsudil with latanoprost is also available. A once-daily netarsudil/latanoprost fixed-dose combination provided better efficacy with statically significant IOP reduction with acceptable ocular safety in clinical trials.

A recent study showed the benefit of netarsudil in steroid-induced glaucoma. Steroid-induced glaucoma is an iatrogenic disease process. The mechanism behind steroid-induced glaucoma is through the Wnt pathway. The Wnt signaling pathways are signal transduction pathways. This Wnt pathway is related to the rho-associated protein kinase. It has been demonstrated that by administering dexamethasone produced, the Wnt/β-catenin  pathway gets activated, which promotes cross-linkage of actin fibers resulting in conformational changes in the trabecular meshwork, ultimately leading to obstruction in the outflow of aqueous humor and elevation of IOP, which is a specific factor in the pathogenesis of glaucoma. Given netarsudil’s key role in ROCK inhibition, netarsudil is a promising treatment option for steroid-induced glaucoma.

Interestingly, the preclinical studies showed potential advantages of netarsudil therapy for normal-tension glaucoma (aka normal pressure glaucoma). The preclinical study on normotensive monkeys decreased IOP significantly with netarsudil administration compared with contralateral placebo-treated eyes. The studies suggest that IOP reduction by netarsudil does not depend on the baseline IOP compared to other glaucoma drugs. Consequently, in patients who require an IOP below normal levels to prevent glaucoma progression, netarsudil may be an efficient treatment option.