Treatment, when indicated, can be organized into three levels. Treatment strategies are aimed at etiology, physiopathology, and symptoms.

- Symptom management is the most frequently used and must first address the most bothersome symptoms while keeping the whole picture in mind. Physical measures like exercise, tailored physiotherapy, pressure stockings can help in some cardiovascular autonomic dysfunctions. Sunglasses can be used for mydriatic pupils. Also, a wide range of non-pharmacologic and pharmacologic measures are beneficial, as described below.

- The pathophysiologic aspect can be addressed in the case of immune-mediated disorders. Immunotherapy, such as steroids and other immune suppressor drugs, intravenous immunoglobulins, and plasma exchange, is employed in immune-mediated disorders management strategies.

- Finally, etiology must always be addressed. It is essential to treat certain situations, such as the malignancy found in paraneoplastic and autoimmune autonomic neuropathy. However, it is imperative to taper or withdraw the drugs interfering with the ANS in drug-induced, symptomatic autonomic failure in some other situations.

**Management of Orthostatic Hypotension**

**Non Pharmacological Measures**

- Discontinue exacerbating medications.

- Use of compression stockings and abdominal binders.

- Increase salt and water intake: Drinking 500 mL of water upon awakening and reaching 1.5 to 3 L per day is a reasonable target.

- Modify lifestyle and daily activities: Slow changing of postures, for example, from supine to sitting and standing to increase the orthostatic tolerance. Avoiding Valsalva-like maneuvers and limiting walking in hot and humid weather, minimize hot showers and saunas as exposure to warm temperatures can cause skin vasodilation and worsen orthostatic hypotension.

- Engaging in an exercise program in a sitting or recumbent position is better tolerated than standing.

**Pharmacotherapy**

Pharmacological intervention is needed if the above measures are insufficient in preventing symptoms and complications of orthostatic hypotension. The two medications approved by US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat symptomatic neurogenic orthostatic hypotension are:

- The alpha-adrenergic agonist, midodrine, and

- The norepinephrine precursor, droxidopa

A synthetic mineralocorticoid, Fludrocortisone, is widely used to treat orthostatic hypotension, is not specifically approved by the FDA for treating neurogenic orthostatic hypotension, and can lead to sustained hypertension in the supine position and other adverse effects. Fludrocortisone can augment intravascular volume and provide symptom relief.

Patients not responding to nonpharmacological measures such as volume augmentation, supine norepinephrine levels must be checked. If the supine norepinephrine level is <220 pg/mL, either midodrine or droxidopa is used, and for other patients, another sympathomimetic, atomoxetine (norepinephrine transporter (NET) inhibitor), can be used as initial pharmacotherapy.

**Adjunctive or Alternative Therapeutic Options**

- Caffeine

- Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs

- Pyridostigmine

- Erythropoietin

- Experimental agents: yohimbine, desmopressin, dihydroergotamine, metoclopramide, norepinephrine infusion (data regarding these agents is limited)

**Management of autonomic dysfunction in Parkinson disease**:

- Constipation: therapies like Polyethylene glycol, probiotics, and lubiprostone have been studied and found to be more effective than placebo.

- Sialorrhea(drooling): for patients with mild symptoms, the initial step would be to use hard candy or chewing gum to encourage swallowing may decrease drooling in social situations.

- Rhinorrhea: Ipratropium nasal spray, an anticholinergic agent, is effective.

- Sexual dysfunction:

- 
              
-  Men with erectile dysfunction may benefit from treatment with sildenafil one hour before sex.
              
              
- Women may benefit from urinating before sexual activity and vaginal lubricants.

- Orthostatic hypotension: It may occur as a feature of the disease itself or due to the medications used to treat Parkinson disease, including dopamine agonists, levodopa, and monoamine oxidase type B (MAO B) inhibitors.