**Adults**

The primary presenting complaints of a patient with bilateral vocal cord paralysis are voice changes (hoarseness, pitch changes, vocal fatigue, etc.) and breathing difficulties (stridor, increased work of breathing, aspiration/pneumonia, etc.). A history of the onset and duration of symptoms should be obtained, as well as whether they are progressing or stable. Any antecedent events should be documented, including prior URI, any neck surgery or trauma, malignancy, radiation therapy, and a thorough past medical history should be obtained. Of specific interest is any systemic rheumatologic or connective tissue disease, as well as any immunosuppression. A thorough physical exam is required, with an emphasis on the head & neck and lung examination. Breathing and voice at rest should be noted, as well as with effort. After a patient has been speaking for a few minutes, the inspiratory stridor may become evident or worsen. Diagnosis is made clinically based on flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy, where the vocal cords are observed to be immobile, and their position can be noted. If the diagnosis is still incertain, video stroboscopy and bronchoscopy can provide additional information about the fluid-wave of the vocal cord vibrations and rule out subglottic and tracheal pathology, such as subglottic stenosis or tracheomalacia.

**Children**

A detailed family and birth histories (including prolonged or protracted delivery, assistive devices used during delivery, concurrent congenital medical problems, and length of any NICU stay should be inquired. The remaining pertinent points of history are the same as in adult patients. Bilateral vocal cord paralysis often presents with stridor and feeding difficulties, and children with congenital bilateral vocal cord paralysis are more likely to exhibit severe manifestations such as cyanosis and apnea. Children with bilateral vocal cord paralysis often present with a normal voice because the vocal cords remain in the paramedian position with abductor paralysis, but can have marked inspiratory stridor and accessory muscle use with inspiration. Diagnosis is usually made via awake fiberoptic laryngoscopy, which is possible even in very small children, though more challenging than in adults. This will also rule out laryngomalacia, which is far more common than bilateral vocal cord paralysis but can have similar presenting symptoms. If the diagnosis is still uncertain, direct laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy under anesthesia may be required. This is done with the patient spontaneously breathing so the motion of the vocal cords can be assessed intraoperatively. This also allows lower airway examination to rule out concurrent or alternate pathology such as subglottic stenosis and tracheo- or bronchomalacia.