# Continuing Education Activity

A pleural friction rub is an adventitious breath sound heard on auscultation of the lungs. The sound results from the movement of inflamed and roughened pleural surfaces against one another. The sound has been described as "grating," "creaky," or similar to "the sound made by walking on fresh snow." Pleural rubs can be caused by several different etiologies, which include any condition that results in pleural effusion, pleurisy, or serositis. Patients may be able to describe the localization of the rub based on pain. A pleural friction rub is a manifestation of pleural disease, though its absence does not exclude this pathology. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of pleural friction rubs and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of a pleural friction rub.
- Review the evaluation of a pleural friction rub.
- Outline the differential diagnosis of a pleural friction rub.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance detection and management of pleural friction rubs and improve patient outcomes.

# Introduction

A pleural friction rub is an adventitious breath sound heard on auscultation of the lung. The pleural rub sound results from the movement of inflamed and roughened pleural surfaces against one another during movement of the chest wall.

# Etiology

Auscultation of a pleural friction rub can occur when the normally smooth surfaces of the visceral and parietal pleura become roughened by inflammation.

Pleural friction rubs need to be distinguished from pericardial friction rubs, which is a sign of pericarditis.

# Epidemiology

Recent literature does not describe the frequency of pleural friction rub in patients with a pleural disease or other chest cavity disease.

# Pathophysiology

Pleural friction rub occurs when inflammation roughens the surfaces of the visceral and parietal pleura. In this setting, friction between the pleura further increases due to decreased production of lubricating fluid (pleural fluid) by the pleura.

# History and Physical

Patients will often complain of pleuritic chest pain, which is sudden, intense, and worse with movement, such as respiration. If the underlying cause of the pleural rub is pleural effusion, patients may experience some relief from leaning forward and supporting their upper body with hands placed on the knees or another surface.

Upon palpation of the chest, the clinician may note a sandpaper-rubbing type of sensation. This sensation is suggestive of a pleural rub. The patient may complain of local tenderness with palpation, depending on the underlying etiology.

On auscultation, pleural friction rub is a non-musical, short explosive sound, described as creaking or grating and likened to walking on fresh snow. The sound may be intermittent or continuous. A typical description of the sound is that it “sounds like walking on fresh snow.” The pleural friction rub is biphasic (heard on inspiration and expiration), usually localized to a small area of the chest, and may be accentuated by increasing the pressure on the stethoscope.

Additional findings on history and physical exam will be suggestive of the underlying pathology. Important factors in the history of the patient include accompanying symptoms, history of infection, and occupational history.

# Evaluation

Patients with an audible rub should undergo further workup. Basic blood working, including ESR, CRP, and WBC can help narrow the differential.

# Treatment / Management

Pleural friction rub should resolve with management of the underlying cause. Management should focus on controlling pleuritic chest pain (if present) and treating the underlying pathological process.

For symptomatic treatment, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications like- aspirin, ibuprofen, or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Antibiotics are indicated if the inflammation results from a bacterial infection.

# Differential Diagnosis

Distinguishing a pleural friction rub from a pericardial rub is critical. In the patient with pericarditis, an inflammation of the pericardium, a grating-like sound can be heard as layers of inflamed pericardium slide against one another.

Pleural friction rub may also be a clinical feature in 4% of patients with pulmonary embolism of pneumonia.

# Prognosis

Prognosis depends on the etiology of the pleural rub.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The identification of a pleural friction rub poses a diagnostic dilemma to the clinician; this is a non-specific finding with a broad differential. Excellent history-taking and documentation will facilitate identifying the cause of the rub. Life-threatening causes of pleural friction rub include pulmonary embolus and malignant pleural effusion, and rapid diagnosis and treatment have a marked effect on patient outcomes. In the emergency department setting, the clinician must rule out life-threatening causes by obtaining the requisite investigations immediately. Effective communication between the referring physician and radiologist is essential to ensure imaging assessment takes place with special attention to the myriad causes of a pleural friction rub. The care of the patient with mesothelioma will necessitate consultations with an oncologist, radiation oncologist, and surgeon, among other physician specialists. At all stages of workup and treatment, patient-centered care is to be the standard.

The prognosis of a patient with a finding of pleural friction rub depends on the underlying cause of this sign. However, to improve outcomes, prompt consultation with an interprofessional group of specialists is recommended.