The management of aortic valvular atresia is complex and is best accomplished with an interprofessional team. Advancements in genetic testing, prenatal echocardiography, and interventional cardiology have all made the treatment of aortic valvular atresia a highly team-based endeavor. To achieve good surgical outcomes, the need for operation, as well as the type of surgery, should be ascertained prior to or soon after birth. At Kitasato University in Japan, the decision to pursue biventricular repair or univentricular repair after initial Norwood palliation was made on the basis of having over 80% right ventricular end-diastolic volume index (RVEDVI).

To improve outcomes, pediatric cardiac surgeons are tracking their hospital outcomes more and more. By utilizing large cohort studies, such as the Congenital Heart Surgeons Study, The U.S. Natural History Study of Congenital Heart Disease Nos. 1 and 2, and the New England Regional Infant Cardiac Program to name a few, a large amount of clinical data can be evaluated to improve surgical techniques and indications.

In the postoperative period, the role of support staff, including nurses, nursing assistants, and pharmacists, is vital. Nursing staff monitors patients for complications such as hypoxia, surgical site infections, as well as common postoperative complications such as atelectasis, pneumonia, and deep venous thrombosis. If complications result, prompt communication between medical teams is vital to improve outcomes and save patients. In the discharge period, close communication between surgeons and outpatient pediatricians is vital to monitor common post-surgical complications. [Level 1]