There is no FDA approved indication, and there is insufficient evidence to support non-FDA approved use of Ginkgo biloba.

**Dementia/ Cognitive Impairment**

In terms of treatment for existing dementia, data has been contradictory regarding the efficacy of Ginkgo biloba extract (EGb). A 52-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, multicenter study of 309 patients in 1997 concluded that EGb was safe and though modestly, it appeared to stabilize and improve the cognitive performance as well as social functioning of dementia patients for six months to 1 year.Ginkgo biloba was relatively safe, but did not support its clinical benefit for patients with cognitive impairment and dementia.

In terms of preventing dementia, there is also insufficient evidence to support the use of ginkgo. The Ginkgo Evaluation of Memory (GEM) Study showed that Ginkgo biloba at 120 mg twice a day was not effective in reducing both all-cause dementia incidence and Alzheimer dementia incidence in elderly patients with normal cognition or with mild cognitive impairment.Ginkgo biloba extract or matching placebo and did not support the benefit of long-term use of standardized EGb in reducing the risk of progression to Alzheimer disease throughout five years.Ginkgo biloba and the placebo in late-life.Ginkgo biloba in enhancing cognitive function in healthy adults.

**Cardiovascular disease (CVD)/ Cardiovascular Risk Factors Reduction**

Effects of ginkgo on cardiovascular disease and risk factors, including hypertension and diabetes, have been the topic of many studies. However, there has been a lack of large evidence-based, well-designed randomized controlled trials/studies to support its use in treating or preventing the incidence of cardiovascular disease. Though Ginkgo biloba extract has often been an option in the treatment of acute ischemic stroke in China, a systemic review in 2005 did not show the benefit of improving mortality or neurological recovery in the post-stroke period.

A randomized controlled trial in 2010 that monitor CVD as a preplanned secondary outcome of the GEM study showed no evidence that ginkgo reduced CV mortality or CVD events though it reported a smaller number of peripheral vascular disease events in ginkgo arm.Ginkgo biloba had no statistical or clinically significant benefit for patients with peripheral arterial disease.Ginkgo biloba research has also shown it to decrease plasma lipoprotein(a) level - a known risk factor for atherosclerotic diseases.

Overall, due to the lack of strong evidence, the use of Ginkgo biloba extract is not indicated at this point for treatment or prevention of CVD.

**Psychiatric disorders:**

Studies have examined the role of Ginkgo biloba in treating depression and other psychiatric disorders. A small randomized controlled trial with 136 subjects suggested that EGb, as an adjunctive treatment along with citalopram, could improve depressive symptoms and cognitive function as measured by Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAMD) and Wisconsin Card Classification Test (WCST), respectively; it also decreased the expression of serum S100B, a marker of brain injury.

**Sexual Dysfunction**

Many small studies have explored the role of EGb in treating sexual dysfunction. A triple-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 24 patients with sexual dysfunction due to antidepressant drugs showed no statistically significant differences in responses and side-effect profiles between the EGb group and the placebo group.

**Vertigo**

A multicenter double-blinded randomized control trial that followed 70 patients throughout three months showed that Ginkgo biloba extract could reduce the intensity, frequency, and duration of vertiginous syndrome compared (47% in the EGb group compared to 18% in the placebo group).Ginkgo biloba versus betahistine group though EGb had a better tolerance profile.Ginkgo biloba in treating vertigo.

******Tinnitus******

A Cochrane review in 2013, which included four trials with a total of 1543 participants, demonstrated that there was no evidence that Gingko biloba was effective in patients with a primary complaint of tinnitus.Ginkgo biloba did not alleviate the severity of tinnitus or improve the quality of life of patients.

**Vitiligo**

A double-blind placebo-controlled trial of 52 vitiligo patients showed that treatment with Ginkgo biloba correlated with a statistically significant cessation of active progression of depigmentation.

**Macular Degeneration**

A 2012 systematic review identified one study of 20 patients with macular degeneration conducted in France, randomly allocated to Gingko Biloba extract EGb 761 80 mg twice daily or placebo and another study of 99 patients performed in Germany randomly assigned to two different doses of Ginkgo biloba extract EGb 761 (240 mg per day and 60 mg per day). Researchers followed the patients for six months in both trials. Their results could not be pooled, but both experiments demonstrated some beneficial effects of Ginkgo biloba on vision.

**Glaucoma**

A 2019 systematic review suggested that flavonoids, often found in Ginkgo biloba, had a beneficial impact on glaucoma, particularly in terms of increasing ocular blood flow and potentially halting the progression of visual field loss.

**Altitude Sickness**

The Prevention of High Altitude Illness Trial (PHAIT) that followed 614 healthy western trekkers showed that ginkgo was not effective at preventing acute mountain sickness when compared to placebo.Ginkgo biloba, neither used alone or as an adjunct to acetazolamide, was beneficial for altitude sickness.