The prevention of ORN is extremely important. The approach to ORN treatment is separated into two phases: pre-radiotherapy prevention and ORN rehabilitation. ORN can be managed dentally, medically, surgically, and hyperbaric oxygen.

The pre-radiotherapy phase of a patient who will be undergoing radiotherapy of the oral cavity includes a pretreatment dental evaluation and management by a dentist experienced with head and neck cancers. The pretreatment evaluation should include full mouth radiographs, dental and periodontal diagnosis, and extraction of teeth with poor prognosis. A tooth extraction should ideally occur at least two weeks before radiotherapy. Optimal dental health is necessary for the lowest risk of ORN. Dental prophylaxis and management should occur before, during, and after radiotherapy. Medical treatment plays a small role in the prevention and management of ORN. Maintaining adequate nutrition and saline irrigation helps to manage oral mucositis. Antibiotics are only necessary when a definitive secondary infection is also present. Pentoxifylline, an anti-inflammatory and vasodilator, has been useful for treating soft-tissue involvement and as a sialoprotective agent.

Treating diagnosed ORN requires surgical intervention. The non-viable bone will need to be removed. For planned surgery or tooth extraction in a tissue area with more than 60 Gy, HBO can be utilized prophylactically. The role of HBO is to promote angiogenesis in hypoxic tissues, thus promoting optimal reparative conditions. The standard HBO protocol includes 30 preoperative and ten postoperative treatments. The treatments occur at 2-2.5 atmospheres for 90–120 minutes, do one treatment per day, five days per week. Subsequent surgical intervention will vary with the severity of the ORN. The bone must be debrided down to healthy, bleeding bone. Depending on the location and status of surrounding tissues, local flaps can often be advanced to cover the bone. If this is unsuccessful, regional or free flaps may be required to bring in healthy, non-radiated tissue to cover and salvage the devitalized bone.