The transabdominal examination is best performed with a curvilinear probe but may be performed using a phased array probe. To best evaluate the patient in the transabdominal views, the patient must be well hydrated and have a full bladder, creating an acoustic window. Intravenous fluids, oral hydration, or Foley catheter fluid insertion are appropriate methods for hydration, depending on the urgency of the workup.  Posterior enhancement, the artifact created when acoustic waves pass through a fluid-filled structure, may make it difficult to visualize the far field of the image.  It may be difficult to adjust the gain enough to correct this. The patient should be placed in a gown and sheets should be available to minimize exposure of the patient during evaluation.

In contrast to transabdominal preparation, transvaginal examination requires the patient to have an empty bladder. The patient is best able to be examined if she is positioned in stirrups on an obstetrical stretcher. A pelvic pillow is an alternative which allows the pelvis to be lifted off a standard stretcher. The probe should then be prepared for optimal acoustic transmission and maximal patient safety. This is done using a probe cover, typically a latex condom or synthetic alternative, with gel on the probe head beneath the condom. Any air bubbles need to be pressed off the probe head, as air will impede the ultrasound waves. Sterile, water-soluble lubricant should be used on the exterior of the condom as there is a theoretical risk of infection from ultrasound gel and some women find the gel irritating. The depth will likely require adjustment to optimize the visual field.