Adverse effects of statins include the following

- **Musculoskeletal:**Myalgia is the most common side effect of statins, and 1 to 10% of individuals using statins have myalgias. Myositis is less common and characteristically presents by an increase in creatine kinase (CK). Rhabdomyolysis rarely occurs (0.1% individuals) but is the most serious side effect of statins and is associated with marked elevation in CK (10 times the upper limit of normal), acute renal failure secondary to myoglobinuria, electrolyte disturbances, and hemodynamic instability. Statins cause musculoskeletal toxicity because they decrease the concentration of coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinone) and end products of the mevalonate pathway (farnesyl pyrophosphate, geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate), which are essential for skeletal muscle energy production. The symptoms usually occur within weeks to months of therapy initiation. Individuals experience relief, and serum CK normalizes within days to weeks of medication discontinuation. Amongst the statins, pravastatin and fluvastatin have the least muscle-related adverse effects. In patients who develop myopathy on statins other than pravastatin or fluvastatin, the recommendation is to switch to one of these two statins once symptoms have resolved. In patients who develop muscle side effects on pravastatin or fluvastatin, decrease the dose of statins.

- **Hepatic dysfunction:**Statins can cause an increase in the concentrations of serum transaminases. If an individual develops serum transaminases three times the upper limit of normal, then reduce the dose of statin or change to a different statin (preferably pravastatin) or switch to a different class of lipid-lowering drugs.

- **Renal dysfunction:**High-intensity statins can cause proteinuria and hematuria. Also, rhabdomyolysis secondary to statin use can lead to renal failure. Rosuvastatin and simvastatin are the statins that cause kidney injury. Atorvastatin, fluvastatin, or pravastatin are the indicated choices in patients with renal impairment.

- **Diabetes mellitus:**Individuals taking high-intensity statins have a slightly increased risk of developing diabetes mellitus. The proposed mechanism is that statins inhibit the biosynthesis of cholesterol, which is essential for the production of GLUT-1, which mediates glucose uptake into the cell.

Other side effects reported with statins in various case reports/case series include:

- Respiratory: shortness of breath, interstitial lung disease

- Gastrointestinal: statin-induced pancreatitis

- Neurological: peripheral neuropathy, insomnia, dizziness, reversible cognitive impairment

- Reproductive: sexual dysfunction, gynecomastia, oligospermia

- Psychiatric: irritability, aggression, or behavioral changes

- Autoimmune: lupus-like syndrome, myasthenia gravis

- Ophthalmic: cataract

- Urinary tract: urinary tract infection, hematuria, albuminuria