IDET utilizes a 1.5 or a 5 cm flexible active-tip catheter to be placed in the junction between annulus and nucleus pulposus or in the posterior annulus.

Giving an intravenous dose of prophylactic antibiotics is recommended.

Before the IDET procedure, the discs undergo selection on clinical grounds according to the level of a provocative discography. This procedure takes place under biplanar fluoroscopy or C-arm fluoroscopy in which a single needle approach is performed with a stylet needle that ranges in size from 18- to 22- gauge. A posterolateral extradural approach is preferred to avoid damage to the dural sac. Once the lumbar level is confirmed and there is corroboration of the painful disc by provocative discography, the IDET procedure can begin.

IDET procedure is performed unilaterally by a posterolateral extradural approach using anatomic landmarks, the location of the entry point at each level is guided under biplanar fluoroscopy or C-arm fluoroscopy. A hollow needle is advanced containing a flexible catheter with a heating element via a safe triangle located at the anterior border of the ascending facet until reaching the posterolateral zone of the intervertebral disc. At this point, the active tip is advanced anterolaterally into the nucleus pulposus and directed in a circled way to return posteriorly to a final position inside the posterior annulus fibrosus. The introducer needle is then withdrawn, and the final position should be rechecked to obtain a satisfactory result. At this time, the catheter should be fixed and connected to the IDET generator. The standard protocol begins heating the catheter tip at 149 degrees F (65 degrees C) with increments of 33.8 degrees F (1 degree C) every half minute over 12.5 minutes up to a final peak of 194 degrees F (90 degrees C). (Figure 1). This temperature is then maintained for approximately 4 minutes. The total treatment time is 13.5 to 16.5 minutes, and the final temperature and duration are subject to the patient’s pain response.

Antibiotics, either intravenous or injected into the disc, are used to prevent spondylodiscitis. No intradiscal corticosteroids or other medications should be injected into the disc.

The treatment procedure is repeatable in case there are multiple discogenic pain levels (no more than three levels).