The mainstay of asphyxiation and burn treatment in the field is safe and supportive care. Priorities include scene safety, rapid extrication, patient decontamination, airway management, intravenous (IV) access, burn care, hypothermia prevention, and proper disposition.

The environment may be considered unstable until the gas toxin source is identified and controlled. Often, this requires effective communication between interprofessional teams such as EMS, fire departments, law enforcement, hazmat teams, and any scene bystanders.

Asphyxiation contributes to a high mortality rate in gas and fire-related accidents. Special consideration should be given to the patient’s airway and ability to ventilate. Proper chin-lift/jaw thrust maneuvers, nasopharyngeal airways, supraglottic devices, and intubation may be required to preserve airway patency. Signs of airway obstruction, shock, altered mental status, hypoxemia, and worsening dyspnea are all indications for endotracheal intubation. Circumferential burns to the chest wall can interfere with ventilation and may also be an indication for intubation.

The carboxyhemoglobin blood concentration is influenced by the fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) and falls more rapidly as FiO2 increases. For example, the elimination half-life of carbon monoxide in the blood is approximately 320 minutes at room air and improves to approximately 74 minutes on 100% FiO2. Therefore, patients exposed to carbon monoxide fumes should be immediately placed on a 100% FiO2 delivered by facemask or endotracheal tube and remain on this high inspiratory oxygen concentration until transported to a higher-level care facility.

Hydroxocobalamin remains the prehospital empiric therapy of choice for cyanide toxicity. Although other antidotes such as amyl nitrite and sodium thiosulfate exist, hydroxocobalamin is preferable given the rapid onset of action, ease of administration, tolerability, relatively improved safety profile, and ability to neutralize cyanide without interfering with cellular oxygen use. Treatment for cyanide toxicity is highly dependent on history and physical findings. The antidote must be initiated in patients with possible cyanide exposure that develop altered mental status, seizures, respiratory depression/arrest, or cardiac dysrhythmia. Current guidelines recommend administering 5 g hydroxocobalamin intravenously, diluted in 200 mL of lactate ringer and given over 15 minutes.

Additional interventions may be considered for asphyxiation injuries. For example, Walker et al. have concluded that bronchodilators such as albuterol, and mucolytics such as N-acetyl cysteine are helpful in reducing airflow resistance and may improve dynamic pulmonary compliance in animal studies. Although still controversial in humans, initiating these pre-hospital treatments may be most beneficial in patients who exhibit signs of lower airway obstruction such as wheezing.

Patients may experience hypotension secondary to burns and may require fluid resuscitation. However, aggressive fluid therapy may cause iatrogenic airway compromise secondary to edema. Therefore, providers should perform serial airway evaluations if a definitive airway is not already in place.

Another important parameter to control is the patient core temperature. Hypothermia in burn patients is associated with increased mortality rates, and thus wet clothing should be removed, and patients should be passively or actively rewarmed.

Finally, proper patient disposition is important and is largely dependent on the mechanism of injury. Although hyperbaric oxygen therapy has been shown to reduce long-term and permanent neurocognitive dysfunction in the setting of toxic gas exposure, there is no clear evidence that it reduces mortality compared to 100% normobaric oxygen. Patients with concomitant trauma or burn injuries do have higher mortality rates and should be transferred to appropriate trauma and burn facilities respectively. Patients that should be considered for hyperbaric centers are those with altered mental status, seizures, nausea/vomiting, loss of consciousness, marked dyspnea, chest pain, or pregnancy in the absence of major burns or trauma.