The main structures of the nasal cavity that guide localization and treatment derive from the lateral nasal wall. Through the various nasal structures, one can visualize the ostia (opening) of the paired frontal sinuses, maxillary sinuses, and sphenoid sinuses. These sinuses, along with the nasal passage, have a lining of pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium, which warm, humidify, and filter inhaled debris.

The frontal sinus, located superior and anterior to the orbits, drains via the frontal sinus drainage pathway inferiorly into the ethmoid infundibulum or middle meatus depending on the attachment of the uncinate process. The uncinate process is a projection of the ethmoid bone, which attaches anatomically to one of three structures. It can attach to the lamina papyracea, which separates the orbit with the nasal cavity and under this circumstance, will cause the frontal sinus to drain directly into the middle meatus. The lamina papyracea is usually 0.2 to 0.4 millimeters thick and can easily suffer a fracture with excessive force. If the uncinate attaches to the skull base or the middle turbinate, the frontal sinus will drain into the ethmoid infundibulum instead.

The maxillary sinuses are on either side of the nose and inferior to the orbit. They drain via the maxillary ostia into the middle meatus via the ethmoid infundibulum.

The sphenoid sinuses, which are the most posterior of the sinuses, are located below the sella turcica of the skull base and drain into the superior meatus via the sphenoethmoidal recess.