The detection of IgM or IgG in an individual can demonstrate that the person has suffered exposure to a pathogen. Yet the detection of IgM or IgG antibodies against a pathogen can not indicate whether a person is still harboring the specific pathogen or whether the body has been able to successfully eliminate the pathogen, as long-lived plasma cells are a component of immunological memory that can produce antibodies against an offending pathogen long after successful clearance of the pathogen. In some cases, such as with Lyme disease, a patient may seek medical attention due to symptoms in the first days of the infection before the ability of the humoral immune system to produce IgM as part of the primary immune response to a pathogen. Furthermore, the absence of IgM or IgG antibodies directed against a pathogen can be problematic to interpret if the individual is suffering from a congenital or acquired immunodeficiency. The detection of IgM to determine exposure to a pathogen is especially useful for neonates. If pregnant women suffer exposure to a pathogen, it is crucial to determine whether the newborn child has also had exposure. Detection of IgG in the neonate is not as useful for this purpose, as IgG is readily transferred across the placenta to protect the fetus against pathogens the pregnant mother has been exposed to previously. The IgG passively transferred to a newborn will gradually breakdown over the first six months of life. IgM is the first immunoglobulin produced in the neonate. Therefore, the detection of IgM raised against a pathogen in a neonate indicates exposure to the pathogen by the neonate.