Treatment of intestinal trauma depends on the stability of the patient.

**Stable Blunt Injury**

Patients who have experienced blunt abdominal trauma, but remain stable should be managed in two main categories: Those with a reliable physical exam and those without. Factors that prevent a reliable clinical exam include brain injury, spinal cord trauma, intoxication, sedation, altered mental status, and distracting injuries. If none of these factors are present, guidelines do not require any further imaging, and the patient can be admitted for serial abdominal exams over the next 24 hours.

If the patient does not have a reliable physical exam, they should undergo CT scanning. If imaging is negative, these patients should still be admitted for 24 hours of serial abdominal examinations.

If an intestinal injury is identified via the CT scan, the patient should be taken to the operating room for exploratory laparotomy.

**Stable Penetrating Injury**

Patients who remain hemodynamically stable and have reliable physical exams (exclusion criteria mentioned above) may be managed non-operatively. EAST (Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma) guidelines recommend further workup or exploratory laparotomy if any of these factors are present. If none of the exclusion criteria are present, then serial abdominal exams are a reliable form of monitoring and should be continued for 24 hours.

If a patient is going to be treated initially with non-operative management, CT scanning is recommended regardless of the reliability of the physical exam. It has been shown to have a sensitivity of 90.5% and a specificity of 96.5% in penetrating abdominal trauma.

The push to manage more penetrating abdominal injuries conservatively stems from the high rate of nontherapeutic laparotomies, and the associated morbidity, following penetrating abdominal injuries.

In the setting of penetrating abdominal injury, diagnostic laparoscopy is another potential option that can spare patients a laparotomy in the correct situation. Its most agreed upon use is for the diagnosis and repair of occult diaphragmatic injuries after penetrating injuries to the left upper quadrant. For diagnosing intestinal injury, it has proved less useful as studies have still shown a high rate of nontherapeutic laparotomies that were undertaken after diagnostic laparoscopy showed peritoneal penetration.

**Unstable Blunt Injury**

Unstable patients who have experienced blunt abdominal trauma should undergo DPL or FAST examination. If either is positive, then the patient should be taken for exploratory laparotomy. If both are negative or non-diagnostic, then further workup should be completed. Further workup consists of CT imaging and evaluation for other injuries that could be causing the shock.

**Unstable Penetrating Injury**

Unstable patients suspected of having a gastrointestinal injury should be taken to the operating room immediately for exploratory laparotomy.

**Operative Management**

Antibiotics should be given perioperatively. The antibiotic regimen should be as specific as possible, but due to the nature of trauma, the exact injury may be unknown, in which case broad-spectrum antibiotics would be appropriate. Current EAST (Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma) guidelines have a level I recommendation for only 24 hours of prophylactic antibiotics after the repair of intestinal trauma.

The exploratory laparotomy should be conducted in a systematic approach. There are four stages of a trauma laparotomy: 1) Control of hemorrhage, 2) Control of contamination, 3) Diagnosis of all injuries, and 4) Reconstruction.

Once hemostasis is achieved, intestinal injuries are evaluated systematically. The small bowel is run from the Ligament of Treitz to the cecum. Gastrointestinal spillage is controlled with atraumatic clamps (Babcock) or a running stitch. Next, the colon and intraperitoneal rectum are inspected. Stomach mobilization is essential for the detection of injuries. The lesser sac is opened to examine the anterior and posterior walls of the stomach and to visualize the duodenum. If there is a concern for duodenal injury, then the duodenum should be mobilized from its retroperitoneal attachments.

Definitive repair should be deferred until the entire bowel is evaluated. The specific approach taken depends on the extent of the injury, the injury location, the other concurrent injuries, and the patient’s clinical status. Options include primary repair, resection with primary anastomosis, resection with diversion, and resection with delayed abdominal closure as part of a damage control approach.

Primary repair- Partial-thickness injuries, or full-thickness injuries that that are less than three centimeters (cm) in the stomach, or less than 50% of the luminal circumference in the small bowel or colon can be repaired primarily. The primary repair could be accomplished with one or two layers of closure.

Resection and anastomosis- Multiple injuries within the same vicinity or a single injury greater than three cm in the stomach or greater than 50% of luminal circumference in the intestines should be resected with anastomosis as appropriate. The anastomosis can be completed with a stapler or in a hand-sewn approach, with studies showing similar efficacy. If there is significant bowel wall edema, differences in the luminal diameters, or the location of the injury is in a difficult anatomic location (near the ligament of Treitz), then a hand-sewn approach should be considered.

Diversion- A recent EAST systematic review found that primary repair or resection and anastomosis of bowel injuries were safe. Therefore, their published guideline recommended against diversion in low-risk patients. Even in high-risk patients, which they defined as delay greater than 12 hours, transfusion of more than six units of blood, contamination, and left-sided injuries, they recommended against mandatory colostomy. In high-risk situations, a surgeon can choose between repair and anastomosis, diversion, or damage control approach with an anastomosis after resuscitation and stabilization.

Damage control approach – Damage control approach in intestinal injury from trauma attempts to obtain source control and then defer the definitive repair until after the patient has been appropriately resuscitated and stabilized. The EAST Clinical Management Update in 2010 did not have any level I recommendations for damage control approach in trauma.

**Special Considerations**

Duodenum- Due to the complexity of the surrounding anatomy, duodenal injury management requires special consideration. As mentioned above, the opening of the lesser sac is a standard part of a trauma laparotomy. If there is a concern for duodenal injury, then a Kocher maneuver should be performed. A right medial visceral rotation (Cattell-Braasch) can be performed for better exposure, and mobilization of the ligament of Treitz can be completed to access the fourth portion of the duodenum. Once exposure has been obtained, then attention can be turned to repair.

Isolated duodenal hematomas should not be explored. These can be treated with nasogastric decompression of the stomach until the obstructive symptoms resolve. Failure to resolve in approximately 2 weeks should lead to operative exploration and repair.

If the duodenal injury does not involve the second portion of the duodenum (the ampullary portion), then the injury can be repaired primarily if the involved portion is less than three cm or repaired via resection and anastomosis if greater than three centimeters. If a repair cannot be completed without tension, then duodenojejunostomy with Roux-en-Y reconstruction should be completed.

If there is a concomitant pancreatic injury with the involvement of the second portion of the duodenum, then the area should be widely drained with definitive reconstruction planned for a later date.

Extraperitoneal rectum- While intraperitoneal rectal injuries should be managed similarly to other colon injuries, extraperitoneal rectal injuries fall into a separate class. Current EAST guidelines for these injuries recommend proximal diversion for extraperitoneal rectal injuries if less than 25% of the rectum has been involved. This can be done without the need for presacral drainage or distal rectal washout.