Commonly in FSS cases, a birth history will reveal a normal birth weight and length.

A history of childhood illnesses, chronic conditions involving the respiratory, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, renal, rheumatologic, and endocrine systems should be obtained and will be absent in cases of FSS.

A family history of short stature (SS) is essential for the diagnosis of FSS. Either one or both parents have a SS. Sometimes there may be factors in either or both parents that may have been acquired in utero or after birth that have contributed to parental SS. This fact will serve to revise the diagnosis.

A child with FSS will grow with a normal growth velocity, albeit in the lowest percentile. Such a child will also progress to puberty at the appropriate age range. In FSS, the final height is in the target height range for the family.

In those children with combined FSS and CDGP, the SS will be more severe, brought to attention when puberty is delayed and will attain a final predicted height at a later age than their peers.

A recent study of children with FSS, CDGP, and idiopathic growth hormone deficiency (IGHD) showed a tendency for IGHD to have a progressive decrease in the height standard deviation scores (Ht SDS) throughout the first five years of life, whereas in FSS and CDGP it was seen mainly in the first two years**.**When serial heights/lengths are measured, this observation may help detect these conditions earlier.

A nutritional evaluation will reveal a good appetite, appropriate weight gain, and correct weight for age, and the absence of significant deficiencies in FSS.

A history of any use of medications like corticosteroids or other treatments that can interfere with growth, like radiation therapy for malignant disorders, should be obtained.

Serial height/length, sitting height, height velocity, weight, and head circumference plotted on a Growth Curve will yield useful clinical information. When the patient transitions from length to the height measurements when the infant reaches two years of age, it is important to remember that a discrepancy of up to 1 cm may be noted (height less than length). Accurate measurements using proper techniques are important.

An arm span to height ratio will reveal a proportionate SS in FSS consistent with expected target adult heights. The child with FSS is otherwise healthy and active except for the SS. An international consensus has recommended the use of a corrected target height (cTH); instead of the traditional Tanner formula because the latter was found to underestimate the child's height when compared with short parents. The cTH is calculated by multiplying the mean of the SD of the child's father's and mother's Ht SD by 0.72. The lower limit of the TH is set at cTH minus 1.6 SD.

A careful physical examination should reveal any dysmorphic features to rule out genetic disorders of bone or cartilage that may produce SS and other syndromic features of known causes of genetic SS, such as Noonan, Turner, or Silver-Russell syndromes.

In some cases of SS, with a diagnosis of FSS, subtle features of monogenic disorders may be present and should be sought diligently and will help serve to revise the diagnosis.