Phacoemulsification is indicated when the lens has become cataractous and results in reduced visual acuity. The various indications can be difficulty performing daily activities, decreased near or distant visual acuity, colored halos, photophobia, monocular diplopia, reduced contrast sensitivity, and white reflex in the pupillary area.

The various types of cataracts which require cataract surgery are posterior subcapsular cataract, nuclear cataract, cortical cataract, brown cataract, mature cataract, nuclear opalescence, traumatic cataract, posterior polar cataract, and subluxated cataract with capsular support devices. Some professions also desire perfect visual acuity with minimally acceptable standards like aviation, driving, armed forces, and operating complex equipment.

Any type of cataract that compromises a patient's visual acuity is the main indication of phacoemulsification. The patients with cataracts often present with the blurring of vision, decreased visual acuity, glare, colored halos, monocular diplopia, decreased visual function, and altered contrast sensitivity. Cortical cataract has a moderate growth rate, produces moderate glare, and have a mild effect on near and distant vision. Nuclear cataract has a slow growth rate, produces mild glare, has a moderate impact on distant vision, and produce moderate induced myopia. In contrast, posterior subcapsular cataract variable growth rate produces marked glow and has a mild effect on distant vision and marked effect on near vision.

The physical examination included assessment of the general physical condition of the patient to rule out systemic comorbidities like diabetes mellitus, hypertension, ischemic heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, bleeding diatheses, adrenal suppression, Cushing disease, neurological problems like Alzheimer disease, and Parkinson disease. Any sensitivity to the drug must be ruled out, and a history of anticoagulants and antiplatelets should be noted. It is also imperative to note the history of systemic alpha a1-adrenergic antagonist medications like prazosin, terazosin, alfuzosin as they are associated with intraoperative floppy iris syndrome during cataract surgery.

It is also essential to document any allergy and adverse reaction to the drugs. A detailed anterior and posterior segment is mandated in each case subjected to cataract surgery. Anterior segment examination of lids to rule blepharitis, meibomian gland disease, trichiasis, distichiasis, and any other adnexal pathology, conjunctiva and sclera to rule out conjunctivitis, episcleritis, scleritis, any nodule or mass, corneal examination to rule out punctate epithelial erosions, guttae infiltrate or any corneal scar, anterior chamber depth assessment to rule angle-closure glaucoma, iris to look for any heterochromia, iris atrophy which may indicate past herpes infection, Koeppe or Busacca nodules, pupillary examination to rule out the persistent pupillary membrane, relative afferent pupillary defect, and posterior synechiae, festooned pupil, occlusio pupillae and seclusion pupillae, lens status to assess the grade and type of cataract and ocular motility assessment to rule out any nerve palsy.