Most animals require no exogenous vitamin C. For humans, however, vitamin C is an essential vitamin. Humans lack the enzyme L-gulonolactone oxidase, and people must ingest it. Therefore, vitamin C deficiency and its manifestations have largely been a product of inadequate dietary intake. Vitamin C is naturally found in fresh fruits and vegetables; for example, grapefruits, oranges, lemons, limes, potatoes, spinach, broccoli, red peppers, and tomatoes. Up to 90% of vitamin C is consumed in the form of vegetables and fruits. Lack of exposure to these foods has been the most frequent cause of the deficiency. Additionally, vitamin C is heat-sensitive, and historically, preparation (boiling or cooking) has removed the nutritional value. While a small amount of vitamin C is found within leukocytes, adrenal glands, or the pituitary, there is very little storage of vitamin C in the body, and therefore, plasma concentration is largely related to recent intake. Total body storage of vitamin C is 1500 mg, and clinical features of deficiency occur after that level is reduced to less than 350 mg.

Risk factors for Vitamin C deficiency include:

- Alcoholism

- Babies only fed cow's milk

- Seniors only consuming tea and toast diet

- Poor people who are not able to afford fruits and vegetables

- Smokers

- Individuals with eating disorders

- Type 1 diabetes who have high vitamin C requirements

- Individuals with disorders of the GI tract like inflammatory bowel disease.

- Individuals with iron overload, which leads to wasting of vitamin C by the kidneys

- Individuals with restrictive diets, food allergies