There are two techniques commonly used for percutaneous drainage, the Seldinger and Trocar techniques. The choice of technique depends on the size and the location of the abscess. The Seldinger technique is used for small, deep, high risk and difficult to access abscesses, whereas the Trocar Technique is used for large superficial collections.

The patient is positioned on the table and connected to the monitor for real-time monitoring of vital signs. An IV line is placed for intravenous sedation and fluids if needed. The area is cleaned and prepped in the usual sterile fashion. The need for local anesthesia with or without conscious sedation depends on the provider and the location of the abscess. Local anesthesia can improve patient compliance with the procedure, while conscious sedation may be warranted for longer, more painful procedures. A small incision is made in the skin to introduce the catheter. With the Seldinger technique, initial access to the cavity is gained using a 21- or 22-gauge needle.

The provider then introduces a 0.018-in wire conversion to 0.035- or 0.038-in wire with the use of a coaxial catheter introduction system. The trocar technique, a small gauge needle, is again utilized to perform aspiration of the abscess contents. This gains access to space and also confirms proper positioning. A coaxial combination catheter should be inserted parallel to this introducer needle, which allows the advancement of a catheter directly into the collection. Once in place through either technique, a catheter is connected to a drainage bag outside of the body. The catheter will remain in place with a drainage bag to collect the contents of the infection. Often drains will take advantage of a negative pressure collection system to aid drainage. Once the abscess or fluid collection is successfully drained, the catheter may then be removed. It may take several days to complete the drainage of an abscess.