Courses such as the Training Orthopaedic Trainers (delivered by the British Orthopaedic Association), Training the Trainers (delivered by the RCSEng, and RCSEd) set out learning outcomes which include the need for trainers to employ technology-enhanced learning (TEL) and simulation where possible. In light of the recent COVID-19 global pandemic, educators have taken to TEL solutions and online platforms, including webinar-based teaching, to educate trainees remotely. The use of such technologies is ideal for adult learners and should be incorporated into training in the post-COVID-19 era. Faculty development days and supervisor training should reflect the use of TEL solutions to enhance locally delivered training. Reflection is already utilized as a learning tool in the current surgical e-portfolio in the UK (Intercollegiate Surgical Curriculum Programme or ISCP); however, faculty should be made aware of newer tools such as online discussion boards which can be implemented to provide a more informal platform for peer and expert discussion and feedback. Training days will be the best way for faculty to practice and learn how to use simulation models. Familiarity with assessment checklists and required competency on simulation models may be achieved through eLearning.

Awareness of educational theory that is relevant to surgical training is invaluable for the delivery of effective teaching. Both faculty and trainees should be aware of a universal model to provide structure to opportunistic clinical teaching. The Briefing, Intraoperative Teaching, Debriefing (BID) model is one such tool which makes operative teaching more deliberate and emphasizes the importance of timely, unambiguous feedback to prevent internalization of erroneous skills and behaviors.