Widespread musculoskeletal pain and fatigue are the characteristics of fibromyalgia and are often accompanied by cognitive and psychiatric disturbances.

**Symptoms**

- **Widespread musculoskeletal pain**– The chief complaint of a patient with fibromyalgia is widespread musculoskeletal pain which is bilateral and involves both upper and lower parts of the body. The pain may be localized initially, commonly in the neck and shoulders. The predominant description of the pain is muscle pain, but the patients may complain of joint pain as well.

- **Fatigue**– The other cardinal symptom of fibromyalgia is fatigue.

- **Cognitive disturbances**– Often referenced as "fibro fog,"; patients have difficulty with attention and doing tasks that require rapid changes in thought.

- **Other symptoms**-  30 to 50 percent of patients have anxiety and/or depression at the time of diagnosis.

The 1990 ACR fibromyalgia classification criteria included tenderness at least 11 of 18 defined tender points

- Suboccipital muscle insertion bilaterally

- The anterior aspect of C5 to C7 intertransverse spaces bilaterally

- Mid-upper border of trapezius bilaterally

- Origin of supraspinatus muscle bilaterally

- Second costochondral junctions bilaterally

- 2cm distal to the lateral epicondyles bilaterally

- Upper outer quadrants of buttocks bilaterally

- Greater trochanteric prominence bilaterally

- Medial fat pad of the knees bilaterally

The pressure appropriate for detecting these tender points should be equal to 4 kg/cm^2,  enough to whiten the nail bed of the fingertip of the examiner.

However, given many limitations of the tender point examination, the 2010 diagnostic criteria eliminated these findings. The criteria are mentioned below under evaluation.