- Patients with perineal discomfort or diagnosed with painful perineal pathology, such as prostatitis or chronic pelvic pain syndrome, who fail to improve on standard therapy should be re-evaluated for possible pudendal neuralgia.

- Take advantage of physical therapy for 6 to 12 weeks despite the lack of definitive prospective studies. If it works, the patient benefits and more invasive treatments are avoided. If not, no harm is done.

- Adding TENS treatment to physical therapy will help improve outcomes.

- Avoid using opioid medications if possible.

- Provide patients with realistic expectations of their prognosis and likely treatment outcomes.

- Take advantage of a team approach to this chronic pain problem by including physical therapists, psychologists, interventional radiologists, surgeons, and pain management specialists.

- Consider a trial anesthetic nerve block injection into Alcock's canal to ascertain the patient's likely response to surgical decompression. If the result is insufficient or inadequate, consider using an image-guided nerve block injection.

- Sacral neuromodulation is safe, reasonably effective, minimally invasive, and frequently underutilized for pudendal neuralgia. It should be considered a possible alternative to surgical decompression in selected patients.

- Patients who fail decompressive surgery may still benefit from sacral neuromodulation. About 2/3 will respond.

- Laparoscopic nerve decompression combined with simultaneous neurostimulator placement has been a successful strategy employed experimentally in a few intractable cases of severe pudendal neuralgia.

- Consider alternative therapies (in a clinical trial if possible) such as cryotherapy, pulsed radiofrequency ablation, and lipofilling in selected patients depending on available resources and patient desires after fully and fairly reviewing all reasonable treatment options.

- Chronic pain patients can sometimes be manipulative, frustrated, depressed, anxious, and hypercritical. Consider using mental health and pain management support to help.

- Recognize that some patients can become suicidal and take appropriate precautions.