The placenta is a vital fetal organ necessary for a healthy pregnancy for both mother and fetus. Incomplete or disordered development of the placenta may cause fetal abnormalities or adverse events in the mother as well. An early gestational sampling of the placenta can be done to test for fetal anomalies, but these procedures do not come without risk to the wellbeing of the fetus. In the case of an abnormal delivery or fetal defects, the placenta can undergo examination for gross and histological analysis.

Most placental diseases can have treatment by preserving the pregnant woman and the fetus from serious consequences. Placenta previa: often, a low placenta returns to its normal position after a few weeks, thanks to the push of the uterus. Where the condition of the low placenta remains throughout the pregnancy, a cesarean section is a strong recommendation. Placenta accreta: to prevent the risk of hemorrhage, an early cesarean section of a few weeks is recommended. In these cases, a hysterectomy, or removal of the uterus without precluding future pregnancies, cannot be excluded. Aged placenta: a diet based on vitamins and calcium and good habits (for example, not smoking) prevents the calcification of the placenta. Placental insufficiency: there is no specific treatment for this type of problem. It is good to undergo periodic checks close to each other to monitor the evolution of the fetus, as well as where it is possible, treat the behavior or pathology of the pregnant woman. Placental detachment: depending on the type of detachment, the hypothesis of monitoring the patient by asking for absolute rest or, as in most cases, proceeding with cesarean section, depending on the time of pregnancy, will be evaluated.