There is no effective treatment for rabies. Prevention is the mainstay of treatment including programs involving domestic animal vaccination, education, and monitoring.

Wound care is the first step in the treatment of any individual with a feared rabies exposure. Appropriate wound care alone has been noted to be almost 100% effective if initiated within three hours of inoculation. Recommendations include scrubbing the wound and surrounding area with soap and water (solutions include 20% soap solution, povidone, and alcohol solutions), and swabbing deeply for puncture wounds, with irrigation. After cleaning the wound thoroughly the application of a virucidal agent such as benzalkonium chloride or povidone-iodine is recommended.

In the United States, when a bite is known to be from a bat, skunk, raccoon, or fox, treat immediately with rabies vaccine and rabies immune globulin. For all other bites, consult the public health department. Outside of the United States, a dog bite should be treated immediately with vaccine and rabies immune globulin.

Treatment is then initiated based on if the patient was previously immunized or not. For patients with previous immunization, a typical treatment may be with a human diploid cell vaccine or purified chick embryo cell vaccine at a dose of 1 mL injected intramuscularly on the day it occurs (day 0) and on day 3.

If the patient has not been previously immunized, the treatment still involves dosing with one of the two vaccines listed above with 1 mL given intramuscularly on days 0, 3, 7, and 14 (and on day 28 if the individual is immunosuppressed). The dose of the vaccine should be given at a site distant from where the second part of treatment (human rabies immune globulin or HRIG) is given. These unimmunized patients are treated with human rabies immune globulin as well at a dose of 20 IU/kg, with a preference to infiltrate as much of that dose around the wound as possible. Any remaining dose of human rabies immune globulin not infiltrated into the wound is then given intramuscularly, and as mentioned above is given at a site distant from the vaccine.

Recently, recommendations have been updated in the United States, and since bats are by far the major source of rabies here, any person who awakens from sleep and finds a bat in the room should be urgently immunized.