The fascia lata (FL) invests the entire length and width of the thigh but varies in thickness throughout. Its thicker portion is at the proximal and lateral portions of the thigh, where fibrous tissue from the gluteus maximus becomes integrated into the fascia lata. The FL extends medially where it invests the adductor muscles and again is strengthened at the knee. At the knee, the fascia lata receives a fibrous continuation from the biceps femoris tendon, from the sartorius and the quadriceps femoris. The FL is attached to the sacrum and coccyx posteriorly. Its lateral origins are from the iliac crest, the inguinal ligament, and the superior pubic ramus anteriorly. Medially and posteromedially, its origin is the inferior ramus of the pubis, ischial tuberosity, and the lower border of the sacrotuberous ligament. From its origin at the iliac crest, it passes over the gluteus medius to the upper border of the gluteus maximus.

The fascia lata separates into two layers, traversing the gluteus maximus muscle deep and superiorly, and at the inferior border of the gluteus maximus, the fascia reunites. The lateral aspect of the fascia lata becomes integrated into the gluteus maximus. The anterolateral fascia lata and its corresponding origin of the TFL extend down the lateral aspect of the thigh as two distinct layers. One is the superficial layer, and the other is deep to the gluteus maximus muscle. At the distal end of the gluteus maximus, the two layers of the fascia lata become united, forming a thick band of fibrous tissue that is contiguous with the iliotibial band. The deep aspect of the fascia lata that is contiguous with the iliotibial band (ITB) also extends superiorly to join the lateral part of the capsule of the hip joint.

The fascia lata is a complex layer of fibrous tissue that has several surgical and clinical implications in terms of surgical exposures and disorders involving the ITB, TFL, and gluteus maximus because of its integrated nature in anatomy and function. The FL attaches inferiorly to bony prominences around the knee joint, including the femoral and tibial condyles and the head of the fibula. Over the medial and lateral aspect of the patella, the fascia lata is strengthened by transverse fibers of the distal portions of all the quadriceps muscles, excluding the rectus femoris. These muscles insert into the patella via the quadriceps tendon and are all integrated with the FL. Traveling distally, the deep surface of the FL diverges into two intermuscular septa that attach at the linea aspera. The lateral intermuscular septum is the stronger of the two, and extends from the gluteus maximus to the femoral lateral condyle, separating the vastus lateralis anteriorly from the biceps femoris short head posteriorly. It gives partial origin to these muscles as well. The medial intermuscular septum is thinner and separates the vastus medialis from the adductor muscles. Multiple smaller septa function to separate the individual thigh muscles and cover the muscles superficially with fibrous tissue. Lastly, the deep fascia of the lower leg is a continuation of the FL. The tensor fasciae latae localizes within the anterior compartment of the thigh along with other femoral muscles, including pectineus, iliopsoas, quadriceps femoris, and the sartorius. The anterior thigh compartment muscles are innervated by the femoral nerve, which is supplied by the ventral rami of the L2-L4.

The orientation of the connective fibers is directed mainly in the longitudinal direction. The thickness of the fascia lata is slightly thicker in the male than in the female. There is also a difference in the gender of tension expressed. In the longitudinal direction, the force expressed is greater in men, but in the medial area of the fascia lata, there is greater tension in women, always with longitudinal traction.

From a histological point of view, the tissue of the fascia lata is mainly composed of collagen fibers, a lower percentage of elastin within the ground substance, compared to other brands of the body (it has a denser structure). We find the extracellular matrix, which is the greatest presence in the fascia, fibroblasts, and mast cells. We find myofibroblasts and telocytes.