**Popliteal Artery**

The predominant arterial supply in the popliteal fossa is the popliteal artery. The artery represents the distal continuation of the femoral artery after passing through the adductor hiatus of the adductor magnus muscle. The popliteal artery then ends at the lower border of the popliteus muscle before further dividing into the anterior tibial artery and the common trunk of the posterior tibial and peroneal arteries.

- **Medial superior genicular artery**: branch of the popliteal artery that runs anterior to the semimembranosus and semitendinosus. Anastomoses with lateral superior genicular artery.

- **Lateral superior genicular artery**: branch of the popliteal artery that passes above lateral femoral condyle. Anastomoses with medial superior genicular artery, lateral femoral circumflex, and lateral inferior genicular arteries.

- **Medial inferior genicular artery:**arises from the popliteal artery and descends with popliteus muscle, then passes the medial tibial condyle. Anastomoses with lateral inferior and medial superior genicular arteries.

- **Lateral inferior genicular artery:**arises from the popliteal artery and passes under the gastrocnemius. Anastomoses with inferior medial genicular, superior lateral genicular, and anterior recurrent tibial artery.

- **Middle genicular artery:**branch of the popliteal artery that supplies the ligaments and synovial membrane of the knee joint.

**Popliteal Vein**

The popliteal vein is superficial to the popliteal artery in the fossa. The popliteal vein receives venous circulation from several tributaries. The anterior tibial vein, posterior tibial vein, and the peroneal vein merge at the popliteus muscle to make the popliteal vein. Within the popliteal fossa, the small saphenous vein feeds into the popliteal vein and is located more superficially, but transverses the deep fascia in between both gastrocnemius heads. Similarly to the popliteal artery, the popliteal vein extends superiorly through the adductor hiatus before transitioning into the femoral vein.

Popliteal lymph nodes can be found in the fossa, as well. Several are located in the fat embedded in the fossa. There are also nodes found beneath the popliteal fascia as well as along the popliteal vessels. These nodes' efferent path mostly follows the femoral vessels and drains into the deep inguinal lymph tissue. Some popliteal nodes may also be located near the great saphenous vein and travel more to the superficial inguinal lymph tissue.