One of the problems in HQM is that the legal and ethical responsibilities for patient care and the management decisions for care are often not performed by the same persons, and there are conflicts of interest concerning these decisions. HQMs who are not simultaneously HCPs are incentivized to increase efficiency and reduce cost. However, increased efficiency in the service of human beings often does not translate to increased effectiveness. As discussed in the Defining Quality and Value section above, quality and value depend on patient-customer outcomes.

Any HQM who, for the sake of efficiency (or cost reduction), sacrifices service features designed to preserve person-centered care and/or patient-customer safety is gambling with the patient/customers' health and potentially worsening the quality (or value) of the service.

**Safety**

The US executive and legislative branches together update laws designed to improve patient safety, such as the Healthcare Research and Quality Act of 1999, which led to a report generated by the US Institute of Medicine (now called the National Academy  Medicine) called To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System.

Despite the mandates and penalties by government and non-governmental organizations, and despite more data available and general awareness in the 21st century than ever before that HCPs' failure to conduct best safety practices results in human death, American HCPs and HCO managers collectively have not changed much in their attitudes or behaviors. As of 2018, HCP safety errors were still estimated to comprise the third leading cause of death in the United States.

Despite a mandate from TJC (most recently in 2017) for HCO managers to establish a "culture of safety" in their HCO and HCO managers advertising that they and the people in their organizations have done so, the medical error data serves as strong evidence that HCOs often still lack a "culture of safety," which overlaps with the concept of a "just culture." According to TJC, in such a culture:

- All HCPs prioritize patient safety over other business factors, such as the cost and time to complete tasks. According to TJC, HCO employees should undergo testing on their understanding of safety measures using a validated testing procedure every 18 months.

- The organization's leaders promote, reward, and 'champion' the attitude and behaviors that create such a culture. According to TJC, this includes 1) carrying out a nonpunitive approach to reporting and 2) learning from adverse events, close calls, and unsafe conditions. NQF also has consensus standards for how HCO leaders, HQMs, and HCPs should respond when there is an adverse event.

HCOs with such a culture adopt practices and technologies approved/endorsed by the organizations mentioned above and from published quality research, particularly level 1 research. The effect of a culture of safety on HCO revenue is difficult to measure, but it likely saves HCOs money. For example, employees at such HCOs tend to have high job satisfaction and low turnover, and patient-customers are more likely to return for business and less likely to file suits and complaints that lead to fines.

Organizations should apply poka-yoke (mistake-proofing) measures to every possible process related to patient care, as well as red rules, which are rules that must always be followed to the letter of the policy and can be used by any employee to stop a patient care process that is not being performed according to pre-established standard procedure. As the managers of the Toyota Production System established, the employees who are performing the tasks are often the best persons to identify the features of the system that result in errors (and, by extension, hazards to patient safety).

**Patient-Customer Centered Care (Also Called Person-Centered Care)**

In general, from an ethical, legal, and business standpoint, patient needs should prioritize the needs of all other stakeholders in the healthcare process. In real life, however, when there is a conflict in goals between the patient-customer and the business or HCP, persons working in healthcare often de-prioritize patient-customer goals. Healthcare managers and HCPs can better serve patient-customers by learning their objectives, aligning business goals with patient/customers' goals when it is ethically and legally appropriate to do so, and by 'activating' patient-customers.

It is true that each patient is different and has different preferences for decision-making control in different circumstances. Nevertheless, in Western culture, empowering patient-customers to make decisions independently or with their pre-established trust network of family or friends generally results in equal or improved patient-customer outcomes and satisfaction compared to treating patient-customers with paternalism and limiting their options. A Cochrane Database systematic review of 115 controlled studies representing 34,444 research participants reported that providing patients with decision support tools:

- Improves patients' knowledge regarding their medical care options,

- Improves the accuracy of their perception of possible benefits and harms,

- Increases the degree to which they engage in decision-making,

- Reduces HCP-patient decision conflicts, and

- Increases the likelihood that patients choose treatments that are consistent with their value.

The list of methods for improving patient-customer-centered care is lengthy. According to data reported on Statista.com, approximately 90% of Americans use smartphones. Therefore, just one way patient-customer centered care can be achieved in the modern world is digitizing and automating patient communication. HCOs can enable patients to communicate with them using an encrypted electronic 'patient portal.' Using technology in this way can:

Allow patent customers to access portions of or all their medical records, including medical images, enable patient-customers to submit photographs they have taken of their physical appearance (e.g., varicosities, wounds, and other dermatologic abnormalities) into their medical record, provide patient-customers with internet links to freely available pertinent medical literature, including patient or practitioner level information produced by national medical societies which they can review before, during, and/or after their visit for healthcare services.

Give patient-customers access to an online scheduling platform where they can initiate appointments based on currently listed availabilities (which can then be approved or modified by a nurse or other HCP through a traditional triage system), and grant patients with a 24-hour means of communication that enables them to send information to their HCP at any time of day that can then be reviewed at the HCP's own time. This can more quickly enable return instructions to the patient customer compared to a 20th century model of requiring the patient-customer to call only during regular business hours and then wait on hold to speak with a designated person who can provide the same 'secretarial' transmission of information to the physician or other designated HCP.