The SUN working group criteria for sympathetic ophthalmia diagnosis is a patient with a history of unilateral ocular trauma or surgery with ocular inflammation in both eyes and either anterior uveitis with vitreous inflammation or panuveitis with choroidal involvement.

**B-scan Ultrasonography**

B-scan ultrasonography may reveal diffuse choroidal thickening and serous retinal detachments. B-scan is particularly valuable in the case of dense vitritis, posterior synechiae, corneal opacity, or any other pathology that prevents a clear view of the retina.

**Fundus Autofluorescence (FAF)**

FAF detects lipofuscin in the RPE, enabling visualization of RPE dysfunction and death. This simple, non-invasive test is useful in assessing sympathetic ophthalmia, showing the extent of damage caused by inflammation and helping identify potential sequelae like choroidal neovascularization.

In acute disease, a petaloid pattern of hyper-autofluorescence centered on the optic nerve may be present in areas of serous retinal detachments.

FAF in chronic sympathetic ophthalmia has a varied presentation depending on the sequelae of the disease, as previously described. Decreased autofluorescence may be detected secondary to outer retinal damage, RPE loss, nummular scars, and peripapillary atrophy. Increased autofluorescence may be seen in cystic macular edema, subretinal fibrosis, and RPE proliferation.

**Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT)**

Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) with or without enhanced depth imaging (EDI-OCT) and swept-source OCT (SS-OCT) are non-invasive imaging modalities that allow for high-resolution examination of the retina and choroid.

Sympathetic ophthalmia may initially present with serous retinal detachments that can be seen on swept-source OCT. These often contain hyperreflective septa, representing bacillary layer detachment splitting the photoreceptor layer at the inner segment myoid. Of note, this finding is also seen in Vogt-Kayanagi-Harada (VKH) disease and resolves rapidly with corticosteroid treatment.

Dalen-Fuchs nodules, classically seen in 25 to 35% of patients with sympathetic ophthalmia, initially appear as round hyperreflective areas in the outer retina with occasional serous detachments of the overlying neurosensory retina. These lesions regress with therapy.

**Optical Coherence Tomography Angiography (OCTA)**

OCTA is a non-invasive imaging modality designed to examine the chorioretinal vasculature without using intravenous dye. OCTA may demonstrate ischemia and reduced capillary density.

**Fluorescein Angiography (FA)**

FA is an excellent non-invasive imaging modality that can provide useful information both for the diagnosis and treatment monitoring of patients with sympathetic ophthalmia. In the acute phase of sympathetic ophthalmia, two patterns may be seen. The first is nearly identical to the pattern seen in VKH with initial diffuse pinpoint hyperfluorescent spots with late leakage with or without hyperfluorescence of the disc. Another less common variant is initial multiple hypofluorescent spots with late-phase pooling.

The second acute phase pattern resembles acute posterior multifocal placoid pigment epitheliopathy (APMPPE), demonstrating initial hypofluorescent foci that become hyperfluorescent in the late phase with staining of the lesions. Unlike APMPPE, the lesions in sympathetic ophthalmia are elevated and mottled in appearance.

Chronic sympathetic ophthalmia FA findings are more variable, depending on the inflammatory sequelae of the disease. Nummular scars from focal damage to the RPE and inner choroid present as window defects on FA.

**Indocyanine Green Angiography (ICGA)**

ICGA can be used as an adjunct to FA, given its superior ability to assess the choroid and choroidal infiltrates. A common finding in sympathetic ophthalmia on ICGA is multiple hypocyanescent spots that correspond to hyperfluorescent spots on the FA. Histopathological studies of these lesions have confirmed that these spots are caused by cellular infiltrates of the choroid or due to blockage by overlying fluid.