A clinician makes a definitive diagnosis of DGS in individuals with a microdeletion of chromosome 22 at the 22q11.2 locus. Classic evaluations of genetic abnormalities, such as trisomies, including the Giemsa banding technique, are incapable of revealing microdeletions. Microdeletions responsible for DGS are therefore detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA), single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array, comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) microarray, or quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). The availability and cost of these techniques can delay diagnosis, particularly in resource-poor settings.

Patients diagnosed with or suspected of having DGS should undergo extensive evaluation, particularly if life-threatening cardiac or immunologic deficits are present. The following tests should merit consideration:

- Echocardiogram to evaluate conotruncal abnormalities

- Complete blood count with differential

- T and B Lymphocyte subset panels

- Flow cytometry to assess T cell repertoire

- Immunoglobulin levels

- Vaccine titers for evaluation of response to vaccines

- Serum ionized calcium and phosphorus levels

- Parathyroid hormone level

- Chest x-ray for thymic shadow evaluation

- Renal ultrasound for possible renal and genitourinary defects

- Serum creatinine

- TSH

- Testing for growth hormone deficiency

It is important to note that the broad spectrum of disease severity makes the evaluation of DGS particularly challenging. Cases involving significant cardiac, thymic, and craniofacial deficits are more easily recognizable than those lacking severe features. Implementation of advancing genomic studies and facial recognition technology in modern medicine may assist in more effective diagnosis and evaluation of DGS patients.