Korsakoff syndrome is a disease mediated by chronic vitamin B1 (thiamin) deficiency, usually as a complication of alcoholism. Irreversible damage on structures like the prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus can alter information storage. Confabulation is one of the most common signs of this disease, where the patient fills the gaps with false information in the memories they can’t fully recall.

Patients with damage to the medial temporal lobe, the location of the hippocampus, seem to have trouble with the creation of new memories. These patients seem to easily forget or commit mistakes even after receiving similar stimuli many times. Also, their short-term working memory storage is impaired. For example, patients with temporal lobe damage, demonstrate an inability to previous correct mistakes when given repeated exposure to the correct information. The authors suggest this is due to exceeding the working memory capacity of these patients by providing too much information in short retention time.

Alzheimer disease is the most common form of dementia, typically known for a loss of short-term memory and the degeneration of the frontal and temporal lobes. Although patients tend to forget where they are, who they are with, or what they are doing at the moment, they may still remember specific details from their past. In the early stages of the disease, episodic and semantic memories, as well as procedural memories, tend to be spared. Semantic memory tends to be more affected than episodic.

Memory deficits can appear in other types of prevalent dementia, such as vascular dementia, Parkinson disease, and Lewy body dementia. Vascular dementia may spare or affect memory. It depends on the territory affected by a stroke or by a hemorrhage so that procedural memory may be more intact than declarative memory. Dementia associated with Parkinson disease and dementia with Lewy bodies are two associated types of dementia. Symptomatology and the duration of symptoms separate these diseases. Dementia with Lewy bodies starts with cognitive decline and hallucinations, while Parkinson's starts with motor symptoms like rigidity, bradykinesia, and tremor. Short-term memory is affected, while long-term memory tends to demonstrate relative sparing during the early stages of disease progression (including episodic and semantic).