Whether IT opioids are added to local anesthetic to provide surgical anesthesia or injected alone, they result in blunting of the intraoperative stress response, decreased requirement for anesthetic agents, and improved postoperative analgesia. Low-dose fentanyl, 10 – 20 mcg, is often added to the local anesthetic for short or less invasive surgeries. For surgeries with large incisions, ITM is usually administered. Applications for specific types of surgery are discussed below.

IT opioids are also very effective in managing patients with severe chronic pain syndromes in whom patient comfort is not achieved with more conventional treatments.

**Foot and Ankle Surgery**

Most foot and ankle surgery is done on an outpatient basis. In these cases, fentanyl (5 to 10 mcg) is the IT opioid of choice. It may improve the quality of the spinal block while supplementing postop analgesia for up to four hours. However, since these patients may be sent home quickly, some prefer to avoid IT opioids, as postop nausea, vomiting, or pruritus may delay discharge.

**Cesarean Section**

Neuraxial anesthesia is the preferred technique for caesarian deliveries in the United States and Canada, used for more than 95% of these procedures.

**Orthopedic**

Spinal anesthesia is beneficial for hip fracture surgery, particularly in the elderly, and a 2005 best practice review recommended regional anesthesia whenever possible for this type of surgery.

**Cardiac**

Multiple groups have reported the use of ITM in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Several groups have reported decreased postoperative pain scores with ITM and diminished postoperative systemic opioids than controls who received no intrathecal injection.

**Monitoring After Administration of Spinal Opioids**

Patients who receive ITM should have an hourly assessment of respiratory rate and level of alertness for the first 12 hours and every two hours from hours 12 to 24. If patients have co-morbidities such as hypertension, cardiac or neurologic disease, a body mass index of 40 or greater, receive any other sedatives or general anesthesia, or receive IV magnesium, respiratory rate, and sedation score should probably be measured hourly for twenty-four hours. In high-risk patients, the addition of capnometry and/or pulse oximetry should be considered. However, it should be noted that desaturation may not occur until late in patients receiving supplemental oxygen. Not uncommonly, a slowing respiratory rate and/or increasing sedation will warn of respiratory depression before desaturation. A respiratory rate of ten breaths/min should prompt an in-depth bed-side assessment. Order sets should require a provider to be notified immediately if the respiratory rate decreases to ten breaths per minute or less. Finally, it is important to note that respiratory depression occurs more frequently in obese patients, possibly due to the presence of obstructive sleep apnea.