Depending on the extent of the disease and other associated conditions, tracheomalacia can be treated conservatively, with medical management, or with surgery. The management of these patients is best when accomplished by an interprofessional team with input from various specialists.

Congenital and mild acquired disease may resolve spontaneously; therefore, these patients should be treated conservatively with adequate monitoring. Healthcare team members should advise parents on appropriate immunizations, vaccinations, and passive smoking avoidance. Although clinicians use bronchodilators, anti-muscarinic agents, mucolytics, and antibiotics, there is currently little evidence for their benefit.

Chest physiotherapy may be necessary to help the management of secretions and prevent airway infections. Prevention and management of GER are mandatory, and specific feeding regimes are required to avoid aspiration and ensure adequate growth and development.

In adults, tracheomalacia may be an incidental finding, and if they do not suffer from any symptoms, a conservative approach should be adopted. Often there is a concurrent disease such as COPD that requires simultaneous management. Continuous positive pressure ventilation (CPAP) is an option for those who fail conservative management. Surgery is the very last resort.

The literature regarding the efficacy of medical treatment options is limited, and the majority of the evidence has its basis in small retrospective studies. There is anecdotal evidence supporting the use of nebulized hypertonic saline in aiding the clearing of mucus and prophylactic antibiotics.

Patients with severe symptoms and acquired disease are more likely to require surgical intervention; this is particularly true of patients who experience apneic spells, failure to thrive, recurrent pneumonia, and cyanotic episodes.

Stenting is an option for very severe disease. There are a variety of different options for intraluminal stenting; however, each poses its own potential issues. Granulation tissue, vascular erosion, and mucosal hyperplasia can occur in various stents. Although silicone stents may be easier to remove, they require a general anesthetic and insertion via rigid bronchoscopy.

Historically, surgery involved tracheostomy, which allows long-term mechanical ventilation if required and a degree of airway stenting. Clinicians can perform tracheostomy either surgically or percutaneously. However, the relative morbidity can be high; therefore, clinicians should reserve this option for end-stage disease or either proximal or diffuse disease.

Aortopexy is a surgical approach to tracheomalacia and a favored option in many centers. The approach provides an anterior lifting of the aorta that is sutured to the posterior surface of the sternum. Nevertheless, there are different surgical approaches and different techniques. Aortopexy is most commonly performed in the anterior direction. It involves the anterior fixation of the ascending aorta and may be performed via a left anterior thoracotomy, partial sternotomy, or thoracoscopically.

Key procedural steps may include the movement of overlying vessels to the back of the sternum, elevation of the pulmonary arteries, and occasionally direct suturing to the trachea if required. These techniques aim to increase the space within the mediastinum and therefore relieve potential external compressive forces on the trachea. If the clinician places sutures in the vessel, a balance between suture strength and the risk of hemorrhage is a consideration. Recently, there have been encouraging results from a single-center study looking at posterior aortopexy, which may address the inwards collapse of the membranous posterior wall of the trachea during inspiration.