The orbit is a pyramid-shaped space formed by seven bones. The orbital roof consists of the frontal bone and the lesser wing of the sphenoid bone. The lateral wall of the orbit consists of the zygomatic bone and the greater wing of the sphenoid bone. The floor consists of the maxillary, palatine, and zygomatic bones. The medial wall consists of the ethmoid, maxillary, lacrimal bones, and the lesser wing of the sphenoid bone. The medial and inferior orbital walls are thinnest and most prone to fracture following trauma to the face.

The globe is located in the anterior orbit. The outer shell of the globe consists of the sclera posteriorly and cornea anteriorly. Within the outer shell lies the uveal tract, which includes the ciliary body and choroid. The innermost layer is the neurosensory retina, which may become detached following trauma.

The lens is suspended by zonules connected to the ciliary body and divides the globe into the anterior and posterior segments. Traumatic violation of the lens zonules may cause dislocation of the lens. The iris and pupil are anterior to the lens and subdivide the anterior segment into the anterior and posterior chambers, which are both filled with aqueous humor. Posterior to the lens is a large cavity filled with vitreous humor.

Attached to the sclera exteriorly are the six extra-ocular muscles responsible for eye movement. Four of the six muscles originate at the orbital apex and attach to the sclera 5.5 to 7.5 millimeters behind the edge of the cornea forming a cone-like structure. Within this cone are blood vessels, lymphatics, fat, and the optic nerve sheath, which contains the optic nerve and the ophthalmic artery. The apex of the cone is a crowded space where many nerves and blood vessels pass through small fissures and foramina. Fractures or hematomas in this area may damage these structures, which is important to assess on imaging. The vital structure for vision is the optic nerve, which consists of the axons of cells that transmit visual input received by the retina. Damage to the optic nerve may lead to permanent vision loss.