The diagnosis of tetanus is clinical with no particular laboratory test. Providers may find a positive wound culture and the isolation of the organism; however, this occurs in only 30% of cases. Key features to note when diagnosing tetanus include acute onset and muscle contractures with generalized spasms without any other medical cause. Some patients can recall a history of injury, but not all.

An assay for antitoxin levels, though not readily available, may help in excluding the possibility of tetanus. A serum antitoxin level of 0.01 IU/mL or higher is generally accepted as protective, making the possibility of tetanus less likely.

Spatula test that has been described before shows high specificity and sensitivity for the clinical diagnosis of tetanus. This involves using a soft-tipped instrument to touch the posterior pharyngeal wall. If this elicits an involuntary jaw contraction instead of the normal gag reflex, this suggests a positive test.

It is important to note that infections occur in people with no immunity or low serum levels of anti-tetanus antibodies. Life-threatening complications from tetanus can occur and include pneumonia secondary to aspiration, laryngospasm, rhabdomyolysis, upper gastrointestinal bleed, cardiovascular instability such as transient cardiac arrest, tachycardia, or bradycardia, arrhythmias, hypertension, acute renal failure, and secondary wound infections. Mortality from the infection occurs from respiratory failure and cardiovascular collapse, associated with autonomic dysfunction.