Generally, these patients present with acute onset of several hours of memory loss. They will display repetitive questioning and have no recall of how they got where they are or what they did in the time immediately preceding the onset. Often, the person(s) accompanying the patient will report recent activity such as vigorous exertion, coitus, or severe stress. They will not report a loss of consciousness. They do not lose their self-identity ability.  There are no accompanying neurological deficits or other cognitive deficits.  There will be no history of trauma, and the symptoms will resolve within 24 hours of onset. The presence of active seizures excludes TGA, whether new-onset or chronic.  The symptoms are not present when the patient awakens in the morning but occur later in the day.

Patients will present with no focal neurological deficits but will often not recall how they got to the hospital, that they are in the hospital, or the day's events. They will often not recall people or locations from the past few hours and will feel disoriented as a consequence. Even with visual cues, such as pictures taken during the day, they will have no recollection of the events. They will repeatedly ask the same question, as they forget they just asked the question moments before. The symptoms will begin to improve within hours and memory will slowly, and almost entirely, return over the course of the next 24 hours. Initially, it was thought that total resolution was achieved, but more recent studies suggest there can be some minor residual impairment surrounding the event as well as some subclinical cognitive deficits, even years later.