The RCA and LMCA extend from the aortic root to supply different regions of the heart. The RCA gives rise to the sinoatrial nodal branch of the right coronary artery, posterior descending artery branch of the RCA, and the marginal branch. The LMCA branches into the circumflex and LAD. The circumflex artery gives rise to the left marginal artery and posterior descending artery (in a left-dominant heart). The left anterior descending artery gives off the diagonal branches.

The RCA supplies blood to the right side of the heart. The sinoatrial nodal branch of the RCA provides blood to the SA node, and the atrioventricular nodal artery delivers blood to the AV node. The marginal branch of the right coronary artery provides blood supply to the lateral portion of the right ventricle. The posterior descending artery branch supplies blood to the inferior aspect of the heart.

The LMCA supplies blood to the left side of the heart. The LAD provides blood to the anterior ventricular septum and the greater portion of the anterior portion of the left ventricle. The LCx supplies blood to the lateral wall of the left ventricle and sometimes to the posterior inferior aspect of the heart when there is left heart dominance.

The heart has a lymphatic system (lymphatic vessels, lymph nodes, and lymphoid organs) just like every other organ in the body. The lymphatic system penetrates through the sub-epicardium, myocardium, and sub-endocardium. The direction of flow starts at the sub-endocardial layer where the lymphatic capillaries absorb interstitial fluid to the collecting lymphatic vessels within the sub-epicardial layer. There are two main collecting lymphatic vessels. The first one runs along with the conal vein then towards the left pulmonary trunk as it approaches towards the mediastinum to drain into the left and right ventricles. The second main collecting lymphatic vessels travel along the left marginal vein, coronary sinus, and left atrium up to the mediastinum.