As with some other antiparkinsonian medications, trihexyphenidyl is known to be a drug of abuse. Misuse has been reported primarily in patients with chronic schizophrenia and those with other substance abuse, the former being less frequent abusers of other substances. A recent systematic review published in 2022 reveals an alarming trend of misuse of trihexyphenidyl. Benzhexol/Trihexyphenidyl (THP) is the most abused anticholinergic drug. It is frequently combined with benzodiazepines, alcohol, cannabis, amphetamines, opioids, LSD, PCP, nicotine, and cocaine.

Trihexyphenidyl toxicity resembles atropine intoxication (antimuscarinic effects) with xerostomia, anhidrosis, mydriasis, nausea/vomiting, tachycardia, hyperpyrexia, decreased bowel and bladder movements, rash, and hyperthermia, which usually accompany excessive doses. CNS symptoms observed with overdose include confusion, restlessness, agitation, incoordination, paranoid and psychotic reactions, delirium, and hallucinations. Reports exist of CNS depression leading to coma, respiratory and circulatory failure, and death in cases of severe overdose.

The management of overdoses is always supportive; establish adequate airway patency immediately. Physostigmine is a specific antagonist that acts centrally and peripherally to counter the antimuscarinic effects. Convulsions and hyperactivity require management with diazepam, but with caution, as the risk of CNS depression could be exacerbated. Acidosis and hypoxia should have appropriate therapy. Dysrhythmias should not have treated with antiarrhythmic drugs. Atonic bladder and bowel are treatable with carbachol.