Patient education is key to preventing and controlling hepatitis, especially viral and alcoholic hepatitis. Patients who have viral hepatitis must obtain education educated regarding the importance of routine follow-up and the importance of monitoring the disease progression and development of complications. They should learn about the importance of personal hygiene, including frequent handwashing. People who are traveling to endemic areas should be advised not to drink untreated water or ingest shellfish or raw seafood, and fruits and veritable should always be eaten after being cooked or after being peeled. Patients who have hepatitis A should not handle food for others until they stop shedding the virus. Patients should receive instruction about not sharing any articles, including toothbrushes, razors, or needles that have the potential for contamination with saliva, semen, or blood. All the patients should avoid using hepatotoxic agents, including alcohol and acetaminophen. Patients who are having a disease progression with liver disease should be referred to a gastroenterologist or hepatologist promptly. Patients with features of liver damage that includes liver fibrosis, cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, and features of portal hypertension should be monitored with routine labs.

All pregnant women should have screening for hepatitis B infection and HIV infection. If they test positive for hepatitis B infection, then both the mother and newborn should be treated appropriately. Neonates who are born to mothers who have hepatitis B infection should be given hepatitis B vaccination within 12 hours of birth to prevent the transmission of the virus. Sometimes the mother needs to be treated actively during pregnancy, also depending on her viral load and HIV status.

Healthcare workers should maintain strict infection control practices, and those at risk of contracting hepatitis C virus infection should be offered appropriate health education, testing, and treatment as required. Healthcare providers should be able to identify the individuals at risk and test them for hepatitis C infection. These individuals include people who have a history of injection drug use, persons infected with HIV, individuals with blood-borne exposure to hepatitis C virus, and certain healthcare workers.

Patients with autoimmune hepatitis should be tested for other autoimmune diseases and should be referred early in their illness to a gastroenterologist or a hepatologist. Referral to other specialists like endocrinology or rheumatology is necessary if the clinician finds evidence for other autoimmune disorders during the workup. Patients should have counsel about the importance of side effects of treatment, including corticosteroids, as many of them would require long term treatment.

Patients who are at risk of developing alcoholic hepatitis or who already have alcoholic hepatitis should be educated about abstaining from alcohol completely and about serious health consequences of continued alcohol use. Patients should be referred to rehabilitation programs and should be encouraged to attend them regularly.

**Vaccination**

**Hepatitis A**

Patients should understand the importance of preventing hepatitis, and it requires emphasis that preventing hepatitis is much easier than treating hepatitis. Viral hepatitis is preventable with vaccination.

Individuals traveling to areas where hepatitis A is endemic should be offered hepatitis A vaccine one month before traveling. Other patients who should be offered hepatitis A vaccine are individuals who use illicit drugs, men who have sex with men, patients with chronic liver disease, patients who are awaiting liver transplant or are recipients of a liver transplant, patients receiving clotting factor concentrates, and individuals who work with hepatitis virus-infected primates in laboratories.

Patients can receive inactivated hepatitis A virus vaccine through the intramuscular route with a booster dose recommended after six months. Patients exposed to hepatitis A virus can also be given postexposure prophylaxis with hepatitis A immunoglobulin and should have it within 48 hours of exposure for higher effectiveness. Typically it is recommended for individuals who are in close contact with the patients of hepatitis A infection at home or in daycare centers.

**Hepatitis B**

Hepatitis B vaccine is recommended for all the infants as a part of the routine immunization schedule. It should also be given to the adults at high risk of infection including patients on dialysis, healthcare workers who are at risk of exposure to blood and body fluids, people with sexual partners who have hepatitis B infection, sexually active persons who are not in a long-term monogamous relationship, persons who are being evaluated or treated for sexually transmitted infections, men who have sex with men, individuals who share needles or syringes, household contacts of individuals who have hepatitis B infection, residents and staff of facilities for developmentally disabled persons and in correctional facilities, victims of sexual assault or abuse, people with chronic liver disease, HIV infection or diabetes, individuals who have a known sexual or household contact with an acutely infected patient, and those individuals who had an inadvertent percutaneous or mucosal exposure. Neonates who are born to mothers who have hepatitis B infection should be given hepatitis B vaccination within 12 hours of birth to prevent the transmission of the virus. Plasma-derived or recombinant hepatitis B vaccines are used and are highly effective with more than 95% rate of seroconversion. Infants are given initial vaccination at the time of birth with repeat vaccination at 1 to 2 months and 6 to 18 months. For the adults, after the initial vaccination, it is repeated at one month and six months. Some clinicians recommend booster dose at 5 to 10 years. Individuals can also receive postexposure prophylaxis with hepatitis B immunoglobulin. It is usually given after liver transplantation to those patients who were infected with the hepatitis B virus to reduce the damage to the liver allograft. Patients requiring frequent transfusion of blood products or factor concentrates like patients of hemophilia should also receive the vaccination; however, with higher usage of recombinant factor and better techniques for the viral elimination process have decreased the risk of infection significantly.

**Hepatitis C**

Vaccine for hepatitis C is currently not available, and immunoglobulin is not proven to be effective in preventing transmission. It is, therefore, of high importance to put infection control practices in place and prevent the contamination of blood, organs, and semen and prevent the transmission of the virus into donor pools with better screening and improved viral elimination techniques.

**Hepatitis D**

Since the hepatitis D virus occurs as a coinfection when hepatitis B virus infection is present, transmission can be prevented by immunizing patients against hepatitis B virus. Currently, it is not possible to prevent hepatitis D virus superinfection in patients with chronic hepatitis B infection.

**Hepatitis E**

Vaccine for hepatitis E virus infection does not exist at this time, and the administration of immunoglobulin does not prevent the disease.

**Hepatitis G**

Patients who are transplant recipients or get frequent transfusions, injection drug users, hemodialysis patients, and men who have sex with men are the groups that are at increased risk. However, there is currently not a vaccine available for hepatitis G.