PCN should be avoided or delayed in certain circumstances but there are no absolute contraindications.

As for all procedures, it is advisable to start with the least potentially harmful manner of therapy. Transurethral access should generally be considered as the first line whenever feasible to avoid the risks inherent with new percutaneous access procedures. Reconsider the procedure if the patient has a predicted very short-term survival.

Untreated urinary tract infections are a relative contraindication.

Attempting PCN on a non-dilated system may be deferred temporarily if there is a chance that the calyces may increase in size with a short delay to make the procedure easier and possibly safer.  Certain factors may need to be addressed prior to attempting the procedure, such as risk factors for hemorrhage and complications from sedation (as discussed below). Patients with obstructed urinary tracts may have renal dysfunction resulting in hyperkalemia, which can destabilize cardiac myocytes and cause a life-threatening arrhythmia if not addressed urgently. In the setting of severe hyperkalemia (i.e., potassium level greater than 7 mEq/L), hemodialysis should be performed before attempting PCN.

During informed consent for the procedure, make the patient aware of the likelihood of having a new foreign body that requires maintenance for weeks or months and may necessitate prolonged nursing or family medical support with limited lifestyle functionality. The unwillingness of a patient to accept this or to accept the risks of the procedure is a contraindication to the procedure.

Specific concerns must be addressed before attempting the procedure, such as the risks of hemorrhage and complications from sedation, with such risks mitigated if possible. The Society of Interventional Radiology (SIR) provides a list of recommendations for the cessation of antiplatelet and anticoagulant medications for interventional radiology procedures (which it categorizes based on hemorrhage risks from level 1 to level 3). The SIR classifies PCN as a level 3 procedure. These recommendations are discussed below under "Preparation."