**CD**

Treatment consists of a gluten-free diet. Patients should avoid wheat, rye, barley, beers, ales, lagers, and malt vinegar because they are made of gluten-containing grains. Distilled alcoholic beverages and kinds of vinegar like wine are gluten-free. Potato, corn, rice, and soybeans are also gluten-free. Dairy can cause a problem if concomitant lactose intolerance is present. Attention to food labels is of prime importance.

A strict diet is difficult, and compliance can be a challenge. Still, such an approach might prevent micronutrient deficiencies that happen because of celiac and decrease the cancer rate associated with it. Tolerance of gluten and body response to it is highly variable in the general population, so one result is not typical. Response to a gluten-free diet should be monitored clinically, serologically, and occasionally with biopsies. Non-responders are those with symptoms or positive serology despite 2 years of a gluten-free diet. A majority of those are people who have a hard time complying with the diet or are accidentally exposed to gluten. The rest might have other pathologies or combined pathologies. In very severe refractory cases, prednisone, azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, or mycophenolate have been used. One consideration in cases of treatment failure is the development of GI cancers or lymphomas. Nutritional deficiencies should be supplemented.

**NCGS**

Treatment follows the same CD treatment guidelines.

**Wheat Allergy**

Treatment is the avoidance of allergen and substitution of wheat with other sources that can supplement the nutrients (cereal and non-cereal grains). Epinephrine pens for IgE mediated reactions are a must.

**DH**

Although a gluten-free diet will cure the problem and is the mainstay of treatment, in the long run, the short-term solution is the use of dapsone. Pruritus improves 72 hours after dapsone is started, and skin lesions will resolve in a matter of days. Fifty to 150 mg of dapsone usually controls most of the lesions (which is the goal of treatment). Some side effects exist, such as hypersensitivity, hemolysis (especially in G6PD deficient persons), and agranulocytosis. Follow-up blood work is usually recommended and includes blood count as well as liver/kidney monitoring. After 3 months of treatment (and if a gluten-free diet has been observed in those 3 months), slow tapering may be attempted.

If dapsone treatment is not feasible, other sulfa agents such as sulfasalazine can be used. Topical steroids might also be beneficial and reduce itching but cannot cure DH. Systemic steroids are of no value.