Treatment recommendations are outlined by the etiology of the agitation, with several alternatives for each category. Individuals involved in the direct care of agitated patients should know the epidemiology and what to expect in the patient population that they will be dealing with, for example, the most common self-harming behaviors and how to manage each of them. The proper management of an agitated patient is essential to keep staff safe and to ensure appropriate treatment for the patient. Treatment teams should be trained in managing any motor unrest and assaultive behaviors and how to tackle these situations with minimal necessary interventions. Such training includes Pro-Act (Professional Assault Crisis Training) that is being implemented globally. In some facilities, annual staff training is mandated to help individuals to develop critical thinking in the management of aggressive, behavioral patients. This ultimately reduces the use of unnecessary coercive or sedative treatments that are destructive to the doctor-patient relationship. Training in the management of agitated patients also tends to decrease the likelihood of staff and physicians fearing for their safety, and, hence, avoiding proper assessment.

The best way to initially engage agitated patients is through noncoercive de-escalation. De-escalation skills are usually involved in training but can only be improved with practice and real-life application. Clinicians can work on these skills through role-playing and impromptu scenarios. If the patient has a good rapport with a trained healthcare provider, this person should start the initial conversation as the patient already trusts them. The goal is to have the patient believe that their concerns are heard and appropriately addressed. It always helps to repeat what the patient is saying, so they know they are heard. The clinician should ask open-ended questions when trying to de-escalate a volatile situation. If this does not work, one may politely ask the patient if they are willing to take any medications to help them. Seclusion is another good method for calming as it reduces stimuli and the patient may calm down, but seclusion should never be forced. One should bear in mind that telling a patient to go to the quiet room is different than asking the patient if they would like to be in a quiet room. Whenever possible, patients should be offered a chance to calm down with physical restraints or medications. In specific, severe cases where verbal de-escalation has failed, or patient or staff safety is in question, involuntary medications become necessary. In more severe cases where everything else, including verbal de-escalation, medications, and seclusion, has failed, a patient will have to be restrained. Restraints are controversial, specifically because there are cases where unnecessary force led to patient deaths. Fortunately, these rates have decreased in recent years due to preemptive staff training.

During restraining, when staff members physically intervene to subdue a patient, the patient's idea that violence is necessary to resolve the conflict is reinforced. Furthermore, patients who are restrained are more likely to be admitted to a psychiatric hospital and have longer inpatient lengths of stay. The Joint Commission and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services consider low-restraint rates a key quality indicator. Staff and patients are less likely to be hurt when physical confrontation is averted.

When medications must be used, the goal should not be to overly sedate the patient, but to calm them to a point at which they can engage in a conversation. In more severely agitated patients, especially patients actively trying to hurt themselves by biting, hitting their heads, or punching walls, sedation may be necessary. If agitation is mild or moderate, medical options should be left to the patient to give them a sense of control and say in the matter. Second-Generation antipsychotic medications are preferred, but consensus can vary among facilities. If, however, the patient is agitated and coming off alcohol then the consensus is to use benzodiazepines instead of antipsychotics. Haloperidol (first-generation antipsychotic) with lorazepam (short-acting benzodiazepine) is an extensively used combination, and there have been numerous studies indicating that haloperidol is as effective as a second-generation antipsychotic either with or without lorazepam. Commonly used second-generation antipsychotic medications like olanzapine, ziprasidone, quetiapine, and risperidone are all equally effective, and it is more a matter of avoiding side effects that lead a physician to choose one medication over another. In all cases, intravenous medications should be used only as a last resort.

**Pharmacological Consensus of the Management of Acute Agitation**

In all cases, seclusion and restraints are the last resort and should be avoided.

For acute agitation requiring rapid management in the emergency department, the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) clinical policy for management recommends the use of benzodiazepines (lorazepam or midazolam) or conventional antipsychotic (droperidol or haloperidol). The addition of benzodiazepines to antipsychotics has not consistently shown improved control of agitation and increases the risk of side effects, including oversedation and respiratory depression. One of the most common medications in the emergency department is butyrophenones (haloperidol and droperidol). Haloperidol and droperidol have been compared with droperidol alone. The result is more rapid control of agitation and/or less need for subsequent dosing. The FDA placed a “black box” warning on droperidol, and later haloperidol, over fears of Torsades de Pointes-inducing QT prolongation. The ACEP Clinical Policy on the management of adult psychiatric patients continues to include droperidol as a recommended treatment option despite the FDA warning as studies have shown conflicting data on droperidol increasing QT interval. Other antipsychotics agents like ziprasidone and olanzapine are marketed as being as effective as the typical antipsychotics with less sedation and fewer extrapyramidal symptoms, but studies have shown that these medications tend to have a slower onset and need more repeated dosing.

For agitation in adult patients with psychiatric conditions, the consensus is to use antipsychotic first or second-generation monotherapy for both management of agitation and initial drug therapy for patients with known mental illness for which antipsychotics are indicated. World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) recommends that the goal of rapid calming without over-sedating as well as involving patients in the selection of oral or injectable medication to help calm them. Again, this gives patients some sense of control. In mildly agitated patients, oral medications are preferred over intramuscular medications. However, in moderate or severe agitation choosing oral versus injectable medications is a clinical decision. Clinicians should reserve intravenous medications as a last resort. For mild-to-moderate agitation, and when rapid effects of medication are needed, clinicians should consider inhaled formulations of antipsychotics. Furthermore, they should avoid the concomitant use of intramuscular olanzapine and benzodiazepines due to possible dangerous effects induced by the interaction of these 2 medications (for example, hypotension, bradycardia, and respiratory depression). Elderly, agitated patients should be treated with lower doses (usually between 25% and 50% of the standard adult dose).

For patients with delirium, especially those in the elderly population, haloperidol twice daily has shown the most benefit. Some studies have also demonstrated that using quetiapine twice-daily dosing decreases the duration of delirium, however, the efficacy of using second-generation antipsychotic versus first-generation medications remains debatable.

For patients with dementia, the American Psychiatric Association 2016 practice guideline recommends consideration of nonemergency antipsychotic medication only for the management of severe, dangerous, and/or significantly distressing agitation or psychosis. They recommend that reviewing the clinical response to nonpharmacologic intervention prior to using any nonemergency antipsychotics for agitation and always assessing the benefit to harm ratio.

In patients whose primary agitation is due to alcohol intoxication or withdrawal, the World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) recommends benzodiazepines as the preferred over treatment with antipsychotics. American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) recommends that antipsychotics alone can lead to delirium tremens due to increased risk of seizures, and hence, using benzodiazepines is ideal. However, using a combination antipsychotic with benzodiazepines should be considered if agitation, disturbed thinking, or perceptual disturbances are not adequately controlled. Benzodiazepines are considered first-line therapy for agitated patients with alcohol withdrawal or central nervous system (CNS) stimulant toxicity, including amphetamines. World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) also recommends that for agitation associated with alcohol intoxication, antipsychotics be used instead of medicating with benzodiazepines.

In patients with autism spectrum disorder, using risperidone or aripiprazole decreases repetitive and challenging behaviors,  like headbanging. Risperidone was FDA approved in 2007 after 3 short-term trials showed some benefit in patients with symptoms of aggression toward others, deliberate self-injury, temper tantrums, and quickly changing moods, but only in patients ages 5 to 17 years old. Of note, over 90% of the patients in the trial were younger than 12 years old. Aripiprazole is also FDA approved for treating irritability in 6-17-year-old children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder.