**Bacterial Vaginosis**

BV is an imbalance of the normal vaginal flora. Loss of vaginal acidity can lead to a loss of Lactobacilli dominance, further alkalization of the vagina, and overgrowth of pathogens such as G. vaginalis, Mobiluncus, Prevotella, Prophyromonas, Peptostreptococcus, Mycoplasma hominis, and Ureaplasma. Alternatively, loss of vaginal estrogen can lead to loss of glycogen. Without glycogen, Lactobacilli will not have the substrate for lactic acid production, and the pH will rise.

Risk factors for BV include new or multiple sex partners, frequent douching, intrauterine contraceptive devices and pregnancy. PROM, PPROM, PTL, PID, endometritis, sexually transmitted infections, and post-hysterectomy cuff cellulitis are all associated with BV.

The signs and symptoms of BV include a nonirritating, malodorous vaginal discharge. The vaginal mucosa and cervical epithelium will appear normal. There will be no cervical motion tenderness or pelvic pain on palpation.

First-line diagnostics for bacterial vaginosis should include a physical exam, pH testing, and a wet prep. Amsel’s Diagnostic Criteria for BV has a 95% PPV. You must have three of the four criteria for the diagnosis of BV. The criteria are a thin, white, homogeneous vaginal discharge, a pH greater than 4.5, a positive amine whiff test, and the presence of clue cells on microscopic examination. Again, the Gram stain is mainly for research purposes.

DNA hybridization probe for concentrations of Gardnerella, point-of-care vaginal sialidase testing (associated with BV pathogens), and bacterial morphology testing available from local labs are acceptable compared to Amsel and Nugent.

**Treatment**

Recommended Regimens per the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC):

Metronidazole 500 mg orally twice a day for 7 days

OR

Metronidazole gel 0.75%, one full applicator (5 g) intravaginally, once a day for 5 days

OR

Clindamycin cream 2%, one full applicator (5 g) intravaginally at bedtime for 7 days

**Alternative Regimens**

Tinidazole 2 g orally once daily for 2 days

OR

Tinidazole 1 g orally once daily for 5 days

OR

Clindamycin 300 mg orally twice daily for 7 days

OR

Clindamycin ovules 100 mg intravaginally once at bedtime for 3 days

Patients should be advised to abstain from alcohol for 24 hours after completion of the metronidazole course and 72 hours after the tinidazole course to avoid the disulfiram-like reaction. There is no evidence to support the use of Lactobacillus probiotics in BV treatment or the recurrence of symptoms.

Eighty percent to 90% cure rates are expected 1 week from treatment. No routine follow-up is necessary for the asymptomatic patient after treatment, though 30% will recur at 3 months or later. With recurrent disease, the first step is to confirm the diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis again. For recurrence, women can be treated with the same regimen again or one of the alternative regimens. Multiple recurrences after completion of a recommended regimen can be treated with 0.75% metronidazole gel twice weekly for 4 to 6 months. While this has been shown to reduce recurrences, the benefit does not persist when suppressive therapy is discontinued. Another option for the persistent or recurrent disease is an oral nitroimidazole followed by intravaginal boric acid 600 mg daily for 21 days and then suppressive 0.75% metronidazole gel twice weekly for 4 to 6 months.

**Trichomoniasis**

Trichomonas vaginalis is a parasitic protozoan, transmitted by sexual intercourse. It causes vaginitis in women and occasionally urethritis in men, but most males are asymptomatic. Trichomoniasis is associated with other STIs such as gonorrhea and chlamydia and can enhance transmission of HIV. As with all other STI’s, the diagnosis of trichomoniasis should prompt screening for other STIs. Trichomonas vaginalis infection in pregnancy is associated with low birth weight, PROM, and preterm delivery.

The signs and symptoms of Trichomoniasis include malodorous, green-to-yellow, frothy vaginal discharge. They may have vaginal pruritic and irritation, dysuria and dyspareunia. A physical exam will reveal vaginal mucosa erythema and punctate hemorrhages of the cervix.

The wet prep 60% to 70% sensitivity for trichomoniasis. The pH will be greater than 4.5. An amine test can be positive. Culture with Diamond’s medium has a 75% to 95% sensitivity but is rarely used as the available PCR test is 95% sensitive and produces quicker results. Overall, start with the wet prep and move on to the DNA probes if you do not identify trichomonas on the slide, but you are still suspicious.

**Treatment**

Recommended Regimen per the CDC:

Metronidazole 2 gm by mouth once or tinidazole 2 gm by mouth once.

**Alternative Regimen**

Metronidazole 500 mg by mouth two times per day for 7 days.

The nitroimidazoles are the only class of antimicrobial medications known to be effective against T. vaginalis infections. Only metronidazole and tinidazole have been cleared by FDA for the oral or parenteral treatment of trichomoniasis. Metronidazole gel does not reach therapeutic levels in the urethra and paravaginal glands and is not recommended for the treatment of trichomoniasis. Tinidazole is avoided in pregnancy and contraindicated in the first trimester.

The recommended metronidazole regimens have cure rates of approximately 84% to 98%, and the recommended tinidazole regimen have cure rates of approximately 92% to 100%.

Because of the high rate of reinfection among women treated for trichomonas (17% within three months in one study), retesting for T. vaginalis is recommended for all sexually active women within three months. Testing by nucleic acid amplification can be conducted as soon as two weeks after treatment. Metronidazole resistance occurs in 4% to 10% of cases of vaginal trichomoniasis, and tinidazole resistance in 1%, but most cases of “persistent” infection will be reinfection. When reinfection can be reliably ruled out a multi-day course such as metronidazole 500 mg orally twice daily for seven days can be ordered. The next regimen would be metronidazole or tinidazole at 2 g by mouth daily for seven days. If these regimens fail, consider referral to an infectious disease specialist and susceptibility testing.

**Yeast Vulvovaginitis**

Yeast vulvovaginitis is most often secondary to Candida albicans, but less common pathogens can include Candida glabrata, Candida parapsilosis, Candida tropicalis and Candida krusei. While Candida is a normal constituent of the vagina, risk factors for pathogenic overgrowth include antibiotic uses, combination oral contraceptives, estrogen therapy, pregnancy, diabetes, corticosteroid use and all forms of immune compromise.

The infection is most common during the childbearing years when estrogen is plentiful. Glycogen is key to facilitating Candida growth and adherence. Signs and symptoms of yeast vulvovaginitis include genital burning, pruritis, dyspareunia, dysuria and a thick, white, curd-like discharge.

The wet prep has a 60% to 70% sensitivity to yeast vaginitis. Budding yeasts, pseudohyphae, large numbers of WBCs, lactobacilli, and clumps of epithelial cells will be seen on the wet mount. The pH will be less than 4.5, and the amine “whiff” test will be negative.

A yeast culture is rarely needed. It can be ordered if nonalbicans species are suspected. Candida glabrata will not for pseudohyphae and is difficult to recognize on microscopy. DNA testing is also available to identify species.

**Uncomplicated Vulvovaginal Candidiasis**

- Sporadic or infrequent, and

- Mild-to-moderate, and

- Likely C. albicans, and

- Non-immunocompromised patient.

**Complicated Vulvovaginal Candidiasis**

- Recurrent (four or more episodes in a year), or

- Severe, or

- Non-Albicans species, or

- Women with diabetes mellitus, HIV, debilitation, immunosuppressive therapy (corticosteroids) or other immunocompromised.

- Yeast vulvovaginitis

**Treatment**

Uncomplicated: A short course (single dose; 1-day or 3-day course) of over-the-counter topical antifungals will result in cure rates of 80% to 90% for uncomplicated vulvovaginal candidiasis (clotrimazole, miconazole, tioconazole, butoconazole, itraconazole). A single dose by mouth of fluconazole 150 mg by mouth is also effective. No follow-up is needed if the symptoms resolve.

**Complicated Disease**

Recurrent candidiasis: 7 to 14 days of topical therapy or a 100-mg, 150-mg, or 200-mg oral dose of fluconazole every third day for a total of 3 doses [day 1, 4, and 7) can be used. Oral fluconazole (i.e., 100-mg, 150-mg, or 200-mg dose) weekly for 6 months is the first line maintenance regimen. 30% to 50% of women will have recurrent disease after maintenance therapy is discontinued.

Severe candidiasis: 7 to 14 days of topical azole or 150 mg of fluconazole in two sequential oral doses 72 hours apart.

Nonalbicans candidiasis: 7 to 14 days of a non-fluconazole azole regimen (oral or topical) as first-line therapy. If recurrence occurs, 600 mg of boric acid in a gelatin capsule is recommended, administered vaginally once daily for 2 weeks.

**Desquamative Inflammatory Vaginitis**

Signs and Symptoms of desquamative inflammatory vaginitis include profuse, purulent vaginal discharge, vaginal erythema, and dyspareunia. Causes are heterogeneous. Most will grow beta-hemolytic gram-positive Streptococcus in vaginal cultures. It is often found with vaginal atrophy.

The wet mount and gram stain will reveal large numbers of WBCs, RBCs, occasional parabasal and basal cells, squamous epithelial cells, reduced or absent lactobacilli and increased gram-positive cocci. The vaginal pH will be greater than 4.5, and the amine test will be negative. It is treated with vaginal 2% clindamycin.

**Atrophic Vaginitis**

Signs and Symptoms of atrophic vaginitis include vaginal dryness, dyspareunia, vaginal inflammation, thinned mucosa, loss of rugae and occasionally purulent discharge. A wet mount will demonstrate large numbers of WBCs, occasional parabasal and basal cells, decreased lactobacilli and increased gram-positive cocci and gram-negative rods. This is best treated with vaginal estrogen therapy.