# Continuing Education Activity

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a member of the Herpesviridae family, which has the largest genome of any herpes virus. It is spread through bodily fluids such as during the perinatal period or sexual contact. Although immunocompetent individuals can be infected, the serious disease typically only manifests in those with immunocompromised states such as patients with AIDS, organ transplant recipients, and patients on chemotherapy. CMV can affect many organs, including the eyes, stomach, colon, but the focus of this discussion is on the esophagus. This article goes into the etiology, presentation, diagnosis, and treatment of cytomegalovirus esophagitis. It highlights the population most likely to be afflicted with the disease and introduces interprofessional team to ways to best recognize and care for patients affected by CMV esophagitis.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of cytomegalovirus esophagitis.
- Describe the evaluation of cytomegalovirus esophagitis.
- Outline the management options available for cytomegalovirus esophagitis.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care and improve outcomes for strategies for patients affected by cytomegalovirus esophagitis.

# Introduction

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a member of the Herpesviridae family, which has the largest genome of any herpes virus. It is spread through bodily fluids, such as during the perinatal period or sexual contact.

# Etiology

CMV is a member of the Herpesviridae family of viruses.

# Epidemiology

CMV is a common human viral infection, affecting 40 to 100 percent of adults.

# Pathophysiology

CMV can infect a large variety of cell types.

In the immunocompetent, CMV replication is kept under control through antibodies against key viral surface glycoproteins and cell-mediated immune response carried out by NK cell, CD4, and CD8 T cells. Disease in the immunocompromised can result from reactivation of the latent virus, newly acquired infection, or reinfection with a new strain. Reactivation in immunocompromised patients is the result of dysfunction in cell-mediated immunity rather than humoral immunity. Patients typically have enough anti-CMV antibodies.

Mucosal infection by CMV leads to inflammation and tissue necrosis, vascular endothelial involvement, and, ultimately, ischemic mucosal injury. The occlusion of vasculature contributes largely to the cause of tissue injury and ulcer formation.

# Histopathology

There is no pathognomonic endoscopic feature for CMV esophagitis, and definitive diagnosis depends heavily on biopsy findings. Histopathological diagnosis can be made by identifying CMV inclusion bodies with standard H&E staining, called a cytomegalic cell. These cells appear 25 to 35 micrometers with basophilic intranuclear inclusion, occasionally surrounded by a clear halo. There can also be intracytoplasmic inclusions.

# History and Physical

Although immunocompetent patients may be infected with CMV, it rarely causes active disease in such patients. In healthy adults, most primary CMV infections are either asymptomatic or present as a mild mononucleosis-like syndrome.

# Evaluation

There are many noninvasive options for diagnosis; however, the most reliable modality is still endoscopy and biopsy.

The endoscopic appearance of CMV esophagitis ulcers is well-demarcated, vertical, or horizontal linear shallow ulcers at the mid to distal esophagus.

# Treatment / Management

The mainstay of CMV esophagitis treatment day is ganciclovir and valganciclovir.

# Differential Diagnosis

Cytomegalovirus esophagitis more commonly presents as a single, isolated large ulcer in the distal esophagus but can also manifest as diffuse esophagitis.

- Achalasia

- Acid peptic disease

- Aphthous ulcers

- Barrett esophagus and Barrett ulcer

- Candidiasis

- Cryptococcosis

- Drug-induced dysphagia

- Epstein-Barr virus infection

- Esophageal cancer

- Gastroesophageal reflux disease

- Herpes simplex esophagitis

- Histoplasmosis

- Tuberculosis

# Prognosis

Upper gastrointestinal CMV disease in immunocompromised individuals carries significant morbidity and mortality, to as high as 25% one-year mortality in some studies.

# Complications

Malnutrition can develop in the setting of dysphagia and odynophagia, which can be devastating in the setting of severe illnesses such as AIDS and organ failure requiring a transplant.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

CMV can infect and remain latent in a large number of people, even if they are immunocompromised. Immunocompetent individuals will not typically manifest with symptomatic disease. Patients receiving chemotherapy, patients with advanced age, newborns, AIDS patients, and organ transplant patients are also at increased risk.

CMV infection can be acquired through bodily fluids such as during the perinatal period, contact with contaminated blood products, and sexual contact.

Patients should discuss their symptoms with the physician managing the cause of their immunocompromise, such as infectious disease specialists for AIDS patients, rheumatologists for autoimmune disease, and oncologists for patients on chemotherapy. Ultimately, patients should be seen by a gastroenterologist for upper endoscopy with biopsy. The biopsy samples will then be reviewed by pathologists to give the final diagnosis.

Antiviral drugs such as ganciclovir, valganciclovir, foscarnet are available to suppress viral replication. However, CMV can remain latent and thus recur in the future.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The first step of improving the outcome for patients affected by CMV esophagitis is to recognize the at-risk population. Primary care physicians for patients with immunocompromised status should educate their patients about the potential diseases that they may face, including CMV esophagitis. The same should be done for patients soon to become immunocompromised, such as patients with newly diagnosed cancer, about to undergo chemotherapy, or patients who are about to begin immunosuppressive therapies for autoimmune disorders. Primary care physicians should educate patients regarding symptoms such as odynophagia, dysphagia, and chest pain. They should also emphasize the importance of HAART medication compliance for patients with HIV to avoid low CD4 count putting them at risk for CMV esophagitis. Patients should be educated about taking universal precautions when coming into contact with bodily fluids.

If there is suspicion for CMV esophagitis, patients should be assessed by primary care physicians for a thorough history, physical and evaluate for the presence of risk factors. Patients should be referred to gastroenterologists for an upper endoscopy, with biopsy samples obtained and to be reviewed by pathologists. The results should be reviewed by the primary care physician with the patient. The primary care physician should also initiate induction treatment and follow-up with the patient. Infectious disease specialists should also be involved in the discussion if difficulties in treatment were to occur.