Family history is vital and should not be missed except in cases of nonpaternity and adoption, which baffles the actual history. Onset and duration of symptoms are variable though the history of gradual onset and slow progression over the years have a positive impact. The duration of such progressive disease is important since it takes years to manifest in full extent. Clinical features may vary significantly among individual members of a single-family. There is a huge overlap of phenotypic features among the various spinocerebellar ataxia subtypes, even within family members or interfamilial cases. Clinical manifestation is usually more severe and early onset in pediatric and adolescents phenotypes.

Some studies concluded that the size of triplet repeat expansion affects the severity and onset of disease and has a direct relationship, i.e., larger the size of the triplet repeat, the more severe and early onset is the presentation.

On neurological examination, hyperreflexia and saccadic eye movements suggest certain SCA types and make the diagnosis of SCA type 2 unlikely. Weakness, numbness, and pain (peripheral neuropathy) are more consistent among SCA1, 2, 3, 4, and 18, but sensory neuropathy is most characteristic with SCA4. Macular degeneration and visual impairment are more consistent with SCA7.

Likewise, ocular muscle weakness, involuntary eye movement(nystagmus), protruded eyes, muscle fasciculations, and parkinsonism are typical for SCA1, 2, and 3. Pyramidal signs such as spasticity, muscle weakness, hyperreflexia are overlapped with most of the subtypes. SCA10 is more prevalent with epileptic seizures, SCA14 with jerky contractions of muscles (myoclonus), brief contractions of face and tongue (fasciculations) with SCA36, abnormal involuntary movement (chorea) and tremor in SCA12, 27, and ichthyosiform plaques with SCA 34. Abnormal movements or postures, cognitive and psychiatric problems, tremor, quick involuntary movements (chorea), hearing loss are other common findings.