**Personalize the Communication**

Medical diagnoses are commonly accepted as providing a classification of understanding etiologies, epidemiology, and pathophysiology of signs and symptoms that frequently cluster. In turn, these diagnoses provide a way of categorizing and providing treatment, prognosis, support, and education to patients with the same diagnosis.

Simultaneously, identifying and appreciating individual differences between patients is often considered important, as these differences account for many healthcare outcomes.

**Specific Techniques**

Specific therapeutic communication techniques have been discussed as early on as 1969 by Goldin and Russell and have been reiterated and expanded upon since then.

These techniques are summarized in the following table:

**Technique**

**Explanation**

Genuine therapeutic relationship

Present oneself in a genuine and boundaried manner to foster a therapeutic relationship.

Respect privacy and try to minimize interruptions

Depending on the setting, close the door or the curtain to demonstrate respect for the patient's privacy.

Introduce yourself using first and last names and refer to the patient by “Mr.,” “Mrs.,” “Miss,” or another appropriate term

This can demonstrate respect for the patient, their dignity, and their autonomy. Consider gender neutrality and preferred pronouns.

Social pleasantries to start the interview

This may help put the patient at ease.

Open-ended questioning

Ask open-ended questions to begin the interview and allow free-flow discussion prior to closed-ended questioning.

Active listening techniques

Foundation for therapeutic communication that itself can be therapeutic.

Non-verbal and verbal cues to continue the conversation.

Nodding one's head and using statements like, “Uh-Huh,” “I see,” and “Go on” can encourage the patient to provide history and demonstrate that they are being listened to.

Reflecting

Repeat back what the patient said, sometimes word for word, to demonstrate active listening.

Exploring feeling tones

Identify and empathize with the emotional state of the patient, and reflect this to the patient.

Silence

Demonstrate attentiveness by minimizing interrupting the patient.

Clarify

Provide guiding statements to help the patient clarify statements and to obtain additional information.

Provide rationale

Provide rationale upfront regarding the need for information and treatment recommendations.

Non-verbal communication through expression, stance, and gestures

Use eye contact and facial expressions demonstrating interest, leaning forward to signify active listening, and sitting near the patient.*

Summarizing

Summarize what the patient said in the provider’s own words to demonstrate active listening, develop a shared understanding, and occasionally complete the interview.

*Note that eye contact and sitting near the patient for some individuals, including those with psychotic disorders and paranoia, could be destabilizing and should be used with caution. In cases where provider safety is uncertain, consider sitting at a safe distance without making the patient feel isolated.

**Common Pitfalls**

Additionally, there are several commonly used approaches with negative therapeutic value. These are summarized in the following table.

**Pitfalls**

**Explanation**

Value judgments

Identify one’s personal biases and judgments, and avoid placing these value judgments on the patient.

Negative body language

This includes crossing arms, appearing distracted, or standing over the patient.

Unsolicited advice

Unsolicited advice can be experienced as intrusive and unempathetic unless the patient has specifically asked for advice.

Providing false reassurance

This can lead to a severe and significant rupture in the relationship, especially if the desired outcome is not achieved.

Agreeing or disagreeing

Occasionally agreeing can be helpful as it can provide validation, but in general, more room for the patient’s views can be facilitated if the provider avoids agreeing or disagreeing.

Using approving or disapproving responses

As above, this can be similar to placing value judgments and can be experienced as intrusive.

Changing the subject abruptly

This can occasionally be perceived as dismissive. Consider using transition phrases such as, “If it is ok with you, I’d like to change the subject and talk about….”

Responding defensively

Though this can be particularly difficult to avoid, avoiding defensive responses can allow more room for the patient to express their frustration and allow them to identify a solution collaboratively with their provider, rather than against their provider.