Treatment involves closed reduction, and this can be performed in a few seconds without sedation.  Even though it is brief, it can be painful as the annular ligament reduces to its proper position. It should be explained to parents that the child will likely be upset, but that once the elbow is properly reduced, the pain should resolve and the child will likely be back to baseline within a few minutes.

In order to minimize trauma and increase comfort for the patient, the caregiver should hold the child in their arms, and the examiner should sit facing the child.

Hyperpronation and supination/flexion are two common techniques preferred for reduction of a subluxed radial head.  The hyperpronation technique has a higher reported first attempt success rate than the supination/flexion technique.  Studies have also suggested that the hyperpronation technique may be less painful than the supination/flexion technique. If it is unsuccessful, the supination/flexion technique may be attempted.

To perform the hyperpronation method, moderate pressure should be applied to the radial head while the child's elbow is supported with the same hand.  The forearm should be hyperpronated by applying force to the wrist with the opposite hand. A click is usually felt over the radial head which indicates the maneuver was successful.

To perform the supination/flexion method, slight pressure should be applied to the radial head with the physician's thumb while supporting the elbow with the same hand.  The other hand should grasp the patient’s distal forearm. The patient's forearm should then be supinated and fully flexed with gentle traction applied. A click may be felt or heard if the maneuver is successful.

A successful reduction should result in immediate cessation of pain. Most children will begin to use their arm within 5-10 minutes, and within 30 minutes 90% of children will be asymptomatic.  It may take a few minutes for the children to realize that it is no longer painful to move the arm.  If the patient does not regain function of the arm, imaging studies to assess for fracture or orthopedic consult may be warranted. If the patient refuses to use the arm after several minutes and imaging are normal, the arm should be placed in a sling, and the patient should be referred to an orthopedic surgeon.

If reduction was successful, no splinting or sling is necessary, and the prognosis is excellent. Because of possible recurrence, parents should be instructed to avoid activities that cause axial traction to the arm such as lifting, jerking or swinging the child by the hands, wrists or forearms.