This section aims to provide an overview of techniques for each sequential step of performing a routine dental extraction. This assumes that the steps outlined in the previous 'preparation' section have all been carried out.

**Anesthesia**

An appropriate anesthesia technique should be chosen according to which tooth is anesthetized. For maxillary teeth, a buccal and palatal infiltration is usually sufficient. This is ideally delivered using a short needle with a local anesthetic agent appropriate to the patient; usually, lidocaine or articaine is used. An inferior dental nerve block is usually used and supplemented with a buccal infiltration for mandibular teeth, administered with a long needle. Initial anesthesia can be supplemented with intraligamentary infiltrations for all teeth, where a short or extra-short needle is inserted into the PDL space, and the anesthetic agent administered.

For nerve blocks, lidocaine is usually the anesthetic agent of choice due to concern over the neurotoxic potential of articaine. However, no clear evidence supports this concern.

Initial anesthesia should be administered, and an appropriate time should be given for the anesthesia to take effect. For IDN blocks, this can be up to five minutes. The patient's pain perception should first be tested by placing a dental probe into the PDL space on all tooth surfaces and applying pressure. The patient should be warned that a pressure sensation is expected, but any sharp pain should not be present. Based on the outcome of this test, the clinician will know whether further anesthesia is required. If it is, supplementary anesthesia should be given. Further doses of anesthesia may be required during the procedure.

**Luxation/Elevation**

Each tooth will require a different approach. However, many teeth will require some elevation or luxation. This elevation or luxation may be prior to applying forceps or sufficient to avulse the tooth. Luxators should be used in an apical motion along the long axis of the tooth, as previously described. Elevators are used perpendicular to the tooth as a lever to elevate the tooth coronally out of the socket. Appropriate types of elevators and luxators should be chosen based on the clinical and radiographic appearance of the tooth. The aim of luxation and elevation is to achieve sufficient mobility and widening of the PDL space either to avulse the tooth or apply forceps.

Should a crown fracture occur, elevators and luxators may also be used to remove the remaining root from the socket.

**Forceps**

Forceps should be chosen based on which tooth is being removed. Forceps should be applied as apically as possible to avoid placing undue stress on the coronal portion of the tooth, which often results in a crown fracture. Once the forceps have been placed on the tooth, a rotational movement, often combined with a buccolingual movement, should be used to increase the PDL space further and slowly remove the tooth.

**Achieving Hemostasis**

Following the removal of a tooth, a roll of gauze or bite pack should be placed over the socket, and the patient should be asked to bite together or hold down on the pack firmly. This pressure should be placed for a minimum of five minutes, and hemostasis should be checked before the patient can leave the chair. If hemostasis has not been achieved after a prolonged period of pressure, then local hemostatic agents should be used.

The above steps outline the usual sequence of simple removal of a tooth. Should these steps not be successful in removing a tooth, then a surgical approach may be required.