A spectrum of outcomes is seen in patients with low-grade gliomas. Patient groups can be recognized with a median survival as low as two years to greater than 12 years, depending on the grade according to 2016 WHO CNS classification. A good understanding of the prognostic factors is thus critical in making a treatment decision and patient education in the overall management of these tumors.

- Age: Younger patients do better compared to older patients, with some studies classifying the age of below and above 40 years being low and high risk, respectively

- Symptoms at presentation: Presenting symptoms like seizures are associated with a good prognosis as well, likely due to the earlier diagnosis of the condition leading to close monitoring - this could well be due to lead-time bias, while fixed neurological deficits are associated with a poor prognosis.

- Tumor size and area involved: Tumor size is also important, with larger tumors associated with a poor prognosis, and involvement of the corpus callosum is associated with adverse outcomes.

Molecular tests allow for a more refined estimation of prognosis. The presence of 1p/19q co-deletion is associated with a favorable diagnosis. One study showed that the median survival of 1p/19q co-deleted tumors (oligodendrogliomas) was 12 years compared to 8 years in non-co deleted gliomas.IDH mutation is also associated with a favorable prognosis in most low-grade gliomas. A French study showed an OS of 11 years versus seven years in gliomas with and without IDH mutation in low-grade gliomas treated with temozolomide, indicating a favorable prognosis with chemosensitivity.