Proper history taking should be done. This includes the duration of diabetes, type of diabetes mellitus, past glycemic control (HbA1C), medication, and associated systemic disorders like obesity, kidney disease, hypertension, pregnancy, dyslipidemia, and nephropathy.

Patients might be asymptomatic in the early stages and might be discovered incidentally on fundus examination. As the disease progresses, the symptoms include blurred vision, distorted vision, floaters, and partial or total vision loss.

Signs seen in diabetic retinopathy on fundus examination include:

**Microaneurysms**

Microaneuryms are the earliest clinically detectable lesions.

- Focal saccular dilatation of the capillary wall

- Location in the inner nuclear layer

- Clinically identified by ophthalmoscopy as tiny, round, red dots with a sharp regular margin

Microaneurysms are differentiated from dot hemorrhages by FFA (fundus fluorescein angiogram), wherein microaneurysms show tiny hyperfluorescent points, whereas dot hemorrhages show blocked fluorescence. Dot hemorrhages are clinically larger and may have an irregular margin.

**Hemorrhages**

Weakened capillary wall ruptures lead to intraretinal dot hemorrhages. Superficial or flame-shaped hemorrhages arise from the precapillary arterioles located in the retinal nerve fiber layer. Deep hemorrhages or dot and blot hemorrhages are located in the inner nuclear and outer plexiform layers of the retina.

**Hard Exudates**

They are composed of lipoprotein and lipid-filled macrophages located in the outer plexiform layer. They develop at the junction of the edematous and non-edematous retina. The hard exudates typically form a circinate ring around a leaking microaneurysm.

**Cotton Wool Spots/Soft Exudates**

They are located in the retinal nerve fiber layer (axoplasmic debris) and represent focal infarcts of the precapillary arterioles.

**IRMA (intraretinal microvascular abnormalities)**

IRMAs are intercommunications between retinal arteriole and venules, which bypass the capillaries and are seen near the areas of capillary closure. IRMAs are intraretinal in location, do not cross the major vessels, and do not leak on fluorescein angiography.

**Venous Changes**

- Dilatation

- Looping

- Beading

- Sausage-like segmentation

**Arterial Changes**

- Peripheral narrowing

- Silver-wiring

- Obliteration

**Neovascularization**

Neovascularization (new vessels) at the disc (NVD) is defined as neovascularization at or within one disc diameter of the optic disc. Neovascularization elsewhere (NVE) is defined as a new vessel away from one disc diameter of the optic disc. Neovascularization of Iris (NVI) is a marker of poor prognosis and is associated with the propensity to develop neovascular glaucoma.

**Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) Classification**

**Nonproliferative Diabetic Retinopathy**

- **No retinopathy**: No retinal lesions

- **Very mild NPDR**: Microaneurysms only

- **Mild NPDR**: A few microaneurysms, retinal hemorrhages & hard exudates

- **Moderate NPDR**: Retinal hemorrhages (about 20 medium-large per quadrant) in 1-3 quadrant + cotton wool spots (between the grades mild and severe NPDR)

- **Severe NPDR:**fulfilling one rule of the 4-2-1 rule.
- **4-2-1 rule**
- Severe hemorrhages in all four quadrants
- Venous beading in 2 or more quadrants
- Moderate IRMA in 1 or more quadrants

- **Very Severe NPDR:**fulfilling two or more rules of the 4-2-1 rule.

**Proliferative Diabetic Retinopathy**

- **Mild to moderate PDR-**NVD or NVE insufficient to meet high-risk characteristics

- **High-risk PDR-**
- NVD greater than ETDRS standard photograph 10A (about 1/3 disc area).
- Any NVD with vitreous hemorrhage.
- NVE greater than 1/2 disc area with vitreous hemorrhage.

**Advanced Diabetic Eye Disease**is the end-stage vision-threatening complication of diabetic retinopathy in patients whose treatment is inadequate or unsuccessful. It may present as pre-retinal or intragel hemorrhage, tractional retinal detachment, or rubeosis iridis.

**Diabetic Macular Edema (DME)**can be classified into the following groups

- Focal exudative and diffuse maculopathy

- Ischemic and non-ischemic maculopathy

- Tractional and non-tractional maculopathy

- Center involving macular edema and non-center involving macular edema

**ETDRS Definition of Clinically Significant Macular Edema (CSME)**

- Retinal edema within 500 µm of the center of the fovea

- Hard exudates within 500 µm of the center of the fovea if associated with adjacent retinal thickening (which may be outside the 500 µm limit)

- Retinal edema one disc area (1500 µm) or larger, any part of which is within one disc diameter of the center of the fovea

**OCT (optical coherence tomography) Classification of Diabetic Macular Edema**

- Sponge-like thickening of retinal layers

- Large cystoid spaces

- Serous detachment of the retina

- Tractional detachment of the fovea or vitreomacular traction

- Taut posterior hyaloid membrane.

**International Clinical Diabetic Retinopathy Disease Severity Scale**

- **No apparent retinopathy**-No abnormality

- **Mild NPDR**- Microaneurysms only

- **Moderate NPDR**-More than just microaneurysms and less than severe disease

- **Severe NPDR**-No signs of PDR and any of the following:

- 
              
- 20 intraretinal hemorrhages in each of the four quadrants
              
              
- Venous beading in ≥2 quadrants
              
              
- Prominent IRMA ≥1 quadrant

- **PDR**- One or more of the following:

- 
              
- Neovascularization
              
              
- Vitreous or pre-retinal hemorrhage

With regards to diabetic macular edema, the DME may be:

- '**DME apparently absent**'- Apparent retinal thickening and hard exudates at the posterior pole are absent.

- '**DME apparently present**'- There is some 'apparent retinal thickening and hard exudates at the posterior pole.' It can further be classified into mild, moderate, and severe based on the distance of thickening and hard exudates from the center of the fovea.
- **Mild DME**: The retinal thickening or hard exudates are located far from the center of the fovea.
- **Moderate DME**: Retinal thickening or hard exudates are approaching the center of the macula but not involving the center
- **Severe DME**: Hard exudate and thickening involve the center of the fovea.