It is estimated that 240 million individuals are chronically infected with hepatitis B virus. Of these cases, more than 680,000 individuals die every year due to complications of hepatitis B, including cirrhosis and liver cancer. Approximately 150 million individuals worldwide have chronic hepatitis C infection, and nearly 700,000 of them die each year from the liver disease.

The estimated number of humans living with HIV/AIDS is 36.7 million worldwide as of 2016. Other risk factors associated with a risk of acquiring HIV infection include men who have sex with men, unsafe sexual practices, the use of intravenous drugs, and hazardous blood transfusions or blood products.

HTLV-1 exists in the blood of 15 million people, which are chronically infected worldwide. HTLV-1 is transmitted sexually, perinatally (breastfeeding), and parenterally (blood transfusions, injection drug user, and transplants).

The African continent has seen a long-term decline in the prevalence of malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum from 40% (1900 through 1929) to 24% prevalence (2010 through 2015), this result has been interrupted by a time of rapidly increasing or decreasing transmission.

Chagas disease is currently a public health problem in Latin America. The vector-borne transmission is the most critical mode for this disease, but other ways such as transfusions require further epidemiological study. Thus in Colombia, the frequency of T. cruzi was serologically low, but it may vary among other nations in the region.

There are many pathogenic isolates of WNV, but the two major WNV lineages L1 and L2 are responsible for most outbreaks observed. L1 includes strains from North, Central and South America, Africa and the Middle East and L2 covers from sub-Saharan Africa, Madagascar, and Eastern Europe, where it has become endemic. An independent L2 strain, detected in 2004 in Southern Russia, caused outbreaks of West Nile neuroinvasive disease in Romania since 2010. This virus circulates primarily between wild birds and mosquitos. Transmission among humans exists through blood transfusion, intrauterine exposure, breastfeeding, and organ transplantation.