When ethanol converts to acetaldehyde, NAD+ reduces to NADH. NAD+ serves as an electron carrier and donates 2 electrons in this reaction. This reaction increases the NADH/NAD+ ratio in the hepatocytes. This increase in ratio causes:

Ketoacidosis: Via inhibition of the citric acid (TCA) cycle, increasing acetyl-CoA levels. This increased acetyl-CoA is shunted into the ketogenesis pathway resulting in ketoacidosis.

Fasting hypoglycemia: The increased ratio inhibits the conversion of malate to oxaloacetate (OAA). This inhibition changes the reaction equilibrium by converting OAA back to malate, impairing gluconeogenesis because the meager amount of OAA is left to convert to phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) for gluconeogenesis.

Hepatic steatosis: The increased NADH/NAD+ ratio increases the synthesis of fatty acid and glycerol-3-phosphate, thereby increasing the levels of TAGs resulting in fatty liver.

Ingested ethanol mainly metabolizes in the liver; hence hepatic damage is profoundly seen in chronic alcoholism. This damage includes steatosis, cirrhosis, and hepatic carcinoma. Other organs/organ systems involved are:

- Gastrointestinal System: gastritis, malabsorption, carcinomas

- Cardiovascular System: hypertension, cardiomyopathies, arrhythmias

- Pancreas: through acinar damage progressing to pancreatitis

- Renal System: glomerulonephritis and AKI

- Reproductive System: infertility, premature birth, SGI babies, and fetal alcohol syndrome

- Breast carcinoma

- Neuro/psychiatric consequences: stroke, major depression, meningitis, alcoholic cerebellar degeneration