Visual consequences of aphakia are not the only concern. Patients require individualized care teams to address visual and pathological sequelae of aphakia.

**Aphakia with Age**

Infantile and childhood cataracts occur in 3 to 6 persons per 10000 live births worldwide.

An uncorrected aphakic eye, characterized by high refractive error and a lack of clear retinal image and sensory input, can adversely affect the development of the visual system. Thus, correcting the residual refractive error, particularly in infancy and childhood, is a top priority in reducing amblyopia risk. The decision to offer eyeglasses, contact lenses, or intraocular lens implantation requires in-depth conversations with the child's parents or guardians.

Eyeglasses may be heavy and difficult to keep on a small child's face; thus, contact lenses are often preferred as the first-line intervention in this age group. When considering corrective lenses for aphakia, it is essential to carefully evaluate and compare the risks, benefits, and alternatives associated with each option. In general, contact lenses are a preferred method of correcting both bilateral and unilateral cases of aphakia.

Soft and rigid gas-permeable (RGP) contact lenses require careful handling, cleaning, and disinfection. Caregivers with difficulty applying, removing, and disinfecting the contact lenses may find eyeglass correction a more suitable option. The placement of an intraocular lens is debated since a child's eye changes dramatically in axial length and corneal curvature, making IOL predictions challenging.

Refractive correction to provide a clear retinal image is only part of the treatment strategy. Regardless of lens type, amblyopia treatments should be reviewed and considered if the best-corrected acuity in the affected eye is worse than 20/20. Although there is no clear consensus on the duration of patching, some sources recommend amblyopia therapy until the child is at least 8 years.

As the child grows, or if aphakia develops later in life, there may be greater interest in the corrective properties of contact or intraocular lenses. Patients and caregivers may spend more time weighing the benefits of different lens options, given the risk of amblyopia is less. There are benefits and limitations to all options, as previously outlined. In cases of unilateral aphakia or trauma, where damage to other ocular structures is documented, eyeglasses have limited success.

Adult aphakia typically occurs in the setting of post-operation, trauma, or spontaneous dislocation of an intraocular lens.

**Unilateral versus Bilateral Aphakia**

Anisometropia, or a difference in prescriptions between eyes, is a consequence of unilateral aphakia. It is generally understood that each 1D of anisometropia corresponds to approximately a 1% difference in relative magnification between the eyes. The visual system can compensate for about 3% to 5% of relative magnification. In cases of mild anisometropia, modifying the base curve, center thickness, or refractive index of the lens material has been shown to minimize the effects of different retinal images, known as aniseikonia.

When the relative magnification difference between the eyes exceeds 5%, it can lead to more significant aniseikonia, which often results in patients experiencing intolerance to eyeglass wear. Retinal rivalry and diminished stereopsis occur as a consequence of aniseikonia.

Ultimately eyeglasses are not the first-line refractive option if visual potential exists in both eyes in a patient with unilateral aphakia. This is particularly true when the patient's visual processing system is still developing, and there is a risk of anisometropic amblyopia. In these cases, contact lenses or intraocular lenses are offered. However, eyeglasses might be considered in patients with bilateral or unilateral aphakia and visual potential in one eye with poor vision in the other eye.

Induced prism in anisometropic high plus lenses prescribed for aphakia may also lead to diplopia when the patient looks away from the optical center of the lens. f these cases, slab-off or reverse slab-off bifocals can be prescribed to avoid diplopia when looking into the bifocal. However, in other cases, single-vision glasses are indicated, and the patient must avoid looking too far away from the optical center of the lenses to avoid diplopia.

**Aphakia with Visual and Binocular Potential**

In suppression or secondary diplopia cases, full correction of the suppressed or diplomatic eye becomes less desirable. If, coincidentally, the eye with aphakia is also the one with suppression or diplopia, it may be best to correct the dominant eye only and allow the brain to ignore the image in the uncorrected eye with aphakia.

In trauma cases, contact lenses may offer a level of visual improvement relative to eyeglasses or IOL implantation, given that rigid gas-permeable lenses can mask underlying irregular astigmatism.