Preparation begins first with identifying the injury being treated. Once this is identified, the type of splint may be determined. The most common forearm splint is the sugar-tong splint. Other forearm splints include a sugar tong with a posterior mold and a volar-forearm splint. It is necessary to determine the splint being used as the required length of the splinting materials differs. For the sugar-tong splint, the forearm needs to be in the neutral rotation, and the elbow flexed to 90 degrees. The splint should begin at the distal palmar crease, wrap around the flexed elbow, and stop at the dorsal metacarpal heads. If necessary, to add a posterior slab to the sugar tong, it should begin distal to the wrist on the ulnar aspect of the forearm and stop proximal to the elbow, which prevents elbow flexion and extension. The volar forearm splint also begins at the distal palmar crease and stops proximal to the antecubital fossa, thus allowing for elbow flexion and some pronation and supination. Whether using plaster or prefabricated splinting material, the required length may be measured directly on the patient using a sheet of cotton cast padding (Webril) as a proxy. The splinting material can then be cut to the length of the measured cotton cast padding. Plaster needs to be at least 8 sheets thick to provide adequate strength but no more than 12 sheets thick to avoid thermal injury. Plaster produces heat as it hardens and care must be taken to prevent thermal injury. Stockinet is cut so that there is extra on both ends. The extra stockinet will be folded down over the plaster which allows the creation of padded cuffs at the ends of the splint for patient comfort. Cotton cast padding is used to wrap the forearm directly over the stockinet. The plaster splinting material is wet, wrung and bonded and placed on the forearm. Webril may be used to wrap over the splinting material once more before overwrapping with an elastic bandage. If necessary, appropriate molding of the splint may commence.