**Consideration of Anesthesia**

Several studies have investigated the suitability of general anesthesia versus local anesthesia for the reduction of nasal fractures.

**Local Anesthetic Technique (as necessary)**

Nasal fracture reduction with a combination of topical and local anesthetics in an outpatient/office setting is, in the majority of cases, well-tolerated with regards to pain. Results are comparable to having the procedure done under a general anesthetic.

**Closed Reduction**

This is the most straightforward approach, with success rates of 60% to 90%; it is usually reserved for simple, noncomminuted fractures.

All nasal bone reduction patients should wear a dorsal splint for seven days. Not only does it help hold the bones in place, but it reminds the patient and others around them to be careful because the bones can quite easily displace again with minimal force. Most closed reductions do not require internal splints, but they may be useful in cases of comminuted fractures, septal dislocation, and inwardly collapsing nasal bones.

**Open Reduction**

Fractures that cannot be reduced adequately by closed techniques are candidates for reduction via open septorhinoplasty.

**Post Procedure**

The external splint should be worn until the follow-up visit, 1 to 2 weeks after reduction. If splints are placed within the nose to assist with septal fracture reduction, these should be removed at the same visit. Patients should be advised that nasal bone fragments remain prone to shifting for up to 2 weeks after reduction and will not be considered fully healed for six weeks. For this reason, contact sports and games involving flying objects (playing catch, tennis, etc.) should be avoided for at least six weeks. Sleeping with the patient's head elevated and avoiding nose-blowing, heavy lifting, strenuous exercise, and bending over with the head below the heart will also help reduce post-procedure edema.