An aorta is a vessel that carries oxygenated blood from the heart up to the brain and then down to the rest of the body. The part of the aorta in the thorax is called the thoracic aorta, and the part below it is called the abdominal aorta. An aneurysm of the thoracic aorta occurs when some part of the vessel is dilated compared to its original size. The ascending aortic aneurysm is the most common type and occurs at the junction between the heart and the aorta. The descending aortic aneurysm is the second most common type, and this occurs in the region of the thoracic aorta facing the legs. Most patients do not have any symptoms, but few patients can complain of pain in the chest or back, cough, or hoarseness. This is a serious condition as most patients do not have any initial symptoms and will develop severe chest pain that goes to the back when the layers of the aorta are tearing apart, which is called aortic dissection. Similar pain can also signify aortic rupture when the aortic aneurysm bursts open. These are the most likely complications of this condition. Male gender, smoking, history of uncontrolled blood pressure, and cholesterol levels are the main risk factors for the development of these aneurysms.

Patients with certain genetic diseases of the connective tissue are more likely to develop an aortic aneurysm in the ascending aorta. They should be routinely screened for the size of the aorta. If the physician suspects a thoracic aneurysm, the patient would be advised to undergo a CT scan to assess the dimensions of the aorta. If the size of the aneurysm is small, the physician will keep on monitoring it periodically. With a diagnosis of TAA, patients should not perform strenuous workouts or lift heavy weights and learn to stay calm and avoid acute emotion as this can increase blood pressure in the vessel, which can dissect or rupture the aorta. Patients who smoke should quit, and those with secondhand smoke exposure should avoid those settings. A bigger size of the aneurysm, rapidly increasing size, or patients with symptoms will need surgery to fix the problem. Patients with a family history of sudden cardiac death and TAA should get themselves evaluated. Recently genetic testing has been offered to screen family members and should be utilized to know if other members have the same disease genes.