Patients with trochlear nerve palsy complain of double vision vertically (vertical diplopia) or the images being tilted or rotated (torsional diplopia). The diplopia is binocular and may worsen or improve in different gazes. In the case of a right superior oblique involvement, the vertical diplopia is maximum when the right eye is directed downwards and inwards.

The main actions of the superior oblique muscle are intorsion, depression, and abduction of the eye. Palsy of the fourth cranial nerve results in the impairment of these actions. The clinical examination may show the following:

- Abnormal head posture (torticollis): To compensate for the diplopia, the patient may adopt a head tilt and face turn to the opposite side.

- Facial asymmetry: Midfacial hypoplasia may be seen in congenital cases of paresis.

- Strabismus: In the affected eye, there is hypertropia, excyclotorsion, and in some cases, esotropia.

Maddox Rod test helps to determine ocular cyclotorsion. When the lines of a Maddox rod are oriented vertically, a horizontal line is seen by normal eyes. In the case of trochlear nerve palsy, the horizontal line will be perceived as tilted downwards nasally because of the excyclotorsion.

- Parks three-step test: This test allows the identification of the paretic muscle in cases of vertical diplopia.

- Step 1: Identification of the hypertropic eye in the primary position.
- Step 2: Identification of the hypertropic eye in the right and left gaze.
- Step 3: It is also known as the Bielschowsky head tilt test. The head is tilted to each side to determine the side on which the hypertropia worsens.

In a case of trochlear nerve palsy, the hypertropia of the paretic eye increases on the opposite gaze and on tilting the head to the same side. The Parks 3-step test, however, is not infallible and can lead to an erroneous diagnosis of cyclovertical muscle palsy in cases with skew deviation, prior strabismus surgery, blowout fracture of the orbit, bilateral trochlear nerve palsy, and myasthenia gravis.

- In some long-standing cases, the hypertropia may be equal in different positions of gaze. This is known as the spread of comitance.

In the case of trochlear nerve palsy, this spread of comitance is characterized by:

- Contracture of the ipsilateral antagonist (Ipsilateral inferior oblique)

- Overaction of the contralateral yoke muscle (contralateral inferior rectus)

- Secondary inhibitional palsy of the contralateral antagonist (contralateral superior rectus)

- Bilateral superior oblique palsy should be suspected in cases with alternating hypertropia in gazes and tilts, objective torsion more than 10 degrees, V- pattern esotropia, bilateral fundus torsion, or a chin-down head posture. A case of bilateral superior oblique paresis may be misdiagnosed as unilateral paresis; a condition referred to as masked bilateral superior oblique paresis.

- Assessment of torsion:
            Subjective method: Torsion can be subjectively assessed using the double Maddox rod test. Subjective torsion is usually very little or absent in congenital trochlear nerve palsy, while acquired palsy has a measurable degree of torsion. Excyclotorsion of more than 10 degrees is seen in cases of bilateral palsy of the superior oblique.
            Objective method: Objectively, torsion is measured using an indirect ophthalmoscope or fundus photography.

- Knapp's Classification:
- Class 1: Maximum hypertropia is in the opposite upfield (Overaction of the antagonist inferior oblique)
- Class 2: Maximum hypertropia is in the opposite downgaze (Underaction of the paretic superior oblique)
- Class 3: Maximum hypertropia in the entire field to the opposite side
- Class 4: Maximum hypertropia in the entire field to the opposite side and across the lower field
- Class 5: Maximum hypertropia is across the lower field.
- Class 6: Bilateral superior oblique paresis
- Class 7: It is caused by direct trauma to the superior oblique resulting in paresis and restriction of relaxation (Brown syndrome). This is also known as ‘Canine tooth syndrome.’