Provider risk stratifies patients presenting with signs and symptoms of new or progressive CAD to deliver early, appropriate preventative and interventional patient care. Initial history and physical exam can gather data on risk factors and clinical signs of coronary disease. All health professional team members, including nurses, nurse practitioners, primary care providers, provider assistants, and cardiologists, must be aware of early clinical signs and CAD symptoms to help facilitate early evaluation. A high index of CAD suspicion in at-risk populations and early investigation helps reduce adverse cardiac events and improve quality of life.

No large, randomized trial compares all stress imaging modalities to identify a superior choice. A meta-analysis found that negative echocardiography and MPI stress tests accurately identified patients with a low yearly risk of myocardial infarction or cardiac death. Guidelines proposed by major national societies, such as the American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association (ACC/AHA), American College of Cardiology Foundation (ACCF) and the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, American Society of Echocardiography, all help providers apply the best diagnostic testing, including stress imaging, to provide optimum evidence-based patient care.

Recommendations on image selection focus on specific patient factors (specified in previous sections) and on the local facility's factors, including the training of those interpreting tests, the experience and skills of the sonographers or nuclear technicians, and the center's overall volume of tests. This highlights each member of the health care team's importance in delivering effective stress testing, as each member must be up-to-date, competent, and complementary to the team. A collaborative approach among various health care providers and shared-decision making with the patient allows for optimal medical care.