The clinical diabetic foot exam includes four major components: dermatological, vascular, neurological, musculoskeletal.

The dermatological exam includes a thorough evaluation of the entire foot and ankle, including interdigital spaces and nails. Hyperkeratosis requires debriding. Pre-ulcerative and ulcerative lesions need detailed documentation of location, size, depth, the appearance of wound base, peri-wound skin, undermining, tracking, probing to the bone, exudate quality, and signs of infection (e.g., warmth, erythema, malodor, crepitus). A temperature of greater than 3 to 4 degrees compared to the contralateral foot may indicate an infection or acute Charcot neuroarthropathy. Also, a prior history of ulcerations, treatments, and preventative modalities requires documentation. A baseline foot radiograph is in order for patients with new ulcerations, and if osteomyelitis is concerned, the clinician should obtain serial radiographs for monitoring and exclusion.

Clinical evaluation of vascularity and PAD starts with a thorough medical history (e.g., PAD risk factors, claudication, rest pain, history of non-healing wounds). Palpation of dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arteries are the baseline for diabetic foot exams, but palpation of popliteal and femoral pulses can further assess the level of PAD. A decrease in pedal pulses may warrant evaluation with a Doppler ultrasound or further non-invasive testing for PAD. A Doppler ultrasound of pedal arteries can reveal triphasic flow (normal), biphasic flow (some arterial disease), monophasic flow (PAD with risk for limb ischemia), or absent (severe PAD and high risk for ischemia and limb loss). Non-invasive vascular tests include vascular labs (i.e., ankle-brachial index (ABI), segmental pressures, pulse volume recording, toe pressures, and transcutaneous partial pressure of oxygen [TcPO2]) and treadmill functional testing. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends a screening ABI in patients with diabetes greater than 50 years old, and if normal, a repeat ABI should take place every five years. Screening ABI in patients with diabetes less 50 years old should be a consideration if they also have PAD risk factors (e.g., smoking, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes greater than ten years). If any indications of PAD are present during these exams, a referral to vascular surgery should follow.

The diabetic foot neurological exam consists of Achilles reflex testing, Semmes-Weinstein monofilament testing (SWMT), 128 Hz tuning fork testing, and pinprick testing. The Achilles reflex is performed on bilateral Achilles tendon with a reflex hammer. Reflexes are graded as 0+ (absent), 1+ (decreased), 2+ (brisk, normal), 3+ (increased), 4+ (increased with clonus). The 5.07/10 g SWMT is the most commonly used monofilament and examines pressure/light touch sensation. It should test for ten sites on each foot as follows: Distal first toe, distal third toe, distal fifth toe, plantar first metatarsal head, plantar third metatarsal head, plantar fifth metatarsal head, plantar medial and lateral arch, plantar heel, and dorsal first interspace. The 128-Hz non-graduated standard tuning fork tests vibratory sensation, and an abnormal result can reveal diabetic neuropathy if the patient can no longer distinguish vibration. The pinprick can be performed with a sharp pin device and evaluates whether the patient can distinguish sharp vs. dull sensations.

Musculoskeletal evaluation should determine lower extremity muscle strength and foot or ankle deformities and limitations. The flexibility and rigidity of the joint range of motion should be determined to guide treatment options. As mentioned previously, patients with diabetes are at higher risk of developing pedal deformities such as digital contractures and ankle equinus, which increases the risk for ulceration. For example, a flexible ankle equinus due to gastrocnemius tightness may result in increased plantar foot pressures and tissue breakdown in the neuropathic patient.  Patients with pedal deformities should be referred to podiatry or other surgical practitioners for further management as they may benefit from surgical correction. For example, a digital flexor tenotomy may help in preventing distal toe ulcerations where tissue breakdown has developed.

Patient and family education and enforcement of proper diabetic foot care should be also be provided during the visit.

Patients should understand the importance of ambulating in protective shoegear, both indoors and outdoors. They should wear properly fitted shoes to prevent ulcerations. Additionally, patients with diabetes may require specialized shoegear and should undergo evaluation for such during the diabetic foot exam. The appropriate offloading and protective modality will depend on an individualized assessment of biomechanical changes, pressure points, and pathology. Shoe modifications, temporary shoegear, toe spacers, orthosis, and offloading felt pads or foam may all assist in protecting the diabetic foot.