**Utility in First Aid, Pre-Hospital Care, and Emergency Care**

The AVPU scale is a quick and simple way of detecting altered mental status (AMS) in a patient. No formal training is necessary to use this score. It can be utilized during first aid and in the pre-hospital setting as any score lower than an "A" is considered abnormal until proven otherwise. This result should prompt the examiner to conduct additional assessments or begin more definitive care. EMS crews may begin with AVPU, followed by a GCS assessment if the AVPU score is below "A." AVPU is less detailed than the Glasgow Coma Scale, but it is performable more quickly. AVPU was initially used in the primary survey of trauma patients, as a decreased mental status could indicate inadequate circulation of oxygenated blood to the brain.

**Utility in Hospital Care and Long Term Healthcare Facilities**

AMS is one of the strongest predictors of death on the wards. Health care professionals within a hospital utilize this scale during patient assessment for any patients at risk of having an abnormal level of consciousness.

**Correlation to the Glasgow Coma Scale and Airway Protection**

Similar to GCS, where a score of 8 or lower prompts health care providers to consider the need for airway protection, the AVPU scale also addresses airway management and aspiration risks. Patients scoring "P" or "U" may have decreased or absent gag reflexes and thus are unable to maintain a patent airway. This status should prompt the healthcare provider to consider initiating a means of airway protection to avoid airway compromise or aspiration.

The AVPU scale correlates to distinct GSC ranges, as outlined below.

- GCS Score 15 - Alert

- GCS 12 to 13 - Verbally Responsive

- GCS 5 to 6 - Physically Responsive

- GCS 3 - Unresponsive