Currently, there are no standardized guidelines for simulation in POCUS training. However, while recent literature for POCUS training education continues to improve, the integration of simulation is lacking in these guidelines.

A basic foundation of POCUS training is, to begin with, didactics to introduce the learner to this modality. This introductory portion of the training can be regarded as vital since it involves becoming familiar with the ultrasound machine and applying this skill to acquiring the desired image.  In this regard, the ACEP policy guidelines on POCUS suggest that rotating between skill and practice improves trainee and faculty engagement.

Once an adequate comfort level is achieved, subsequent opportunities for clinical simulation or supervised bedside training are necessary. This may include live patient scans with an expert supervising the session. However, as mentioned previously, the bedside patient training approach may negatively affect the stress-induced environment and expectations of the learner. Therefore, it preferable to utilize clinical scenarios in a controlled environment to simulate bedside clinical training. This allows for real-time feedback by the supervising expert to enhance the development of learner skills and techniques. Furthermore, this can augment psychomotor training, learner positioning, interpersonal skill, and professionalism and educate patients and families as it relates to their clinical presentation. Appropriately designed cases can be used to assess a trainee's ability to recognize both common and rare diagnoses and demonstrate reproducible image acquisition and interpretation.

Simultaneous quality assurance of images acquired by the trainee is also an essential part of POCUS training. This oversight can be done during a supervised scan, whether by simulation or during clinical management. If this is not possible, immediate quality assurance of the images acquired and submitted by the learner should be completed in a timely fashion.  Expert sonographers can also complete a subsequent review of acquired images to provide the trainee with feedback that reinforces learned concepts and skills.

By definition, measurement of competency is intended to assess baseline knowledge of POCUS technique and skill. This often includes evaluating the trainee's understanding of the ultrasound equipment utilized to acquire quality images for clinical integration and management of patient care. Assessment of competency may be done by written examination that emphasizes basic ultrasound concepts in the clinical setting based on POCUS applications central to the common clinical encounters (i.e., focused cardiac ultrasound for chest pain).