Human lungs constantly have exposure to airborne fungus, which is a relatively ubiquitous component of our external environmental microbiome. Of all fungal organisms, aspergillus with species fumigatus and niger are common colonizers. The primary portal of entry for aspergillus spores is through the respiratory tract, although they can be commensals within the external auditory canal as well. In a diseased lung or with systemic immunodeficiency, these filamentous organisms then proliferate rapidly and become consequential.

Nearly 60% of aspergillomas thrive in a poorly drained and avascular cavitary space. Aspergillus, once harbored within cavitary airspace, adheres to the wall with its conidia, then germinates and, in the process, evokes an inflammatory reaction. The organism, along with the inflammatory debris, forms an amorphous mass identified as an aspergilloma. In very early stages,  an ulceration or irregular cobblestoned cavity wall or floor may be the only pathological finding. Even with advanced disease, aspergilloma is most often mobile within the cavity,  and thus changes position with respect to the cavity in radiological images taken in different postures of the subject.

Hemoptysis is the most common clinical manifestation in symptomatic patients. The bleeding source is usually a bronchial vessel and can be secondary to:

- Direct invasion of capillaries of the wall lining

- Endotoxin release from the organism

- Mechanical irritation of exposed vessels within the cavity

- Rarely a rapidly growing cavity can erode into the pleural surface and intercostal arteries, causing massive, often fatal hemoptysis that is extremely challenging to control.

However, in an aggressively growing aspergilloma, chances of exposure and erosion into the much wider branched pulmonary arterial system are higher. Triggered by hypoxia, inflammation, and architectural distortion, there is an opening up of pulmonary arterial and bronchial arterial anastomotic plexus, which then become targets of erosion and hemoptysis. Inoue et al. did publish on increased expression of vascular endothelial growth factor in aspergilloma and the significance of monitoring their levels to predict massive hemoptysis.

Multiple fungus balls are also seen, particularly in patients with chronic cystic bronchiectasis or multicystic or bullous disease.

In the brain, aspergillus involvement characteristically demonstrates the invasion of small, medium, and large vessels with the invasion of fungal hyphae through vascular walls into adjacent tissue. Initial hemorrhagic infarcts convert into septic infarcts, cerebritis, and abscesses. When chronic, fibrosis, and granuloma formation follows. Although CNS involvement is mostly through hematogenous dissemination, local infiltration into the base of the skull can cause osteomyelitis or meningitis.