The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve exclusively carries afferent sensory fibers. Most commonly, the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve is formed from the L2 and L3 nerve roots. It first appears at the lateral border of the psoas major, then moves parallel to the iliac crest and in an oblique fashion across the iliacus muscle toward the anterior superior iliac spine. Here, the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve branches into a left and a right nerve. The left branch of the LFCN dives behind the lower descending colon and provides sensation to the parietal peritoneum in the iliac fossa. The right branch passes posterolateral to the cecum behind the fascia iliaca, outside the peritoneum. The left and right branches both run underneath the inguinal ligament, anterior to, through, or posterior to the sartorius muscle and 10 mm medial to ASIS and into the thigh. Once distal to the inguinal ligament, the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve branches into anterior and posterior divisions. The anterior branch exits the fascia lata more distally than the posterior branch and provides sensation to the anterolateral thigh as distally as the knee. It also forms part of the peripatellar plexus along with the anterior division of the femoral nerve and the infrapatellar branch of the saphenous nerve. The posterior division provides sensation to the skin of the lateral thigh, covering the area from the greater trochanter (and sometimes the gluteal skin) to half-way down the thigh. Meralgia paresthetica is more commonly seen in the distribution of the anterior division than the posterior division, although both may be affected.