**Electrocardiogram**

The initial diagnostic assessment of any athlete undergoing screening for cardiac diseases and/or an athlete undergoing assessment for syncope is an ECG. The ECG will provide information on the rate and rhythm of the heart and can indicate structural abnormalities. Assessment of the ECG should include the following:

- Shortened PR interval and/or accessory pathways

- Long QTc interval (greater than 480 ms)

- Short QTc interval (less than 340 ms)

- Brugada type 1 pattern

- Premature ventricular contractions (greater than 1)

- Doublets or triplets

- Mobitz type II atrioventricular block

- Complete left bundle branch block (LBBB)

- T wave inversion (unless in V1-V3 and also under age 16)

- QRS greater than 140ms

- Epsilon wave

Other significant findings that can present on an ECG include pathological Q waves, significant ST-segment changes, and third-degree atrioventricular blocks.

**Normal Physiologic Findings On ECGs**

Athletes may have findings on their ECG that would otherwise be considered abnormal in the general population. Sinus bradycardia (under 60 beats per minute) is among the most common benign abnormal ECG findings, but very low heart rates should not be ignored. Infrequent PVCs and premature atrial contractions (PACs) are also considered normal among the general population and physically active people. However, specific findings on ECGs considered normal among athletes but abnormal in other populations include:

- Left ventricular hypertrophy (QRS voltage criteria)

- Right ventricular hypertrophy (QRS voltage criteria)

- Sinus arrhythmia

- Early repolarisation

- First-degree atrioventricular block

Left and right axis deviation and left or right atrial enlargement may or may not be considered abnormal depending on other findings and the clinical context. If present in isolation, they are generally not considered abnormal. However, coexistence with other borderline or abnormal findings warrants further investigation.

**Holter Monitor**

Two types of athletes will qualify for a 24 or 48-hour Holter monitor: athletes with abnormal ECG findings and/or athletes with symptoms caused by potential cardiac pathology. The Holter monitor will provide greater insight into the athlete's electrophysiology over a greater period compared to an ECG. Arrhythmias will be detected on the Holter monitor, and the etiology of symptoms, such as palpitations, can potentially be uncovered. The Holter monitor is especially useful for assessing the burden of PVCs, given that their frequency of occurrence largely points to their significance. People with ARVD will generally have a high PVC burden and may also experience non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (NSVT).

**Stress Test**

A stress test allows for the reproduction of potentially dangerous arrhythmias that may occur during exercise but are infrequent at rest.

**Echocardiogram**

An echocardiogram allows for a general overview of the heart's structure. Evaluating the four cardiac chambers, valvular structures, and the heart's ejection fraction can be made using an echocardiogram.

Multiple criteria exist that combine clinical evaluation, ECGs, and echocardiograms. They carry variable levels of evidence, and hence their utility is subject to use within a clinical context. An example of well-established criteria is the Schwartz scoring scale for evaluating long QT syndrome.

Long QT syndrome is a known cause of syncope and sudden death among the general population and athletes. The most common cause of prolonged QT on an ECG is secondary to medication use.

The following represents a scoring system to assess the probability of long QT syndrome in a patient.

- QTc greater than 480 ms = 3 points

- QTc 460 to 479 mc = 2 points

- QTc 450 to 459 (male) = 1 point

- QTc greater than 480 ms after 4th minute of exercise = 1 point

- Torsades de pointes = 2 points

- T wave alternans = 1 point

- Notched T wave in 3 leads = 1 point

- Clinical bradycardia = 1 point

- Syncope with stress or exertion = 2 points

- Syncope at rest = 1 point

- Congenital deafness = 0.5 points

- Family members with diagnosed Long QT syndrome = 1 point

- Unexplained sudden death under age 30 among immediate family members = 0.5 points

- A score of less than or equal to 1 is equal to low probability, a score of 2 to 3 is equal to intermediate probability, and a score greater than 3.5 is equal to a high probability of congenital long QT syndrome. In patients with a high probability of congenital long QT syndrome and/or patients with intermediate probability where clinical suspicion exists, genetic testing may be warranted. As of 2019, there are 17 different known types of congenital long QT known, with the first three types being the most common.

**Physiologic versus Pathologic Left Ventricular Hypertrophy**

Left ventricular hypertrophy is a common occurrence among athletes. A mild to moderate degree of hypertrophy occurs as a natural response to exercise, particularly endurance-based and isometric exercise. Large levels of hypertrophy are generally noted to be pathological and are known to be induced either genetically and/or as a result of anabolic steroid or peptide hormone use. One differentiating factor between physiological and pathological left ventricular hypertrophy is the wall thickness itself. On an echocardiogram, a normal ventricle will be 6 mm to 11 mm. Under 13 mm is generally not considered to be hypertrophic from a clinical perspective, although 11to 13 mm is borderline thickened. Over 16 to 18 mm is considered significantly enlarged and crosses over into the territory of hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy.

The grey area of 13 mm to 16 mm requires clinical evaluation to differentiate between physiological adaptations to exercise and cardiomyopathy.

Symptomatically, athletes may experience syncope, dizziness, and dyspnea during exercise. They will also generally be younger.

ECGs will be done to assess athletes for the voltage criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy, of which three criteria exist. Although positive voltage findings are often normal in athletes, the degree of their elevation provides information to be used within a clinical context.

Sokolow-Lyon index: S in V1 + R in V5 or V6 greater than or equal to 35 mm or R in aVL greater than or equal to 11 mm

Cornell Voltage criteria: Men = S in V3 + R in aVL greater than 28 mm / Women = S in V3 + R in aVL greater than 20 mm

The Romhilt-Estes point score system may also be useful, which looks at similar voltage criteria as well as ST-T abnormalities, left axis deviation, and QRS duration. Other indications of HOCM on an ECG are pathological Q waves, ST-segment depressions, LBBBs, and T wave inversions.

Aside from measuring left ventricular wall thickness on an echocardiogram, asymmetrical septal hypertrophy and a small left ventricular cavity diameter are additional indicators of cardiomyopathy. As well, evidence of outflow obstruction is a key factor in assessing the risk of sudden cardiac death.

Additional diagnostic tools will generally be used if there exists significant suspicion of cardiomyopathy in a young athlete; this includes cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which will give detailed insight into differentiating physiological and pathological hypertrophy, allow for visualization of fatty infiltration in ARVD, and also reveal many potential congenital abnormalities. Angiography is another available tool and is the gold standard for the diagnosis of coronary anomalies and ARVD. Electrophysiology studies are an option for the evaluation of arrhythmias, particularly when the etiology remains unidentified.

Outside of cardiac testing, the use of genetic testing is quite prevalent in assessing for any congenital issues. An extensive range of congenital illnesses may undergo an evaluation with genetic testing, but definite answers will not always be apparent.