**Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm (AAA)**

Major risk factors for developing AAA include cigarette smoking and hypertension. Additionally, individuals with Marfans or Ehlers-Danlos are at risk of developing AAAs. Men are at greater risk. The majority of AAAs develop below the renal artery branches of the abdominal aorta. Routine screening using abdominal ultrasound for AAAs (in the United States) is done for men over the age of 65 years old who have a history of smoking or who are current smokers. If the abdominal aorta has a diameter greater than 3 cm, this is considered AAA. However, surgical intervention is reserved for AAAs that grow to greater than 5.5 centimeters or if the AAA grows greater than 1 centimeter within one year while doing ultrasound surveillance of a known AAA. Surgical intervention can be open repair or with the use of endovascular repair.

**Nutcracker Syndrome**

The left renal vein runs between the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and the abdominal artery on its way to drain into the inferior vena cava (IVC), and the left renal vein can be compressed between the SMA and abdominal aorta, potentially leading to hematuria and left-sided flank pain. The right renal vein does not cross the aorta to drain into the IVC and is therefore not susceptible to compression between the SMA and abdominal aorta.

**Splenic Artery Aneurysm**

If there is an aneurysm of the splenic artery, there is potential for upper GI bleeding as the short gastric artery will have a build-up of backpressure.