**Maternal-Fetal Transmission**

Medication therapy for both mother and child during pregnancy, childbirth, and postnatally has reduced the mother-to-child transmission rate to less than 1%. Breast milk can transmit HIV to the child. Using infant formula, which is readily available in the United States in place of breast milk, eliminates that risk. In addition, rapid HIV testing at the time of delivery in high-incidence areas has proven to further reduce transmission.

**Blood Transmission**

The healthcare system has effectively instituted testing of all blood products to nearly eliminate transmission between patients through the blood. Universal precautions for health care workers have been widely accepted to decrease occupational exposure. Occupational exposures do occur, and effective post-exposure prophylaxis (oPEP) reduces the risk of infection. Effective post-exposure prophylaxis is a 28-day course of antiretrovirals when the risk of HIV is considered significant within 24 to 72 hours of exposure. Effective post-exposure prophylaxis, occupational (oPEP), and non-occupational (nPEP) will be reviewed later in this article.

Persons who inject drugs (PWID), such as heroin, are at very high risk of being infected with HIV. Substance abuse clouds judgment, and often there is needle sharing among HIV positive and HIV negative individuals. In areas with a high prevalence of PWID, syringe service programs (SSPs) are shown to be very effective. For example, in Philadelphia, Prevention Point (a syringe exchange program) has played a huge role in reducing the rate of those who acquired HIV from injecting drugs from 42% in 2005 to 5% in 2015. In November 2016, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported that syringe programs could significantly decrease the risk of HIV in people injecting drugs. One study in 2015 showed that injection drug users who received all of their needles from a syringe exchange program shared needles 13% of the time. In contrast, those who didn't receive all their needles from a syringe exchange program shared needles 41% of the time.

People who inject drugs are also at high risk of being undiagnosed, and therefore, they possibly transmit the virus through both blood and sexual encounters. In addition to access to clean needles, pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) may be an ideal prevention method for many injection drug users. Oral PrEP is one pill containing two antiretrovirals, taken daily in those considered at risk of acquiring HIV. Injectable PrEP is also available as an injection every two months. PrEP has shown to be very effective in reducing the risk of HIV infection and will be explored in detail later in this article. Syringe service programs also link PWID to PrEP, harm reduction teaching, access to condoms, and connection to HIV and HCV testing and treatment.

**Sexual Transmission**

Sexual transmissions still account for the bulk of new infections in the United States. Many factors affect the risk of transmission: type of sexual encounter, viral load of HIV-positive partner, and use/type of protective measures such as a barrier method or PREP.

Available barrier methods include male and female condoms and dental dams. Male condoms remain the mainstay of HIV prevention as the most effective and available barrier method. Male condoms are cheap, readily available, and protect against many other sexually transmitted diseases. Unfortunately, using male condoms is primarily the decision of the insertive male partner. The receiving partner may not have control to protect themself. Condoms also are only effective when consistently used during every sexual encounter. One meta-analysis (looking at male-male, male-female, and unstated sexual risk factors) estimated condoms to be 80% to 85% effective at reducing HIV transmission.

Another metanalysis showed condoms reduce HIV transmission by more than 70% when used consistently by HIV serodiscordant heterosexual couples.

Female condoms have the advantage of transferring decision-making to the female, yet they have lacked widespread acceptance and understanding of the method. Dental dams are thin sheets of latex that can be used during cunnilingus or anilingus. Many still underestimate the risks of oral sex practices, and dental dams are not commonly integrated into regular use.

Treating those living with HIV to reduce transmission of HIV is known as Treatment as Prevention or TaSP and will be discussed below.

**PREP**

Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) has been the newest addition to HIV prevention. PrEP has shown to be highly effective, FDA-approved, and recommended by the CDC.

On May 14, 2014, the US Public Health Service released the first comprehensive clinical practice guidelines for PrEP. Several large trials evaluated PrEP among gay and bisexual men, heterosexual men and women, and those who inject drugs. Those participating in the trials received pills containing either PrEP or placebo, with intensive counseling on safe-sex behavior, including access to condoms and regular testing for sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV. In all of these studies, the risk of getting HIV infection was lower (up to 92% lower) for participants who took the medicines consistently than for those who did not.

In December 2021, the CDC released the most recent PrEP guidelines highlighting the education of all sexually active adolescents and adults about PrEP and the recommendation to prescribe PrEP to all patients who request it, regardless of known risk factors.

Oral PrEP is one tablet, either tenofovir disiproxil fumarate/emtricitabine or tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine, a combination of two antiretrovirals taken by those at high risk for acquiring HIV. Oral PrEP is recommended to be taken daily for those at high risk of HIV sexually or when actively injecting drugs. Oral PrEP can be taken "on-demand" when a patient is able to identify a high-risk sexual event at least 2 hours before. "On-demand" or episodic PrEP is taken as two pills of tenofovir disiproxil fumarate/emtricitabine at least two hours, but up to 24 hours, before the sexual encounter and then once a day for two days after the sexual encounter. This dosing can also be referred to as "2:1:1" in reference to the dosing schedule. Episodic PrEP cannot be used with tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine or those at risk of HIV due to injection drug use due to the lack of studies in these populations. Of note, tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine is not indicated for those at risk of HIV due to receptive vaginal sex.

The provider is responsible for evaluating patients at high risk for HIV and screening for HIV, HBV, and renal disease before starting PREP. Oral PrEP is only part of an HIV treatment regimen and, when prescribed to someone with HIV, can cause resistance and suboptimal viral control. Therefore, HIV testing is required every three months with oral PrEP. Tenofovir disiproxil fumarate/emtricitabine is also used to treat HBV, and the presence of HBV would not exclude using PREP but would need to be evaluated separately for use. Tenofovir disiproxil fumarate is a component of tenofovir disiproxil fumarate/emtricitabine and can rarely cause renal disease, so a baseline renal function test is essential. PrEP does not prevent STIs or pregnancy. Another disadvantage is that the efficacy is significantly reduced with a lack of compliance. PrEP is expensive (although usually free through pharmaceutical-sponsored programs) and requires engagement at a health facility with frequent follow-up visits. The choice of tenofovir disiproxil fumarate/emtricitabine vs. tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine is a patient/provider discussion, including cost considerations and the topics mentioned above.

Additionally, at the end of 2021, the first long-acting injectable PrEP, cabotegravir, was approved to prevent HIV. Cabotegravir is given as an in-office gluteal intramuscular injection every two months for those at risk of HIV sexually or due to injection drug use. Cabotegravir includes a boxed warning that the patient must have a negative HIV test directly before receiving. This is due to reports of patients developing an HIV variant that has resistance caused by taking cabotegravir while undiagnosed with HIV. Study participants had a 69% to 90% less chance of contracting HIV than tenofovir disiproxil fumarate/emtricitabine in the trials leading to the approval of cabotegravir.

PrEP can potentially revolutionize HIV prevention. It allows equal decision-making among sexual partners and removes the pressure of barrier methods during sex. It also protects those who inject drugs. Uptake of prescribing PrEP is still not common among medical providers across all specialties.

**PEP**

Post-exposure prophylaxis is also gaining ground as a commonly used method to prevent HIV. The decision to begin PEP is based on calculating the risk of taking PEP against the risk of acquisition of HIV during exposure. HIV risk exposure risk depends on the likelihood that the source patient is HIV-positive (including if viral load is detectable in the source patient) and the risk of the type of exposure (type of sexual encounter, size of the needle in a needle stick exposure, type, or size of mucosal exposure.)

Non-occupational PEP (nPEP) is given when an individual has been exposed to a confirmed or suspicious HIV-positive body secretion of semen, vaginal fluid, or blood and seeks medical treatment within 72 hours that was not in an occupational setting. If the source patient is known to be HIV negative or the exposure is more than 72 hours in the past, nPEP is not recommended. If the source is known to be positive, the type of exposure needs to be evaluated for the significance of the risk. If the HIV status of the source patient is unknown, evaluation is on a case-by-case basis. A rapid HIV test should be obtained and an assessment for any other exposure-related risks (sexually transmitted diseases, hepatitis A and B, and pregnancy).

Occupational PEP (oPEP) was used as a model to create nPEP, and in many ways, they are similar. In oPEP, there is more opportunity to test and monitor the source patient in many cases. In both oPEP and nPEP, Antiretroviral therapy needs to be started as soon as possible, preferably less than 72 hours, and continued for four weeks. The preferred regimen for both nPEP and oPEP for otherwise healthy adults and adolescents is tenofovir 300 mg/emtricitabine 200 mg once daily with either raltegravir 400mg twice daily or dolutegravir 50 mg once daily for four weeks.

In oPEP, the type of exposure may be a mucous membrane or different body fluids. There is also usually more ability to test the source patient in occupational exposure. The main difference between non-occupational and occupational PEP is the protocol for nPEP implements risk reduction in medical visits. Patients seeking nPEP should be referred to PrEP if they are at repeated risk for HIV infection or if nPEP has been sought more than once in the past 12 months. Post-exposure prophylaxis regimens have low side effects and minimal risk of HIV resistance, yet use among healthcare providers is still lacking. Providers should take full advantage of the PEP consultation service for clinicians, a live hotline from 9 am to 2 am ET. They can be reached at **1-888-448-4911.**

**TasP**

Treatment as Prevention (TasP) is a campaign that engages patients and providers to treat HIV for the patient's health and reduce the risk of transmission to others—popularly known as "U=U." It has been shown that if a patient maintains an undetectable viral load, HIV will be untransmittable. The PARTNER 1 study looked at condomless sexual intercourse in 1166 HIV-discordant couples in which the partner with HIV was receiving ART and achieved viral suppression (HIV-1 RNA viral load <200 copies/mL). Fifty-eight thousand condomless sexual acts were observed, and there were no HIV transmissions as a result of these sexual acts. This study, in addition to others, launched the assurance that providers and patients can use the goal of maintaining viral suppression as an important part of HIV prevention.