Health professionals frequently deal with the loss of a patient in the emergency department and in intensive care units. These deaths are often due to unforeseen violent circumstances, such as gunshot wounds, motor vehicle accidents, suicides, and homicides. Only after extensive, failed resuscitation attempts will the health professional team end their efforts. This harrowing experience takes not only a physical but emotional toll on the providers, as they are the last hope of survival for the patient. The loss of a patients life reflects immense personal and professional stress and anxiety on the health care team. However, they must put aside their grief to disclose the bad news to family members of a patient who has died unexpectedly. The clinician likely lacks a prior intimate relationship with the family. This lack of familiarity makes it important for health providers to be aware of and ready for various emotional reactions from the family so that he or she can alleviate extended grief and bereavement. This activity reviews the management of the grieving family and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in helping the family through the stressful event of losing a loved one.

**Objectives:**
- Explain how to use the GRIEV_ING mnemonic.
- Illustrate common grief reactions that family members who have lost a loved one may have.

- Articulate how to support family members experiencing common grief reactions.
- Explain the importance of interprofessional efforts to communicate in a clear and empathetic manner when notifying family members of a patient's death.