Insect bites are a very common presentation to clinicians. While only a small percentage of arthropods attack humans, serious consequences including anaphylaxis, venom toxicity, and vector-borne illness can occur. Insect bites are usually managed by an interprofessional group of clinicians and they should be familiar with the management. Local treatment and symptom management are sufficient in most arthropod bites and stings. In cases of severe envenomation due to arthropods, such as scorpions and black widow spiders, the patient should be managed in a hospital setting where the administration of antivenom may be appropriate. Consultation with a toxicologist is indicated in the management of any severe envenomation and when the use of antivenom is a treatment consideration.

The most significant impact on human health secondary to arthropod bites is the transmission of serious, and sometimes fatal, infectious diseases.  Some arthropod-borne infectious diseases may not manifest for weeks, months or even years following the inciting bite.  Therefore, it is imperative for clinicians including the pharmacist, nurse practitioner, and primary care provider to obtain a detailed history from patients, including prior arthropod exposure, travel to, or residence in, areas known to have endemic arthropod-borne diseases. Methods to prevent the incidence of arthropod bites, such as the use of appropriate insect repellents and protective clothing, can significantly reduce the risk of acquiring arthropod-borne infections.  Clinicians play a critical role in assessing a patient’s risk of exposure to arthropod vectors and providing risk-reduction counseling to at-risk patients.

All patients with a history of anaphylaxis or serious allergies should be told by the nurse practitioner to wear an ID bracelet and carry epinephrine on them. For travelers, the pharmacist should encourage carrying an antihistamine, mosquito net and wearing appropriate garments.

The outcomes for most patients with insect bites are good.