Small full-thickness eyelid defects, typically up to 25% of the width of the lid, can often be closed directly by opposing the two free edges. Direct closure typically requires closure in two layers, one layer to close the tarsus, and one layer to close the skin. The lid margin is usually closed with a horizontal mattress to provide wound edge eversion, to promote healing without a notch. In patients with very lax eyelids, sometimes larger defects may be closed in this fashion. For defects between 25% to 50% of the width of the lid, an option may include lateral canthotomy and inferior cantholysis to provide additional laxity, followed by direct closure. Lateral cantholysis allows the lateral lower lid to be stretched further medially to close a defect. A periosteal flap from lateral to the lateral orbital rim may also be performed to increase the amount of posterior lamella support, allowing a larger defect to be closed.

For medium-sized defects between 33% to 66%, a Tenzel semicircular musculocutaneous rotation flap beginning at the lateral canthus extending upward and laterally in a semicircular fashion may be used to recruit anterior lamellar tissue. The flap is then rotated into position over the eyelid defect. Although this flap addresses the anterior lamella defect (skin and muscle), it does not address the posterior lamella defect (conjunctiva and tarsus). A periosteal flap may be performed in conjunction to provide posterior lamella support and also to increase the ability to close a larger defect.

Finally, for large defects, a tarsoconjunctival flap, a Hughes procedure, may be performed for defects up to 100% of the lower eyelid. A tarsoconjunctival flap is a flap from the superior eyelid, including only a portion of the tarsus and conjunctiva, which is brought down and sutured into the lower eyelid defect. This provides a replacement for the posterior lamella. Commonly about 4 mm of the inferior tarsus of the lower lid is preserved, to maintain the stability of the upper eyelid. The anterior lamella can then be replaced by either local flaps if enough skin laxity is present, or with a full-thickness skin graft, typically from the upper lid. At the end of the surgery, a flap is present closing the upper and lower eyelids, usually leaving the patient unable to see out of that eye. A second stage procedure can then be performed typically around four to six weeks later to separate the lids, and to reform the eyelid margins. Alternatively, a Mustarde cheek rotation flap, similar to but larger than a Tenzel flap, can provide a larger anterior lamella replacement to reconstruct a larger lower eyelid defect.

Proper lower eyelid height and support are necessary to prevent post-operative ectropion and retraction. One may choose to perform a temporary tarsorrhaphy (to connect the upper to the lower eyelid) or a Frost suture tarsorrhaphy (to connect both eyelid margins to the brow) to further provide elevated support. If significant eyelid laxity is noted either pre-operatively or post-operatively, it may be necessary to perform an ectropion repair with a lateral tarsal strip procedure. This may be needed especially in conjunction with either a first or second stage Hughes procedure. This may also be necessary with a lower eyelid skin only defect, for example when a skin cancer excision does not include a defect of the posterior lamella if the lower eyelid is lax. Cicatricial changes with healing can sometimes predispose a lower lid to cicatricial ectropion.

Further, one may perform a mid-face lift to repair large defects of the lower eyelids and repair large anterior lamella defects. With this technique, the surgeon still needs the posterior lamella provided from either the upper eyelid (Hughes tarsoconjunctival flap) or possibly from hard palate graft to avoid closure of the eye, and then the anterior lamella will be provided via the mid-face.