Increased RTK signaling leads to uncontrolled cell growth and proliferation. Clinically, this results in cancer and other hyperproliferative disorders. One mechanism by which this occurs is gain-of-function mutations in RTK genes. Point mutations, deletions, or insertions result in RTK products with increased affinity for their ligands, an increased propensity to dimerize, or hyperactive TKD regions due to the loss of cis-autoinhibitory interactions. For instance, an exon 21 L858R substitution or exon 19 L747_A750 deletion in the EGFR gene both result in a receptor with a hyperactive TKD region and can present in patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung. They tend to be more common in nonsmokers, women, and persons of Asian ethnicity.

DNA amplification of RTK genes, leading to receptor overexpression, is another means by which RTK signaling aberrantly increases. Clinically relevant examples of DNA amplification include ErbB2 (i.e., HER2) in breast and gastric cancers and FGFR1 in squamous cell lung cancer.

Lastly, chromosomal rearrangements can result in RTK fusion genes producing constitutively active receptors. The EML4-ALK fusion gene, which results from a t(2;2) inversion, is seen in 2 to 7% of lung adenocarcinomas. ROS translocations present in 1 to 2%.

Not only can the RTKs themselves be hyperactive or overexpressed, but so can their downstream targets. Gain-of-function point mutations in KRAS are present in a significant percentage of patients with pancreatic, colorectal, lung (adenocarcinoma), serous ovarian, and thyroid cancer**.**BRAF V600E substitution mutations may present in melanoma, hairy cell leukemia, papillary thyroid cancer, and lung adenocarcinoma. In the PI3K/AKT pathway, there are reports of Akt1 E17K point mutations in lung (squamous), breast, colorectal and ovarian cancers, while researchers have observed PIK3CA mutations in endometrial, breast, colorectal, anal, and cervical cancer.