# Continuing Education Activity

Astereognosis is the inability to identify objects by feel only, in the absence of input from the visual system. It may also be defined as the impairment of recognition of the objects by somatosensory discrimination of the size, texture, weight, and shape of the objects, in the absence of any major somatosensory deficit. This activity reviews the etiopathology, evaluation, and treatment of astereognosis and emphasizes the role of the interprofessional team in improving the disability due to astereognosis.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of astereognosis.
- Explain the evaluation of patients with astereognosis.
- Review the management options available for patients with astereognosis.
- Summarize the importance of communication and coordination amongst the interprofessional team members to enhance the care of patients with astereognosis.

# Introduction

Astereognosis is the inability to identify objects by feel only, in the absence of input from the visual system. Stereognosis is the ability to know ('gnosis'- knowledge) the three-dimensional form of an object ('stereo'- solid) with tactile manipulation.

Astereognosis may also be defined as the impairment of recognition of the objects by somatosensory discrimination of the size, texture, weight, and shape of the objects, in the absence of any major somatosensory deficit.

The primary recognition deficit, called morphognosia, is the impairment in recognition of the physical features of the object. The secondary recognition deficit is a specific impairment in object recognition with spared primary recognition. The patient can feel the object and sense the dimensions and texture but is unable to correlate with the stored information and identify.

# Etiology

Astereognosis indicates a lesion of the contralateral parietal lobe. Small postcentral lesions can produce astereognosis, whereas complete parietal lesions produce hemianesthesia on the contralateral side.

Other etiologies include ischemic infarction of the parietal lobe.

Astereognosis is associated with the severity of stroke.

# Epidemiology

On analysis of the lateralized vascular, neoplastic, or traumatic cerebral lesions for their effect on sensory functions, it was found that cerebrovascular accidents caused severe impairment.

# Pathophysiology

Octave Landry formulated the fundamental concepts in the physiology of sensation as proprioception and stereognosis.

There are four types of mechanoreceptors:

- Merkel cell receptors respond to slowly moving stimuli

- Ruffini corpuscles responding to skin stretch

- Meissner corpuscles for low-frequency vibrations

- Pacinian corpuscles for high-frequency vibrations

They perceive information about the size, shape, texture, and motion of the objects. The spatial pattern of the activation of the mechanoreceptor in response to the forces applied to the skin and the relative receptive field of each receptor determine the perception. The information from the forelimb is carried in the dorsal column-medial lemniscal pathway to the cuneate nucleus in the medulla and from there to the ventroposterior lateral nucleus of the thalamus. From the thalamus, the inputs go to the primary somatosensory cortex, Brodmann areas 3,1, and 2. The information is then carried to the association areas in the posterior parietal cortex and the second somatosensory cortex.

Astereognosis occurs in cortical sensory syndrome secondary to superior-posterior parietal stroke.

# History and Physical

If the tests of peripheral sensations such as light touch, pain, temperature, and vibration are normal, the cortical sensory function can be assessed.

In the assessment for stereognosis, an object such as a coin, pencil, scissor, cup, glass, comb, or sponge is placed in the hands of the patient for 30 seconds. The patient is asked to identify by naming or description. The score is given as 2 for normalcy, 1 for impairment (identification of some features of the object), and 0 for absence. The Nottingham method of stereognosis assessment is found to be a reliable tool between raters, in patients that have had a stroke.

The sensory deficits in cortical sensory syndrome are loss of position sense, inability to localize noxious stimulus, astereognosis, agraphesthesia, and loss of two-point discrimination. This is seen contralaterally in either parietal lobe disease along with hemiparesis, hemianopia, hemineglect, and loss of optokinetic nystagmus. Additional features in the involvement of the dominant parietal lobe will be aphasia, ideomotor apraxia, and Gerstmann syndrome consisting of agraphia without alexia, left-right confusion, digit agnosia, and acalculia.

# Evaluation

Computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are the imaging modalities to assess intracerebral pathology. CT is often the initial imaging in emergencies as it is quick, with no contraindications, and can identify hemorrhage. The use of MRI in acute stroke is increasing.

A study of the somatosensory network after stroke, using resting-state fMRI, has shown the strong associations between the interhemispheric network connectivity indices and stereognosis.

Somatosensory evoked potentials (SEP) help in the correlation of sensory impairments such as astereognosis and hemianesthesia with parietal lesions seen in imaging.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment of astereognosis is directed towards the underlying etiology. Treatment of acute ischemic stroke includes intravenous and intraarterial thrombolysis, mechanical thrombectomy, control of blood pressure, antiplatelet drugs, statins, etc.

Cognitive rehabilitation therapy (CRT) may improve cognitive deficits due to brain trauma, stroke, brain tumor, and dementia.

# Differential Diagnosis

There are mainly three syndromes in the differential diagnosis of hemisensory disturbances in a parietal lesion.

- The cortical sensory syndrome, including astereognosis, agraphesthesia, and loss of position sense, is due to a superior-posterior parietal lesion.

- The pseudothalamic sensory syndrome consists of a faciobrachiocrural impairment of touch, pain, temperature, and vibration, due to an inferior-anterior parietal lesion.

- The atypical sensory syndrome with a sensory loss involving all modalities of sensation in a partial distribution is produced by parietal lesions of different topography.

Astereognosis is used to describe both the inability to discriminate shape and size by touch and the inability to recognize objects by touch. These are apperceptive and associative types of agnosia. The term tactile agnosia is used for the associative type. The deficits in discrimination are most commonly seen with lesions in the primary somatosensory area and its connections. Lesions in the parietal somatosensory association areas result in tactile agnosia.

Tumors at the craniovertebral junction also can produce astereognosis with the involvement of the dorsal column medial lemniscus tract.

# Prognosis

Astereognosis is a frequent somatosensory impairment after stroke.

# Complications

Somatosensory loss has a negative influence on functional outcomes. Discriminative sensory impairment of the upper limb is seen in about half of the patients with stroke in the phase of rehabilitation. The sensory impairment of the upper limb results in a hindrance to its usage in daily life.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients are given sensory re-education to improve the deficits. This is by giving graded tactile stimuli to restore sensory areas.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Health professionals should be trained to elicit discriminatory and cortical sensations. The Nottingham sensory assessment is a good method to assess the tactile and kinesthetic sensations and stereognosis. Patients with astereognosis are best managed with an interprofessional team approach. There is a significant role in rehabilitation after the acute treatment of neurological diseases. This may include neurologists, physiatrists, occupational therapy, physical therapy, and speech therapy. Sensory training should be given as much importance as motor training. The involvement of therapists early in the course of the disease is important for optimal outcomes. The competence and training of physical and occupational therapists in astereognosis are vital.