Because of the obturator nerve's innervation of the thigh adductor muscles, blocking the obturator nerve has clinical utility. As described previously, the obturator nerve block (ONB) can help to immobilize the adductor musculature during surgery. Furthermore, due to the obturator nerve's articular branches to the hip and knee, ONB can provide analgesia for hip and knee surgeries, improve chronic groin/thigh pain, and treat adductor spasticity. As a result, conditions such as total knee replacement, hip fracture, traumatic brain injury, and multiple sclerosis can benefit from ONB. If a simple ONB is not effective in providing analgesia, some studies have suggested utility in percutaneous radiofrequency lesioning of the articular branches of the obturator nerve in easing hip joint pain.

The obturator nerve is relevant in multiple pathologic conditions. Obturator hernias typically occur in elderly, emaciated women or patients with elevated intra-abdominal pressure due to ascites, chronic cough, or COPD. In an obturator hernia, the hernia sac enters the obturator foramen and follows the course of the obturator canal, obstructing the small bowel. The clinical course is characterized by acute small bowel obstruction and pain in the medial aspect of the upper thigh due to compression of the obturator nerve. Computed tomography (CT) is the imaging modality with the highest sensitivity and accuracy for the timely diagnosis of an obturator hernia. Meanwhile, the definitive treatment is a surgical fixation of the hernia. If the bowel is ischemic, bowel resection and/or a colostomy may be required dependent upon the intraoperative findings. In addition to older women, obturator hernias may also occur during pregnancy due to relaxation of the pelvic peritoneum and development of a wider and more horizontal obturator canal.

Just as the obturator nerve can become compressed by a hernia, the obturator nerve can become compressed by fascia or other tissue in the pelvis. Specifically, the nerve can become entrapped at the exit of the obturator canal or more distally by fascia. Entrapment of the obturator nerve causes exercise-induced medial thigh pain, typically in athletes. Hip abduction and extension aggravate the pain, whereas resisted adduction does not elicit pain. Conservative treatment has not been the target of much research, but stretching and strengthening exercises, cognitive behavioral education, neural gliding, and manual therapy may have utility in easing symptoms. Neurolysis or neurectomy may merit consideration if symptoms are refractory to treatment.