- Determining accurate numbers and statistics on coprolalia is not available at this point. There is a need for more studies that focus on tics solely or coprolalia, specifically since the majority of evidence is based on Tourette syndrome or other disorders that are accompanied by tics.

- No studies have been done yet to determine the efficacity of habit reversal therapy in combination with medications.

- It is crucial to keep in mind that coprolalia (as well as other tics) can negatively influence a child's life, impacting their development and potential as a functional adult. It is essential to recognize coprolalia to provide the appropriate support to the affected individuals, both in the behavioral area, as well as in the education aspect, so that they can be understood and reach their highest potential.

- It is essential to educate parents, coaches, teachers, other health professionals, and educators who interact with individuals with coprolalia to give them adequate support on how to be supportive rather than a reprimand or punishment, as to not cause more stress and worsen the condition.

**Educational Aspect**

Tourette syndrome and associated tics (such as coprolalia) can impact school performance in children in different ways, whether it is by interfering with studying, paying attention in class, and making it stressful for the child to be in the class. The stress of the classroom can make tics worse. The teachers may wrongly discipline them, or they may experience bullying by their classmates. All of which can lead to a decrease in academic performance and social isolation.

Special education services are often recommended. Educational support is available with a 504 modification plan (75% of kids with Tourette syndrome are given classroom accommodations, like being able to leave the classroom as needed, or ignoring their tics). And when the students have educational needs, these recommendations are included in the individualized education plan.

Primary care providers should offer referring individuals with coprolalia or Tourette to a behavioral or developmental specialist for further support and management.

Diagnosing and managing coprolalia requires the efforts of an interprofessional team. When the clinician suspects a condition associated with coprolalia, they should immediately enlist a psychiatric specialist. In the event pharmaceutical treatment is part of the treatment plan, and board-certified psychiatric pharmacist can provide additional direction on pharmaceutical care, including agent selection, dosing, and medication reconciliation. Psychiatric health nurses can assist in monitoring, counseling the patient and family, and assessing treatment progress and effectiveness. Social workers can interact with school officials and teachers to ensure the provision of proper accommodations there. In this manner, an open, communicating, interprofessional healthcare team can direct patient outcomes to optimal results. [Level V]