When exposed to skin, dilute hydrogen peroxide - as is found in most households, can act as an irritant, and symptoms are generally mild. Symptoms are more significant when exposed to mucous membranes but are still mild. Ophthalmic exposure can be very painful and may cause local injury to the cornea or conjunctiva. Similarly, ingestion of dilute hydrogen peroxide also usually results in milder symptoms and generally presents with possible injury to the mucous membranes, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Toxicity from ingestion usually results from the release of oxygen gas when hydrogen peroxide comes into contact with catalase found in tissues.

More concentrated hydrogen peroxide solutions, often found in industrial strength solutions, cause significantly more severe damage with all types of exposures. As a concentrated solution, hydrogen peroxide is classified as caustic and can cause significant chemical burns. Ingestion of concentrated hydrogen peroxide may also cause burns to the mouth, throat, and esophagus, as with ingestion of other caustics. However, it will also release significant amounts of oxygen gas when exposed to the enzyme catalase, which is present in living tissue.

This gas is released both in the GI tract and in the bloodstream as hydrogen peroxide passes easily through biological membranes and crosses into nearby blood vessels. If introduced into the bloodstream directly, it releases oxygen gas and can cause significant air emboli, including possible cerebral emboli.

Inhalation of hydrogen peroxide may cause severe issues due to tissue injury and airway irritation leading to potential airway compromise.