Establishing the diagnosis of prolonged QT starts by measuring the QT interval on ECG. This is often done on lead II or V5-6, whichever is longer. This should be done on several successive beats, of which the longest interval is chosen. If a U wave exists and is large (greater than 1 mm), and fused with T-wave, then this should be included in the QT measurement. On the contrary, if the U wave is small or separate from the T-wave then it should be excluded. The maximum slope-intercept method is used to define the end of the T wave. A helpful tip that helps identify prolonged QT interval on initial examination of the ECG is that a normal QT interval should be less than half the preceding RR interval.

Due to the variation of QT interval with heart rate (higher heart rate has shorter QT interval, lower heart rate has longer QT interval), it is important to correct the QT interval for the heart rate. This is known as QTc. QTc is prolonged if it is greater than 440 ms in men or greater than 460 ms in women. A QTc greater than 500 is associated with increased risk of torsade de pointes. While several equations exist to help correct for variation in heart rate, the most commonly used is Bazett formula ( QTC = QT / √ RR ). Though Bazett formula seems to be relatively accurate in heart rates between 60 to 100 beats/min, it tends to overcorrect with higher heart rates and undercorrect in lower heart rates.

Once QTc is identified as prolonged, the next step in a workup is to look for acquired causes. The most common cause of QT prolongation in an ICU setting is usually drug-related. Serum potassium, calcium, and magnesium levels should be checked, as low serum of each can cause QT prolongation. Also, stimulating thyroid hormone (TSH) levels may be checked in patients with suspected hypothyroidism.

In the absence of reversible or acquired causes of QT prolongation, the diagnosis of Long QT syndrome is made. In those patients, it may be very helpful to obtain an electrocardiography of the patient and family members. Noncardiac phenotype (as discussed above) may aid in making the diagnosis. Genetic testing of the patient and family members is the gold standard; however, this testing is limited by cost. Pharmacologic provocation with epinephrine or isoproterenol is warranted in patients with a borderline presentation. The concept of this testing is that patients with Long QT syndrome have an abnormal response to sympathetic stimulation. Their ECG shows the failure of the QT interval to shorten with increased heart rates, or it may even show prolongation. In patients with LQT2, there is marked shortening with exercise, however, exaggerated lengthening of the QT interval as the heart rate declines during late recovery.