During the second week of embryonic development, implantation occurs, and the conceptus is referred to as the blastocyst, which contains the inner cell mass. The inner cell mass is an early derivative of the embryo. The blastocyst begins organizing itself into four extra-embryonic membranes. These are called the yolk sac, amnion, chorion, and allantois. Each membrane provides a supportive role for the developing embryo. The yolk sac, or umbilical vesicle, is the first of the extra-embryonic membranes to appear.

The inner cell mass begins to form a bilaminar embryonic disc with different cells on each side. Ventrally, hypoblast cells line the bilaminar disc and proliferate to form the yolk sac, the extra-embryonic membrane which sits in the cavity of the blastocyst. The yolk sac also gives rise to the allantois at three weeks post-fertilization (five gestational weeks). The allantois is a tubular outpouching of the yolk sac that is involved in removing nitrogenous waste products and is associated with the development of the urinary bladder. The allantois connects the come of the bladder to the yolk sac during fetal development. The allantois begins to involute during the 4th and 5th months of pregnancy, forming the urachus. The lumen of the urachus eventually closes after birth, which prevents further communication between the bladder and umbilicus. Subsequently, the urachus becomes the median umbilical ligament, a fibrous supportive structure that extends internally from the bladder to the umbilicus.

The chorion also develops from the yolk sac and functions to nourish the developing embryo. It also produces chorionic fluid, which is essential for cushioning and protecting the embryo. Furthermore, due to its vascularity, the chorion is involved in gas and nutrient exchange. Its chorionic villi can extend and contact maternal blood vessels since it is the outermost layer of the extra-embryonic membranes. The villi also contribute to the formation of the placenta.

The dorsal side of the bilaminar disc contains cells of the epiblast, which form the amnion, another extra-embryonic membrane. The amnion resides in the amniotic cavity. The process of amnion formation also occurs during the second week of development. The amnion is responsible for surrounding the embryo with amniotic fluid, which supports the development and movement of the embryo.