# Continuing Education Activity

Vohwinkel syndrome, also known as keratoderma hereditarian mutilans, is classified as a type of hereditary palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK). Classically, it is associated with starfish keratoses on the knuckles, PPK in a honeycomb pattern, hearing impairment, and pseudoainhum, mutilating digital constriction bands that often lead to autoamputation of affected digits. This activity describes the treatment and management of Vohwinkel syndrome and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the pathophysiology of Vohwinkel syndrome.
- Outline the common physical exam findings associated with Vohwinkel syndrome.
- Review the treatment options available for managing Vohwinkel syndrome.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration among the interprofessional team to optimize the care for patients affected by Vohwinkel syndrome.

# Introduction

Vohwinkel syndrome, also known as keratoderma hereditarian mutilans, is classified as palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK).

A variant of Vohwinkel syndrome, loricrin keratoderma, presents as a honeycomb PPK with pseudoainhum with the addition of ichthyosis; deafness is not a feature of this ichthyosiform variant.

# Etiology

Classic Vohwinkel syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant (AD) fashion. It is caused by a mutation in the gap junction beta 2 (GJB2) gene located on chromosome 13q11-12, which encodes the protein connexin 26.

Loricrin keratoderma, the ichthyosiform variant of Vohwinkel syndrome, is caused by LOR mutations; this is the gene on the epidermal differentiation complex (EDC) on chromosome 1q21 that encodes loricrin.

# Epidemiology

Vohwinkel syndrome is extremely rare, with less than 50 reported cases in the literature. Males and females are equally affected.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of classic Vohwinkel syndrome is, in part, explained by the role of connexin proteins in forming the building blocks for gap junctions. The connexin proteins that compose gap junctions are integral for the transportation of nutrients, ions, and neurotransmitters from cell to cell. Specifically, connexin 26 is found in the epidermis of palmoplantar skin, sweat glands, and cochlea.

The pathophysiology of loricrin keratoderma, a Vohwinkel variant, can be appreciated by recognizing the role that the loricrin protein plays in the cornified envelope and the importance of the cornified envelope in maintaining the integrity of the stratum corneum. The stratum corneum is the outermost layer of the epidermis that serves as a barrier to transepidermal water loss.LOR gene is mutated, the structure of the loricrin protein is distorted and cannot make its way into the cornified envelope. This leads to transepidermal water loss and resultant ichthyosis.

# Histopathology

There are no specific histologic findings in Vohwinkel disease. Nonspecific findings include prominent orthohyperkeratosis (pertaining to the PPK), as well as papillomatosis.

# History and Physical

Vohwinkel syndrome is characterized by a PPK, digital constriction bands (pseudoainhum), and hearing impairment/deafness. The PPK begins within the first few years of life and appears as a callus-like thickening on the palms and soles and is often referred to as having a “honeycomb” pattern.

The loricrin variant presents as mild, generalized ichthyosis with accentuation of the ichthyosis in flexural surfaces.

# Evaluation

This is a clinical diagnosis based on the typical findings of PPK and sensorineural hearing loss. Hearing testing is indicated in Vohwinkel syndrome. Genetic testing is available to identify the gene mutation.

# Treatment / Management

The hyperkeratotic callus-like lesions (PPK) are often improved with oral retinoids such as isotretinoin.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for classic Vohwinkel syndrome includes other PPKs with hearing impairment. These include Bart-Pumphrey syndrome, which presents as a non-mutilating PPK with deafness, knuckle pads, and leukonychia. Bart-Pumphrey syndrome lacks the starfish-shaped keratoses as well as the honeycomb pattern to the PPK.

The differential diagnosis for mutilating PPKs (PPKs with digital constriction bands) includes Olmsted syndrome, Papillon-Lefevre syndrome, Loricrin keratoderma, and Mal de Meleda.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of Vohwinkel syndrome carries a normal lifespan.

# Complications

Autoamputation of digits and lifelong keratoderma are potential complications.

# Consultations

Dermatology, hand surgery, and otolaryngology (ENT) are should be involved in the care of patients with Vohwinkel syndrome.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Patients may want to consider genetic counseling.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Interprofessional collaboration is an essential component of care for any syndromic disease that presents with a constellation of findings. A primary care doctor, dermatologist, surgeon, and ENT often work together to provide Vohwinkel patients with the best possible outcome and enhance treatment outcomes. It may be prudent for the patient to establish care at a multispecialty care clinic to ease coordination of care, access to laboratory data and encounter notes between healthcare professionals, and convenience for the patient leading to a better quality of life. Multispecialty “hubs” have been linked to lower hospital admission rates, higher patient satisfaction, and improved quality of care overall.