**Subjective Tests**

Tests that require a patient response, such as potential acuity meter, laser interferometry, and critical flicker fusion frequency, may be interfered with by:

- patient cooperation

- malingering

- hysterical blindness

**Clear Media Tests**

For those tests that require clear media such as OCT, FFA, and microperimetry, the presence of opacities can interfere with the results.

**Photostress Test**

There is no standardization for the procedure, and variables influencing the PSRT include the brightness of the light used and the length of exposure.

**Amsler's Grid**

- It is a personal chart, and there is often a lack of attention to a rote task performed routinely daily.

- A completion phenomenon occurs, which can compromise the perception of the scotoma/metamorphopsia for the patient. This phenomenon is where the cortex perceptually fills small gaps in line stimuli.

- The test relies heavily on maintaining central fixation and, therefore, cannot be used in children or patients with very poor vision.

- Incorrect working distance, near corrections, performing the test binocularly, or wearing glasses - such as bifocals - that distort lines are all sources of error that can affect the outcome of the test.

**Potential Acuity Meter**

- Being a subjective test, it is heavily dependent on patient compliance.

- It is less accurate in cases with denser cataracts.

- It overestimates vision in cystoid macular edema and retinal detachment.

- In patients with severe glaucomatous damage, the results of PAM are not accurate.

**Laser Interferometry**

- It overestimates visual acuity in macular edema.

- Underestimates visual acuity in some cataracts.

- Inconsistent in predicting visual acuity in senile maculopathy**.**