Axillary anatomy is very important to know for performing axillary lymphadenectomy. There are three levels of axillary lymph nodes. Typically, level one and level two lymph nodes are taken during this dissection. Level three nodes are not sought after in current times. Level one nodes are lateral to the pectoralis minor muscle, level two lymph nodes are deep to the pectoralis minor muscle, and level three lymph nodes are medial to the pectoralis minor muscle. Rotter's nodes are lymph nodes between the pectoralis major and minor muscles. The axillary fat pad is deep to the subcutaneous fat and does have a different appearance so that it is usually distinguishable. The borders of the axilla are especially important as they act as a guide to orient the surgeon during the procedure and indicate where the dissection should be performed. The important borders of the axilla are the axillary vein superiorly, which can act as the first structure to identify during an especially difficulty dissection. The medial border is the chest wall. The pectoralis major and pectoralis minor make the anterior border. The axillary skin is the lateral border. The posterior border is the latissimus dorsi muscle. There are multiple nerves within this area that great care must be taken to avoid injuring. The most likely injured is the intercostobrachial nerve. When this is transected, it causes paresthesias to the medial upper arm. The long thoracic nerve, thoracodorsal neurovascular bundle, and lateral thoracic artery are also within the region and can be at risk for injury. The long thoracic nerve innervates the serratus anterior muscle. Injury to the long thoracic nerve results in winged scapula and patients may complain of upper extremity weakness or decreased range of motion of the shoulder. The thoracodorsal nerve innervates the latissimus dorsi muscle, and injury causes loss of function.