# Continuing Education Activity

The thyroid gland functions to produce the thyroid hormone, which is needed by the body to carry out different metabolism. Follicles comprise the thyroid and are the functional and structural units of the gland. Thyroid cancer is one of the most common endocrine tumors and is classified as differentiated or undifferentiated. Differentiated cancers include papillary and follicular thyroid carcinoma, and undifferentiated types include medullary thyroid and anaplastic cancer. This activity reviews follicular thyroid cancer, describing the etiology, epidemiology, histology, evaluation, staging, and complications of follicular thyroid cancer and the role of interprofessional teams in caring for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with follicular cancer.
- Describe the typical evaluation findings associated with follicular cancer.
- Explain the treatment options for patients with follicular cancer.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination amongst interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients with follicular cancer.

# Introduction

The thyroid is an endocrine gland located just below the cricoid cartilage in the neck, and it is composed of both the right and the left lobes separated by an isthmus. The thyroid gland functions to produce the thyroid hormone, which is needed by the body to carry out different metabolism. Follicles comprise the thyroid and are the functional and structural units of the gland.

Up to half of follicular carcinoma cases show RAS point mutations, while one-third may show PAX-PPAR-gamma rearrangements, and only 3% show both.

# Etiology

The cause of thyroid cancer has links to radiation exposure, iodine intake, diabetes, obesity, Hashimoto thyroiditis, exogenous estrogen use, and dietary choices.

In some studies, like the one reported by Knobel et al. in 2007, it was found that iodine intake was a predisposing factor for thyroid cancer

Some occupations have been correlated with an increased incidence of thyroid cancer. Occupational exposure to radiation, pesticides, and working in the textile industry has also shown an increased association with thyroid cancer.

# Epidemiology

Thyroid cancer ranks as the ninth most common cancer and accounts for 3.8% of all new cancer cases in the United States.

Some studies report that follicular thyroid cancer incidence is approximately 10% in iodine-sufficient areas and 25 to 40% in areas of iodine deficiency.

# History and Physical

Patients with thyroid carcinoma might have an enlargement of the thyroid gland due to the presence of a nodule in either or both thyroid lobes. They can occasionally be symptomatic with either hypothyroid or hyperthyroid characteristics, but they are usually asymptomatic.

# Evaluation

Ultrasound imaging and ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration or core biopsy are used to diagnose primary thyroid carcinoma. Ultrasound of primary thyroid cancer usually shows solid hypoechoic nodules with micro-calcification, poorly defined margins, and vascular patterns with the dominant intranodular flow, as opposed to perinodular.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment and management of follicular thyroid carcinoma depend on the stage at presentation. Follicular thyroid carcinoma with minimally invasive characteristics is treated with thyroid lobectomy and isthmectomy

For patients with metastasis to bones and soft tissues, either radiotherapy or chemotherapy, or both are indicated after the total thyroidectomy. Chemotherapy that has been reported to control tumor progression and prolong progression-free survival includes tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as sorafenib, lenvatinib, vandetanib, and cabozantinib.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis of follicular thyroid carcinoma includes a follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma, papillary thyroid carcinoma, noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear features or NIFTP, and follicular adenoma.

NIFTP is one of the newest categories added to the pathology description of thyroid cancer cases. It is now considered benign, so it is recommended to be treated as such.

# Staging

The TNM staging system is used to classify differentiated thyroid carcinoma. The T describes the size of the tumor. Tx indicates that the primary tumor cannot be assessed, T0 means the tumor is not palpable, T1 means less than 1cm, T2 means the tumor is 1 to 4 cm, T3 indicates it is greater than 4 cm, and T4 means any tumor size with extrapyramidal invasion. The N signifies lymph node involvement. Nx signifies regional adenopathy is not assessable, N0 means no palpable cervical adenopathy, N1 means ipsilateral cervical adenopathy, N2 means contralateral or bilateral cervical adenopathy, and finally, N3 means fixed cervical nodes. M means metastasis, with M0 indicative of no distant metastasis, and M1 indicates distant metastasis. Follicular thyroid carcinoma is classified into stages from I through IV. Stage I under 45 years old is any T, N, and M0, and over 45 years old is T1, N0, M0; for stage II under 45 years old is any T, N, and M1, and over 45 years old is T2, N0, M0; stage III is described for over 45 years of age with T4, N0, M0, and stage IV is described with any T, N, M1.

# Prognosis

The thyroid cancer death rate has remained steady despite the increase in incidence. It is one of the lowest mortality cancers in the United States.

Even though follicular thyroid cancers have distant metastasis, metastasis to lymph nodes is uncommon, and occurrence is estimated to be fewer than 10%.

The overall 10-year survival of follicular cancer depends on the level of invasiveness. For minimally invasive cancers, 10-year survival is reported to be 98%, and for invasive follicular cancer, it is 80%.

# Complications

The most worrisome complication involved in follicular thyroid cancer is metastasis. Studies have reported metastases mostly to bones, lungs, and lymph nodes. In a study done by Parasmeswaran et al. (2017), they found that 42% of their subjects had metastasis to the bones, 33% to the lungs, and 8% to the lymph nodes.

Other complications correlate with surgery. The external and recurrent laryngeal nerves are near the thyroid gland and can mistakenly get damaged during surgery or resected due to invasion.

Because the patient is undergoing total thyroidectomy, hypothyroidism will always develop, and patients will require thyroxine replacement therapy.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Although the prognosis of thyroid cancer has been reported to be good compared to other forms of cancer, the mention of the word "cancer" will still be a concern for most patients. For instance, most patients will still opt for surgical thyroid removal even if they have non-invasive follicular thyroid cancer that can be followed due to its slow growth. Patients and their physicians must work together to decide the best treatment option.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The incidence of thyroid cancer has increased over the past few decades, attributed to its overdiagnosis.

Health providers, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs) and other healthcare professionals (e.g., nurses and pharmacists), should operate as an interprofessional team. All interprofessional team members must coordinate their activities using open communication channels and maintain accurate and updated patient records. They should all be aware of these guidelines; this will prevent potential harm to patients from overtreatment of low-risk thyroid cancers and help appropriately treat patients with high-risk diseases. Reportedly, the overall cost of thyroid cancer in 2019 was nearly 21 billion dollars due to surgery costs.