**Radiographic Evidence**

Plain films demonstrate non-specific findings indicative of bronchial inflammation, such as segmental infiltrates, peribronchial thickening, hyperinflation, and atelectasis. Chest computed tomography (CT) is more sensitive to the presence, location, and severity of the disease.

Sequela of chronic aspiration, such as aspiration bronchiolitis and pneumonia, can also be imaged. The CT evaluation of aspiration bronchiolitis demonstrates increased attenuation, centrilobular nodules, and poorly defined mottled acinar areas. Radiographic features of aspiration pneumonia depend on volume, pH, and chronicity.

Further complications of these sequelae include lung abscess and empyema. It is important to differentiate lung abscess and empyema as they are treated drastically differently. Plain films of a lung abscess demonstrate air-fluid levels in a generally round cavity, while empyema is usually lentiform. Distinguishing features are more readily observable on CT. Abscesses have thick irregular walls and form an acute angle with the pleura. In contrast, empyemas have smooth walls and form an obtuse angle with the pleura. In addition, abscesses abruptly interrupt bronchovascular structures, while empyemas compress and distort adjacent lung tissue, often causing separation and thickening of visceral and parietal pleura.

**Diagnostic Procedures**

**Speech and Swallow Studies**

The breakdown of swallowing, breathing, and speaking mechanisms are directly related to the risk of chronic aspiration. Thorough speech and swallow studies are the mainstays of early evaluation of these processes. In children where a formal swallow and speech study is indicated, it may be necessary to place a feeding tube and take stepwise diet progression if the child is unable to perform classic testing.

The next step is a formal videofluoroscopic swallow study (VFSS), also known as a barium swallow. In this study, the subject ingests food or liquid mixed with barium. The fluoroscope is then used to observe the ingested material as it descends through the oropharynx, esophagus, and into the stomach. Three key findings are visible on VFSS: penetration, aspiration, and response to aspiration. Penetration is the passage of food or liquid into the epiglottis’ laryngeal surface, sometimes extending to the vocal folds in what is known as deep penetration. Aspiration is indicated by the presence of the barium in the trachea or bronchioles.

Finally, the patient’s response to aspiration is observed. If the patient does not cough when barium is in the pulmonary system, it is considered a silent aspiration. A penetration-aspiration score (PAS) is given on a scale of 1 to 8, with eight being the worst and indicating passage of the material into the tracheobronchial tree without any cough or clearance response. Higher scores are generally associated with worse functional outcomes, but research shows mixed results regarding the predictive morbidity and mortality outcomes of this scoring.

Fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES) is an alternative method to the VFSS. It involves a skilled practitioner passing a scope transnasally into space above the soft palate to observe swallowing. Aspiration and pooling of oral secretions can be observed. It is clearer than VFSS if clefts or physical deformities contribute to the aspirations. VFSS and FEES are often used in conjunction. Both have a strong positive correlation, but FEES has a slight advantage in detecting penetration and aspiration.

Another useful adjunct is a radionucleotide salivary scan. A tagged tracer is added to the saliva of the patient’s oropharynx and observed as swallowing occurs. This test is useful in patients that cannot tolerate formal VFSS or FEES. It can also pick up small salivary microaspirations that may be missed on FEES or VFSS. If used in conjunction with these other tests, it can increase the detection of aspiration pneumonia in both children and adults.

**Laryngoscopy and Bronchoscopy**

Direct observation of the oropharynx and vocal folds using a laryngoscopy, bronchoscopy, or combination can be useful tools to rule out anatomic lesions or abnormalities that may contribute to aspiration risk. Flexible laryngoscopy observes the mobility of the vocal folds and is used to directly identify high-risk anatomical features. The patient must be awake for this procedure. A rigid laryngoscopy with bronchoscopy has the added benefit of being able to distract and probe into the inter arytenoid space and posterior cricoid. This makes it easier to find and identify clefts, fistulas, and other anatomic variances. This method is more sensitive in finding airway lesions than flexible laryngoscopy but does require the patient to undergo heavier sedation and anesthesia.

Finally, a flexible bronchoscopy with lavage (BAL) allows for assessing aspiration such as laryngomalacia and tracheomalacia. The BAL can differentiate the presence or absence of inflammation and disease, guiding management by determining if a chosen strategy is preventing further aspirations.