As previously mentioned, defects in the outer ear lead to conductive hearing loss, while defects in the inner ear lead to sensorineural hearing loss, the most common type of hearing impairment worldwide. Sensorineural hearing loss arises due to damage to the cochlea or auditory nerve, and several structures are often affected simultaneously. There are many causes of sensorineural hearing loss, including genetic mutations affecting the structures of the inner ear and environmental insults such as noise, ototoxic substances, and hypoxia.

Clinical diagnosis of sensorineural hearing loss is most commonly accomplished by measuring detection thresholds and comparing these to normative values to determine the degree of hearing loss. In addition to causing decreased sensitivity to weak sounds, sensorineural hearing loss has several adverse perceptual consequences, including loudness recruitment, poor perception of pitch and auditory space, and difficulty understanding speech, particularly in the presence of background noise. The condition is usually incurable, with treatment focusing on restoring the audibility of sounds made inaudible by hearing loss using either hearing aids or cochlear implants.

The two main etiologies of sensorineural hearing loss specific to cochlear dysfunction include noise damage and Ménierè disease. Noise damage occurs during brief or sustained exposure to extremely loud noise, with prolonged or repeated exposure to sounds of greater than 85 decibels increasing the risk of permanent cochlear damage. The damage associated with loud noise exposure destroys the hair cells in the cochlea, which leads to an inability to stimulate afferent nerves and, therefore, a failure to hear various frequencies.

Ménierè disease is a slowly progressive inner ear disorder characterized by vertigo, tinnitus, and hearing loss. It is caused by endolymphatic hydrops, or the accumulation of endolymphatic fluid within the cochlea, causing distention. Ménierè disease involves dysregulation of aquaporin channels and osmotic disequilibrium involving endolymph production from perilymph through the Reissner membrane and stria vascularis.

Alport syndrome is a genetic defect of type IV collagen, which is present in the basement membrane of the eyes, kidneys, and cochlea. It commonly presents as glomerulonephritis, decreased visual acuity, and bilateral sensorineural hearing loss.