Drug targets for cGMP include GC stimulation and PDE inhibition, both of which increase intracellular levels of cGMP in targeted cells. sGC stimulators are being studied as a potential therapy to treat pulmonary hypertension, due to their ability to increase the synthesis of cGMP even in the absence of NO. Although better known for its ability to treat erectile dysfunction, PDE5 inhibitor sildenafil is being studied for cardioprotective effects. Elevation of myocardial cGMP is associated with improved pulmonary vascular tone and right ventricular function in diastolic heart failure.

Therapies targeting cGMP levels to address visceral pain have demonstrated promising results. In irritable bowel syndrome with constipation (IBS-C), abdominal pain and discomfort are a significant factor in patient quality of life. Guanylate cyclase agonists appear to reduce visceral pain by reducing the hypersensitivity of chronically stimulated nociceptors, by raising extracellular cGMP in the colon.

Through activation of PKG1, targeting cGMP levels may be an effective treatment of kidney disease. PDE5 inhibitors have demonstrated improvement in kidney function, specifically respective to inhibition of renal fibrosis, countering thrombosis through regulation of platelet aggregation, and antitumorigenic properties via promoting apoptosis of tumor cells and inhibiting tumor cell survival signals.

Although associated with many positive outcomes, increased cGMP levels may also have a cytotoxic effect in some instances. In models of retinal dystrophy, elevated cGMP levels correlate with accelerated retinal degeneration. Uncontrolled calcium influx through constitutively open CNG channels, coupled with overactivation of PKGI, may be partially responsible for retinal cell death.

Hydralazine is a medication commonly used to treat severe hypertension and heart failure. It works by increasing the activity of cGMP, leading to smooth muscle relaxation.