The American Heart Association (AHA) provides a class 1 recommendation of catheter-based stenting in adults who have the finding of significant coarctation in the native aorta or in recurrent coarctation that was previously intervened. Aortic coarctation is defined as significant if there is a peak to peak resting gradient or mean doppler gradient of greater than or equal to 20 mmHg between the upper and lower extremities. Additionally, a significant coarctation is an upper extremity to lower extremity peak to peak gradient or mean doppler gradient of greater than or equal to 10 mmHg with decreased left ventricular systolic function, aortic regurgitation, or demonstration of collateral flow around the coarcted segment. The AHA adds that this physiologic data should be accompanied by advanced imaging, including computed tomography angiography or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. The strongest indication for intervention includes a patient with systemic hypertension, a mean doppler or peak-to-peak gradient of greater than or equal to 20 mmHg between the upper and lower extremities, and anatomically significant coarctation as confirmed by advanced imaging.

The spectrum of symptoms and exam findings that formulate the indications for the procedure vary among infants vs. children and adults. Older adults typically display manifestations of a 20 mmHg systolic gradient between the upper and lower extremities, systolic hypertension, and headaches. Uncommonly this group has associated ventricular dysfunction and diastolic component hypertension. Children and young adults typically are asymptomatic with elevated systolic blood pressure with less frequently associated headaches.

In addition to the pathophysiologic gradients and confirmation of coarctation by advanced imaging, other considerations need to be understood in the decision-making process of surgical vs. transcatheter management. These parameters include age at presentation, if the coarcted segment is native or recurrent, and the complexity of the lesion. Transcatheter management is favored as a temporizing measure in infants too unstable for eventual surgical management. In the younger adult, transcatheter stent implantation has been deemed the preferred approach for native and recurrent coarctation.