The uterus is the central anatomical landmark of the female internal genitals and pelvic anatomy. It is a highly muscular, childbearing organ in females, approximating 3 x 2 x 1 inches in size in a nulliparous. Even though the uterus is primarily a pelvic organ, but during later stages of pregnancy due to hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the myometrium, it can reach up to the epigastric region. The most common anatomical position of the uterus is anteverted-anteflexed. Anteversion is the angulation between the long axis of the cervix and the vagina, which nears the right angle.

The ovaries are the primary organs of the female reproductive system. They are oval-shaped gonadal structures, approximately 3 x 1.5 x 1 cm in size, and homologous with the testis in males. They are present in pairs with the long axis oriented downward and forward. The ovaries are within the pelvis, just lateral to the uterus. They lie within the ovarian fossa, in front of the ureters, and behind the external iliac vessels.

The ovaries link to the uterus through fallopian tubes, which function to carry the zygote to the uterine cavity for implantation. The fallopian tubes (also known as oviduct, uterine tube) divide into the fimbriated infundibulum, ampulla, isthmus, and intramural parts.Neisseria gonorrhoeae or Chlamydia trachomatis. It may lead to scarring of the fallopian tubes and predispose to infertility and ectopic tubal pregnancy. Tubal infertility caused by disruption of the integrity of the fallopian tubes by infusion, endometriosis, or surgical complication is an important consideration when evaluating women with unexplained infertility.

The vagina is a fibromuscular canal ranging from 6 to 8 cm. in length. It is anatomically located anteriorly to the rectum and posteriorly to the wall of the urinary bladder and the urethra. This canal directs downwards and forwards. Because of the oblique nature of the vagina, the anterior wall is slightly shorter, i.e., about 6 cm compared to the posterior wall, which is about 8 cm. The upper segment of the vaginal forms a vaginal vault by being enclosed within the vaginal portion of the cervix.