Managing patients with alkali toxicity requires an interprofessional team comprised of emergency physicians, nurses, pharmacist, gastroenterologist, and possibly general surgeons. If the ingestion was intentional, then psychological help is also necessary. Another important step in the management of caustic ingestion is staging and assessing the extent of injury to establish the appropriate treatment course. The Zagar modified endoscopic classification scheme is used to stage caustic ingestion injuries.

Alkali toxicity requires a comprehensive, interprofessional healthcare team effort for assessment and subsequent management.  Initial contact will often be in the ED and the clinician there will need to assess as to the severity and whether it was intentional or accidental. A triage nurse can be of great help at this stage of the evaluation. Both physicians and nurses will work together in rendering immediate supportive care, intubation, and engaging poison control resources. Pharmacists can offer help with preparing colloids and other necessary medications, as well as performing medication reconciliation in conjunction with nursing. If the toxicity is the result of an intentional event, then psychological resources can be brought in as soon as the patient is stable. Nursing can continue to monitor vital signs and report back to the team any unusual or abnormal findings. As can be seen, a collaborative interprofessional team effort is needed in alkali toxicity cases to direct outcomes to a positive result. [Level 5]