The initial evaluation of the patient should be focused on immediate life support and securing the patient’s airway as facial trauma can commonly compromise the airway. It is also important to assess patients for potential cervical spine and head injuries, in particular, if the injury has been sustained from a high-velocity mechanism. Spinal fractures and dislocations have been associated with approximately 1.4% of Lefort fractures and 1% of spinal cord injuries

A basic eye assessment is of paramount importance as maxillary fractures can result in severe ocular injuries, including retrobulbar hemorrhage, optic nerve compression, and retinal detachment. This can highlight any concerns which may require escalation to an opthalmologist for detailed assessment or clinical intervention. Up to 4.5% of ocular injuries caused by midface fractures required ophthalmologic surgery; therefore, evaluation of the eyes is prudent

Imaging is critical for the identification and diagnosis of the maxillary fracture as well as for planning the repair of the fracture. Options include plain film radiographs, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

CT is the gold standard when examining bone for fractures. Plain films are appropriate if operating in an austere environment or there is restricted access to a CT scanner, but should not be considered first-line. MRIs are rare in a trauma setting and not helpful when examining bony structures. A common pitfall with CT scans is not specifying the size of cuts. The finest possible cuts should be obtained, often 0.5mm or 0.625mm, in all views (axial, sagittal, coronal). The standard 2.5mm cuts obtained from head CTs are much too big and will miss many fractures. A 3D reconstruction should also be obtained as often this will help elucidate fractures that might not be obvious when just examining slices from a single view.