The diagnosis of exercise-induced laryngeal obstruction can be made clinically if the presentation is typical, especially in the absence of other airway or breathing abnormalities.

Imaging has no role in the diagnosis of EILO; it helps rule out other respiratory and airway disorders when suspected.

Spirometry can be a helpful tool but is also non-diagnostic. Patients with EILO usually have normal flow volume loops on spirometry. Airflow obstruction, which is more characteristic of asthma, is not typical in EILO.

Visualization of the larynx via flexible laryngoscopy during symptomatic periods remains the gold standard to diagnose EILO. The procedure is usually performed by trained otolaryngologists, pulmonologists, or speech therapists; this is more commonly done through exercise laryngoscopy. This technique consists of performing a transnasal flexible laryngoscopy after asking the subject to exercise to peak in a diagnostic lab. Treadmills or stationary bicycles are typically used. The goal is to reproduce the symptoms that are otherwise absent at rest.

More recently, a new approach to laryngoscopy has been adopted. Continuous laryngoscopy during exercise (CLE), as opposed to exercise laryngoscopy, consists of continuous laryngoscopy throughout exercise on a treadmill or stationary bicycle. This test requires a set-up that is not always widely available to specialists. A flexible laryngoscope is attached to the head via a band or helmet. The tip of the scope is introduced through the nose into the larynx, allowing visualizing the supraglottic and glottic structures in real-time throughout the exercise. During both techniques, cardiopulmonary data is collected as the patient exercises to peak in an attempt to reproduce EILO symptoms.

The European Respiratory Society and European Laryngological Society are adopting CLE as the test of choice for EILO diagnosis.