**Anatomy**

The osseous forearm is composed of the radius and ulna bones. The radius and ulna are stabilized by three groups of ligamentous structures: distally the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC), the interosseous membrane, and proximally the annular ligament. The interosseous membrane is responsible for dispersing axial load force to the forearm, 60% to the radiocapitellar joint and 40% to the ulnohumeral joint. The radiocapitellar joint largely stabilizes the proximal forearm while the TFCC predominantly supports the distal forearm. Proximally the ulna consists of the olecranon and coronoid. Distally the ulnar head serves as an insertion point for the TFCC, supplementing the DRUJ. The proximal radial head articulates with the capitellum of the humerus (radiocapitellar joint), rotating within the annular ligament during pronation and supination. Distally the radius connects with the lunate and scaphoid bones of the wrist.

**Classification System**

Two classification systems have been proposed when categorizing Galeazzi fractures.

The first classifications were based on the position of the distal radius:

Type I: Dorsal displacement

Type II: Volar displacement

The second classification system is based on Rettig ME and Raskin KB who categorized Galeazzi fractures based on fracture stability. They found stability to be dependent on the distance of the radial fracture from the distal radial articular surface:

Type I:

- Fracture occurring distally from the 7.5 cm demarcation (i.e., closer to the wrist)

- Associated with significant DRUJ instability in more than 50% of cases

Type II:

- Fracture occurring proximally from the 7.5 cm demarcation (i.e., further from the wrist)

- Associated with significant DRUJ instability in only around 5% of cases