The ideal outcomes in any surgical setting are good closure and stabilization of re-approximated wound edges. However, dental surgeons are exposed to a unique challenge since they have to reapproximate and stabilize various types of soft tissue (delicate unattached mucosa vs. more substantial attached mucosa with keratinized tissue) onto varying types of hard tissue (compact and medullary bone, cementum, and titanium implant surfaces). Additional challenges include bacterial colonization, the tension created from the tongue, swallowing pattern, and masticatory function.

Wound healing is a multifaceted process consisting of four sequential and overlapping phases: the hemostatic phase, inflammatory phase, proliferative phase, and maturation phase. The hemostatic phase is rapidly occurring, usually within minutes of wound closure. Exposed collagen and tissue factor initiate the hemostatic phase constricting vessels and formating the platelet plug. The platelets degranulate, releasing cytokines and growth factors originating the fibrin clot formation via the coagulation cascade. Simultaneously, the acute inflammatory phase drives the healing process, which usually lasts 72 hours. This phase is characterized by heat, pain, swelling, and redness. Increased vascularity facilitates the accumulation of cells consisting of macrophages, leukocytes, growth factors, and enzymes that rid the site of toxins, damaged cells, and bacteria.

The proliferative phase varies in duration but generally continues for days to weeks, replacing the fibrin clot with granulation tissue and immature type III collagen. The granulation tissue comes from the extracellular matrix (ECM), consisting of collagen, elastin, hyaluronic acid, and proteoglycans. Cell types present in this phase are fibroblasts, keratinocytes, and endothelial cells. Growth factors and cytokines (TGF beta 1, 2, and 3; vascular epidermal growth factor and the interleukin family) are actively involved during this phase.

The maturation and remodeling phase is the last step in wound healing. This phase consists of replacing the extracellular matrix and type III collagen with type I collagen (better organized), which can take months to years.

Wounds heal by first, second, and third intention. Ideally, a wound heals by first intention whereby the wound edges are reapproximated, and the sutured is closed. The site will heal through the process mentioned above with minimal scar formation. Second intention healing is when the wound is too wide, deep, or jagged to re-approximate the tissue edges. These wounds are not closed, and the healing process begins at the wound base, migrating superficially to the epidermis. Finally, third intension healing is when a wound is infected or necrotic; therefore, it must be cleaned or drained until the infection has resolved to be definitively closed.