It is now undisputed that sugammadex provides a faster and more complete reversal of neuromuscular blockade than neostigmine. However, for most institutions, sugammadex remains more expensive than neostigmine. Therefore, there is significant international interest in determining if the increased cost of sugammadex can be offset by increased operating room efficiency, better surgical outcomes, shorter recovery room times, fewer postoperative complications, and reduced hospital readmission rates.

Residual neuromuscular blockade is common after surgery, with an estimated 30 to 60% incidence in the recovery room.

Evidence is emerging that sugammadex may reduce the risk of postoperative pulmonary complications. Single-institution interrupted time series analysis and a large multi-institution retrospective matched cohort study found a lower rate of postoperative pulmonary complications with sugammadex than neostigmine.

There is budding interest in determining if sugammadex may help reduce the incidence of postoperative ileus. The incidence of postoperative ileus after colorectal surgery has been reported to be 10 to 25%.

In summary, sugammadex is a valuable tool to reverse neuromuscular blockade administered to perform many procedures and surgeries. Still, for safe and effective use, it requires the efforts of an interprofessional team, including clinicians, surgeons, specialists, anesthesiologists/nurse anesthetists, surgical nurses, and pharmacists. An interprofessional approach will improve patient outcomes and fewer adverse events when using sugammadex in situations where it has been indicated. [Level 5]