The Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or OSHA, is the section of the United States Department of Labor that establishes, oversees, and enforces safety within the workplace to minimize the health and safety risks for employees. Additionally, OSHA provides education and outreach to improve employee safety further. OSHA sets general guidelines for all fields but also has subparts that are more specific to high-risk fields like the healthcare field, including but not limited to bloodborne pathogens, harmful chemicals, infectious diseases, and personal protective equipment necessary to prevent exposure to hazardous materials. One such hazard overseen by OSHA is the fire which can cause significant injury or death from direct contact with the flames or, more often, through smoke inhalation.

Fires can be ignited by a wide variety of mechanisms reflected by the array of OSHA guidelines for various sources, including hazardous materials like oxygen and flammable liquids, high-risk industrial trades like welding, high-risk industries like sawmills, and electrical power generation. Once a fire is ignited, the damage can be mitigated by preventing its spread, reflected by OSHA guidelines for emergency action plans and fire protection and prevention.

Regulated specifically under standards 29 CFR 1910 subparts E, H, L, and Q, standards 29 CFR 1926 subparts C and F, and more generally under many others, OSHA aims to establish guidelines for fire safety that are used to prevent the onset of a fire and limit the damage and casualties should a fire ignite. By establishing these guidelines, OSHA can enforce the minimum standards required by a workplace, especially those part of high-risk industries, to ensure optimal safety for employees.