# Continuing Education Activity

Thoracotomy is described as an incision made between the ribs to access the contents of the thoracic cavity. Due to the anatomic location of the contents within the thorax different commonly utilized thoracotomy incisions exist and are used under different circumstances. This activity reviews the various types of thoracotomy incisions and situations in which they are most appropriate to facilitate better interprofessional understanding of thoracotomy incision choice and postoperative care.

**Objectives:**
- Review the basic anatomy of the thoracic cavity as it pertains to the thoracotomy procedure. 
- Identify the common indications for a thoracotomy. 
- Describe the common complications after a thoracotomy procedure and ways to prevent them. 
- Outline interprofessional team strategies to improve care coordination for patients undergoing thoracotomy procedure.

# Introduction

Thoracotomy describes an incision made in the chest wall to access the contents of the thoracic cavity. Thoracotomies typically can be divided into two categories; anterolateral thoracotomies and posterolateral thoracotomies. These can be further subdivided into supra-mammary and infra-mammary and, of course, further divided into the right or left chest. Each type of incision has its utility given certain circumstances.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The thoracic cavity hosts the heart, great vessels, lungs, esophagus, and trachea. The thoracic cavity is bordered by the thoracic outlet superiorly, the diaphragm inferiorly, the sternum anteriorly, and the vertebral bodies posteriorly. The thoracic cavity can be further subdivided into the pleural cavities and the mediastinum. The mediastinum and its contents are found within the center of the chest cavity and include the heart, great vessels, thymus, esophagus, and trachea. The pleural cavities enclose the parenchyma of the lungs. It is important for this discussion to note that the bulk of the heart lies mostly in the middle and to the left of the midline within the thoracic cavity.

# Indications

Indications for thoracotomy most commonly include surgical treatment of distal aortic, cardiac, esophageal, and pulmonary diseases. The distal thoracic aortic disease may include dissection, rupture, or aneurysmal disease.

# Contraindications

Contraindications to thoracotomy can be absolute or relative and depend upon the circumstances surrounding a thoracotomy. Thoracotomy may be contraindicated in patients who have had prior thoracotomy in the planned location, making re-entry unsafe, who are too frail to undergo anesthesia and in patients who will derive no benefit from operative intervention.

# Equipment

The following equipment is necessary for thoracotomy: scalpel, long curved Mayo scissors, Finochietto retractor, long curved Metzenbaum scissors, long tissue forceps, curved hemostats, electrocautery, toothed forceps. Other materials may be required for the subsequent planned operative intervention and are not listed here. All anticipated equipment needed for an operation should be available prior to thoracotomy.

# Personnel

Surgeon, anesthesiologist, scrub nurse or tech, and circulating nurse are some of the personnel needed for a thoracotomy. Other personnel may include a surgical assistant, resident, or fellow.

# Preparation

Preoperative evaluation for patients undergoing surgery via thoracotomy is specific to their particular disease process and will not be discussed here. Preoperative evaluation, however, may be much less intensive if the thoracotomy is for an emergent indication. Imaging may play a key role in the determination of whether or not a patient will be best served with thoracotomy or sternotomy incision and is particularly helpful in the evaluation of patients with previous sternotomy incisions.

# Technique or Treatment

For a supra-mammary anterolateral thoracotomy, the patient will need to be placed with their ipsilateral side elevated approximately 30 to 45 degrees. The ipsilateral arm is positioned at the patient's side. The thoracotomy incision is made between the second and third ribs along the superior border of the third rib. The pectoralis major and minor muscles are divided with electrocautery. Intercostal musculature is divided along the superior border of the rib in order to prevent damage to the neurovascular bundle that runs along the inferior border of the ribs. At this stage, the third rib may be detached from the sternum with an oscillating saw and moved for a better view of the operative field, or a thoracoscope may be used, allowing for the avoidance of rib resection. It is important to note that the internal mammary artery will need to be visualized and ligated to prevent hemorrhage obscuring the field of vision. In order to perform a submammary anterolateral thoracotomy, the patient will need to be positioned similarly to the supra-mammary thoracotomy position with the ipsilateral side elevated between 30 and 45 degrees and the ipsilateral arm at the patient's side.

# Complications

Complications of thoracotomy include but are not limited to bleeding, infection, pneumothorax, pleural effusion, shoulder dysfunction, pain, and post-thoracotomy pain syndrome.

# Clinical Significance

Most patients undergoing non-emergent thoracotomy incision, whether for cardiac or thoracic operative interventions, will have multiple comorbidities and are more likely to be frail. The procedures they will have via thoracotomy incision will decrease their cardiopulmonary reserve in a significant manner putting them at increased risk for postoperative complications resulting in a potentially higher rate of morbidity and mortality. In caring for a patient with a thoracotomy, it is critical to understand this and to know that the details in patient care may make a substantial difference in the clinical outcome for the patient.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

When caring for a patient who will undergo thoracotomy for any number of procedures, or who has just had a thoracotomy performed on them, it is critical to understand why that patient has the incision they do. The incision type alone can be a clue to the type of procedure performed and should serve as a marker for the severity of the illness to the team caring for the patient, alerting them that this patient is at high risk for complications. In caring for these patients, it is critical that teams communicate clearly and frequently, especially if any concerning features arise. These patients, prior to their procedure, will likely have seen a primary care doctor, a thoracic surgeon, an anesthesiologist, nurses, and, if appropriate, a cardiologist as well.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Preoperatively patients can be optimized with simple measures such as smoking cessation. Intraoperatively proper technique and excellent decision making will best help the patient. Recovery for thoracotomy patients can be improved and hastened with attention to detail postoperatively. Key interventions that seem simple and may be easy to neglect will greatly benefit them. These include appropriate and timely use of pain medication, frequent and proper use of incentive spirometry, ambulation in hallways, regular work with physical therapy and occupational therapy if necessary, and attention to detail while caring for patient incision sites.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

Especially during the postoperative care of a thoracotomy, patient attention must be placed particularly on respiratory status (oxygenation, respiratory rate, respiratory effort, etc.) and cardiovascular status (rhythm, rate, blood pressure, etc.). As with any postoperative patient, attention to detail while performing incisional care is of utmost importance. It is important to note the state of the incisional site (erythema, discoloration, discharge, drainage, temperature, pain, etc.) and note any changes that occur from day-to-day.