The detailed clinical history and family history are required from the patients suspected of having NF2. A complete physical examination should be done to look for cutaneous schwannomas or plaque-like lesions, ophthalmic examination to look for cataracts, optic nerve, among others. Contrast-enhanced MRI of the brain and entire spine is recommended to evaluate schwannomas and meningiomas.

Vestibular schwannoma has characteristic features on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). They are located in the internal auditory canal which is often widened. Large tumors also extend into the cerebellopontine angle and cause the typical "ice cream cone" appearance. These lesions are hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images with intense contrast enhancement. Cystic changes can be seen in large tumors. There is a poor correlation between the tumor size and degree of hearing loss.

Meningiomas are the most common extra-axial tumors in the brain. NF2 patients develop meningiomas at an earlier age, and they are often multiple. If meningiomas are seen in the pediatric age group, then a diagnosis of  NF2 should be considered. Meningiomas have typical features on the MRI. They are dural-based lesions with the isointense signal on T1-weighted images and iso to the hyperintense signal on T2-weighted images with intense enhancement along with an enhancing dural tail.

Multiple spinal tumors can also be seen in patients with NF2 including schwannomas, meningiomas, and ependymomas and can be diagnosed with MRI. Schwannomas are the most common type; they typically arise from the dorsal root with the typical appearance of dumbbell shape with the widening of the neural foramen and intense enhancement. Meningiomas are enhancing extramedullary lesions, typically seen in the cervical or thoracic region. Ependymomas are intramedullary lesions causing enlargement of the spinal cord with hemorrhage, cystic changes, and variable enhancement.