While there are many properties to sutures, it is most important to be able to determine which sutures are best for individual clinical scenarios. This determination depends on the thickness and location of the tissues, the amount of tension across the wound, and the risk of infection.

There is no specific algorithm for suture choice; however, a few rules are helpful. For instance, if there is a high infection risk, a monofilament absorbable suture is chosen. For running intradermal sutures, thin monofilament absorbable sutures with minimal reactivity are typically used.

For absorbable sutures, if more strength is required, one can choose a suture with a longer absorption time. Slow healing tissues, like fascia and tendons, should be closed with non-absorbable or slow absorbing sutures, while faster healing tissues like the stomach, colon, and bladder require absorbable sutures.

In general, surgeons typically use either polypropylene or polydioxanone sutures for fascia, depending on how strong the repair needs to be. Polypropylene is also very common in cardiovascular surgery. Deep dermis closure is with either polyglycolic acid or poliglecaprone 25 sutures. If closing the epidermis with a running subcuticular suture, poliglecaprone 25 is preferred. If one is performing interrupted sutures on the skin surface, nylon is ideal; polydioxanone for near dark hair and fast absorbing or chromic gut suture if it is on a child or in an area where sutures are difficult to remove. Many good choices exist depending on provider preference, experience, and the desired result.