Depending on the underlying causality of pseudoappendicitis, the clinical presentations might differ. However, several non-specific general findings in the history and physical examination are common. Accordingly, a history of a negative appendectomy, unresolved and even aggravated right lower quadrant pain following the surgical procedure, accompanied by negative imaging studies, and normal pathological evaluations are quite common in pseudoappendicitis. Collectively, the intractable abdominal pain in these patients might be mistakenly labeled as a psychosomatic disorder.

Most patients who contract Y. enterocolitica never develop symptoms. Often mild symptoms of diarrhea and abdominal pain may occur during yersiniosis. More advanced signs of this infection include watery or bloody diarrhea, fever, chills, and increased abdominal pain. If mesenteric adenitis is also present, patients will have moderate to severe right lower quadrant abdominal pain. This is easily mistaken for acute appendicitis. They may exhibit abdominal guarding and rebound tenderness with McBurney's sign (point tenderness one-third of the way between the umbilicus and the anterior superior iliac crest). Localized adenitis causes this at the terminal ileum, where most of the bacteria are concentrated. Extreme watery or bloody diarrhea is often misdiagnosed as salmonellosis, shigellosis, or Giardia enteritis. Patients with advanced infections, especially those left untreated, will present with signs of sepsis, dehydration, and shock.