Each year there are close to 2.5 million new HIV cases worldwide. To date, there is no cure for HIV. While research on a vaccine has been going on for several decades, it will be many more years before something more practical is available. In the absence of any treatment, most patients with HIV will die within a decade.

With treatment, long-term survival is possible, but it comes at a very high cost. Those who survive are at risk for new opportunistic infections, and in many cases, pre-existing infections can reactivate and are associated with a high morbidity. Also, the use of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) is associated with numerous adverse effects, drug interactions, and resistance. Many patients eventually develop lipid abnormalities and are at risk for premature atherosclerosis. With the development of a vaccine still several years away, a new way to lower the risk of new HIV infections in high-risk individuals has been advocated with the use of pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis. Since the discovery of HIV, it has been well known that sexual transmission of the virus strongly correlates with the concentration of the organism in the genital secretions and blood. Several studies have shown that the use of antiretroviral drugs can be utilized to lower the infectivity of high-risk patients by decreasing the concentration of the organism from blood and genital secretions. Today, use of pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis is no longer just a hypothesis but a clinical application that helps to decrease the number of new cases of HIV.

**Pre-Exposure Chemoprophylaxis for Prevention of HIV**

Pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis is a relatively new concept that consists of daily intake of antiretroviral medications that protect high-risk individuals from HIV infection. Several trials have shown that when pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis is closely monitored for adherence, it is an effective method to reduce the risk of HIV infection, almost to zero. This new concept is now seen as a more effective way of preventing HIV infection than treating the individual after exposure.

The important thing to note is that pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis is only effective against HIV and does not provide protection against any other sexually transmitted infection (STI), hepatitis, or blood-borne infections. The critical feature of this regimen is that adherence to medication must be total. Individuals who regularly miss doses of their medication will be at high risk for acquiring HIV. Thus, pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis for HIV prevention is part of a combination package that also includes support, sex education, and advice about the importance of adherence to treatment.

The idea that preexposure chemoprophylaxis to prevent HIV infection has gained momentum from the following observations:

- Behavioral approaches have failed to lower the risk of HIV

- Use of biological methods like contraception also has not completely decreased the risk of HIV infection

- Initial studies suggest that antiretroviral medications may help prevent HIV infection

- Use of antiretroviral regimens is a less expensive and much simpler way to prevent HIV, compared to treatment with HAART

- Data from clinical trials indicate that use of antiretroviral medications to prevent HIV is effective