Based on the review of the summary describing the compassionate use of remdesivir published by the European Medicines Agency (EMA,2020), researchers noted that the bioavailability of remdesivir in animal models was poor when administered via the oral route due to almost complete first-pass clearance attributed to poor hepatic stability. Also, the pharmacologic active analog adenosine triphosphate was delayed when administered via the intramuscular (IM) route. However, radiolabeled remdesivir administered intravenously in rats and monkeys demonstrated the widespread distribution of radioactivity in most tissues with the circulation of the predominant metabolite GS-441524. Hence, the conclusion was that the intravenous (IV) administration of remdesivir delivered the active metabolite rapidly compared to the IM or oral route. When administered IV, the absolute bioavailability of remdesivir formulations is 100%, with readily detectable levels of remdesivir in blood and plasma following a single remdesivir infusion in healthy male participants reaching peak concentrations at the end of infusion.

The current recommended dose of remdesivir for adults and pediatric patients hospitalized with suspected or laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 infection is weight-based, and administration is via the IV route. Before initiating f remdesivir, a baseline renal function panel, hepatic function panel, and PT/INR must be performed. If the patient's eGFR is <30mL/min, clinicians should avoid using remdesivir; eGFR >30mL/min requires no dosing adjustments. Hepatic dosing is undefined at present.

**Adults and Pediatric Patients Weighing ≥ 40 kg**

- 200 mg IV as a loading dose on day 1, followed by a maintenance dose of 100 mg IV every 24 hours for two additional days - the drug should be started ASAP within seven days of symptomatic onset.

**Pediatric Patients ≥ 28 days and Weighing  ≥ 3 kgs to <40 kg**

- 5 mg/kg/dose IV for a single dose, then 2.5 mg/kg/dose IV every 24 hours for two days - the drug should be started ASAP within seven days of symptomatic onset.

Remdesivir has also received authorization for use in a non-hospital setting with mild-to-moderate COVID-19 who are non-hospitalized but are at high risk for progression to severe COVID-19, including hospitalization or death, and the optimal treatment duration for COVID-19 is three days.

However, for patients requiring invasive mechanical ventilation and/or ECMO support, treatment may be extended an additional five days. However, for patients not requiring invasive mechanical ventilation and/or ECMO support, remdesivir can be administered for five days with a recommendation to extend treatment duration for five additional days if no clinical response is seen in the first five days, for a total treatment duration of 10 days.