Tissue harmonic imaging is indicated in stress echocardiography. It improves resolution, reduces artifacts, improves signal-to-noise ratio, greater depth of penetration and improves myocardial signals. Tissue harmonic imaging increases the sensitivity of stress echocardiography as it improves endocardial delineation due to enhanced resolution.

Intravenous contrast agents in combination with harmonic imaging increase the accuracy of the procedure. Increased number of wall segment motion abnormalities can be studied when contrast agents are used.

**Stress testing methods:**

Exercise stress testing: This is indicated in patients who can exercise. Either treadmill or bicycle can be used for exercise.

- Treadmill stress echocardiography: Bruce protocol is most commonly used for treadmill exercise echocardiography. Exercise capacity is reported in terms of estimated metabolic equivalents of task (METs). Imaging studies are performed at rest and immediately after completion of exercise and compared for evaluation of wall motion abnormalities.

- Bicycle stress echocardiography: Less often used in North America than treadmill stress test. Can be performed using supine or upright bicycle ergometry. Usually, bicycle protocol starts at a workload of 25 watts and increases by 25-watt increments every three minutes until an endpoint is achieved. It is quieter, permits sensitive precordial measurements without much motion artifact. Bicycle exercise offers Doppler information in addition to assessment of regional wall motion abnormalities.

Pharmacologic stress testing: This is indicated in patients who cannot exercise. Dobutamine and vasodilators are used for assessing regional wall motion abnormalities.

- Dobutamine echocardiography: A graded dobutamine infusion starting at 5 mcg/kg/min and increasing at three-minute intervals to 10, 20, 30, and 40 ug/kg/min is the standard for dobutamine stress testing.

- Vasodilator stress testing: Adenosine and Dipyridamole can be used in stress echocardiography.

- Pacing stress testing: This is indicated in patients with a permanent pacemaker. The target heart rate can be achieved by increasing the pacing. This is indicated in patients who are unable to exercise. The pacing protocol consists of two-minute stages, and an increasing paced heart rate to levels of 85% and 100%, respectively, for pre-peak and peak stress information.

**Interpretation:**

Imaging obtained at resting and stress phase are compared for interpretation of left ventricular (LV) size, shape, and function. A normal response during stress involves LV size becoming smaller compared to rest, while the shape is maintained, and there is increased endocardial excursion along with systolic wall thickening.

In a patient with multiple vessel diseases, exercise echocardiography demonstrates a dilated LV cavity with changes in the shape and reduction of systolic wall thickening of the septum, anterior, and inferior walls. Prolonged systolic wall thickening may also indicate severe coronary artery disease.

The coronary arteriographic cut off of luminal diameter stenosis at which wall thickening abnormalities occur is 54% for exercise, 58% for dobutamine, and 60% for dipyridamole. The sensitivities for the detection of coronary artery disease (CAD) are 85%, 80%, and 78%, with specificities of 77%, 86%, and 91% for exercise, dobutamine, and dipyridamole stress results.