Mastery of gastric ultrasound requires knowledge of the anatomy of the stomach and nearby organs. The stomach is a “J”-shaped organ divided into four named regions: the cardia, fundus, body, and pylorus. The cardia is the region immediately distal to the esophagus. The fundus is the most cephalad portion of the stomach, lying above the cardiac notch. The body is the largest part of the stomach, providing space for food to mix with digestive enzymes. The funnel-shaped pylorus is the distal-most portion of the stomach, consisting of the antrum and the pyloric sphincter. The antrum lies between the gastric body and the pyloric sphincter, storing food before release through the pyloric sphincter into the duodenum. The antrum is the most important anatomical structure to visualize when performing gastric ultrasound.

The stomach wall consists of three layers of alternating echogenicity, which can frequently be distinguished on ultrasound. The outermost layer is the serosa, which appears as a thin hyperechoic line. The muscularis propria, immediately deep to the serosa, appears as a thick, hypoechoic line and is easy to see on an ultrasound. The mucosa is the innermost layer of the stomach, which appears as a thin hyperechoic line. Occasionally, five layers of alternating echogenicity can be appreciated. The two innermost are thought to be artifactual due to the interface between the mucosal layer and fluid in the gastric lumen.

Gastric ultrasound is performed in the parasagittal imaging plane; thus, it is crucial to understand the relationship of adjacent organs to the stomach when viewed in this plane. The liver is easy to recognize due to its large size and highly vascular appearance. It should be located on the left of the screen (cephalad). The pancreas is located deep to the stomach and has a hyperechoic appearance. The bowel is difficult to visualize on ultrasound due to the presence of gas in the lumen but is generally located on the right side of the screen (caudad to the stomach).

During the gastric ultrasound, several major blood vessels can be seen, including the aorta, the superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and the inferior vena cava (IVC). All appear anechoic (black) because they are filled with blood. The pulsatile SMA is the most superficial, located deep to the stomach but superficial to the aorta. The aorta and IVC can be challenging to distinguish, as both are large and located at similar depths. Only one should be visible in the parasagittal plane at a time because they run parallel to each other. The aorta has a thick wall, is pulsatile, and usually has a smaller diameter than the IVC. The IVC has a thin wall, if often compressible, and the diameter changes with the respiratory cycle, decreasing with inspiration and increasing during expiration. The aorta is seen anterior to the vertebral bodies and left of midline, while the IVC is at a similar depth but to the right of the midline.