Despite the wide prevalence of urge incontinence, very few patients seek help, assuming that they just have to live with it. Specific questions for urinary symptoms of urge and stress incontinence should be included in the review of systems, as many patients are uncomfortable discussing this with the provider. When history and exam are suggestive of urge incontinence, lifestyle changes like cutting back on caffeine, alcohol, artificial sweeteners that increase urinary frequency and avoiding them close to bedtime can help many patients to reduce urgency and urine leaks. It is important to avoid constipation that could worsen urge incontinence by increasing fiber intake. Even though many patients have heard about pelvic floor exercises and bladder retraining, they often perform them incorrectly. Providers should take the opportunity during the initial evaluation to educate on the correct technique of the exercises or offer a referral to a physical therapist who has special training in these exercises.

Asking the patient to have scheduled bathroom breaks helps to retrain the bladder. To begin, the patient should be asked to hold their urine for at least an hour. If they feel the urge, ask them to try to wait until the whole hour is passed. After they get used to waiting 1 hour, the patient can try waiting longer between bathroom visits. The goal should be to train the bladder to hold urine for 3 to 4 hours between bathroom visits. During an urge, patients can try sitting down or standing still, taking a deep breath, and squeeze the pelvic floor muscles. This can help them relax and overcome the urge. When the urge passes, they can then walk slowly to the bathroom to urinate.

Providing printed handouts and going through self-management skills and outlining the available treatments to control and cope with the symptoms will improve patient confidence and cooperation with the treatment. Resourceful patient education is available on the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology website.