A common application of these principles is the measurement of blood pressure. While automated machines are quickly replacing manual blood pressure readings as a rapid clinical tool, manual blood pressure is widely considered to be more reliable. Taking a manual blood pressure involves filling an inflatable cuff that is fastened above the systolic blood pressure to constrict the patient’s arm and slowly releasing the pressure while auscultating the main artery constricted. The practitioner is taking advantage of two key points to gauge the systolic and diastolic blood pressures. The first is when the sound of turbulent flow begins (Korsakoff sounds), and this audible heartbeat represents the first time blood flow overcomes the pressure of the cuff (the practitioner has been slowly lowering the cuff pressure while the blood pressure is relatively constant for a given beat). This blood flow is heard as a rushing noise because the increased velocity leads to non-laminar (turbulent) flow. The turbulent flow and audible beats continue to the next critical point, where the blood returns to laminar flow and the audible turbulent flow cases. The pressure at which this takes place represents the diastolic blood pressure.

Cardiac auscultation takes advantage of similar principles as the blood pressure measurement previously described. The foundation of both is the principle that turbulent flow may be auscultated, and laminar flow is essentially silent for our purposes. When auscultating a healthy heart, two beats are heard representing the closure of the mitral and tricuspid valve (S1) and then the aortic and pulmonic valves (S2). Under physiologic conditions, those are the only sounds heard, but pathologic valves or defects in the cardiac muscle can create extra noises. These noises are a result of the blood flow being disturbed, and as already mentioned while discussing blood pressure measurement, this can result in an audible rush of turbulent flow. Auscultated turbulent flow in cardiac examination represents murmurs and can help diagnose cardiac pathology.

Cardiovascular pharmacology is a massive topic, but a few principles are helpful when beginning to understand hemodynamics in a clinical context. One case is clinical blood pressure management. When treating blood pressure that is not related to an underlying condition (such as renal artery occlusion or pheochromocytoma), the primary goal is to decrease blood pressure to less than 130/80 in most of the population. These goals are achievable through medications that augment the variables previously discussed, namely systemic vascular resistance and cardiac contractility. While it is possible for certain drugs such as beta-blockers and non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (verapamil and diltiazem) to decrease cardiac contractility, the majority of blood pressure medications target systemic vascular resistance. By decreasing systemic vascular resistance for a given cardiac output, the pressure decreases [remembering Q = ΔP/R, for flow (Q) to remain constant as resistance (R )goes down so must the pressure gradient (ΔP)]. Drugs such as ACE inhibitors and dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (e.g., amlodipine) ultimately result in vasodilation and decreased systemic vascular resistance. Vasodilation also can be induced by nitrates to reduce cardiac preload in the case of angina.

Systemic vascular resistance also can be reversed by agents collectively referred to as vasopressors. This constricting of the blood vessels and the subsequent increase in resistance is valuable when the blood pressure drops to dangerous levels. A clinical example of this phenomenon may present in anaphylactic shock, where vasodilation decreases blood pressure to dangerous levels. Epinephrine can reverse this effect by increasing systemic vascular resistance.