Hydrocodone is pharmaceutically available as an oral medication with formulations, including tablets, capsules, and oral solutions. Tablets and capsules are not to be crushed, chewed, or dissolved, as this can lead to uncontrolled rapid medication delivery and overdose.

Immediate-release (IR) hydrocodone is a combination product (combined with acetaminophen and ibuprofen). Hydrocodone IR combination product dosages typically range from 2.5 mo 10 mg every 4 to 6 hours as needed. In hydrocodone formulations combined with acetaminophen, the dosage of acetaminophen should not exceed 4 gm/day.

Hydrocodone ER formulations are available in both tablets and capsules. Single-entity hydrocodone is only available in extended-release (ER) formulations. Depending on the product, the initial dose of hydrocodone ER formulations in patients who are not opioid-tolerant or are opioid-naïve is between 10 mg to 20 mg every 12 hours to 24 hours. Patients should receive instruction to discontinue all other opioids when starting on a hydrocodone ER medication unless specifically directed by a physician.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**Clinicians should initiate hydrocodone therapy with 50% of the initial dose in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**According to a study, systemic exposure to hydrocodone (AUC) was 70% higher with moderate to severe renal impairment compared to patients with normal renal function.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**The use of hydrocodone is not contraindicated in pregnancy but is listed as a US FDA boxed warning since opioids cross the placenta, and prolonged use during pregnancy may cause neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome(NOWS). Patients taking hydrocodone should receive counseling on the risks associated with opioid use during pregnancy with such documentation in the medical record.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Maternal hydrocodone use during breastfeeding can cause neonatal drowsiness, depression of the central nervous system, and even death of the newborn. Infants are susceptible to even low dosages of opioids. Contact the clinician immediately if the infant exhibits increased drowsiness (more than usual), difficulty breastfeeding, and breathing difficulties. Non-narcotic analgesics are preferred during breastfeeding.

**Pharmacogenomic Considerations**: Genetic polymorphisms in CYP2D6 metabolism lead to variations in plasma hydrocodone concentrations from a standard dose. Genetic variants in hydrocodone metabolism include ultra-rapid, extensive, and poor metabolizer phenotypes.