The first step in solving these problems is first to acknowledge there is a problem. Throughout most of EMS history, it was “weak” or “not tough” for the provider to admit there were any responses to these stressful stimuli. Currently, there are programs such as the Code Green campaign acts as an EMS mental health advocacy and education organization. The organization states "The campaign has two main goals. Our primary goal is raising awareness of the high rates of mental health issues that affect first responders. Due to the stresses to which first responders are exposed, they have increased rates of PTSD, depression, anxiety, substance abuse, and suicide. In addition, we aim to provide education for responders on multiple mental health-related topics" (http://codegreenstore.com/about/)

Code Green along with other entities such as NAEMT, Journal of Emergency Medical Services, and EMS1 have been attempting to educate providers on the dangers of these stressors. Additionally, they have been teaching courses on resiliency, trying to keep balance in a person’s life, and when and where to seek help when it is needed.

Workers in EMS have been facing health and wellness challenges since the inception of modern-day EMS. It is only in recent years that the industry has begun to attempt to study the causes and workable solutions to these problems. It is only through education, willingness to study, acceptance of the problems, and a change in the culture of EMS providers that we are going to reverse the damage the industry can do.