Calories are a measure of energy. The lowercase “c” calories (cal) is the amount of energy to raise the temperature of one gram of water by one degree Celsius at one atmospheric pressure. Likewise, the uppercase “C” Calories (Cal or Kcal) is the amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of one kilogram of water by one degree Celsius.

1 Cal or 1 Kcal = 1000 cal

When referring to food, the Calorie (Kcal) is used. Proteins and carbohydrates both contain 4 Kcal/g. Fats provide 9 kcal/g. According to the U.S. Dietary Guidelines, 45-65% of calories should come from carbohydrates, 20-35% from fats, and 10-35% from proteins.

The total energy expenditure (TEE) includes the total daily energy expenditure (DEE), active energy expenditure (AEE includes exercise and non-exercise related), and the thermic effect of feeding (TEF). The Basal Metabolic Rate (BMR) measures the total daily energy expenditure per day by the body at rest or basal level and accounts for up to 60% of total energy expenditure, with active energy expenditure ~30% and remaining ~10% accounts for thermic effect of feeding. BMR measures the amount of energy required for vital activities such as respiration and maintaining circulation. Thermic effect of feeding accounts for the energy required to digest and absorb food. BMR can be calculated by Direct or Indirect calorimetry and is measured under controlled conditions. Thermoneutral conditions are important while measuring BMR to eliminate the inclusion of any activity that may contribute to BMR. Direct calorimetry measures the total heat generated over a certain period of time, while indirect calorimetry calculates BMR by measuring the total quantity of oxygen consumed in a defined time. Resting metabolic rate (RMR) is yet another way to measure the metabolic rate and is essentially similar to BMR but is measured under less restrictive conditions

Women: BMR = 655 + ( 4.35 x weight in pounds ) + ( 4.7 x height in inches ) - ( 4.7 x age in years )

Women: BMR = 447.6 + (9.3 x weight in kg) + (3.1 x height in cm) – (4.3 x age in years)

Men: BMR = 66 + ( 6.23 x weight in pounds ) + ( 12.7 x height in inches ) - ( 6.8 x age in years )

Men: BMR = 88.5 + (13.4 x weight in kg) + (4.8 x height in cm) – (5.7 x age in years)