General factors important in management include the following:

- Avoid cross contamination by frequent hand washing and wearing gloves

- Irrigate eye with sterile isotonic saline

- Systemic treatment is required for staphylococcal, gonococcal, Chlamydia, Pseudomonas and herpetic conjunctivitis

- Avoid eye patching

- Consider Pediatric iInfectious disease and/or Pediatric Ophthalmology consult

- Chemical conjunctivitis usually resolves with 24 to 72 hours and may be helped with lubrication and artificial tears

**Gonococcal conjunctivitis:**a medical emergency. Because of PCB resistance, third-generation cephalosporins are the first line antibiotics. It can happen even with appropriate prophylaxis infants delivered to mothers with positive maternal gonococcal infection.

- Ceftriaxone 25-50mg/kg intravenous or intramuscular x 1 dose

- Alternative is cefotaxime single dose of 100 mg/kg

- Isolate the infant during the first 24 hours of parenteral antibiotic therapy

- Test for concomitant HIV and syphilis

- Evaluate for disseminated disease (arthritis, meningitis, sepsis, anorectal infection)

- Consider treating for chlamydia due to high rate of concomitant infection

- Keep a low threshold to evaluate for systemic infection (sepsis, meningitis)

- Ophthalmology consult since gonococcal conjunctivitis can lead to perforation and blindness

- Irrigate the eyes with normal saline at frequent (1 to 2 hour) intervals

- Topical antibiotics are not necessary

**Chlamydial conjunctivitis:**Recommended prophylaxis does not prevent chlamydial conjunctivitis, and topical treatment is ineffective and unnecessary but may be used as an adjunct to oral therapy. Topical therapy for chlamydial conjunctivitis is generally not effective and has a high failure rate because C. trachomatis is known to colonize the nasopharynx and can thus spread into the lungs if not adequately eradicated.

Erythromycin x 14 days or azithromycin 20 mg/kg/day x 3 days is the recommended treatment. However, the American Academy of Pediatrics still recommends erythromycin because other treatments are not well studied.

A second course is usually required since 1 in 5 cases recur after antibiotic therapy. Pyloric stenosis has been seen in infants less than six weeks old treated with erythromycin.

For infants born to mothers with chlamydia exposure, there is no prophylaxis recommended but it is important to educate the family to monitor for infection including pneumonia.

**Herpetic conjunctivitis:**Administer topical vidarabine or trifluridine five times a day for ten days, evaluate and treat for systemic herpes, ophthalmology consult is indicated. Systemic treatment with acyclovir is also indicated for SEM (skin eye and mucosa) and central nervous system infection. Ophthalmologic evaluation is recommended as retinopathy, cataracts and chorioretinitis can develop

**Isolation:**Isolation of a patient is recommended for Pseudomonas, herpes, and gonococcal conjunctivitis.

**Lacrimal Duct Obstruction:**Most clear spontaneously without treatment. If the problem does not resolve and symptoms persist (usually after 6 to 7 months), the infant should be evaluated by an ophthalmologist.