Routine measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) immunization effectively prevents rubella infection, as indicated by the dramatic decline in the number of rubella cases following the introduction of vaccine programs in the 1960s.

One should remember that reactions to the vaccine often occur with the first rather than the second dose. Adverse effects include fever, rash, lymphadenopathy, joint complaints, hypersensitivity reactions, development of immune thrombocytopenia, and seizures.

Since the rubella vaccine is a live vaccine, it is not recommended in pregnant women, and women who receive the vaccine are advised not to become pregnant for four weeks.

Formal documentation of immunity to rubella should be established for all women of childbearing age to decrease the incidence of congenital rubella syndrome (CRS). The recommendation is that all non-pregnant women who have no evidence of immunity should be offered a rubella vaccine. The MMR vaccine should not be administered during pregnancy due to concerns about teratogenicity. Instead, susceptible pregnant women should receive the MMR vaccine as soon as possible in the postpartum period.

However, there are no reported cases of congenital rubella syndrome in women who have received the rubella vaccine during pregnancy. Rubella can cause CRS in the newborn. CRS is the most severe sequela of rubella and the main reason the rubella vaccine was developed. About 100,000 cases of CRS occur each year. The contraction of rubella within the first trimester carries a risk of miscarriage or stillborn birth. Fetuses that survive the infection can be born with severe heart disorders, blindness, deafness, or other life-threatening organ disorders.

Another recommendation is a multidisciplinary approach to address misinformation and the false perception of risk associated with vaccination. In 1998 a research paper published in The Lancet authored by Dr. Andrew Wakefield claiming an association of MMR with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and inflammatory bowel disease(IBD).

Further investigations found that Wakefield had multiple undeclared conflicts of interest, had manipulated evidence, and had conducted research in a manner that was not in accordance with medical ethics. The Lancet paper was fully retracted in 2010. The scientific consensus today is that there is no association between the MMR vaccine and ASD, and the benefits of vaccination greatly outweigh its potential risks.