The Endocrine Society recommends screening for specific patient presentations. Patients with hypertension on triple-drug therapy and diuretic-induced hypokalemia; patients with hypertension and adrenal incidentaloma; hypertension with a family history of the early-onset cerebral vascular accident; or patients with hypertension and first-degree relatives with confirmed primary hyperaldosteronism.

Suspect primary aldosteronism when a patient presents with hypertension at an early age with hypokalemia and poorly controlled blood pressure despite medical therapy. The next step is to obtain a morning plasma aldosterone and renin activity. If the ratio of morning aldosterone to plasma renin activity is higher than 20 to 1, then the excess aldosterone can be attributed to the adrenal gland as the primary source. Next, any of the four confirmatory tests may follow: 1) oral sodium loading 2) saline infusion 3) fludrocortisone suppression 4) captopril challenge, which should suppress aldosterone; however, in a patient with primary aldosteronism, there will be a lack of aldosterone suppression. Once primary aldosteronism is confirmed, all suspected patients are recommended to undergo an adrenal computed tomography scan as the initial study and to exclude possible adrenocortical carcinoma. It is then recommended for the patient to have an adrenal venous sampling.

The best diagnostic test involves the measurement of cortisol and aldosterone in bilateral adrenal venous effluent and a peripheral vein before and during an ACTH infusion. Cortisol will be used to evaluate the catheter placement in the adrenal veins, as levels from the two sides should be similar. When an adenoma is present, the aldosterone-to-cortisol ratio on one side is usually at least five times greater than the other, indicating suppression. Bilateral hyperplasia tends to produce similar values on each side. If the study points towards a unilateral adenoma, then laparoscopic adrenalectomy is the preferred treatment. If the patient declines surgery or is not a surgical candidate, medical therapy is the recommended route. If the study points towards a bilateral cause, then medical treatment with a mineralocorticoid antagonist is warranted.