# Continuing Education Activity

There are two inherited varieties of polycystic kidney disease (PKD): autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) and autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). These two forms have distinct clinical and genetic features. ADPKD is a multisystem progressive cystic disorder characterized by bilateral renal cysts arising anywhere along the nephron and leading to progressively worsening fibrosis and architectural distortion of kidneys and ultimately renal failure. ARPKD involves microcystic cysts that that arise exclusively in the collecting tubule and can lead to hepatic fibrosis and consequently, manifestations of portal hypertension. This activity reviews the evaluation, treatment, and complications of PKD and the importance of an interprofessional team approach to its management.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiologies of polycystic kidney disease.
- Describe the presentations of polycystic kidney disease.
- Review the treatment options for polycystic kidney disease.
- Summarize the importance of optimizing coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care to patients with polycystic kidney disease.

# Introduction

There are two varieties of polycystic kidney disease based on inheritance: autosomal dominant (ADPKD) and autosomal recessive (ARPKD) types. These two forms have distinct clinical and genetic features.

ADPKD is a multisystem progressive cystic disorder. It is characterized by bilateral renal cysts, which progressively lead to fibrosis and architectural distortion of kidneys, and progressive renal failure.[

Cystic dilatation of renal tubules characterizes both ADPKD and ARPKD. ADPKD shows cysts of varying sizes which may show coarse calcifications and renal calculi. Cysts in ARPKD are mostly microcystic. Cysts in ADPKD can arise from anywhere along the nephron, most commonly from the collecting tube. However, cysts in ARPKD arise exclusively in the collecting tubule.

# Etiology

ADPKD is the most common hereditary renal cystic disease.

There is considerable variability in the phenotypic expression of ARPKD. All forms of ARPKD are caused by a mutation in the PKHD1 gene on chromosome 6p12.

# Epidemiology

ADPKD occurs in 1 in 400-1000 live births, without any sex or racial predilection.

ARPKD is one of the most common causes of heritable, infantile cystic renal disease. Despite that, it accounts for only 1 in 20,000 to 50,000 live births.

# Pathophysiology

Variable expression of PKD 1 and PKD 2 genes causes ADPKD. PKD 1 gene-disease has more severe manifestations than PKD 2 genes. Polycystin 1 and 2 proteins are components of cell membranes of primary cilia of renal tubular epithelial cells.

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate, a cellular second messenger, also induces the proliferation of tubular epithelial cells. Mutations also cause mislocalization of sodium-potassium-activated adenosine triphosphate at the apical membrane of tubular epithelial cells, resulting in secretion of sodium and a gradient formation accounting for fluid secretion and cyst formation. According to Knudson's two-hit hypothesis, all the renal tubular epithelial cells of the patient carry a germline mutation in PKD1 and PKD2. When somatic mutations occur in the normal allele,  a second hit takes place. This leads to the monoclonal proliferation of that cell causes further pathogenesis of the disease.

Intrarenal cysts distort normal renal architecture and function causes continued activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system which leads to hypertension. Liver cysts arise by excessive proliferation and dilatation of biliary ductules, caused by a similar mechanism.

Pathogenesis of ARPKD is characterized by circumferential proliferation of epithelial cells, which predominantly affects collecting ducts in renal tubules.

# Histopathology

ADPKD: Gross, histologic specimen reveals bilaterally enlarged kidneys with multiple cysts of varying sizes. On microscopy, renal tubular ectasia and cysts lined by columnar to cuboidal to flattened epithelial cells and thickened basement membrane are the usual findings.

ARPKD: Variable degrees of collecting duct epithelial proliferation, biliary duct proliferation and ectasia, periportal fibrosis are present in almost all patients.

# History and Physical

ADPKD: Patient may present clinically usually around the third decade of age with hypertension and with or without pain or hematuria of renal origin or other cyst's related-complications as infection or rupture.

Renal stones are a known complication of ADPKD, which contributes to significant morbidity. Medical renal disease as renal tubular acidosis is also common in this population. About 45% of patients may progress to end-stage renal disease, which leads to their dependence on hemodialysis or renal transplant. Imaging studies play a vital role in the diagnosis and screening of families at risk.

ARPKD: Early identification of these patients has increased tremendously in the last few decades with routine antenatal ultrasound which usually shows large and echogenic kidneys. The majority present in the neonatal period with hypertension and renal dysfunction. Hepatic fibrosis may lead to manifestations of portal hypertension. There is a variable phenotypic presentation of the disease depending on the severity of renal and hepatic involvement, which usually have an inverse relationship.

Perinatal Type is the most common. It presents with oligohydramnios and pulmonary hypoplasia and has a poor prognosis.

Neonatal and Infantile Type: Minimal to moderate hepatic/periportal fibrosis.

Juvenile Type: Gross hepatic fibrosis and features of portal hypertension like hepatosplenomegaly and portosystemic varices with less severe renal disease.

# Evaluation

ADPKD:****

Imaging of patients with ADPKD can be tedious because of the enlarged, distorted kidneys and variably sized cysts and their mass effects on adjacent structures.

Ultrasound is cheap, easy, fast, and lacking in ionizing radiation, and is an excellent choice for regular follow-up of these cases. Simple cysts appear anechoic on ultrasound, while complex cysts may show anechoic material and thick septa or calcifications, which require careful assessment to rule out hemorrhage, infection, or renal malignancy. Ultrasound is also used to assess cysts in other organs like the liver.

CT is a very sensitive tool in imaging renal cysts. Any complex cysts showing thick enhancing septa and a solid nodule are viewed with caution and classified according to Bosniac classification.

MRI is as informative as CT with the added benefit of lack of ionizing radiation. Simple cysts appear hyperintense on T2 and hypointense on T1. Hemorrhage in a cyst appears hyperintense on T1; calcification shows blooming on GRE or susceptibility-weighted images. A complex cyst may show thick enhancing septa or enhancing solid nodules which raise suspicion for malignancy.

Recently,  image-based renal and cyst volumetry measurement has been implemented in several institutions and utilized as an indicator for the assessment of treatment response or disease progression.

ARPKD:

In the perinatal and neonatal period ultrasound typically shows bilateral smooth enlarged kidneys with loss of corticomedullary differentiation. CT shows smooth enlarged kidneys with a striated pattern of contrast excretion.

Those children who survive the neonatal period and present later with portal hypertension in the infantile or juvenile period, usually have less involvement of kidneys. Their renal ultrasound is usually normal or may show minimal cysts.

Genetic testing of an affected sibling with ARPKD is another tool in the evaluation of these families and patient's at risk.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment of patients with ADPKD includes managing high blood pressure with medications, a low-salt diet, dietary protein restriction, and statins which may reduce disease progression.

Selected patients may receive treatment with a vasopressin receptor antagonist, tolvaptan. Few randomized clinical trials have shown convincing results of tolvaptan in checking the progression of kidney disease in ADPKD.

Targeted therapies for hereditary renal cystic diseases are undergoing extensive clinical studies. Drugs targeting mTOR signaling pathways like rapamycin, by checking cellular proliferation are under their Phase II/III clinical trials. A variety of drugs like methylprednisone, urine alkalinization, lovastatin, epidermal growth factor tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitor and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor are undergoing animal studies to assess utility in this group of patients.

For example, combined somatostatin and tolvaptan blocks the effect of cyclic adenosine monophosphate and inhibit fluid secretion and cell proliferation. Triptolide, which affects calcium signaling, also exhibits antiproliferative effects. A number of other agents may prove helpful in halting the progression of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease.

Patients with ADPKD who ultimately progress to end-stage renal disease require renal replacement therapy which includes hemodialysis and renal transplantation.

ARPKD: Management depends on the severity of the clinical manifestations and the organs involved; this involves monitoring respiratory function, renal function tests, liver function tests, infant growth evaluation and blood pressure monitoring, and symptomatic treatment. Dual organ transplant (liver and kidney) depending on the severity of portal hypertension and end-stage renal disease has shown promising results in a significant number of cases.

Finally, genetic counseling is of paramount value for both patients and families.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differentials for ADPKD:

- Medullary cystic kidney disease

- Von Hippel Lindau disease

- Tuberous sclerosis complex

- Localized renal cystic disease

- Acquired renal cystic disease

- Developmental renal cystic disease- medullary sponge kidney, multicystic dysplastic kidney disease

Differentials for ARPKD:

- ADPKD

- Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome

- Laurence-Moon-Beidl-syndrome

- Meckel-Gruber syndrome

- Renal dysplasia associated with trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome)

# Prognosis

ADPKD: In a majority of patients, the renal function remains intact until the fourth decade of life. Once renal function is affected, glomerular filtration rate (GFR) starts to decline, at an average rate of 4.4 to 5.9 mL/min per year.

ARPKD: Prognosis is poor. Prognosis depends on the severity of renal disease. Neonates born with severe renal disease may not survive due to pulmonary hypoplasia and insufficiency.

The liver disease in ARPKD is relatively mild in neonatal and early infancy. The severity of disease is known to progress with age. These children develop features of portal hypertension because of chronic liver fibrosis. However as portal hypertension and variceal bleeding are not life-threatening if properly managed, many of these patients survive up to middle age.

# Complications

Complications related to renal structure and functions as discussed above are possible.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients and their families must receive education regarding their condition, disease progression, complications, and management options. Social support to patient and families along the course of treatment and management are the recommendation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional approach and management are essential in the treatment of patients with polycystic kidney disease. Patients may need regular follow up with a neurologist, gastroenterologist, dietitian, nephrologist, radiologist, and pediatrician. Lifelong monitoring for complications is necessary.