# Continuing Education Activity

Pediatric facial trauma includes blunt and penetrating trauma to the structures of the face in patients ages less than 18 years. This article primarily focuses on soft tissue injuries, including the evaluation and acute management, with a focus on pediatric aspects of care. Common injuries such as lacerations and contusions that can be managed by general or emergency medicine providers, as well as more complex injuries requiring specialist evaluation, are discussed. This activity reviews the assessment and treatment of pediatric facial trauma and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and
improving care for pediatric patients with facial trauma.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the presentation of a patient with pediatric facial trauma.
- Identify the physical exam findings associated with pediatric facial trauma.
- Review the management considerations for patients with pediatric facial trauma.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for pediatric patients affected by facial trauma.

# Introduction

Trauma is the leading cause of injury and death in the pediatric population.

Facial trauma ranges from soft tissue, bony, and neurovascular injuries that can be due to any trauma affecting the face, including the eyes, nose, mouth, bones, and skin. In infants and younger pediatric patients, in particular, the relatively larger skull is more likely to be the site of blunt force injury compared to the face. Injury patterns and management in adolescents tend to be similar to young adults.

For this section, pediatrics refers to patients below 18 years of age. Most incidences of isolated pediatric facial trauma are limited to soft tissue, nasal, or dentoalveolar injury.

While facial injuries or often isolated, it is essential always to consider concomitant head or neck trauma. Facial injuries alone are unlikely to be life-threatening, though facial fractures, bleeding, oropharyngeal injuries, and particularly burns may threaten the airway.

This section will focus primarily on pediatric-related care considerations for the initial clinical presentation of soft-tissue facial traumatic injuries as the following topics, among many others, are well addressed in other StatPearls articles:

- Pediatric facial fractures (in preparation at the time of article submission)

- Pediatric abusive head trauma

- Pediatric head trauma.

- Pediatric skull fractures

- Traumatic brain injury

- Pediatric spine trauma

- Neck trauma

- Tooth fracture

- Avulsed tooth

- Complex ear laceration

- Auricular hematoma.

- Tongue laceration

- Penetrating head trauma

- Facial nerve trauma

- Ocular burns.

- Blunt eye trauma

- Globe rupture

- Corneal abrasions

- Eyelid laceration

- Bites, animal

# Etiology

Pediatric facial trauma is most often the result of blunt force (e.g., falls, motor vehicle collision, bicycle injury, sports-related, assault), though penetrating injuries may occur.

Age-related etiology considerations include non-accidental trauma, particularly in infants, accidental self-injurious behavior, suicide attempts, and assaults, which are more common in adolescents, and less frequently occupational exposure or weapons-based injuries.

At birth, the skull is relatively much larger than the face, which grows over time.

Lacerations and contusions are common in young patients when more acutely edged bony structures strike against hard objects, such as the floor, stairs, or furniture, resulting in common presentations of lacerations to the chin, cheek, and forehead (often overlying the lower mandible, zygomatic arch, or superior orbital rim respectively).

**Special Consideration**

Children are at risk of unique facial injuries due to age-related accidental self-injurious behavior. A distinctive oral commissure electrical burn may occur if a young child bites into or sucks on an active electrical cable.

# Epidemiology

Pediatric trauma results in over 11,000 deaths and over 8 million ED visits annually.

Soft tissue injuries to the face are common, with approximately 34 to 92% of facial trauma presentations in children having soft tissue injury, generally contusions or lacerations, and around 15 to 69% having a dental injury.

There are more than 22,000 pediatric dental trauma cases annually, with 10 to 60% of pediatric athletes report having experienced dental trauma at some point.

Many minor facial traumas can be treated in the home without contacting the medical system. Thus there is likely underreporting of facial trauma as care at home or in stand-alone clinics may not be captured in a hospital or systems-based data collection.

Neonates and toddlers generally have an equal gender representation or a slight male bias. However, with increasing age, there is an increasing predominance of male involvement, attaining a case gender ratio of male-to-female 2 to 1 to 4 to 1 by late adolescence.

The cause of injury is highly correlated with age. Overall, 38 to 55% of presentations were due to a fall or play, typically in children under six years of age.

# History and Physical

**History**

The history will dictate both the likely pattern of injuries as well as the level of suspicion for subtle injuries requiring more advanced imaging.

Depending on the type of injury, the patient may complain of head, facial, dental, ocular, or nasal pain, as well as stiffness of the jaw, the sensation of sinus and nasal congestion, epistaxis, loose teeth or subjective malocclusion, hearing loss, cough, tingling or numbness of a portion of the face, vision problems, confusion, or history of loss of consciousness.

It is also essential to gather information regarding the patient’s medical history, medications, allergies, vaccinations, and last oral intake (especially if procedural sedation is anticipated).

**Physical Exam**

The physical exam has extreme importance in pediatric patients relative to adults as younger children may be nonverbal or unable to provide a detailed history. The initial evaluation of any significant traumatic injury should follow advanced trauma life support (ATLS) principles. Extensive facial injuries may be associated with airway compromise, traumatic brain injuries, neck or spinal trauma, or other significant injuries. After completion of the trauma survey and stabilization of the patient, it is crucial to perform a more focused examination of the facial structures.

Even when there is a seemingly isolated injury to the face and ATLS activation is not necessary, a thorough skin and musculoskeletal exam of the body and extremities should be conducted to identify any concurrently sustained traumatic injuries.

After a trauma, the exam benefits from a calm and cooperative pediatric patient. Calming measures such as being held on a parent’s lap, pain control, and anxiolysis or distraction can dramatically improve examination success.

**Musculoskeletal and Skin**

For lacerations or wound exams, note the depth and gently explore for injury to underlying structures, including muscles, tendons, blood vessels, nerves, salivary ducts, and disruption of fascial planes. Visualization of fat in the cheek is concerning for possible nerve or duct injury and should prompt consultation with a facial specialist.

**Eyes**

For cases with no suspected direct trauma to the eyes and no reported or apparent loss of visual acuity, a visual inspection, pupillary response, and assessment of extraocular movement is sufficient.

The eye exam should occur early in the patient’s course because periorbital swelling can become profound, making it difficult to open the eye for evaluation if delayed. Care should be taken to note brisk, equal, and symmetric pupillary response to light, intact extraocular movements, and patient report of grossly normal visual acuity (with corrective glasses if available). The abnormal pupillary response, especially inequality of size, is most urgently concerning for intracranial hemorrhage. The inability of an eye to fully range raises concern for entrapment of the responsible extraocular muscle. The presence of chemosis or subconjunctival hemorrhage concerns for blunt eye injury, which is further addressed in the associated StatPearls article “Blunt Eye Trauma.”

**Ears**

The external exam should evaluate for hematoma or lacerations with exposed cartilage (management of these conditions is discussed in the associated StatPearls articles.

**Nose**

Examination of the nose should focus on swelling, palpation of bony and cartilaginous structures, and whether the nasal bridge appears midline. Providers can compare the exam to patient photos before the injury. Always inspect internally for the presence of a septal hematoma, a foreign body, and bleeding. If epistaxis is ongoing, an attempt to determine location should be made, though traumatic epistaxis is often anterior.

**Mouth**

Examine the lips, mucus membranes, tongue, teeth, and posterior oropharynx. Evaluation for a fracture or dislocation involves evaluation for trismus, bony tenderness, malocclusion, or dental laxity with palpation; gingival tears or ecchymosis may be a subtle sign of underlying mandibular or maxillary fracture. For mucus membrane lacerations, note whether they are deep, gaping, or through-and-through.

# Evaluation

Laboratory studies are generally not indicated in pediatric patients with isolated facial injuries and may cause more pain and anxiety in the younger population.

The initial radiographic study for the evaluation of suspected facial fractures is a computerized tomography (CT). Plain film X-rays can be valuable for dental evaluation. However, if only soft tissue injuries present, there is no indication for further imaging. Similarly, if an isolated nasal fracture is suspected, there is no role for either plain film or urgent CT imaging.

Deep or complex lacerations may warrant consultation with a facial surgical specialist such as plastic surgery, otolaryngology, or maxillofacial surgery.

For patients with any eye complaints or abnormalities on the exam, if there is any concern for globe rupture, no pressure (such as tonometry) should be applied to the eye.

Point of care ocular ultrasound, when performed by an experienced operator, can evaluate for the presence of orbital lens dislocation, vitreous hemorrhage, retinal detachment, and elevated intracranial pressure.

# Treatment / Management

For most pediatric patients with facial soft tissue trauma, particularly isolated contusions or abrasions, it will be sufficient to provide local wound care, ice, rest, and anti-inflammatory pain control. More advanced management strategies are described below.

**Anxiolysis and Pain Control**

While distraction is often the safest and fastest method of anxiolysis and pain control in pediatric trauma patients, pharmacotherapy is often needed for procedures.

**Inhaled and Intranasal Agents**

Inhaled pharmacologic agents such as nitrous oxide can be considered, especially if there are contraindications for intranasal product use, or a brief detailed examination such as the ear, eye, or mouth is needed without sedation in a patient unwilling or unable to cooperate with the exam.

**Topical Agents**

For topical procedures, such as intravenous access or wound care, consider early use of topical local anesthetic agents and allow for adequate time for anesthesia before reassessing. Traditionally a compounded mixture of lidocaine-epinephrine-tetracaine (LET) has been favored for open wounds. Some commercial products have a package-insert prohibition against use on open wounds and are not FDA-approved for open wounds though the evidence for this prohibition is unclear. Commercial agents have been demonstrated to be safe and effective when applied directly to wounds.

**Nerve Blocks**

Nerve blocks are an under-utilized practice to provide anesthesia that relies on fewer needlepoint introductions and smaller volumes of anesthetic agents, especially for laceration repair or dental injuries.

**Antibiotics and Vaccination**

For all open wounds or dental avulsions, confirm the patient’s vaccination status. Tetanus is part of the pediatric vaccine series, so as long as general vaccinations are up to date, then the patient is protected. For well-cleaned wounds requiring closure, systemic antibiotics are not beneficial.

**Lacerations and Wounds**

**Simple Lacerations**

Once pain and anxiety are adequately managed, wounds must be cleaned before any attempt at repair. Copious, high-pressure irrigation minimizes the chance of infection.

Facial sutures should generally remain in place for 3-5 days, at which time they should be reassessed for healing and need for removal if non-absorbable.

For younger children, especially, covering the wound with a sterile dressing can reduce the tendency of the child to touch or irritate the wound directly. There is no conclusive evidence that topical ointments (either sterile petroleum gel or containing topical antibiotics) affect wound healing or infection rates. However, it is unlikely to be harmful, and it is reasonable to apply to closed wounds.

**Dog Bites**

Detailed animal bite management is discussed in the StatPearls article “Bites, Animals.” In general, dog bites to the face should be treated with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid.

**Intraoral Lacerations**

Tongue laceration management is described in the StatPearls article “Tongue Lacerations,” though some pediatric considerations bear mention.

**Wounds that Need a Specialist**

Wounds in highly cosmetic or structurally complex regions may be considered for exploration and closure by a facial or ophthalmologic specialist, either at the bedside or in the operating room. These generally include involvement of the eyelid, injuries to ductal or cartilaginous structures, suspected nerve injuries, and depending on provider comfort, may involve the vermillion border, nasolabial fold, and the ear. Facial wounds may also be closed up to 24 hours after the occurrence, so next-day specialty follow-up for closure can also be considered.

**Nose Soft Tissue Injuries**

Nasal contusions and swelling are primarily treated with the application of ice. Septal hematomas should be drained and packing applied.

**Ear Injuries**

Auricular hematomas should be drained and covered with a pressure dressing.

**Dental Injury**

Management of dental injuries, including fractures and avulsions, is discussed elsewhere.

**Burns**

Evaluation and treatment of burns are covered elsewhere in StatPearls.

**Eye Injuries**

Comprehensive approaches to eye trauma are discussed elsewhere in StatPearls.

# Differential Diagnosis

Facial trauma in children can be associated with additional sites of both minor and severe injury, especially in high-energy blunt force trauma such as motor vehicle collisions. It is also essential to consider high-risk situations that lead to trauma, such as assault or neglect (including lack of supervision leading to self-injurious behavior).

Specific injuries to consider during the evaluation of pediatric facial trauma include:

- Bony Injuries

- Mandibular dislocation
- Facial bone fractures, including sinus involvement
- Skull fractures
- Spinal fractures or cervical instability
- Cartilaginous injuries
- Dental fractures and avulsions

- Wounds

- Lacerations and abrasions, including intraoral
- Penetrating injuries (including stab wounds and gunshot wounds)
- Animal and human bites

- Miscellaneous Injuries

- Contusions and swelling
- Epistaxis
- Septal hematoma
- Auricular hematoma
- Tympanic membrane perforation
- Inhalation injuries
- Burns (including chemical, thermal, electrical)
- Ocular injuries (extra-ocular muscle entrapment, globe rupture, retrobulbar hematoma, corneal abrasion)
- Ductal and glandular injuries
- Nerve injuries
- Vascular injuries
- Psychosocial trauma
- Spinal cord trauma
- Traumatic brain injury and concussion

- Injury Etiologies

- Non-accidental trauma (including shaken baby syndrome)
- Assault (including intimate partner violence)
- Suicide attempt
- Irritant exposure (inhalation injuries)

# Prognosis

The prognosis of most pediatric facial trauma is excellent, especially in the absence of underlying fractures. Even if fractures are present, children have a remarkable ability to remodel bone and rarely have either need for surgical intervention or any lasting bony deformity. The most common sequela is scarring, particularly from burns or lacerations near the lips or around the eyes; generally, this is cosmetic but can have functional deficits. Scarring can be reduced with meticulous daily application of sunscreen to the site of the wound for 6-12 months after suture removal or adhesive dissolution.

# Complications

Complications, listed in approximate order of later presentation:

- Infection (especially burns or animal bites)

- Delayed bleeding (especially electrical cord labial arterial injury)

- Need for advanced dental repair and long term dental issues, including orthodontics

- Scarring and keloid formation

- Delayed psycho-social consequences

- Posttraumatic facial pain

# Deterrence and Patient Education

While trauma is often a matter of chance, preventative and cautionary methods can reduce both the incidence and severity of traumatic injuries that do occur. In all children, this includes strict vigilance and screening for risk of child abuse or unsafe living environments. In older children and adolescents, this expands to include screening for risks of self-harm, intimate partner violence, and involvement in hazardous activities. Similarly, patients of all ages benefit in terms of reduced mortality and morbidity when appropriate vehicle safety restraints are utilized.

# Pearls and Other Issues

**Home Medications and Diet**

A soft or liquid diet with avoidance of food temperature extremes should be recommended to all patients with dental injuries or substantial jaw pain; these patients may also need prescriptions of their standing or home medications in liquid form.

**Follow Up**

Follow up for most traumatic injuries can be managed by a primary care provider, such as a pediatrician. However, some injuries prompt additional specialized aftercare, even if consultations are not needed during the initial evaluation. Oral commissure burns should be re-evaluated by a burn or plastics specialist in the outpatient setting. Injuries to the teeth should be seen in follow-up by a dentist. When follow-up is anticipated and images were obtained (such as CT or x-rays), a copy of the imaging should be provided to the patient’s guardians so that repeat radiography may be avoided when subsequent providers see the patient.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Pediatric facial soft tissue trauma is common, and mild cases are often handled at home or by a general pediatrician or family medicine provider. However, more complex trauma, especially if lacerations or additional bodily sites of injury are involved, is typically managed in and discharged from an emergency department or urgent care. The team consists of the emergency department provider and nurses. If available, a child specialist, additional specialist consultants, as well as social workers may be involved depending on the injury type. Facial injuries are rarely dangerous, but a cohesive team approach is necessary to ensure that no subtle lesions indicative of more severe injuries are missed. So that preventable sequelae such as infections are avoided.

Much of the data presented above is derived from small randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or extensive cohort studies [Oxford CEBM Level of Evidence: Level 2-3]