Heparin enjoys wide use in the hospital setting for several different indications that require specific dosing and administration routes. The use of heparin is a balance between effective anticoagulation to treat or prevent thromboembolism and safety. According to ISMP (Institute for Safe Medication Practices), heparin is in the high-risk medication classification that correlates with a multitude of patient safety errors and has the potential to cause significant harm. Many factors can contribute to potential errors, including dosing, monitoring, adverse effects, and dispensing logistics. To mitigate these potential errors, major safety monitoring organizations and several clinical studies have been conducted to delineate the most effective management standards for hospitals. Collectively, more information available about past errors can influence practice to protect patients in the future.

There are numerous documented heparin errors attributed to manufacturer labeling and the many stock vials and bags available. After fatal errors in the pediatric population, a labeling update was instituted in 2013 to display the total number of units in each heparin vial. Limiting current stock to a standard heparin bag solution and standard vial concentrations for automatic dispensing cabinets may also help to prevent errors.

Dosing of heparin varies from indication, and dosage is by weight. Weight-based dosing offers another area for potential errors with calculations. Whether the initial dose is ordered as a unit/kilogram/hour rate versus a unit/hour versus milliliters/hour can significantly affect the initial dose. Current recommendations are that hospitals have a standard initiation protocol driven by dosing data for each indication.

Monitoring aPTT levels throughout heparin therapy can also offer an area for errors. Protocols are in place to instruct nursing staff on titration instructions based solely on the aPTT level. However, at that time, a new rate must be calculated and titrated based on the instructions on the protocol. These protocols have correlated with an increase in the amount of time that the aPTT is within the therapeutic range, which would improve the outcomes of patients with thromboembolism.

The heparin prescribing information states that dosing and titration often require an interprofessional double check to ensure the correct dose and indication. One study evaluated the use of pharmacist management of heparin that showed significantly fewer errors in the hospitals where pharmacists were managing anticoagulation.

In conclusion, heparin is a high-risk medication that requires many safety barriers to avoid errors and protect patients; this takes an interprofessional team approach in the hospitals consisting of clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), nurses, and pharmacists. [Level 5] It also requires an even greater approach from safety organizations and manufacturing companies.