Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) that remain untreated lead to systemic infections leading to prolonged medical recovery, also include psychological, financial, and general health complications. STIs complications arise from partially treated or untreated infections. Medically underserved populations show an increase in undiagnosed untreated STIs because they have no attainable healthcare system. An increase in complications can be seen if resources are not allocated to the public sector, such as planned parenthood, to provide needed resources to educate people about safe sex practices, including prevention, treatment, and health promotion.

There is a wide array of complications from STIs if left untreated. Females tend to be at higher risk for complications from STIs, including systemic infection from untreated pelvic inflammatory disease, sterility, and infertility from complicated gonorrhea/chlamydial infections. STIs in pregnant females will cause a higher percentage of preterm labor, premature rupture of membranes, newborns with low birth weight, chorioamnionitis, miscarriages, stillbirths, and early infant mortality. Newborns may become infected as the baby is exposed to various infections during passage through the birth canal. Newborns so exposed are at particular risk for lung and eye infections.

Infants born to mothers with untreated syphilis may develop problems in many organ systems, including bones, the brain, ears, eyes, the heart, skin, and teeth.

Females and males have a risk of neoplasm secondary to certain HPV strain types.