**Medications and Portable Oxygen**

Medications used to treat altitude-related conditions are quite specific and often are not a part of EMS formularies.  Both ibuprofen and dexamethasone are used for prophylaxis of altitude illness and in the treatment of symptomatic patients.  Each medicine has met safety standards to use and should be a part of any EMS systems treatment plan and equipment if there is high likelihood of responding to a patient needing evacuation due to altitude-related conditions.  The dosing for ibuprofen is 600mg by mouth every 8 hours whether for treatment or prophylaxis.

**Portable Pressure Bags**

Commercially available portable hyperbaric chambers (Gamow bag) can increase the ambient pressure around a patient and can be useful for the treatment of severe altitude illness.

**Descent**

Descent from altitude is universally considered the primary treatment for any patient with severe or life-threatening altitude-related conditions.  In patients with HAPE or HACE, descent is essential and the only legitimate reason to delay is secondary to a lack of an available method to do so or safety concerns that prevent it.  While patients with acute mountain sickness can usually safely maintained at altitude and only need to halt ascent to acclimatize, any patient with severe symptoms, progressive symptoms, or other concerns that prompted the activation of EMS most likely will require descent.  Absent life-threatening symptoms of HAPE or HACE, the descent, should be considered urgent rather than emergent.  Regardless, absent an available method or because of safety concerns, descent from altitude should be the primary focus of all EMS efforts in any patient with HAPE or HACE. The rapidity and absolute elevation decrease of descent are both of utmost importance when considering the optimal process for evacuation from an EMS perspective.  Descents of as little as 300m are known to be extremely effective in reversing the effects of altitude-related conditions, and a descent of 1000m is usually effective.  A greater degree of descent from altitude is never a problem and is prudent if possible.