Treatment for MGD is defined based on the signs and symptoms. The international workshop on MGD described treatment based on the stage of the disease.

**Stage 1**– The patient should be explained about the disease and the effect of diet, home, or work environment on evaporation of tears. The result of medications taken for any other systemic conditions should also be evaluated. Warm compresses and lid expression are usually sufficient in this stage. Warm compresses aim to apply heat to the lid margins directly. The localized increased temperature leads to the melting of the altered meibomian secretions. With regular adherence to the treatment, symptomatic relief is reported by the patients.

Digital massage of the lids following warm compresses allows expression of the thicker meibum from the glands. This manual expression of altered secretions clears the meibomian gland ducts blockage, allowing the meibomian glands to produce normal secretions. Regular lid hygiene with warm water lid scrubs, with or without local shampoo application, are also recommended to patients.

**Stage 2**– The patient should be advised to optimize the work environment avoid excessive screen time and direct exposure to wind.

Additional treatment options like artificial lubricants, topical antibiotics like azithromycin, the emollient, or liposomal spray should be considered case-to-case basis. Topical 1.0% ophthalmic solution of azithromycin is a broad spectrum, macrolide antibiotic with anti-inflammatory properties. Oil emulsion tear substitutes help improve the lipid layer thickness and thus improve the overall tear film stability.

**Stage 3**– All the above treatments should be considered in this stage. Additionally, topical anti-inflammatory drugs should be considered for treatment in this stage.

**Stage 4**- As symptoms and signs are more severe, additional anti-inflammatory drugs are recommended. Topical anti-inflammatory eye drops like 0.05% cyclosporine A and topical steroids like loteprednol etabonate have shown benefits in reducing inflammation in stage 4 MGD.

**Plus disease**– Targeted treatment might be needed based on a specific condition associated with MGD.

- Ocular surface disease – Pulsed dose of steroids

- Phlyctenular keratitis – Steroids

- Lash trichiasis – Epilation or cryotherapy

- Chalazion – Intralesional steroids or incision and curettage

- Anterior blepharitis – Lid hygiene, warm compresses, topical antibiotic

- Demodex infestation – Tea tree oil scrubs

**Surgical Treatment**

In some patients with severe MGD, if conservative management does not benefit much, alternative measures like the mechanical opening of the terminal ducts and meibum expression play an important role. Probing or electronic heating devices allow the opening of blocked ducts either mechanically or assist in the expression of meibum by heating.

- Intraductal probing is a slit lamp procedure that involves mechanical opening and dilatation of the blocked meibomian gland orifices and ducts.

- Dynamic probing – Syed and Sutula described a modified technique of probing that is done against resistance and has shown benefit in a more significant subset of patients.

- Electronic heating devices – These help by locally raising the temperature of eyelids and thus helping in melting of the inspissated meibum.

- LipiFlow – Several electronic heating devices are now available in the market. LipiFlow (TearScience, Morrisville, NC, USA) has been used widely and proved beneficial. 5098463 This device acts by delivering simultaneous heat to the palpebral conjunctiva of both upper and lower lids. It also helps express the meibomian gland content by providing pressure to the outer eyelid surfaces in a pulsatile manner. LipiFlow treatment has improved meibomian gland secretion, TBUT, increased lipid layer thickness on interferometry.

- MiBo Thermoflow – MiBo thermoflow (MIBO Medical Group, Dallas, TX, USA) is another model of an electronic heating device.

- Intense pulse laser (IPL) therapy – IPL therapy uses a light source that generates wavelengths in the range of 500 to 1200 nm.

- Neurostimulation – Recently, the role of intranasal tear neurostimulation has been advocated for the treatment of dry eyes associated with MGD. The technique is based on neural pathways connecting the nasal mucosa to structures that maintain the tear film. The anterior ethmoidal nerve is stimulated with the help of intranasal prongs, which results in increased tear volume, decreased tear osmolarity, and improved lipid and protein concentration.