There are multiple large venous drainage systems as well as arterial systems supplying the anterolateral abdominal wall. The major arteries of the anterolateral abdominal wall are the superior epigastric, inferior epigastric, musculophrenic, subcostal, and posterior intercostal arteries, deep circumflex iliac artery, superficial circumflex iliac artery, and superficial epigastric artery. The four origins of the arterial supply of the wall are the internal thoracic artery, aorta, external iliac, and femoral artery—the internal thoracic artery branches to the musculophrenic and superior epigastric arteries. The musculophrenic descends along the costal margin and supplies superficial and deep layers of the abdominal wall in the hypochondriac region as well as the anterolateral diaphragm. The superior epigastric artery travels inferiorly through the rectus sheath into the deep rectus abdominis. The aorta is the origin of the tenth and eleventh posterior intercostal arteries and the subcostal artery.

The 10th and 11th posterior intercostal arteries travel past the ribs to descend into the abdominal wall between the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles to supply the lateral superficial and deep lumbar/flank region. The subcostal artery travels the same course as the tenth and eleventh arteries and supplies the same regions. The external iliac artery supplies the inferior epigastric and the deep circumflex arteries. The inferior epigastric arteries travel superiorly and enter the rectus sheath, then travel through the deep rectus abdominis to supply the rectus abdominis muscle, deep abdominal wall of the pubic, and the inferior umbilical regions. The deep circumflex arteries travel through the deep abdominal wall, parallel to the inguinal ligament, then supply the iliacus, the deep inguinal region along the abdominal wall, and the iliac fossa—the femoral artery branches to the superficial circumflex artery as well as the superficial epigastric artery. The superficial circumflex artery travels subcutaneously along the inguinal ligament to supply the superficial abdominal wall of inguinal and anterior thigh regions. The superficial epigastric artery travels subcutaneously towards the umbilicus to supply the superficial abdominal wall of the pubic and inferior umbilical regions.

The venous system consists of a large venous plexus throughout the abdominal wall. The plexus drains superiorly to the internal thoracic vein and lateral thoracic vein. Inferiorly it drains to the superficial and inferior epigastric veins.