Kidney involvement has been well documented in patients with plasma cell disorders secondary to multiple causes such as immunoglobulin-dependent, Ig-independent, glomerulonephritis (GN), and direct parenchymal invasion by the plasma cells. The renal injury is dependent upon the free light chains (FLCs) concentration in the urine. Interestingly, not all the FLCs can cause renal injury, as the FLCs are made of amino acids with different electrical charges creating a different isoelectric point. There is a high risk of precipitation when the pH of the solution reaches the pH of the proteins (amino acids). It has been shown that not all patients with FLCs have renal disease, suggesting the intrinsic property of the FLCs and their nephrotoxicity.

Cast nephropathy is the commonest cause of renal injury in MM, followed by hypercalcemia.

As the filtered monoclonal light chains can cause cast formation, obstruction of the distal tubules can also rupture the tubules in severe cases. The thickening of the basement membranes of the glomerulus and the tubules is seen in MIDD due to the deposition of the filtered immunoglobulin. The monoclonal Ig deposits in the glomerulus can lead to glomerular deposits resembling kimmelsteil-Wilson lesions. Interaction among the immunoglobulin light chains and other proteins results in beta-pleated sheets, thus causing AL. Thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) can result from immunoglobulin-mediated endothelial damage or with the use of chemotherapy. The deposition of monoclonal IgM (larger size when compared to IgG) can result in hyperviscosity syndrome. Likewise, deposition of monoclonal IgA can result in Henoch-Schonlein purpura (HSP) or IgA nephropathy.

It can cause Fanconi syndrome by the formation of crystalline inclusions in the proximal tubules. In vitro, it has been shown that increased distal delivery of sodium chloride can further precipitate THPs and Bence Jones proteins. Thus, loop diuretics contribute to the cast formation by inhibiting sodium-potassium-chloride cotransporter and increasing the distal sodium-chloride delivery.