The epidermal inclusion cyst can be primary or secondary. Primary epidermal cysts arise directly from the infundibulum of the hair follicle. Plugging of the follicular orifice allows for cyst formation. The cyst often communicates with the surface of the skin through a small orifice or visible central punctum. Patients suffering from acne vulgaris have a higher rate of hair follicle disruption and pore blockages leading to a higher rate of epidermal inclusion cyst formation from preexisting comedones. Secondary epidermoid cysts can arise after the implantation of the follicular epithelium in the dermis due to trauma or comedone formation. Epidermoid cysts are lined with stratified squamous epithelium with the accumulation of keratin in the core. Recently, Human papillomavirus and chronic ultraviolet light exposure have been seen to allow epidermal cysts to form.

Additionally, the epidermal inclusion cysts can occur in any area of the body. Most often, they are found on the face, scalp, neck, back, and scrotum. Inclusion cysts found in unusual numbers or locations like the extremities, trunk, or the back of the ears may be seen in the setting of Gardner syndrome. Gardner syndrome or familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) with extracolonic manifestations is an autosomal dominant inherited disease due to a mutation in the APC gene on chromosome 5. The cardinal clinical feature is innumerable, widespread colonic polyps in conjunction with extracolonic lesions. In this disease process, the epidermal cysts will often appear before the onset of puberty and may even precede the onset of colonic polyposis.