It is worth reading the original description of the maneuver as described by Mr. Crigler as read before the Section on Ophthalmology at the New York Academy of Medicin on February 19, 1923, and subsequently published in the JAMA in the same year:

"The infant's head is held between the surgeon's knees in a manner similar to the method in vogue of inspecting the eyeball. Assuming that it is the right sac that is affected, he places his right thumb over the sac in a way to shut off the return flow through the puncta. This is done by holding the thumb sidewise, with the thumbnail outward and forming an acute angle with the plane of the iris. The edge of the thumb is now pressed down over the puncta, compress¬ ing it against the rim of the orbit; with this point of pressure maintained, the thumb is rotated to the right, at the same time pressing downward, abruptly, over the sac. The fluid, now being compressed by the thumb, transmits the pressure to the walls of the sac, which must give way at its weakest point, which happens to be the site of the nasal opening. Repeated cures after one manipulation of this sort, and no failures so far, extending over a period of seven years, convince me that the probe should never be resorted to except as a last resort. The salient points to be remembered are : (1) Pressure must be made over the sac only when it is distended; (2) care should be taken that the thumb is applied in such a way as to prevent régurgitation into the conjunctival sac, and (3) sudden pressure over the sac causes the retained fluid to burst through the persistent fetal membrane which separates the mucous lining of the nose from that of the nasal duct."

Kushner describes the hydrostatic massage technique as follows, "The technique consists of placing the index finger over the common canaliculus to block the exit of material through the lacrimal punctum and of stroking downward firmly to increase hydrostatic pressure within the nasolacrimal sac." **Figure 1**He asked the parents to perform this with four to five strokes and four times a day. He treated his patients with this massage up to the time when the patient was six months old.

Our modification of the technique: We have found it best to massage both sides even if the tearing is only on one side as it makes it convenient to massage both lacrimal sacs with a pressure exerted downward by using the thumb on one side and the forefinger on the other side of the nose, over the respective lacrimal sacs. This is best performed with a fed child sitting on mum or dad's lap. We ask the parents to perform five to ten "strokes" four times a day. Although there is no agreement in the literature as to how long it should be done, we institute it at the first appointment and review the children every three to four months. **(Video)**