Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and their modifiers are invaluable to the formation of the kidney, especially BMP4, expressed in the mesenchyme surrounding the nephric duct, and BMP7, expressed in the metanephric mesenchyme and ureteric buds.

The ureteric bud expresses Hoxb, and the metanephric mesenchyme expresses the transcription factors Six2 (a marker for self-renewing nephron progenitors) and Cited 1. FGF2 and BMP7 are essential for the proliferation of metanephric mesenchyme and the production of WT1. As such, deletions in the Fgfr2 receptor produce small kidneys, anomalous branching of the ureteric bud, scant nephrons, and defective stromal mesenchymal patterns.

WT1, expressed by mesenchyme of the metanephric blastema, regulates the production of glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) by the mesenchyme, which then stimulates the branching and growth of the ureteric bud from the mesonephric duct. RET, the tyrosine kinase receptor for GDNF, and MET, the receptor for HGF, are synthesized by the epithelium of ureteric buds to stimulate its growth.

Upregulation of PAX2 and WNT4 by WNT9B and WNT6 promotes the condensation of the mesenchyme and epithelialization into tubules of condensed mesenchyme, respectively. Wnt signaling is essential for Müllerian duct development, differentiation, and regression, and WNT4 has been deemed the ovary-determining gene. In both males and females, WNT4 and the autosomal gene SOX9 are expressed in the gonadal ridges.

SRY and/or SOX9 induce the secretion of FGF9 by the testes that promote the penetration of the gonadal ridge by the tubules of the mesospheric duct. SOX9 becomes upregulated by SRY and activates expression of SF1 (steroidogenesis factor 1), stimulating differentiation of the Sertoli and Leydig cells.

Interaction of SOX9 and SF1 is essential to raise the concentration of AMH to cause regression of the Müllerian ducts. WNT4 upregulates DAX1, whose role is to suppress SF1 transcriptional activity, inhibiting the function of SOX9; thus, in females, ovaries will develop from the inhibited expression of SOX9 and is not just a passive ‘default’ process.

Lastly, sonic hedgehog (Shh) becomes expressed in the genital tubercle, and its signaling is implicated in the formation of the penis.