The timing of treatment initiation for HIV-1 infection has been a topic of much research and discussion among physicians. Current recommendations are that HAART should be initiated within seven days of a confirmed HIV diagnosis and detectable virology, regardless of CD4 count or clinical symptoms. Early HAART initiation, vs. waiting for CD4 counts to decline as were the previous recommendations, has been shown to reduce severe AIDS and AIDS-associated illnesses.

Many of these medications are administered orally, once a day, in a co-formulated combination tablet. However, some medications are not yet in combination formulas, thus creating a large pill burden for patients who require a regimen of three or four drugs twice daily. The increased number of pills can decrease patient adherence, particularly for patients in resource-limited settings, patients with dysphagia, or patients who struggle with the financial burden of a HAART regimen. For patients who have dysphagia or trouble swallowing for any reason, there are liquid preparations or crushable tablets, though dosages may need to be adjusted. The Food and Drug Administration has recently been approving medications containing two or three-drug, a fixed-dose regimen in a single tablet. Combination medications with once-daily dosing are preferred as these regimens have been shown to increase patient compliance up to three times over more complex dosing regimens.

The dosages and preferred regimens may be adjusted based on various factors, including concomitant use of CYP inducers/inhibitors, renal or hepatic impairment, baseline resistance, childbearing potential, and comorbid conditions such as cardiovascular disease, hepatitis B, or tuberculosis. The healthcare professional should ensure they have a detailed patient history to review options for each patient’s distinct condition before selecting a HAART combination.