**Malaria**

The Plasmodium parasite transmitted by the female Anopheles mosquito leads to characteristic cyclical fevers. There are five species of Plasmodium; Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium ovale, Plasmodium vivax, Plasmodium malariae, and Plasmodium knowlesi. Symptoms may be similar to trench fever, such as headache, malaise, weakness, gastrointestinal distress, and muscle aches. However, there may be distinguishing traits in severe cases, including jaundice, confusion, seizures, and dark urine. If this diagnosis is recognized, the gold standard for diagnosis is a microscopic evaluation of Giemsa-stained thick and thin smears of a blood sample.

**Typhus**

This is caused by Salmonella typhi and Salmonella paratyphi. Symptoms consist of nausea and vomiting, which may progress to diffuse abdominal pain, bloating, anorexia, and diarrhea with or without blood. This disease may also result in bacteremia. If typhoid fever is suspected, blood cultures should be obtained.

**Relapsing Fever**

Patients typically present with symptoms of recurrent fevers, chills, and malaise. This is caused by a spirochete known as Borrelia recurrentis, and diagnosis may be made via Giemsa-stained blood films, serologic analysis, or PCR.

**Leptospirosis**

The anicteric presentation can have similar symptoms to trench fever, such as headache, cough, non-pruritic rash, fever, rigors, muscle pain, anorexia, and diarrhea. The icteric presentation, also known as Weil's disease, may present with renal failure, jaundice, hemorrhage, and respiratory distress. This disease should be considered and diagnosed by specialized culture or microscopic agglutination test (only available at the CDC in Atlanta).

**Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (RMSF)**

Initial symptoms include fever, headaches, and rash, which is typically petechial but can also be maculopapular. The differentiating feature from trench fever is the rash’s progression, which is usually extremities to the trunk. Other symptoms can include lymphadenopathy, and central nervous system changes, mainly confusion or nuchal rigidity, myalgias and arthralgias, hepatitis, gastrointestinal distress, and cardiovascular instability. RMSF is diagnosed by immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) serology.