One of the direst neurologic presentations, locked-in syndrome, is resultant from thrombosis of the proximal and middle portions of the BA, sparing the pontine tegmentum.

Transient partial ischemia of the posterior circulation due to decreased VB blood flow is known as VB insufficiency and may be classified as a transient ischemic attack if symptoms resolve within 24 hours. Vertigo is often the only symptom of VB insufficiency, although patients may also develop diplopia or suffer from drop attacks (sudden fall without a loss of consciousness).

Vertebral artery dissections result from a tear in the tunica intima of the VA, leading to blood accumulation within the tunica media. The blood eventually thromboses within the arterial wall, causing the stenosis of the VA and increasing the risk of embolic stroke. Dissections may be traumatic or spontaneous, with spontaneous dissections associated with connective tissue disorders, including Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV and Marfan syndrome.

The subclavian steal phenomenon is resultant from the redundancy of the VB system. Proximal stenosis of the subclavian artery by atherosclerosis, a cervical rib, or Takayasu arteritis results in a high resistance path to blood flow through the subclavian artery. The low resistance distal to the occlusion leads to retrograde blood flow down the ipsilateral VA to the affected upper extremity and diminished blood supply to the posterior circulation.

Diagnostic evaluation of the VB system can be performed via several imaging modalities. Doppler ultrasonography was the initial technique used to assess the patency of the extracranial segments of the VAs, although it is unable to visualize the origin of the VAs in some patients.