The cause of this condition is primarily by the prolonged use (more than 7 to 10 days) of topical nasal decongestant. However, intranasal cocaine use has also been reported to cause a similar condition.

**Physiology of Nasal Congestion**

The nasal mucosa vascular system can divide into resistance vessels (arterioles) which are predominantly regulated by alpha-2 adrenoreceptors, and capacitance vessels (venous plexus) regulated by both alpha-1 and alpha-2 adrenoreceptors. Stimulation of these receptors leads to the decongestants effect;  where there is vasoconstriction of the large venous sinusoids and collecting veins, leading to decreased blood flow and subsequently decreased nasal edema and rhinorrhoea.

Contributing factors of nasal congestion include parasympathetic nervous system stimulation, the release of local mediators including mast cells, eosinophils, basophils; which subsequently stimulates the release of histamine, tryptase, kinins, prostaglandins, and leukotrienes, inducing an overall change in nasal resistance and capacitance vessels.

**Topical Nasal Decongestants**

Topical nasal decongestants can classify as either beta-phenylethylamine derivatives or imidazoline derivatives. Beta-phenylethylamine derivatives mimic the effects of the sympathetic nervous system stimulation by producing vasoconstriction via the activation of alpha-1 adrenoreceptors. Rebound vasodilation may occur due to weak affinity towards beta–adrenoreceptors. Imidazolines, on the other hand, produces its effect mainly via alpha-2  adrenoreceptors. This difference in adrenoreceptor sensitivity makes the imidazoline agents more effective at decreasing mucosal blood flow due to its vasoconstrictive effect to both capacitance and resistance vessels in the nasal mucosa.

Comparatively, imidazole group demonstrates a more potent and longer-acting effect. For example, 0.1% xylometazoline hydrochloride works within a few minutes and lasts up to 10 hours, while 1% phenylephrine works within 15 to 20 minutes with effects lasting 2 to 4 hours.

**Types of intranasal decongestant**(adrenoreceptor activity)

- **Beta-phenylethylamine derivatives**
- Ephedrine HCl (alpha-1, alpha-2, beta-1, beta-2) 
- Phenylephrine HCl (alpha-1)

- **Imidazoline derivatives**(primarily alpha-2 agonists)
- Naphazoline HCl  
- Oxymetazoline HCl 
- Xylometazoline HCl

**Benzalkonium chloride (BKC)**

A common antimicrobial preservative benzalkonium chloride (BKC) used in the topical nasal preparations has correlations with exacerbation of RM, as it may increase the risk of developing RM by inducing mucosal swelling.