The most common cause of infectious scleritis is Pseudomonas spp, with Pseudomonas aeruginosa being the most frequent. This pathogen uses collagenases to destroy the scleral tissue.Staphylococcus aureus causes localized scleral thinning and inverse hypopyon.Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) has also been noted in cases of post-surgical infectious scleritis, incorrectly diagnosed as Pseudomonas. Streptococcus has been noted in patients with simultaneous cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary infections. Additional predisposing factors are the use of radiation and mitomycin C.

Several cases due to S. pneumoniae were refractory to antibiotics and resulted in enucleation, suggesting an aggressive form of infectious scleritis. Gram-negative bacilli are another common cause of infectious scleritis. One patient with a gram-negative bacilli infection presented with a mass over an area of the sclera, which was discovered by ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) 18 years after pterygium surgery. Other reported etiologic agents for infectious scleritis are Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Klebsiella, Rhodtrula, and other Mycobacterial infections in the immunocompromised.

Fungal infectious scleritis has a worse outcome compared to bacterial or viral scleritis. Poor outcomes for fungal scleritis may be explained by the following:

- Fungal infections take longer to diagnose than bacterial infections.

- Antifungals have poor penetration into the sclera.

- Fungal infections are more aggressive.

A majority of cases progress to the evisceration of the eye.Nocardia is classified with fungal scleritis because the findings are more similar to fungal scleritis than bacterial scleritis. Additionally, fungal etiology should be considered in developing countries. The study hypothesized that fungal infections are more likely to occur in hot/arid climates, allowing for a higher presence in the soil, and are due to inciting factors of trauma or surgery. Signs of fungal scleritis include full-thickness corneal inflammation with scleral lesions, rapidly progressive cataracts, and serous retinal detachment.Nocardia, Psuedallescheria boydii, and Paecilomyces lilacinus. Aspergillus was noted to be found in a patient with a history of intravenous drug use (IVDA). Scedosporium is another fungal vector.

Other forms of infectious scleritis result from viruses and parasites. Among the parasites, the most notable is Toxoplasma gondii. In one study, patients with this pathogen had retinochoroiditis and were immunosuppressed on the diagnosis.