The production of X-ray images is a complex process that uses electromagnetic radiation. X-rays are high-frequency energy waves that penetrate through the body or the target organ and are either absorbed, reflected off, or traversed through the body. The X-ray tube, which produces the X-ray, is composed of a cathode and an anode. The cathode is a tungsten filament, which is heated during the process by electricity and ultimately produces electrons that travel through the tube to the target (anode). Once the high-speed electrons hit the target, producing X-rays in the form of photons.

X-rays are primarily regulated by the kVp, mA setting, and exposure time. Image production can be individualized by manipulating these three factors to produce the best image.

Once the patient is positioned in the right spot with the anatomic target in place, X-rays pass through the body, and remnant rays strike the image receptor located behind the patient. The image receptor may be a charged electron device used in digital radiography, a photosensitive phosphor plate used in computed radiography, or a conventional film screen. In conventional radiography, X-rays pass through the body and hit a film screen receptor, a transparent film composed of a silver bromide crystal emulsion spread between polyester base sheets. Once it strikes the film, the crystals fluoresce and produce a latent image. A latent image needs further processing for it to be visible. Although it is invisible to the naked eye, it is now more sensitive to chemicals used to produce the image. After using these chemicals called developers, a process of fixation, washing, and drying takes place to create an image. In computed radiography, X-rays strike a photosensitive phosphor plate, and the resulting electrons in the phosphor particles are placed in a high-energy state, producing a latent image. The latent image is processed and scanned via lasers to develop a visible image. Digital radiography uses different chemical elements to interact with X-rays. The latent image is produced in the form of electric signals, which are directly transferred to a computer to create an image in real-time. Digital radiography is the latest advancement in image production and is currently preferable to other modalities due to its efficiency and improved quality.

There are several things to consider when evaluating an image. The contrast of an image gets produced by the difference in tissue density displayed on a radiograph, and it can thus be manipulated to distinguish an area of interest. Contrast is dependent on the film density, film processing, curve of the film, and the use of intensifying screens. The density is the amount of light transmitted through the film and measures the degree of film darkening. Distortion of the image can depend on the size, shape, and position of the target structure within the body. Identification markers serve to differentiate the location, type of image, position, and orientation of the image. These markers are necessary to identify and analyze the anatomical structures correctly. Awareness of these factors is essential when evaluating radiographic images.