Treatment of chronic intracranial hypertension is mainly focused on treating and reversing the etiology.

A sudden increase in ICP is a neurosurgical emergency, requiring close monitoring in an intensive care unit (ICU) setting. For acute intracranial hypertension, a patient should first be stabilized with healthcare providers aiming for hemodynamic stability, and preventing and treating factors that may aggravate or precipitate intracranial hypertension. These patients should have close monitoring of heart rate, blood pressure, body temperature, ventilation and oxygenation, blood glucose, input and output, and ECG. Patients with suspected intracranial hypertension, especially with severe traumatic brain injury, should also have ICP monitoring.

It is vital to prevent and treat factors that may aggravate or precipitate intracranial hypertension. These interventions are used to buy time until the underlying etiology is identified and corrected.

- Keep the head elevated to 30 degrees and neutrally positioned to minimize venous outflow resistance and improve cerebral spinal fluid displacement from the intracranial to the spinal compartment.

- Hypoxia and hypercapnia can increase ICP. Controlling ICP through optimal respiratory management is crucial. It is essential to control ventilation to maintain a normal partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) and maintain adequate oxygenation without increasing the PEEP.

- Agitation and pain can increase blood pressure and ICP. Adequate sedation and analgesia is an important adjunctive treatment. Since most sedating medications can have effects on blood pressure, medications with a minimal hypotensive effect should be preferred. Hypovolemia can precipitate the hypotensive side effects and should be treated before administering sedative agents. Shorter-acting agents have the advantage of allowing brief interruption of sedation to evaluate neurological status.

- Fever can increase brain metabolic rate and is a potent vasodilator, which in turn increases the cerebral blood flow and leads to an increased ICP. Fever should be controlled with antipyretics and cooling blankets and infectious causes must be ruled out.

- Elevated blood pressure is commonly seen in patients with intracranial hypertension especially when due to traumatic brain injury. In patients with untreated intracranial mass lesions, cerebral perfusion is maintained by the higher blood pressure, and systemic hypertension should not be treated. The absence of an intracranial mass lesion presents a more individualized, controversial decision when treating systemic hypertension. When antihypertensive drugs are used, the preferred treatment includes beta-blockers like labetalol and esmolol or calcium channel blockers because they reduced blood pressure without affecting ICP. Agents with short half-lives should be preferred. Avoid vasodilators like sodium nitroprusside, nitroglycerin, and nifedipine.

- Seizures can contribute to and complicate elevated ICP and should be prevented by prophylactic medications, especially in severe traumatic brain injuries.

For patients with sustained intracranial hypertension, additional measures are needed to control the ICP.

- Emergent surgical management should be considered when there is sudden intracranial hypertension or refractory to medical management.

- Nondepolarizing muscle relaxants along with sedatives may be used to treat intracranial hypertension caused by posturing, coughing, or agitation. When a neuromuscular blockade is used, EEG should be monitored to rule out convulsive states.

- Hyperosmolar therapy is used for severe, acute intracranial hypertension.

Mannitol is commonly used as a hyperosmolar agent and is usually given as a bolus of 0.25 to 1 g/kg body weight. Serum osmolality should be kept less than 320 mOsm to avoid side effects of therapy like renal failure, hypokalemia, and hypo-osmolarity.

Hypertonic saline can also create an osmotic shift from the interstitial space of brain parenchyma into the intravascular compartment in the presence of an intact blood-brain barrier. Hypertonic saline has an advantage over mannitol for hypovolemic and hypotensive patients. The adverse effects of hypertonic saline administration include hematological and electrolyte abnormalities. Hyponatremia should be excluded before administering hypertonic saline to reduce the risk of central pontine myelinolysis.

- Hyperventilation can be used for a rapid reduction in ICP if there are clinical signs of herniation or with severe intracranial hypertension. Hyperventilation decreases PaCO2 which causes vasoconstriction of cerebral arteries, resulting in reduced cerebral blood flow and reduced intracranial pressure.

- Barbiturate coma should be considered for patients with refractory intracranial hypertension.

- Routine induction of hypothermia is not indicated; however, moderate hypothermia may be an effective adjunctive treatment for increased ICP refractory to other medical management.

- Steroids are commonly used for primary and metastatic brain tumors to decrease vasogenic cerebral edema. For other neurosurgical disorders like traumatic brain injury or spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage, steroids have not been shown to benefit and sometimes may even be detrimental.

**Surgical Interventions**

- Resection of intracranial mass lesions producing elevated ICP should be done as soon as possible.

- CSF drainage lowers ICP immediately by reducing intracranial volume. This modality can be an important adjunct treatment for lowering ICP. However, it has limited utility when the brain is diffusely swollen and the ventricles are collapsed.

- Decompressive craniectomy is used to treat severe uncontrolled intracranial hypertension. It involves surgical removal of part of the calvaria to create a window in the skull, allowing for herniation of swollen brain through the bone window to relieve pressure.