NSAIDs are commonly used in the management of pain and are frequently associated with side effects. Acetaminophen is associated with hepatic injury, and its use should be limited in patients with underlying hepatic impairment. Other NSAIDs like ibuprofen and ketorolac can lead to severe gastrointestinal side effects, including hemorrhage, ulceration, and perforation. Their prolonged use should be accompanied by proton pump inhibitors for prophylaxis. NSAIDs increase the risk for stroke, myocardial infarction, and renal failure.

Opiates can be associated with overdoses with grave consequences. Lethargy and depressed level of consciousness is the commonest symptom of overdose. Respiratory depression can ensue if the overdose is not countered in time. Respiratory distress, hypoxia, cardiovascular compromise from hypotension are other signs of opiate overdose. In case of a suspected overdose, Naloxone, a pure competitive antagonist of opiate receptor, should be used. It can be dosed subcutaneously or from the intravenous, intramuscular, intranasal, or endotracheal route. Dosage is 0.4 mg to 1 mg in adults. If the patient continues to show signs of toxicity, a dose may be repeated after 3 to 8 minutes, which corresponds to the time to peak effect.

Opioid-induced hyperalgesia (OIH) involves increased sensitivity to pain, with the diffuse extension of pain despite an escalation of opiate dose. It is thought to result from neuroplastic changes to the peripheral and central nervous system leading to sensitization of pain pathways. NMDA receptor activation has been thought to be a predominant mechanism for OIH. It is more often seen in association with morphine and hydromorphone. Treatment is focused primarily on reducing the dose of the opioids, switching the opioid class. The addition of NMDA receptor modulators like ketamine, methadone, and buprenorphine has also been suggested.

Severe constipation can be associated with opiate use due to delayed gastric emptying and peristalsis in the GI tract. Increased fiber in diet and fluid intake can help counter constipation. Methylnaltrexone bromide, a peripherally acting opiate antagonist which does not cross the blood-brain barrier, can be used to treat opiate-induced constipation.