Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide and is responsible for approximately 20% of all deaths in the United States. CAD is due to underlying atherosclerosis, which leads to plaque formation in the lumen of coronary arteries. The actual frequency of atherosclerosis cannot be precisely determined as it is mostly asymptomatic until the late stages. It starts early in childhood and develops fatty streaks over time. More advanced and complicated lesions are present in individuals in the fifth or sixth decade of life. In the United States, approximately 14 million individuals experience CAD and its complications, including post-myocardial infarction heart failure (HF) being the most common one.

According to 2009 epidemiology data, around 785,000 Americans suffered their first AMI, while 470,000 Americans had a recurrent MI. An estimated 195,000 "silent" heart attacks occur each year. About every 34 seconds, an American will have an AMI. In developed countries, the incidence of AMI is similar to that observed in the United States. The frequency of symptomatic CAD in ethnic immigrant populations in the United States approaches that of the white population, which supports the role of environmental factors. In France, the Mediterranean diet with the use of alcohol and its possible HDL-raising benefit, and the predominant use of monosaturated fatty acids (canola oil or olive oil) and omega-3 fatty acids, leads to a lower risk of atherogenesis with the said factors.