Cardiovascular, anticholinergic, and neurologic manifestations are common. Vital signs may be abnormal. The patient may not be able to protect his or her airway. Respiratory depression may occur. Sinus tachycardia is commonly present due to anticholinergic toxicity, but more dangerous tachydysrhythmias and even bradycardia with or without heart block can occur. Hypotension can occur due to dehydration, cardiac toxicity, and alpha-adrenergic blockade. The patient may often demonstrate anticholinergic toxicity, such as fever, dilated pupils, dry mouth, dry, warm skin, decreased bowel sounds, and altered mental status. The patient may be agitated or seizing, or the patient may have decreased mental status, and may even become comatose. An EKG should be obtained early in the management of these patients, and any evidence of sodium and/or potassium channel blockade should be promptly addressed. Prolongation of QRS, due to sodium channel blockade of more than 100 milliseconds, is predictive of seizures while QRS > 160 milliseconds is predictive of arrhythmia. An R/S ratio in AVR of 0.7 or more and an R wave in the AVR lead more than 3 mm is strongly predictive of seizures and arrhythmias. In addition to basic lab investigations, including levels of possible co-investments, such as acetaminophen and aspirin, a CT scan of the head to rule out other causes of altered mental status should be done if clinically indicated. It should be noted that TCA levels do not correlate with toxicity, but may be helpful in diagnosing an unknown overdose when the clinical symptoms and signs point to a possible TCA ingestion. Any sign of toxicity warrants admission in an intensive care setting for at least 24 hours. Asymptomatic patients should be continuously monitored for signs of toxicity, changes in vital signs, and EKG for at least 6 hours.