Vitamin B5 (pantothenic acid) supplements are not subject to initial review by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The agency does not have the authority to examine dietary supplement products for safety and effectiveness prior to marketing. Out of all the drugs listed in this indications section, only panthenol and dexpanthenol are approved by the FDA for use in cosmetics. All other indications listed are non-FDA approved.

Vitamin B5 is a naturally occurring substance found in various plants and animals (i.e., eggs, milk, vegetables, beef, chicken, and whole grains). It is also artificially added to foods. B5 deficiency is generally rare since the vitamin is present in many foods. However, it can present in people with severe malnutrition. An individual with vitamin B5 deficiency commonly has deficiencies in other nutrients, which can make it challenging to identify the effects that are specific to vitamin B5 deficiency. An experimental vitamin B5 deficiency study associated the deficiency with symptoms such as fatigue, headache, malaise, personality changes, numbness, muscle cramps, paresthesia, muscle/ abdominal cramps, nausea, and impaired muscle coordination.

Individuals with a mutation in their pantothenate kinase 2 (PANK2) gene are likely to have a pantothenic acid inadequacy as well. Enough PANK2 mutations reduce the activity of pantothenate kinase 2, which can potentially decrease the conversion of pantothenic acid to coenzyme A (CoA) and lead to reduced CoA levels. PANK2 gene mutations also cause pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN). A common hallmark of individuals with PKAN is an accumulation of iron in the brain that forms a pattern called the "eye of the tiger" sign.

The usage of vitamin B5 is prevalent within the field of dermatology. There is a growing interest in the various effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).

Clinical studies have shown the evaluation of dexpanthenol in wound healing applications. These small clinical trials used the drug as a pastille and or spray to heal wounds in postoperative endotracheal intubation, endoscopic sinus surgery, and tonsillectomy.

Dyslipidemia is another field that can potentially use vitamin B5. Since vitamin B5 is essential for the biosynthesis of coenzyme A, it plays a role in the metabolism of lipids. One study concluded that pantethine (a derivate of vitamin B5) lowered cardiovascular disease risk markers in low to moderate-risk participants.

Pantothenate deficiency can play a vital role in Ach deficiency, neurodegeneration, myelin loss, and age-related dementias like Huntington disease.