Modern anesthesia machines have become more complex over the decades, incorporating an array of safety features, alarms, and displayed messages enhancing user-friendliness.  Despite these advances, the machine is still prone to user error and thus requires the attention and focus of all operating room personnel in anticipation of a dreaded scenario of failure to oxygenation/ventilate or anesthesia awareness. Although an understanding of the intricate workings of the anesthesia machine is not a requirement of all operating room staff, familiarity and awareness of components of the machine may help provide a safer anesthetic to the patient.

Healthcare team awareness of the location of a bag-valve-mask or self-inflating bag to hand off to the anesthesia provider can provide a temporary means of oxygenation and ventilation until anesthesia machine issues are resolved if the machine fails.  Familiarity with the flaws of a low-pressure, circle-circuit anesthesia machine that is complex and prone to leaks may allow for greater confidence in nursing and allied health professionals to point out when a tube is disconnected so the anesthesia provider can quickly resolve issues to prevent unnecessary adverse outcomes.  With the emphasis on faster turn-over times between cases, it can be easy for operating room staff to forget that the anesthesia machine is the most important piece of equipment in the operating room. Failure of its proper function can lead to hypoxia and death or anoxic brain injury in a matter of minutes.  Although routine, anesthesia providers must have the time they need to check the machine and ensure its proper functioning before the arrival of a patient to the operating room so concerns and issues can be addressed safely and effectively.