Methacholine challenge testing is a form of non-specific bronchoprovocation and is useful in patients with a questionable diagnosis of asthma. Baseline spirometry should be normal, and an atypical history that may be suggestive of asthma should prompt evaluation for testing. The test has high sensitivity and a strong negative predictive value, helpful in excluding a diagnosis of asthma. Positive test results may suggest asthma. However, other conditions that may produce false-positive test results merit consideration. Positive testing in otherwise asymptomatic patients can be seen in up to 7% of the population and is believed to be normal with hyperreactive airways, which may also be indicative of the future development of clinical asthma and requires follow-up. In patients with a clinical history suggestive of asthma, with negative testing, alternate diagnoses should be considered, such as vocal cord dysfunction, occupational asthma, or central airway obstruction (i.e., tumor, polyp, or foreign body) as these conditions may clinically imitate asthma. Full inspiratory and expiratory phase flow volume loop analysis is important when paradoxical vocal cord motion is suspected. In patients with a history suggestive of asthma with positive testing, response to therapy merits close observation. Baseline spirometry that shows a pattern of airway obstruction (i.e. low FEV1/FVC ratio and low FEV1) may be difficult to interpret as hyperresponsiveness strongly correlates to the baseline level of obstruction, and strong bronchodilator response of more than 12% and 200 mL in either FEV1 or FVC likely establishes the diagnosis without the need for methacholine challenge.