The diagnostic management of OSA follows three steps: clinical interview, physical examination and sleep diagnostic tests.

According to the recommendations, physician assessment should include evaluation of risk factors and common presenting symptoms for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). The best-documented risk factor is obesity.

Routine laboratory tests usually are not helpful in OSA in the absence of a specific indication. A thyrotropin test should be performed on any patient with possible OSA who has other signs or symptoms of hypothyroidism, particularly in elderly individuals.

Polysomnography is the gold standard for OSA diagnosis but is expensive and time-consuming.

Several questionnaires have been designed to identify patients at risk for OSA. The Berlin Questionnaire is a screening test that identifies 82.03% of the subjects as being at high risk of sleep apnea and 17.9% as being at low risk. In adults, an instrument derived from eight easily administered questions called the STOP-Bang questionnaire had been shown to stratify the risk of OSA, with a negative predictive value of 93% for moderate OSA and 96% for severe OSA. A comparison of five questionnaires – STOP, STOP-Bang, Berlin Questionnaire, Epworth Sleepiness Scale and four variable screening tool for stratifying risk of OSA show more sensitivity and less specificity for STOP-Bang (97.6 to 12.7%) and Berlin questionnaire (87 to 33%), and more specificity for the four variable screening tool (74.4%) and the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (67%).

Polysomnography (PSG): Involves simultaneous recording of physiologic variables during sleep like Electroencephalogram, Electro-oculogram, Chin electromyogram, electrocardiogram, respiratory effort, airflow, oxygenation, ventilation, snoring.

A PSG is necessary to diagnose OSA accurately and to assess treatment benefit. The duration of the diagnostic study should be at least six hours.

The following PSG findings are characteristic of OSA:

- Apneic episodes occur in the presence of respiratory muscle effort.

- Apneic episodes lasting 10 seconds or longer are considered clinically significant.

- Patients may have a combination of apneas and hypopneas, or they may have one or the other exclusively.

- Mixed apneas may occur.

The apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) is derived from the total number of apneas and hypopneas divided by the total sleep time.

Recommendations for cutoff levels on AHI include five-15 episodes per hour for mild, 15-30 episodes per hour for moderate, and more than 30 episodes per hour for severe.

Daytime sleepiness is also a main indication for the treatment of sleep apnea.