- **Venous Ulcers:**It is caused by chronic elevation of venous pressure leading to incompetent valves. Venous blood from deep veins refluxes into superficial veins causing varicose veins and lower limb edema.Leakage of plasma proteins and leukocytes causing edema and free radical damage to the tissue resulting in ulcer formation. The most common locations are the pretibial area and above the medial malleolus. Usually, a shallow ulcer with irregular borders and overlying fibrinous exudate is present.

- **Diabetic Dermatopathy:**These are purplish, round asymptomatic lesions that usually occur in the lower extremities but can be present anywhere on the body of diabetic patients. These lesions usually require no intervention.

- **Malignancy:-**Different malignancies can present as cutaneous ulcers but systemic signs and symptoms ( fever, weight loss, malaise, etc) are also usually present. The diagnosis can be confirmed by microscopic examination of the biopsy specimen.

- **Superficial Thrombophlebitis:**Characterized by pain, erythema, tenderness overlying inflamed and thrombosed superficial veins.

- **Leukocytoclastic Vasculitis:**Inflammation of blood vessels and surrounding tissues caused by the deposition of immune complexes.

- **Gouty Arthritis:**Monosodium urate crystal deposits in joints can result in inflammation, usually associated with hyperuricemia.

- **Infection:**Primary infectious ulcer results either by direct inoculation or systemic spread. Clinical features vary with the types of infection.

- **Sickle Cell Disease:**Sickle cell disease can result in painful leg ulcers commonly on medial and lateral malleoli.

- **Drugs:-**Some drugs e.g, warfarin, heparin, hydroxyurea can result in ulcer formation.