While there are multiple adverse effects of foscarnet, the most notable ones are nausea associated with the infusion of the drug, electrolyte derangements, and reduced renal function. Of these three significant adverse effects, the reports of renal insufficiency is a relatively more common event in patients receiving this drug. The acute decrease in renal function is reversible; therefore, it is crucial to address it once identified. Foscarnet affects the renal tubular cells via direct cytotoxic mechanisms, and the degree of drug-induced toxicity directly correlates to the dosage administered.

Due to these adverse effects on the renal system, monitoring renal function while on foscarnet therapy is essential. Within 1 to 2 weeks of administration of foscarnet, if there appears to be a rise in the plasma creatinine, then it could be a sign of renal tubular injury; this often presents as acute tubular necrosis, with granular or muddy brown casts in the urine and a triphasic event with an acute drop in GFR, followed by a rise in GFR and then an eventual resolution of kidney function.

Electrolyte derangement is another adverse effect of foscarnet, which often presents with hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia.

Patient intolerance due to nausea and other gastrointestinal symptoms is a well-known and often reported adverse event of foscarnet and is a primary reason it is difficult to administer to patients. Administration of foscarnet is often with concurrent IV and oral hydration to suppress nausea. Nausea can also be mitigated by providing the patient with antiemetics and slowing down the drug infusion rate.

The less commonly reported adverse events due to foscarnet administration include seizures, genital ulcers (more common in males - possibly due to a topical toxic effect resulting from medication concentration in the urine), and anemia. There are also reports of QT prolongation and torsades de pointes.