The pulmonary system and the airways are continuously exposed to particulate matter and environmental pathogens. The healthy airways normally contain some bacterial species and are not sterile. The most common mechanism through which the micro-organisms or pathogens reach the lung is known as micro-aspiration. Hematogenous spread and macro-aspiration are other mechanisms.

However, the pulmonary defense mechanisms such as cough reflex, mucociliary clearance system, immune response help maintain low levels of the microbiome. CAP occurs when there is a defect in normal host defense, or a virulent pathogen overwhelms the immune response or a large infectious microbial inoculum. The invasion and propagation of these virulent strains of bacteria in the lung parenchyma following micro-aspiration cause the host immune response to kick in leading to a cascade of inflammatory response causing pneumonia.

Alveolar macrophage is the predominant immune cell which responds to lower airway bacteria. However, a stronger immune response comes into play when an overwhelming virulent pathogen or a large inoculum causes these alveolar macrophages to recruit polymorphonuclear neutrophils(PMN) to phagocytose and engulf these bacteria. The alveolar macrophages release cytokines namely, tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukins. Interleukin-8 and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor promotes neutrophil chemotaxis and maturation. The leakage of the alveolar-capillary membrane due to cytokines can lead to a decrease in compliance and hence, dyspnea. Cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF can lead to constitutional symptoms such as fever. Bacterial pneumonia is a result of this inflammatory response. These cytokines are essential for the immunity but, the excess can lead to sepsis and multiorgan failure. The body tries to balance the deleterious effects of cytokines by attenuation of several inflammatory mechanisms by IL-10.

Microbial virulence factors and predisposing host conditions make a person more vulnerable to pneumonia.[3]