EoE occurs as a result of an immunogenic reaction to various antigens which are commonly found in food and air. There is a strong genetic component involved in the pathogenesis of EoE and a high concordance reported for EoE among family members. The pioneer study that described the genetic basis for EoE was a study of genome-wide microarray expression profile analysis. This study reported that the gene responsible for EoE was TSLP (thymic stromal lymphopoietin) which is located in the 5q22 region of male X chromosome. TSLP stimulates Th2 cells and induces eotaxin-3. The stimulated Th2 cells activate various proinflammatory cytokines such as IL5, IL13, and IL15, which recruit eosinophils. Eotaxin-3 is overexpressed in the esophageal mucosa in EoE patients. Overall, this immunogenic process starts as an allergic response to various environmental antigens, food, or aeroallergens and leads to the inflammation of esophageal mucosa.

The other important cytokine involved in the pathogenesis is TGF-B (transforming growth factor-beta), which is released by eosinophils and mast cells recruited after immune activation. TGF-B is responsible for remodeling of esophageal mucosa and smooth muscle dysfunction. The remodeling of inflamed mucosa can occur with repeated exposure to the antigens, leading to remodeling and fibrosis which clinically manifests as various esophageal dysfunction that includes dysphagia, epigastric pain, dyspepsia, chest pain, and food impaction. It has been reported that a single exposure to airway antigen challenge and cutaneous antigen exposure may lead to recruitment of eosinophils in the esophagus leading to EoE.