**General Systemic Control of Diabetes**

The systemic status should be optimized by

- Strict metabolic control of diabetes,

- Maintaining HbA1C levels under 7%,

- Lifestyle modifications like routine exercises and a proper diabetic food diet,

Patients should visit diabetologists for proper follow-up visits and take timely antidiabetic medications. Other systemic ailments like hypertension, dyslipidemia, hypoproteinemia, anemia, nephropathy, neuropathy, cardiac ailments, and others should also be taken care of by respective medications and excellent interprofessional collaboration.

**Management of Non-Proliferative Diabetic Retinopathy (NPDR)**

Strict glycemic control and strict compliance of patients towards antidiabetic medication is the key to managing a case of NPDR. Stress should be on proper systemic control of diabetes mellitus, keeping a watch on the progression of ocular findings. Associated comorbidities should be addressed. A detailed systemic investigation by a physician or an endocrinologist should be done to rule out any other systemic side-effects of diabetes mellitus.

The suggested follow-up schedule is given.

- Very mild NPDR- follow-up every year

- Mild to moderate NPDR - follow-up 6-12 monthly. Sixteen percent of cases of mild NPDR and 23% of cases of moderate NPDR progress to proliferative stages within four years

- Severe to Very Severe NPDR- Close follow-up within 2-4 months. Fifty percent of severe NPDR and 75% of cases of very severe NPDR progress to PDR within one year

**Management of Diabetic Macular Edema (DME)**

**Center-involving diabetic macular edema**- Nowadays, anti-VEGF agents have become the first line of treatment for center-involving diabetic macular edema. Bevacizumab, ranibizumab, and aflibercept have beneficial effects in patients with baseline better visual acuity. Aflibercept is shown to have better visual outcomes in patients with worse baseline visual acuity on presentation.

**Non-center involving macular edema**- Focal or Grid laser-guided by ETDRS is the treatment of choice.

Nowadays, in the era of Anti-VEGF medications, laser treatment is usually avoided in the center involving macular edema. It may be added as adjuvant therapy in patients not responding to anti-VEGF therapy alone. As stated by ETDRS, laser helped in halting the progression of moderate visual loss, but it did not improve the visual acuity. Bevacizumab intravitreal injection is also effective in the center-involving DME, but it is not FDA approved. Hence it is available only for off-label use. Cluster endophthalmitis due to fake drugs or other reasons is another concern.

Doses of commonly used intravitreal injections:

- Bevacizumab- 1.25mg/0.05 ml (PACORES, DRCR.net PROTOCOL H, BOLT, READ-2)

- Ranibizumab - 0.5 mg or 0.3 mg /0.05 ml(RESOLVE, DRCR.net PROTOCOL I, RESTORE, RISE/RIDE

- Aflibercept -2 mg/0.05 ml (DA VINCI, VISTA/VIVID, DRCR.net PROTOCOL T)

- Pegaptanib- 0.3mg/ 0.09 ml (not FDA approved for this indication)

- Brolucizumab 6mg/0.05 ml (not approved by FDA for this indication as of May 2022)

Long-acting corticosteroid implants like dexamethasone implants and fluocinolone acetonide implants (Retisert and Iluvien) are also used in diabetic macular edema. Though they are not considered the first line of treatment. They are reserved for cases not responding to multiple injections of Anti-VEGF medications (according to protocol U of DRCR.net).

**Tractional diabetic macular edema**can occur because of VMT (vitreomacular traction) or ERM (epiretinal membrane). Vitrectomy surgery should be considered in such cases. Intravitreal injections might worsen the traction component. Laser spots, too, should be given away from the tractional area to avoid further worsening.

**Refractory Diabetic macular edema**- The definition of refractory or persistent DME varies, including macular edema not responding to multiple injections of anti-VEGF and, at least one sitting of laser, and suboptimal response (central macular thickness on OCT of more than 250 microns with associated visual loss) to 6 consecutive monthly injections of anti-VEGF agents.

**Ischemic type of diabetic macular edema**is associated with poor visual prognosis. The patient can be considered for an extreme peripheral laser to kill out the ischemic areas responsible for VEGF release.

**Treatment of Proliferative Diabetic Retinopathy (PDR)**

Panretinal photocoagulation (PRP) has been considered the standard treatment of proliferative diabetic retinopathy for ages. But because of its destructive properties, intense research was done to find an alternative non-destructive mode of management of diabetic retinopathy. Various studies evaluated the role of intravitreal anti-VEGF injections in PDR cases. Because of the limited half-life of these injections, repeated injections at timely intervals become mandatory. Hence cost-effectivity of this regime is questionable. A concoction of intravitreal injection and pan-retinal photocoagulation, depending on the severity of the disease and taking into account the presence or absence of macular edema, may help manage diabetic retinopathy patients.

- Non-high-risk PDR without DME - Careful 2 to 4 monthly follow-up and immediate pan-retinal photocoagulation should be done if high-risk PDR occurs. Some physicians perform PRP in all PDR cases.

- High-risk PDR without macular edema- Pan-retinal photocoagulation should be initiated.

- PDR with DME- Combined intravitreal anti-VEGF injections and PRP sessions should be considered.

- High-risk PDR in which complete photocoagulation is not possible- Alternatives like cryopexy or vitrectomy should be considered.

In Protocol S of DRCR.net, a comparison of safety and efficacy of PRP to intravitreal injection of 0.5 mg ranibizumab was studied. The primary outcome of protocol S ranibizumab 0.5 mg was non-inferior to PRP. Hence, ranibizumab might compete with PRP to be the first line of management in the near future. High cost, repeated injection, multiple follow-up visits, distortion of the vitreous anatomy and physiology because of the repeated injections, chances of endophthalmitis, and tachyphylaxis are hindering factors.

**Treatment of Advanced Diabetic Eye Disease**

Prognosis is guarded in patients with advanced diabetic eye disease. Persistent vitreous hemorrhage can initially be given the trial of observation or intravitreal injection of the anti-VEGF agent, following which, if the hemorrhage resolves, then scattered pan-retinal photocoagulation in the visible areas can be tried.

If the hemorrhage does not resolve with the above management, pars plana vitrectomy should be considered. Also, vitrectomy is the treatment of choice in cases presenting with tractional retinal detachment.

Indications of vitrectomy in diabetic patients include:

- Non-clearing vitreous hemorrhage (vitreous/subhyaloid/pre-macular)

- Tractional retinal detachment with macula off

- Combined tractional with rhegmatogenous retinal detachment

- Anterior segment neovascularization with the invisibility of the posterior segment

- Ghost cell glaucoma

- Thick epiretinal membrane

- Vitreomacular traction

In vitrectomy surgery, three pars plana ports are made, one for the infusion line, one for the light pipe, and the third for the microinstruments. A fourth port can be made if a chandelier light source is used in cases of bimanual vitrectomy.

In cases of rubeosis iridis, pan-retinal photocoagulation with or without anti-VEGF medication might be helpful in the early phases. In the advanced stages, the new vessels lead to fibrosis and contracture, leading to permanent distortion of the angles causing refractory glaucoma, which might eventually require a glaucoma drainage implant). The prognosis is, however, poor in such cases. Painful blind eyes may need diode laser cyclophotocoagulation or cyclocryotherapy.

**Treatment of Diabetic Retinopathy (without DME)**

This is an FDA-approved indication of ranibizumab and aflibercept, which can reduce the severity of diabetic retinopathy.