Unfortunately, laboratory studies are typically non-specific. Labs may show jaundice and hepatic enzyme alterations, but this is only seen in about one-third of the patients with Bouveret syndrome. Leucocytosis, electrolyte abnormalities, acid-base alterations, and renal failure may also be present, but the grade depends on the comorbidity, the intensity of the inflammatory response, and the compensatory mechanisms of the individual. As far as imaging is concerned, the constellation of pneumobilia, bowel obstruction, and an aberrant gallstone referred to as Rigler's triad is highly suggestive of Bouveret syndrome but is only found in 40% to 50% of cases. Ultrasound may be useful, showing possible cholecystitis, dilated stomach, pneumobilia, and ectopic location of gallstone, yet bowel gas makes it suboptimal. If the gallbladder is contracted, it may be difficult to detect the exact location of the stone (orthotopic or ectopic) using ultrasound.

Abdominal radiographs, though non-specific, may help identify Bouveret syndrome. The subtle cues include pneumobilia, intestinal obstruction, aberrantly located gallstone, air-fluid levels in the right upper quadrant due to air in the gallbladder, gastric distention, and a change in the location of a previously observed stone. However, abdominal radiographs are only diagnostic in 21% of Bouveret syndrome cases. CT is the imaging modality of choice, with an overall 93% sensitivity, 100% specificity, and 99% diagnostic accuracy. In addition to its higher accuracy than plain radiograph or ultrasound, it can also provide important information about the presence of a fistula, presence of an abscess, inflammatory state of the surrounding lumen and tissue, size of gallstone, and the number of gallstones.

In patients unable to tolerate oral contrast or with intense emesis, as well as in cases with iso-attenuating stones, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) can be utilized, as it distinguishes stones from fluid, visualizes the fistula with good precision, and does not require the use of oral contrast material. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is another option, with diagnostic and therapeutic advantages. However, simultaneous removal of the stone is only successful in a minority of cases and can be associated with further complications. In about 20% to 40% of cases, the final diagnosis is established intra-operatively when a patient is undergoing laparotomy for small bowel obstruction of an unknown cause. This applies particularly to the 15% to 25% of gallstones that are iso-attenuating and not visible on CT scans.