In general, PAs can prescribe medications in collaboration with supervising physicians. However, specific states prohibit PAs from prescribing Schedule II controlled substances. As of 2010, PAs were allowed to prescribe controlled substances except for in two states—Kentucky and Florida.

Georgia and Texas restrict PAs from prescribing Schedule II medications; however, they can prescribe Schedule III-V drugs.

Some state laws also specify a formulary of drugs that PAs are unable to prescribe. For example, Florida Admin. Code R. 64B8-30.008 sets multiple stipulations for PA prescribing capabilities.

State laws to determine NPs' prescriptive authority differ considerably. Some states allow the full practice of NPs where they may prescribe medications with a level of autonomy comparable to physicians. On the other hand, many states have restrictions on NP prescriptive authority and require physician supervision. The American Association of Nurse Practitioners categorizes state practices into three divisions: restricted, reduced, and complete practice authority. Twenty-two states are classified as full practice where NPs have similar prescriptive authority to physicians. In sixteen states, NPs have reduced authority and work alongside physicians in joint practice agreements. States with reduced prescriptive authority have varying limitations on medications that NPs have the authority to prescribe to patients. NPs are categorized as restricted in the remaining twelve states and require physician supervision or delegation when prescribing controlled substances. Overall, NPs have a broader scope of practice and fewer limitations on prescriptive authority than PAs, particularly in states that allow full practice.

NPs have the prescriptive authority to prescribe controlled substances in all fifty states. However, NPs cannot prescribe Schedule II medications in Georgia, Oklahoma, South Carolina, and West Virginia.

Notably, the passage of legislation allowing for the greater prescriptive authority does not equate to uptake by advanced practice providers. For example, in 2001, Washington state passed laws to allow NPs to prescribe Schedule II-IV medications under a joint practice agreement with a physician. However, NPs were required to apply to the DEA to obtain the increased prescriptive authority. Surprisingly, only 60% of NPs submitted applications to prescribe Schedule II-IV drugs following the new law's implementation.

Some physician groups have expressed concern relating to the increasing prescriptive authority by advanced practice providers. The current literature is mixed of differences in provider care concerning physician and advanced practice providers. Certain studies have highlighted higher average opioid prescriptions written by NPs and PAs compared to physicians.