Cardiac calcifications have a unique diagnostic, therapeutic and prognostic significance. When present in the coronary arteries, calcifications predict risk for future adverse cardiovascular events. The use of cardiac CT angiogram to quantify these calcifications can help risk stratify asymptomatic patients with intermediate-risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) into high or low risk. This is important as the treatment strategy is completely different in these two groups with high-risk groups requiring intense lifestyle modifications with the treatment of underlying risk factors while the low-risk group needs to be reassured and appropriately followed.

Myocardial calcifications have been less well studied. They usually follow a global myocardial injury likely in the setting of sepsis, coronary artery disease, or myocarditis. Their role other than being an incidental finding on chest imaging is not clear. However, these patients should be closely followed to monitor the symptoms of cardiomyopathy since these calcifications can theoretically restrict the filling of heart, leading to diastolic failure.

Pericardial calcifications usually are present in constrictive pericarditis. In patients with refractory heart failure symptoms, a pericardiectomy may be needed to relieve the symptoms of heart failure in these patients.

In general, outcomes of cardiac calcifications depend on the cause and the location of the calcifications. However, to improve the outcomes, prompt consultation with an interprofessional group of physicians, including primary care physicians, cardiologists, cardiac surgeons, and pulmonologists is recommended.