**Single-incision Fasciotomy of the Leg (Davey, Rorabeck and Fowler Technique)**

- Make a skin incision beginning at the lateral malleolus and extending proximally along the fibula for the full length of the compartment.

- Develop the subcutaneous plane anteriorly to expose the fascial layer– beware of damage to the superficial peroneal nerve at this stage.

- Make a longitudinal incision in the anterior and lateral fascial compartments.

- Develop the subcutaneous plane posteriorly and perform a longitudinal incision into the superficial posterior compartment.

- Identify the soleus in the superficial posterior compartment begin to develop the plane between the distal third of the soleus and the lateral compartment.

- Remove the soleus and the deeper flexor hallucis longus from the posterior fibula. Be aware the peroneal neurovascular bundle will be immediately medial to the fibula.

- Retract the peroneal vessels posteriorly to expose the fascial attachment of the tibialis posterior to the fibula, make a longitudinal incision.

- Apply appropriate wound dressing.

**Double Incision Fasciotomy of the Leg (Mubarak and Harges Technique)**

**Anterolateral Incision**

- Make a 20 cm anterior skin incision centered between the crest of the tibia and the fibula.

- Identify the anterior intramuscular septum, make a longitudinal incision on either side into the anterior and lateral compartments.

**Posteromedial Incision**

- Make a second skin incision starting 2 cm proximal and 2 cm superior to the medial malleolus of the tibia, extending proximally in line with the tibia longitudinally.

- Carefully use blunt dissection to identify the fascial layer, the long saphenous vein, and the saphenous nerve; retract these anteriorly.

- Make an incision along the length of the posterior fascial compartment.

- Make another fascial incision over the flexor digitorum longus muscle immediately posterior and medial to the tibia to release the posterior compartment.

**Forearm Fasciotomy**

**Volar Incision**

- Make a large skin incision starting just radial to the flexor carpi ulnaris and extending proximally to the medial epicondyle.

- Extend the incision distally to the wrist crease, cross the wrist crease diagonally towards the hypothenar eminence, and into the palm to facilitate a carpal tunnel release.

- Make a longitudinal incision into the superficial fascial compartment.

- Retract the flexor carpi ulnaris, the ulnar neurovascular bundle medially.

- Retract the flexor digitorum superficialis medially.

- This exposes the deep fascial compartment; make a fascial incision onto the flexor digitorum profundus.

- Extend both fascial incisions to the transverse carpal ligament.

**Dorsal Incision**

- Make a skin 10cm incision between the extensor digitorum communis and extensor carpi radialis brevis starting 2cm distal to the lateral epicondyle.

- This incision will allow you to release the fascia over the mobile wad immediately.

- Develop the subcutaneous plane posteriorly to expose the extensor retinaculum and release the fascia to decompress the posterior compartment.

**Follow-up**

Fasciotomy wound management begins with an inspection at 48 hours. If the compartments are soft, this closure is achievable by primary wound closure, secondary wound healing, or as needed in approximately 50% of wounds split-thickness skin grafting. Delayed primary closure is also feasible using a vessel loop shoelace stitch. A negative pressure wound management device is another option.