Conservative treatments, such as compression stockings, are the cornerstone and initial step of CVI management. Compression treatment aims to provide graduated external compression to the lower extremities and counteract the hydrostatic pressures of venous hypertension. Available compression garments consist of graded elastic compressive stockings, gauze boots, layered bandaging, and adjustable compression garments.

The tension between 30- and 50-mm Hg is believed to produce considerable improvement in pain, edema, and pigmentation with a compliance of 70 and 80%.

**Skin and wound care:**Advanced CVI may affect skin integrity; therefore, it is crucial to maintain skin health and avoid infection. Topical moisturizers, commonly containing lanolin, minimize skin fissuring and disintegration. Topical steroids may be used to treat stasis dermatitis. Bacterial overgrowth may occur with venous ulcers; hence diligent wound care is needed to limit infection. A range of hydrocolloids and foam dressings can reduce wound fluid drainage and skin maceration.

**Sclerotherapy:**Sclerotherapy is beneficial in treating telangiectasias, reticular veins, varicose veins (1-4 mm diameter), and veins with reflux. It can be used as a primary or in combination with other treatments. Sclerosing agents include the hypertonic solution of sodium chloride (23.4%), polidocanol, sodium iodide, chromated glycerin, sodium tetradecyl sulfate, and sodium morrhuate. For veins with a lower diameter, the sclerosing agent must often be diluted to prevent tissue irritation and necrosis. Polidocanol is superior to normal saline, eliminating incompetent varicose veins and enhancing venous hemodynamics.

Darkening of the surrounding skin because of hemosiderin degradation is a common side effect of sclerotherapy, which may be mitigated by microthrombectomy, which involves the expulsion of the thrombus.

**Endovenous ablative therapy**: Ablation of incompetent veins utilizes thermal energy through radiofrequency or laser. This procedure is often utilized for GSV reflux as an alternative to stripping. The heat produced induces local thermal damage to the vein wall, leading to thrombosis and fibrosis. Radiofrequency ablation of the GSV results in complete obliteration in 85% of patients after two years. Laser therapy with either an 810-nm or 940-nm diode has shown outstanding outcomes, with saphenous vein obliteration in 93% of patients at two years.

Both radiofrequency and laser treatments are administered under tumescent anesthesia to avoid skin burns, minimize discomfort, and facilitate a speedier return to regular activities. Deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism remain, although seldom, the possible complications of ablation.

**Endovenous deep system therapy**: For iliac vein stenosis and occlusion, endovascular stenting has superseded surgical techniques such as cross-femoral venous bypass or prosthetic iliac vein reconstructions. Close monitoring is recommended to ensure that stent patency is maintained since in-stent restenosis or occlusion can occur in individuals with thrombotic illness; however, restenosis is uncommon (5%).

**Surgical management**: In individuals who do not respond to pharmacological or endovenous therapy, surgical surgery for CVI may be considered in addition to compression stockings. Specifically for individuals with persistent discomfort and disability, recurrent varicose veins, inability to cooperate with compression treatment, and chronic non-healing venous ulcers.

The prospective method is contingent upon the underlying pathophysiologic processes and afflicted vein area. Ligation and stripping have been shown to enhance venous hemodynamics, alleviate pain and promote ulcer healing. The excision of GSV with high ligation at the saphenofemoral junction is sustainable and applicable to all CEAP classes with GSV reflux. Venous valve reconstruction procedures include valvuloplasty, transposition, transplant, cryopreserved vein valve allografts, and neo-valve construction.