A median sternotomy incision is extended inferiorly around 5-6 cm longer than the standard incision for CABG, opening the peritoneum and the stomach delivered into the surgical field. The GEA is identified, traced, and handled very gently to prevent spasm. It is then mobilized from the greater curvature of the stomach as a pedicle with surrounding tissue or skeletonized keeping the pedicle as long as possible. Electrocautery is used to achieve hemostasis to prevent hematoma formation in the pedicle and to cauterize vessels in the omentum. Silk ligatures are used for branch vessels to secure hemostasis. The GEA is then divided distally and has diluted papaverine hydrochloride injected into its lumen. The distal end is later clamped, which achieves good caliber and adequate distension of the GEA due to papaverine and the effect of its own blood pressure, which is important to achieve a satisfactory anastomosis. The length of the graft is decided by calibrating the distance from the anastomotic site. Approximately 2-3 cm of the artery is skeletonized, and the gastroepiploic vein is ligated. Harmonic scalpel is used to harvest the GEA. The greater omentum is opened, its anterior layer divided and the GEA traced entirely in order to cauterize all its small gastric and omental branches. After ensuring thorough hemostasis, the skeletonized GEA is enveloped in papaverine soaked sponge to prevent spasm and remain relaxed. Thereafter, a small incision is made in the anterior aspect of the diaphragm through which the skeletonized GEA is brought up into the pericardial cavity traversing the anterior surface of the stomach and the liver. The end of the pedicle is then transfixed to the anterior edge of the diaphragm to ensure fixity.

Under cardioplegic arrest or an off-pump beating heart, the GEA and the coronary artery anastomosis is performed. Using a 7-0 or 8-0 polypropylene suture a few running sutures are placed at the heel of the coronary artery and the GEA. Thereafter the rest of the anastomosis is completed using a single continuous suture. The anastomosis could be antegrade or retrograde depending on the site and artery involved. Hemostasis is confirmed before the release of the aortic cross-clamp. It is imperative to avoid twisting or kinking of the GEA due to improper fixation near the peri-anastomotic site. The pedicle of the GEA is now fixed to the epicardium. Thorough hemostasis is performed, the patient weaned off cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), and the closing of the chest and abdominal wounds takes place. A drain may be placed in the abdominal cavity if required. The patient should be monitored in the immediate post-operative period in the intensive care unit usually for about 1 week.