**Drug interactions**

Naltrexone and nalmefene are opioid receptor antagonists that can precipitate withdrawal symptoms when used along with hydromorphone, decreasing its analgesic effect.

The use of hydromorphone in patients taking safinamide (MAO inhibitor) can precipitate serotonin syndrome and necessitates caution in dosing. It also requires careful administration for patients taking selective serotonin inhibitors (SSRI) or tricyclic antidepressants (TCA) for this same reason.

Concurrent use of hydromorphone with other CNS depressants, including benzodiazepine and barbiturates, can induce severe respiratory and/or CNS depression. For this purpose, the use of alternative analgesic agents is necessary.

**Clinical Studies**

In a meta-analysis by Bao et al. comparing the effect of hydromorphone to codeine and morphine, the authors analyzed data from 504 oncology patients. There was no significant difference between the three groups, regarding the safety profile and effectiveness of the drugs. Likewise, in the EXHEAL trial, Inoue et al. compared the effect of extended-release hydromorphone to extended-release oxycodone in the cancer patient. The efficacy of both drugs was equivalent, with similar adverse event rates.

Moreover, hydromorphone pumps have been the object of research for intrathecal administration with patient control. Hayek et al. reported their retrospective analysis of 57 patients with the post-laminectomy syndrome, treated with patient-controlled intrathecal hydromorphone and bupivacaine, and presented the data over 24 months.