**Procedure for pulmonary artery catheter placement (after the consent, equipment arrangement, preparation, and positioning of the patient):**

- Using a high-frequency ultrasound probe, the desired vein is identified. The surrounding skin is anesthetized using 1% lignocaine.

- Access to the vein is obtained using an appropriate gauge needle. Once access is confirmed, the syringe is removed, leaving the needle in the vessel and a guidewire is inserted through the needle into the vein.

- The needle is then removed leaving the guidewire in place. A small incision is made at the entry of the guidewire.

- An introducer sheath is inserted, threaded into the vein and the guidewire is removed.

- If the PAC is intended to be left in place for long durations, a sterile sleeve is placed over the catheter prior to its insertion to allow for some adjustments in the position of the catheter at a later time (whilst maintaining sterility).

- The PAC is inserted through the introducer sheath and advanced into the RA. Once it is inserted up to the 20cm mark, the balloon of the catheter is free of the sheath and is inflated with 1.5ml of air.

- The catheter tip is advanced slowly through the sheath while observing for the characteristic waveforms and pressures from the RA->RV->PA->PCWP. All pressures are measured at the end of expiration.

- When the PCWP is obtained, the balloon is deflated, and the catheter is withdrawn slightly to observe the PA trace reappear.

- A chest radiograph is obtained to ensure the correct placement of the catheter.

**Procedure for central venous catheter insertion (after the consent, equipment arrangement, preparation, and positioning of the patient):**

- Using ultrasound guidance the desired vein is identified and confirmed. The skin is infiltrated with 1% lignocaine to anesthetize cutaneously and subcutaneously.

- Under dynamic ultrasound visualization, the introducer needle is used to cannulate the vein.

- This is followed by the insertion of a guidewire through the needle.

- While holding the inserted wire steady inside the vein, the needle is removed.

- Advance the tissue dilator over the guidewire to dilate the soft tissues and aid the passage of the central venous catheter.

- The dilator is removed and the catheter is threaded over the guidewire.

- Once the catheter is in place, the guidewire is removed.

- Blood is aspirated from each port and flushed with saline.

- The catheter is sutured in place and a sterile dressing is applied.

- The position of the tip of the catheter is confirmed using chest radiography (for subclavian/internal jugular vein).