Initial evaluation of a patient with spinal stenosis often begins with a detailed history of symptoms and physical exam, with a focus on sensation, motor strength, reflexes, special tests, and gait. Stenosis in the cervical spine can lead to radicular symptoms due to nerve root compression and myelopathy due to spinal cord compression. Patients initially present with neck or arm pain. If a patient has a nerve root impingement, radicular symptoms occur and depend on the level affected. For example, a C5-6 disk herniation leads to C6 radiculopathy. C6-7 disk herniation is the most common, leading to a wrist drop and paresthesia in the 2 and three fingers. C5-6 disk herniation is the next common, resulting in weakness in forearm flexion and paresthesia in the thumb and radial forearm. C7-T1 disk herniation can lead to weakness in the hand intrinsic muscles and numbness in the 4 and five digits. Lastly, a C4-5 disk herniation can lead to deltoid weakness and shoulder paresthesia. Patients also can experience pain and paresthesia in the head, neck, and shoulder.  Cervical spondylotic myelopathy can be seen in patients with greater than 30% spinal narrowing, leading to clumsiness in the upper extremities, gait disturbance, lower extremity weakness, and ataxia.

Stenosis in the lumbar spine can lead to neurogenic claudication, myeloradiculopathy symptoms, sensory disturbances, motor weakness, and pathologic reflexes. Patients will present with complaints of cramping pain in the leg, calf, and or buttocks. They might report an increase in pain with walking or standing for prolonged periods and relief when sitting or leaning forward while using a shopping cart.