Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the preferred diagnostic modality for patients with seizures. MRI offers excellent signal-to-noise and contrast within the brain. Seizures that are attributed to known metabolic arrangements may not necessarily require further diagnostic studies; however, nearly every patient that suffers from an unexplained seizure should undergo an MRI to evaluate for underlying structural brain abnormalities. Virtually any MRI can be used to assess for mass lesions within the brain, but high field strength scanners, more than 1.5 Tesla, should be used for evaluating patients with epilepsy when possible.

Patients with medically intractable partial complex epilepsy are most commonly affected by mesial temporal sclerosis (MTS). MRI is essential in identifying MTS, as it has characteristic findings of volume loss and increased T2/FLAIR signal intensity due to hippocampal neuronal cell death and gliosis. There may also be associated atrophy within the ipsilateral amygdala, entorhinal cortex, fornix, or mammillary body. Identifying these subtle differences requires the acquisition of a 1 mm isotropic series with T1 weighting and FLAIR. Reconstructions must be performed perpendicular to the plane of the hippocampi to allow adequate side-to-side comparison. A coronal T2-weighted series should also be obtained with 2 mm slices and sub-mm in-plane resolution to allow both side-to-side comparisons of the hippocampi as well as to delineate the typical internal architecture.

Intravenous contrast may improve the utility of MRI depending on the clinical circumstances. Gadolinium-based contrast agents act to increase the T1 signal, highlighting vascular structures and blood-brain barrier abnormalities. A common approach to patients with seizures is to perform non-enhanced MRI sequences initially and only to administer contrast if the nonenhanced study requires further investigation.

Although MRI can be useful for the detection of underlying structural lesions, MRI can also be used to evaluate brain physiology. In patients being evaluated for surgical resection, functional MRI (fMRI) is useful in identifying the language laterality