Evaluation of ultrasound-guided barbotage of the rotator cuff tendons should begin with a thorough history and physical examination. In addition, a shoulder physical exam to include evaluation of other etiologies such as a septic joint should be performed. Laboratory analysis to include white blood cell count and inflammatory markers should also be obtained in the patient's initial workup.

Clinicians performing the procedures should have a basic understanding of the sonographic anatomy of the shoulder joint. Sonography has gradually replaced fluoroscopy in treating calcific tendinitis of the shoulder due to its ease of use and the radiation involved in fluoroscopy. Sonography is also able to easily evaluate for subtle changes in joint pathology and can evaluate for tears and degree of calcific deposits within the tendon. The humeral head (particularly the bicipital groove), coracoid process, the distal clavicle, and the acromion are often used as landmarks in localizing the supraspinatus tendon.

Before beginning the procedure, a clinician needs to have a thorough discussion with the patient regarding the following:

- The steps involved in the procedure, including the use of a needle to break up the crystalline deposits

- The potential for pain or significant discomfort during the procedure

- Prior medical conditions or surgeries that could affect the procedure

- The possible complications of the procedure such as skin or joint infection, steroid flare (usually within the first 24 hours), and tendon rupture.

Before beginning the procedure, an initial ultrasound exam should be performed to confirm and document the presence of hydroxyapatite deposition within the intended tendon target. A final time-out should also be performed before beginning the procedure. The skin entry site should then be cleaned, and a sterile drape should be put in place. The ultrasound probe is covered with a sterile sleeve.

- Optimal patient positioning includes:

- Patient in the supine position

- Arm in full extension

- Arm either rotated internally or externally (depending on the location of the HADD)

- Alternative positioning (can include the patient sitting in a partially reclined chair if they are unable to lie flat)