Diagnostic criteria for LVNC is a ratio X/Y < 0.5 where X is the distance, measured from the epicardial surface to the trough of the trabecular recess and Y is a distance measured from the epicardial surface to the peak of the trabeculation. This method, originally proposed by Chin et al., evaluates the size of trabeculations relative to the thickness of the compacted wall in different echocardiographic views and at different levels of the LV in end diastole. Jenni and co-worker also proposed a method that involves detection of the two myocardial layers, non-compacted and compacted, in short axis views of the LV in end systole. This method describes the ratio >2 between non compacted to compacted myocardium. The third definition proposed by Stollberger et al. determines the number of prominent trabeculations visible in the apical views of the LV in diastole. Regarding diagnosis, there is a debate going on with regards to features displaced by angiography, echocardiography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging. One can use any of imaging for confirmation.

Echocardiography is routinely used initially as the non-invasive investigation of choice. Contrast echocardiography may potentially improve the sensitivity of diagnosing non-compaction due to improved contrast between myocardium and blood pool.

The diagnosis of spongy myocardium is challenging, as it has to be distinguished from muscle bundles.  In non-compaction left ventricle, there are prominent trabeculations. The adequacy of diagnosis of non-compaction depends very much on experience and knowledge of the investigator. Transthoracic echocardiography is also useful for detecting associated lesions like muscular ventricular septal defects or supra mitral ring along with non-compaction.

Septal indentation in left ventricular hypertrabeculation is a finding mostly in children and its differentiation from left ventricular non-compaction is challenging.

Left ventricular angiography is rarely required for making the diagnosis of non-compaction. But angiography is required in associated complex congenital heart disease.

Other imaging modalities which are being increasingly used these days for diagnosis are computed tomography or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. MRI provides very useful images. Magnetic resonance cine imaging, using so-called steady-state free precession sequence, is increasingly used because of its ability to image with clarity the compacted and non-compacted layers. This technique provides a better ratio of non compacted to compacted myocardium. It also gives superior visualization of left ventricular thrombi and myocardial fibrosis. Cardiac CT is of limited value in the evaluation of left ventricular function.