Before discussing surgical options and timing, it is important to note that not every flexor tendon laceration is expedited to the operating room on initial presentation. As patients present to the clinic, the emergency department, urgent care, or other primary settings, initial treatment usually consists of IV antibiotic administration, thorough debridement of the wound basin with the removal of foreign debris and inspection of tissue viability, followed by loose skin closure, appropriate splint application to limit proximal tendon retraction, and education on the importance of compliance with early follow-up.

**Primary repair**(<24 hours) is the preferred option when medically and surgically feasible. However, it is otherwise contraindicated in the setting of gross contamination, or when the injury is secondary to a human bite, there is obvious evidence of active infection (cellulitis, purulence, etc.), and/or there is a lack of stable soft tissue coverage.

**Delayed primary repair**(>24 hours, yet <2 weeks) constitutes a reasonable approach for heavily contaminated wounds and provides functional results comparable to initial primary repair.

**Secondary repair**can occur in either an early (2 to 5 weeks) or late (>5 weeks) fashion. Early repair within 2-5 weeks is performed before significant muscle contraction, with results similar to delayed primary repair. It is important to note the increased risk of infection and prolonged edema with progressive delay in definitive repair. Late secondary repair after five weeks is often faced with the presence of tendon edema and softening in the setting of a scarred flexor tendon sheath that reduces the likelihood of good tendon gliding. The best options for late repair are tendon graft or transfer, as repair is often inhibited by significant muscular contraction. Significantly, the FDP tendon may be advanced up to, but not more than, 1 cm; excessive advancement can induce a flexion deformity in the repaired digit which subsequently limits active flexion in adjacent digits.

**Zone 1 injuries:**FDP tendon laceration distal to the insertion of the FDS tendon or avulsion from its insertion at the base of the proximal aspect of the distal phalanx.

- Avulsion injuries or "Rugger jersey finger" are most common in young male athletes participating in contact sports during forced extension with maximal profundus contraction. The ring finger is most commonly involved, as it is the longest digit when the PIP joints are fully flexed. The following types of avulsion injuries are categorized under the Leddy classification:

- 
              
- **Type I**- FDP retracts into the palm; requires repair within one week, as the myotendinous unit will shorten and the tendon will weaken without nutrition
              
              
- 
                  
- There is a concomitant rupture of the vincula, compromising the blood supply
                  
                

              
              
- **Type II**- FDP tendon avulses with a small fragment of the distal phalanx, and the tendon retracts to the level of the PIP joint (A3 pulley); repair can be delayed up to 6 weeks
              
              
- 
                  
- The long vinculum is spared, thus preserving bloody supply
                  
                

              
              
- **Type III**- large bony fragment is avulsed with the tendon to the level of A4 pulley and is prevented from retracting beyond the middle phalanx
              
              
- **Type IV**- a combination of tendon avulsion from a fragment of tendon retraction and avulsion fracture of the distal phalanx ("double avulsion")

- If the tendon is lacerated and the distal tendon stump is <1 cm, FDP tendon advancement and primary tendon-to-bone repair is usually indicated; if >1 cm remains, primary tendon repair can be performed to avoid unnecessary shortening of the flexor tendon.

- Either suture anchors or pull-out button technique can be orchestrated, with several studies demonstrating superior arc of motion, patient-rated outcomes, lower complications, and shorter return to work following anchor repair versus buttons.

**Zone 2 injuries:**historically associated with poor results. Secondary to the risk of adhesion formation, the difficulties encountered during treatment, and the lack of satisfactory clinical outcomes, the termno man's land was originally used by Bunnell to describe zone 2 tendinous injuries. Most advocate repairing FDP and FDS should more than 60% of the cross-sectional tendon area be disrupted. However, in cases of massive injury (i.e., replantation), an FDP-only repair is acceptable. If emergent repair is not performed, the wound should be thoroughly irrigated and skin loosely approximated, with the administration of tetanus prophylaxis and antibiotics, following which it is advised the patient be placed in a dorsal splint. The repair can generally be completed up to 3 weeks following injury; however, delay in treatment beyond three weeks is associated with less satisfactory outcomes.

- It is imperative to restore the appropriate anatomic relationship in which FDP passes through slips of FDS. Repairing the FDS may warrant smaller sutures to decrease bulkiness and minimize trauma to the individual slips. In cases where a bulky repair does not permit gliding within the flexor sheath, one slip of the FDS can be excised without compromising results.

Throughout the literature, zone 2 injuries are most common, perhaps resulting from being the longest zone, confining tendons to a narrow area without protective tissues.

**Zone 3 injuries:**although the operative repair technique remains the same as for zone 2, the prognosis is better than for zone 2, with functional outcomes primarily dictated by the extent of associated nerve repair. Given its lack of sheath, zone 3 injuries generally preclude a good prognosis when not linked with neurovascular trauma.

- Injuries to the deep motor branch of the ulnar nerve and/or deep palmar arch must be repaired before addressing flexor tendons.

- A lumbrical plus finger can result from repair in this region, secondary to excessive advancement, and results in paradoxical IP joint extension with attempted forceful flexion.

**Zone 4 injuries:**operative repair is similar to zone 2, with recommendations for transverse carpal ligament repair after tendon repair to prevent bowstringing. Most tendinous injuries are combined with median (as it is the most superficial structure in the carpal tunnel) or ulnar nerve injury; pure tendon injuries are rare, in part due to the protection of the flexor retinaculum. Direct tendon repair is the gold standard in zone 4 injury management.

- If possible, tendons should be repaired proximal or distal to the carpal tunnel without releasing the transverse carpal ligament (TCL).

**Zone 5 injuries:**disability here is more commonly a sequela of associated median or ulnar nerve injury and results in more disability as opposed to isolated tendon injuries. Acute injuries within zone 5 may be repaired within three weeks, after which permanent shortening occurs, and reconstruction or tendon transfers may be required. The most crucial factor in repair for zone 5 injuries is suture strength.

- Here, should the distal tendon ends have retracted into the carpal tunnel, the TCL should be released to permit exposure.

- For injuries >7 days old, the surgeon should be prepared to perform nerve grafting for median nerve injuries.

Simple lacerations, lacerations with an isolated tendon injury, and lacerations with associated nerve injuries can be debrided and closed in the emergency room in the setting of a well-vascularized digit. After establishing local or block anesthesia and tourniquet application, thorough debridement and wound cleansing should include exploration of the wound base to exclude the possibility of an open joint and further assess tendons. Follow-up should be established within the week to remove the monofilament suture placed at the time of repair.

Flexor tendon injuries may undergo definitive treatment on the day of injury if they are associated with concomitant major nerve injury or circulatory compromise or per surgeon preference. Repairs for injuries within the synovial sheath should employ a suture method strong enough to allow early digital mobilization while permitting a smooth repair, allowing the tendon to glide through the narrow fibro-osseous tunnel, optimizing early digital mobilization.

The optimal treatment of flexor tendon injuries is primary repair; however, this technique is not always feasible in severe hand trauma. Despite significant improvements in reconstructive techniques, the inconsistencies of primary repair prompt surgeons to consider reconstruction with tendon implants as an alternative method.

**Tendon Grafting**is used to repair segmental tendon loss or muscular contracture.

- Indications for tendon grafting include failure of flexor tendon repair, injuries resulting in segmental tendon loss, delay in repair that obviates primary repair, severe crush injuries with segmental tendon loss, lacerations that have been neglected for more than 3-6 weeks, patients in whom the surgeon believes delayed grafting is the better treatment alternative, suspicion of wound infection, a closed rupture in zone 1 to zone 3, or for delayed presentation of FDP avulsion injuries associated with significant tendon retraction.

- 
              
- Single-stage repairs require adequate tendon sheath and pulleys, soft tissue coverage, and supple joints.
              
              
- 
                  
- The injured tendons are excised and replaced with a suitable tendon graft secured to the base of the distal phalanx at FDP insertion and joined to a proximal motor in the palm or distal forearm.
                  
                

              
              
- Two-stage repair is used when tendon sheath is scarred or unusable, in cases of pulley incompetence, joint contracture, inadequate passive range of digital motion, or following crush injuries with extensive soft tissue damage and underlying fractures; the native tendon is excised during the 1st stage, while the graft is sutured and subsequent tension is adjusted during the 2nd stage.
- The first procedure consists of thorough digital exploration, reconstruction of associated injuries, and placement of a passive silicone tendon implant that allows for correction of joint contracture, reconstruction of pulleys, and formation of a pseudosheath.


              
              
- Potential sources for donor graft include palmaris longus, plantaris, extensor digiti minimi, extensor indicis proprius, or toe tendons.
              
              
- Intrasynovial tendon grafts may afford distinct advantages over extrasynovial tendons. Their association with less tenocyte death and fewer peri-tendinous adhesions has been well documented. However, since Leversedge et al. first reported outcomes of their 8-case flexor tendon injury pilot study that suggested intrasynovial tendon grafting offers an improved alternative for grafting to digital synovial spaces, there has not been considerable evidence to substantiate these basic biological principles.

**Tendon Transfer**has limited indications for flexor tendon repair; however, it can be considered when proximal musculature is deemed unusable because of denervation, direct injury, or contraction.

**Operative Principles:**

Before proceeding with surgery, the nature and number of expected procedures and the extent of postoperative rehabilitation should be outlined to the patient's level of understanding. Patient selection and education are essential for the success of flexor tendon reconstruction. As it has been previously proven that most patients will underestimate the impact of the reconstruction process, the patient must be willing and able to comply and demonstrate adherence to their aftercare program and therapy protocol(s).

Younger patients typically have better outcomes than the elderly; however, technical difficulties and compliance with rehabilitation may compromise this statistic in very young patients. Crush injuries, fractures, joint disruption, nerve and artery damage, associated skin loss, and infections preclude a poorer prognosis after tendon reconstruction—tendons injured outside of the digital flexor sheath yield greater results than those injured within zone 2. The patient's innate healing response to injury ultimately influences the end result.

For simplicity in operative visualization, profundus tendons are generally flat and multistranded, while superficialis tendons, FPL, and index profundus are oval. Profundus tendons should be repaired first, followed by FPL, and finally, superficialis.

Flexor tendon repairs should be performed under loupe magnification in the operating room while maintaining the viability of skin flaps, permitting wide exposure, and prohibiting the formation of scar contractures, with minimal traumatic handling of the tendon surfaces to limit subsequent adhesion formation. It is important to recognize the location of the skin laceration may be different than the site of the tendon injury based on the extension/flexion position of the digit at the time of injury. The initial strength of repair is proportional to the size and number of suture strands crossing the repair site.

The Pulvertaft weave technique interloops the proximal and distal tendon ends and is suitable for tendon grafts or transfers. The added bulk provided by weaving prohibits using this technique outside zones 3/4. As the strongest method, it is capable of withstanding immediate active motion.

Every effort should be employed to preserve or reconstruct at least A2 and A4 pulleys. An incompetent pulley system leads to volar translation or "bowstringing."

Optimized outcomes were reported amongst slightly tensioned multistrand repairs that underwent judicious venting of pulleys which then proceeded to early active motion - all widely accepted principles. In addition, tailoring the repair according to intraoperative active movement examinations in a wide-awake local anesthesia no tourniquet (WALANT) surgical setting is recommended for improved results.

Conversely, increasing the number of core sutures to achieve greater strength inevitably adds more volume to the tendon, resulting in a bulky repair that further leads to increased resistance to gliding, thus must be balanced with the surgeon's ability to suture the tendon atraumatically between bulk and repaired tendon gliding.

A Journal of Clinical Orthopedics and Trauma recent study revealed 4-stranded cruciate technique had greater functional outcomes and decreased risk of complications compared to modified Kessler repair. The 4-strand cruciate repair demonstrated an excellent (defined as a tip-to-palm distance of less than 1 cm and total active motion of more than 200 degrees) result in 66.6% of patients, while modified Kessler had excellent results in 45.8%.

WALANT surgical technique for flexor tendon repair is recommended to permit necessary adjustments of tendon repairs. There are numerous advantages to employing the WALANT technique: reduced costs, no tourniquet, no sedation nor need for an anesthesiologist, intraoperative patient education, and a direct view of repair.