Kyphoplasty and vertebroplasty are the most common forms of vertebral augmentation. They can be defined as the injection of bone cement, often under fluoroscopy, into a fractured vertebra percutaneously.

Vertebroplasty has been the focus of the majority of systematic reviews for vertebral augmentation rather than kyphoplasty. The results of meta-analyses regarding the efficacy of vertebral augmentation procedures to reduce pain have been largely inconclusive. The mixed results and inconclusive evidence can often be contributed to study design or the quality of the studies performed. Interestingly, when compared to conservative management, vertebral augmentation has been shown to be favorable with improved pain as well as disability in patients. When compared to a placebo-controlled trial or sham vertebral augmentation, the results do not show a clinically significant benefit for vertebral augmentation in osteoporotic compression fractures of the spine.

Complicating the evidence is how multiple studies have shown a mortality benefit for patients undergoing vertebral augmentation for refractory pain secondary to osteoporotic compression fractures of the spine when compared to conservative management.

There have been multiple conflicting controlled trials regarding patients with osteoporotic compression fractures of the spine opting for vertebroplasty. Three separate controlled trials showed no significant reduction in pain for vertebral augmentation when compared to controls. There was also shown to be no decreases in the use of oral pain medications or improvement in reported quality of life and the reported disability. In comparison, one sham-controlled trial did show a significant decrease in reported pain for patients undergoing vertebral augmentation. Additionally, this study showed improvement in reported pain scores as well as a decrease in disability scores. Researchers reported these scores at one, three, and six months duration following treatment.

There have been concerns for discrepancies in study designs across various studies. Some of these concerns include the duration of back pain before vertebroplasty, and lack of confirmation of bone marrow edema in the location of an osteoporotic compression fracture prior to augmentation. Also, vertebral augmentation is not being completed during the acute or subacute phases following a compression fracture. Acute would be considered pain for less than one month in duration, and subacute considered pain for less than three months in duration. Symptoms for less than a three-month duration are considered to be the most beneficial time for the patient to undergo augmentation.

Potential alternatives for patients who have contraindications for vertebral augmentation are median branch radiofrequency ablation or facet joint injections for attempted pain relief.

Spinal fusion surgery can loosely be described as fusing two or more of a patient's vertebral bodies together. Studies have shown patients undergoing surgery have decreased levels of pain in both short and intermediate follow-up after surgery. However, there are limited disability outcomes for patients undergoing vertebral fusion. There has been a recommendation for patients with low back pain greater than one year in duration, with pain non-radicular in nature, to undergo spinal fusion. Some experts consider spinal fusion to be a reasonable treatment option for refractory osteoporotic compression fracture, despite having inadequate evidence of its effectiveness in the long term.