The neuron’s membrane potential gets generated via a difference in the concentration of charged ions. The lipid bilayer of the neuronal cell membrane acts as a capacitor, the transmembrane channels as resistors. This resting (steady-state) potential is critical for the neuron’s physiological state, maintained by an unequal distribution of ions across the cellular membrane and established by ATP-dependent pumps--most notably, sodium-potassium antiporters. These exchangers are responsible for pumping sodium out of the cells into the extracellular space, potassium into the intracellular compartment. When opened, various channels allow permeable ions to flow down their electrochemical gradients, thereby altering the membrane potential. The gating of these channels is by second messengers, neurotransmitters, or voltage changes. Voltage-gated cationic channels are the main channels used in the generation and propagation of neuronal action potential.

There are 100 billion neurons in the human brain, and there are a quadrillion synapses in the human brain. Any neuron will have on average of 1000 synapses which influence the electrical potential of the membrane. When the resting membrane potential (-60mV) becomes less negative, it depolarizes. When it is more negative, it hyperpolarizes. Upon collating the various movements of ions, particularly the entering of sodium, the cell may have sufficient signals to reach the threshold potential and achieves this threshold by sufficient positively charged ions entering the cell, i.e., terminating the polarity in what is called depolarization. At normal body temperature, the equilibrium potential for sodium is +55 mV, -103 mV for potassium. There are three stages in the generation of the action potential: (1) depolarization, changing the membrane’s potential from -60 mV to +40 mV primarily caused by sodium influx; (2) repolarization, a return to the membrane’s resting potential, primarily caused by potassium efflux; and (3) after-hyperpolarization, a recovery from a slight overshoot of the repolarization.

Local currents created by depolarization along a portion of the neuronal membrane, if sufficiently strong, can depolarize neighboring segments of the membrane to the threshold, thereby propagating the action threshold down the membrane and along the neuron’s axon. The determining factor in the speed of this propagation is primarily the extent to which the initial local currents first spread before creating further depolarizations. Factors influencing this speed include the membrane’s electrical resistance and internal contents of the axon. Wider axons have lower internal resistance, and having more voltage-gated sodium channels in the membrane decreases membrane resistance as well. Higher internal resistance and lower membrane resistance contribute to slower action potential propagations. Because the body does not have enough space, instead of making large axons, the nervous system, to maximize propagation velocity, employs glial cells, specifically oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells, to wrap themselves around axons, creating myelin sheaths. These sheaths contribute to greater membrane resistance, patching up areas where channels would otherwise leak. Still, the action potential can only propagate so far before requiring more sodium channels to perpetuate the potential, creating gaps in the myelin sheath called nodes of Ranvier. These nodes have high concentrations of those channels to restart the action potential along the axon, termed saltatory conduction.

Neuron Action Potential - see the table in media below.