The larynx receives most of its blood supply via the superior and inferior laryngeal arteries. These arteries exist bilaterally, forming several branches before anastomosing with the contralateral side and opposing artery.

Superior laryngeal artery: originates from the superior thyroid artery branch of the external carotid artery. The superior laryngeal artery travels with the internal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve, piercing the thyrohyoid membranes bilaterally before splitting into several branches. The superior laryngeal artery serves as the main contributor of the larynx, supplying blood to structures located between the peak of the epiglottis to the rima glottidis.

The inferior laryngeal artery branches from the inferior thyroid artery branch of the thyrocervical trunk, which originates from the subclavian artery. The inferior thyroid artery ascends the trachea alongside the recurrent laryngeal nerve, before entering the larynx at the level of cricoid-thyroid cartilage articulation to supply mucosal tissue and laryngeal muscles.

Venous return of the larynx follows paths strikingly parallel to the laryngeal arteries, occurring mostly through the superior and inferior laryngeal branches of the superior and inferior thyroid veins. The internal jugular vein and left brachiocephalic veins serve as the draining vessels for the superior thyroid and inferior thyroid venous tributaries, respectively.

The lymphatic drainage of the larynx is defined into upper and lower categories, utilizing the vocal cords as the landmark differentiator to predict the lymphatic pathways for each structure.

- Above the vocal folds: deep cervical lymph nodes

- Below the vocal folds: pre/paratracheal lymph nodes