Six cranial nerves innervate motor, sensory, and autonomic structures in the eyes. The six cranial nerves are the optic nerve (CN II), oculomotor nerve (CN III), trochlear nerve (CN IV), trigeminal nerve (CN V), abducens nerve (CN VI), and facial nerve (CN VII). The oculomotor nerve and the trochlear nerve originate in the midbrain. As for the trigeminal nerve, abducens nerve, and facial nerve, they originate from the pons. Interestingly, the optic nerve arises from the optic disc in the eye then enters the brain as opposed to the other cranial nerve that originates in the brain and then exits peripherally.

**Optic Nerve (CN II)**

The function of the optic nerve is purely sensory in the eyes. The optic nerve senses the incoming light and image displayed on the retina. The optic nerve then transmits this image into the cerebral cortex. The optic nerve also works in sync with the oculomotor nerve to change pupil size. The optic nerve conducts the afferent impulse to the brain. Then the oculomotor nerve will constrict the pupils if the light is bright, and it will allow pupil dilation when light is dim.

**Oculomotor Nerve (CN III)**

The oculomotor nerve is responsible for innervating the major of the extraocular muscles of the eyes. The oculomotor nerve provides motor innervation to the superior rectus muscle, medial rectus muscle, inferior rectus muscle, inferior oblique muscle, levator palpebrae superioris muscle, ciliary muscle, and the sphincter muscle. The action of the superior rectus muscle is to rotate the eye superiorly. The medial rectus muscle functions to adduct the eye. The inferior rectus muscle rotates the eye inferiorly when it contracts. The inferior oblique muscle's role is unique because it causes torques the eye downward and laterally when it contracts. The levator palpebrae superioris muscle is responsible for elevating the eyelid during eye-opening. The iris sphincter muscle is part of the autonomic nervous system, but specifically the parasympathetic nervous system. The action of the iris sphincter muscle is to constrict the pupils (miosis). Lastly, the contraction of the ciliary muscle allows for the accommodation of the eyes.

**Trochlear Nerve (CN IV)**

The trochlear nerve also contributes to the motor function of the eyes, but it only innervates one muscle that attaches to the eyes. The muscle that receives its motor innervation from the trochlear nerve is the superior oblique muscle. This muscle's action is unique due to its attachment. When the superior oblique muscle contracts alone, it causes the eye to torque inward and inferiorly.

**Trigeminal Nerve (CN V)**

The trigeminal nerve has three main branches. The three branches are the ophthalmic branch (CN V1), maxillary branch (CN V2), and mandibular branch (CN V3). Only the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve innervates the eye. The ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve provides sensory innervation to the eye. The ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve works as the afferent part of the corneal and lacrimation reflex. The facial nerve is the efferent part of the corneal and lacrimation reflex.

**Abducens Nerve (CN VI)**

The abducens nerve innerves only one muscle in the eye. This muscle is the lateral rectus muscle. When this muscle contracts, it causes the eye to abduct.

**Facial Nerve (CN VII)**

The facial nerve provides innervation to the muscles of facial expression, salvation, the taste of the two-thirds anterior portion of the tongue, and auditory volume modulation. But in the eyes, the facial nerve is responsible for eye closure and blinking by the motor innervation of the orbicularis oculi muscle. The corneal and lacrimation reflex is a result of the sensory afferent input from the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve and the efferent output from the facial nerve.

**Sympathetic Nervous System**

The action of pupillary dilation is called mydriasis and occurs via the sympathetic nervous system. The sympathetic nervous system pathway starts at the first neuron in the hypothalamus. The first neuron spans from the hypothalamus to the ciliospinal center Budge (C8-T2). Then the second neuron exits at the level of T1 and travels to the superior cervical ganglion. The path of the second neuron travels along the sympathetic chain near the apex of the lung and the subclavian vessels. Then the third neuron travels in the sympathetic plexus along the internal carotid artery. This third neuron travels through the cavernous sinus and arrives in the orbit and becomes the long ciliary nerve. The long ciliary nerve innervates the pupillary dilator muscles. These sympathetic nerve fibers also have a minor function in eyelid retraction and sweat glands in the forehead.

**Parasympathetic nervous system**

The parasympathetic nervous system causes pupillary constriction through a process called miosis. The parasympathetic nerve fibers start at the first neuron called the Edinger-Westphal nucleus. This neuron's nerve fibers span to the ciliary ganglion by traveling on the oculomotor nerve. After the ciliary ganglion, the second neuron is from the short ciliary nerves to the sphincter pupillae muscles. When the sphincter pupillae muscle contract, it will cause the constriction of the pupils.