There should be a high level of suspicion in diagnosing aspiration pneumonia, especially in critically ill hospitalized patients. Antibiotic treatment should be initiated immediately, and imaging studies should not delay the treatment. The commonly utilized imaging studies are chest x-ray and computed tomography of the chest, which will help in localizing the site of aspiration. However, most cases are unwitnessed aspiration, which makes it very hard to distinguish between aspiration pneumonitis and aspiration pneumonia. Clinical features may help to distinguish between the two. In aspiration pneumonitis, a large volume of gastric content has to be aspirated to produce chemical pneumonitis and can quickly progress to acute lung injury with subsequent development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Whereas, in aspiration pneumonia, aspiration can be of smaller volumes and can be unwitnessed, which with inoculation of bacteria progress to features of pneumonia and subsequent development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).

The arterial blood gas can be used to assess pH status and oxygenation. Sputum analysis is not helpful as it usually reveals a multitude of organisms, while blood cultures have a low yield and are not used frequently.

**Imaging**

On the chest x-ray, the right lower lobe is most frequently involved. Patients who have aspirated while upright may have bilateral lower lobe involvement. Patients lying in the left lateral decubitus position tend to have left-sided infiltrates. The involvement of the right upper lobe is more common in patients who aspirate in the prone position and those with alcohol use disorder.

Bronchoscopy is indicated when particles of food have been aspirated. The technique also allows the retrieval of organisms for culture.