**Pre-operative Work-up**

The standard of care for rectal microsurgery can be variable across different centers due to a lack of uniformity and standardization. The work-up and decision-making process are the same for TEMS and TAMIS. Once a rectal lesion has been identified and considered suitable for localized surgery, a full colonoscopy should be performed to exclude any synchronous tumors elsewhere in the colon. The rectal lesion must be accurately localized, with its position and orientation carefully documented.

Staging is performed using a combination of magnetic resonance imaging and endoscopic ultrasound to characterize the lesion with computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis to ensure there is no evidence of metastatic disease. Biopsy of the rectal lesion is a contentious topic as there is a risk of fragmentation and seeding of cancer. Furthermore, any disruption to the tissue will lead to scarring and make mucosal resection more difficult.

Nonetheless, without histological analysis, it is difficult to appreciate the exact nature of the lesion and the extent of invasion. Transanal microsurgery can be used as a curative method for low-risk T1 (sm1) rectal cancers, but patients with poor histological features or deeper submucosal invasion (sm2 and sm3) have a high risk of recurrence.

If the patient has been diagnosed with early rectal cancer, then cancer nurse specialists should be made available to provide patient support and detailed information about the operation and recovery. A stoma nurse consultation may also be deemed necessary to give advice and reassurance to patients even though the likelihood of a stoma is low.

**Pre-operative Preparation**

Patients are typically given full bowel preparation the day before surgery to empty the bowel and provide optimal exposure and access to the tumor. Prophylactic antibiotics and venous thromboembolism prophylaxis are administered at the surgeon's discretion at the time of the procedure.

**Post-operative Care**

After the operation, patients tend to stay one or two days in the hospital. Most people will complain of discomfort or some pain in the back passage, but this should resolve quickly. Oral intake is encouraged, and although there is no consensus, solid food can usually be started immediately. Bowel movements will be quite loose initially and can take a few weeks to normalize. In certain scenarios, the patient may need the help of dieticians to adjust their dietary intake for a short period postoperatively to ensure nutritional needs are met.