Generally, benztropine is contraindicated if the patient has a history of hypersensitivity to benztropine mesylate or any component of the drug formulation. Also, benztropine is contraindicated in patients with the following specific syndromes and diseases:

**Urinary Retention, Bladder Obstruction, and Prostatic Hypertrophy**

Benztropine can be used with caution for bladder obstruction and benign prostatic hypertrophy because it exerts anticholinergic effects that can mask symptoms of these diseases. Also, benztropine may cause dysuria that can aggravate urinary tract problems, especially urine retention.

**Closed-Angle Glaucoma**

Commonly, most anticholinergic drugs are avoided in closed-angle glaucoma. Benztropine is contraindicated in patients diagnosed with closed-angle glaucoma as it can cause mydriasis and cycloplegia. It can also lead to a significant increase in intraocular pressure indirectly.

**Tachycardia**

Benztropine use requires extreme caution in cardiac patients, especially those with tachycardia since it can worsen tachycardia due to its anticholinergic action at the sinoatrial(SA) node.

**Tardive Dyskinesia**

Long-term use of phenothiazines may cause the development of tardive dyskinesia. Although benztropine can be used to alleviate extrapyramidal symptoms, it is contraindicated for patients with tardive dyskinesia since benztropine, and other anti-parkinsonian drugs can aggravate the symptoms of tardive dyskinesia instead of reducing them.

**Behavioral and Psychological Changes**

Benztropine may impair mental and physical abilities. It can also cause vision impairment, including blurring effects that can cast a high risk when performing potentially hazardous tasks such as operating machinery or driving. Using benztropine for treating extrapyramidal disorders in psychotic patients may exaggerate the psychotic symptoms and behavioral changes. Thus, it should be contraindicated for such cases since anti-parkinsonian drugs, including benztropine, can lead to toxic psychosis. Besides, benztropine can cause visual hallucinations and mental confusion at a relatively higher dosage. Also, it can intensify the symptoms of dementia, so it should be contraindicated in dementia patients.

**Myasthenia Gravis and Autonomic Neuropathy**

The anticholinergic effects of benztropine cause muscle weakness as it competes with acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction(NMJ). Thus, like other anticholinergic drugs, benztropine should be avoided in patients diagnosed with myasthenia gravis and autonomic neuropathy. If the patient starts to feel stiffness in the neck, followed by sudden relaxation, it indicates the need to adjust the benztropine dose.

**Alcoholism and Hyperthermia**

The similar structure and function between benztropine and atropine as anticholinergic agents can cause anhydrosis. The administration of benztropine in individual patients should be slow and under extreme caution. For instance, giving benztropine to patients with hyperthermia, alcoholism, who perform manual labor in a hot environment, and patients taking other atropine-like medications require extreme caution. Common signs for anhydrosis induced by benztropine are a disturbance in sweating and the development of hyperthermia.

**Contact Lenses**

In general, anticholinergic drugs, including benztropine, usually cause dryness in the eyes. Thus, patients that typically wear contact lenses may feel discomfort. Consequently, users of the medication should apply lubricant eye drops (artificial tears) before using contact lenses to relieve the dryness. If the eye dryness is severe, patients should avoid contact lens use during benztropine treatment.