Infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysms are the most common aneurysms of the aorta. Screening ultrasound has helped detect AAA and allows for surveillance in asymptomatic patients with a diameter < 5 cm. In females, the repair should be considered at 5 cm, and in males, at 5.5 cm. If rapid enlargement is demonstrated (>5 mm over six months), repair should be considered. Education of first responders, including the nurse practitioner, triage nurse, primary care physicians, physician assistants, and emergency department physicians, can facilitate diagnosis and reduce delays in treatment.

An interprofessional team approach of emergency nurses, emergency physicians, intensivists, radiologists, and a vascular surgeon will facilitate rapid evaluation and treatment and improve outcomes. The vast majority of patients with AAA initially present to the emergency department with vague abdominal pain and/or a pulsatile mass. Thus, the triage nurse must be familiar with the presentation of an AAA and initiate a rapid admission with direct communication to the emergency department physician and the rest of the interprofessional team about the patient. Once admitted, if stable, these patients need an urgent ultrasound, so the radiologist needs to be notified. If the patient is unstable, the nurse should obtain vitals, attach monitoring equipment, and assist with resuscitation if the patient is hemodynamically unstable.

Referral to a vascular center that can provide a standard of care management is appropriate. Once the decision for repair has been made, cardiology workup and clearance and optimization of other medical co-morbidities can improve outcomes. If the aneurysm is small, the patient and family should be educated by the interprofessional team regarding compliance with blood pressure control, a healthy diet, exercise, cessation of smoking, and follow-up.

During postoperative care, the nurse has to be familiar with potential complications of the surgery and notify the interprofessional team if the patient has abdominal or back pain, wound discharge, fever, oliguria, or hypotension. The nurse should also ensure that the patient has prophylaxis for deep vein thrombosis prevention. The respiratory therapist has to encourage deep breathing and coughing, and the physical therapist has to encourage ambulation. The nurse should also auscultate for bowel sounds and convey the results to the interprofessional team so that feeding can be initiated. Before discharge, the pharmacist and nurse should educate the patient on the importance of medication compliance, the need to control blood pressure, and avoiding tobacco. The nurse should also ensure that the appropriate consulting physician/dietitian/social workers have seen the patient and the surgeon notified prior to discharge. Open communication between the interprofessional team is vital to ensure good outcomes. [Level 5]

**Outcomes**

For elective AAA repair, the outcomes are good, with minimal morbidity. However, if a rupture has occurred, the mortality rates can exceed 50%. Current guidelines suggest that patients with AAA should have the surgery in hospitals with an interprofessional team approach to dealing with this pathology. To improve outcomes, it is vital that the patient stop smoking, maintain a healthy body weight, control their blood pressure, and remain compliant with medications.