There are many benign variants of dermatofibroma, which are not discussed here. It is more important to differentiate benign dermatofibromas from more advanced and aggressive neoplasms that may appear similar to dermatofibromas in some cases.

Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) is a low to intermediate grade, locally aggressive neoplasm that can be mistaken for a benign dermatofibroma. Thankfully, there are several distinguishing features. DFSP is characteristically more cellular and will involve more of the subcutis, displaying “honeycomb” entrapment of subcutaneous fat. In difficult cases, immunohistochemical staining can be very helpful, as DFSP characteristically stains positive for CD-34 and will be factor XIIIa negative. Benign dermatofibromas will stain strongly positive for factor XIIIa but negative for the marker CD-34. Dermatofibromas may also show higher positive staining for D2-40. Ki-67 staining should indicate a much higher proliferation index in DFSP’s, and the mitotic rate should also be much higher in DFSP than in dermatofibromas. DFSPs are also often much larger lesions, with average diameters of 5 centimeters, according to one study.

Kaposi Sarcoma, also composed of a spindled cell proliferation within the dermis, may be mistaken for the aneurysmal variant of dermatofibroma as Kaposi Sarcoma characteristically displays red blood cells between spindled cellular areas and vascularity. However, Kaposi Sarcoma should display HHV-8 positivity and may also stain positive for CD31, CD34, and D2-40.

Basal cell carcinomas (BCC) can mimic a dermatofibroma with overlying follicular induction, which refers to epidermal hyperplasia such as basaloid proliferation. This differentiation is usually most difficult in superficial biopsies, which miss the underlying dermatofibroma. There may even be peripheral palisading in these lesions, a characteristic finding usually of BCCs. Important differentiating factors include the presence of CK20 positive Merkel cells in follicular induction. Other signs arguing for dermatofibroma may include clear cell hyperplasia, the absence of nuclear atypia, and crowding.