Patients with CBS will report a history of "release hallucinations," which is often synonymous with CBS, describing visual hallucinations that occur in individuals with vision loss related to the brain, optic nerve, or eye involvement.

Patients with chronic slow-progressing ocular disease typically report hallucinations at least one year after severe visual impairment or complete vision loss.

The visual hallucinations can vary from described events such as light flashes, shapes, or lines to complex events, including formed images and scenes.

Hallucinations are typically colored and range in the visual field from being animated, static, or moving en block. Patients will also report that hallucinations are more prevalent with eyes open than closed. Patients with CBS will also often report distress from their hallucinations, even though they often recognize them as unreal and disconnected from themselves. Lastly, in obtaining a patient's history, it is essential to note that CBS is not associated with sensory or auditory hallucinations.

Moreover, the hallucinations observed in CBS can be typically simple or complex, even though a full complex spectrum of hallucinations can exist.

Complex visual hallucinations are composed of lucid and complicated images of people, faces, animals, plants, flowers, trees, vehicles, and images of objects.

Ophthalmologic examination, identifying features like glaucoma, macular degeneration, cataracts, and retinal or optic nerve damage, can also be critical components of the physical exam as CBS requires visual impairment to be concurrent with reported visual hallucinations.

In a study from London, 38% of the 492 subjects reported visual hallucinations as frightening, horrifying, and startling during the onset. With time the emotional inputs to hallucinations reduced to 8%.

In 60% of patients, visual hallucinations didn't affect their lives, 33% said it had a negative impact, and 7% felt it had a good effect on their lives.

The patients manifest with some level of visual impairment; the visual hallucinations are better with more clarity than the residual vision. These visual hallucinations are vivid and are not under voluntary control. The hallucinations are exclusively visual and do not involve any other sensory modality. CBS patients manifest hallucinations when awake, alert and conscious. The patients have no dementia, and their mental function is preserved. The mental intellect, awareness, reasoning, judgment, and applications of knowledge are intact.