Obeticholic acid is a modified, synthetic bile acid that acts as a farnesoid X-activated receptor (FXR) agonist. Farnesoid X-activated receptors are primarily expressed in human enterocytes and hepatocytes. Naturally occurring bile acids are most often the ligands for FXRs. In the enterocytes, FXRs regulate the synthesis of bile acids and release fibroblast growth factor, specifically FGF-19, into the hepatic portal circulation.

FXRs primarily regulate hepatic triglyceride synthesis, fibrosis, and multiple other metabolic pathways in the hepatocytes. Once FGF-19 is released into the portal circulation, it binds to the FGFR-4 receptor on the hepatocytes. This receptor complex cascades to ultimately lead to the suppression of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1), the enzyme responsible for converting cholesterol into bile acids.

This primary pathway inhibits bile acid synthesis by the hepatocytes. FXRs in the hepatocytes are also activated by circulating bile acids to stimulate the bile salt export pump (BSEP) to increase bile salt excretion. Obeticholic acid upon intake is metabolized in the liver and is conjugated into glycine and taurine. Later, the conjugated products are secreted into the bile and absorbed by the small intestine. After these products enter enterohepatic circulation, they are then deconjugated back into OCA by the intestinal microbes.

Obeticholic acid selectively binds and activates the FXRs of the enterocytes and the hepatocytes, thereby reducing the liver and bile ducts to toxic levels of bile acids. Its binding potency, when compared with naturally occurring bile acids, is over 100-fold, effectively blunting the deleterious effects of bile acids on hepatic tissues. Obeticholic acid also directly stimulates the BSEP to decrease circulating bile salts in the liver and biliary tree. By reducing the hepatic exposure to bile acids, the progression of cholangitic processes such as PBC and PSC are limited.

While obeticholic acid has not been approved for use in NASH, current research suggests OCA's activity in suppressing hepatic triglyceride synthesis and promoting insulin sensitivity and insulin-dependent activities decreases the risk of lipid deposition into hepatocytes, reducing the incidence and progression of NASH.