The standard approach to perform aortic valve replacement is through a median sternotomy using cardiopulmonary bypass (CBP). With the advent of TAVR, minimally invasive SAVR approaches such as through a right anterior mini-thoracotomy are also being performed, albeit with hour longer CBP times.

After 300 IU/kg heparin has been administered, the ascending aorta cross clamped, CBP established, the patient cooled to 30°C, and cardioplegia is given, the specific steps of aortic valve replacement can begin. The entirety of the work is performed through an aortotomy at the level of the sinotubular junction or 1 cm above; the aortotomy may be transverse or oblique, extending down into the non-coronary sinus.

After having selected a valve (see below paragraph), the corresponding commercial valve sizer should be used to choose the valve of the best fit. The sizer at the simplest level is a disk attached to a probe, which is the same size as the desired valve. Since the sinotubular junction is typically where the aorta tapers, this area usually limits the introduction of sizer and valve. In cases where the basal ring/surgical aortic annulus is too narrow, an enlargement procedure may be used, as discussed below. When the appropriate sized valve is chosen, the valve is mounted on the valve introducer, introduced into the field, and attachment is begun. Although some surgeons have explored sutureless valve attachment, most valves are sutured into place using a 2-0 permanent braided suture such as polyester of alternating colors such as teal and white for better clarity identifying which suture goes where in a tight space.

Continuous, interrupted, or horizontal mattress technique may be used, with or without pledgets, to reinforce weak annuli. The suture is commonly passed through the annulus from the ventricle to the aorta side then through the sewing ring surrounding the valve. If pledgets are used, placing the pledgets below the annulus may allow the valve to sit on top, accommodating a larger valve. Suturing may begin at any cusp and proceed in either direction as long as it is systematic. Once all sutures are placed with equal spacing, crossing none, the valve is then held up straight with the introducer and valve and introducer are “parachuted” down by the surgeon and assistant pulling all of the sutures slowly tight. The introducer is removed, the sutures are tied, and the tails cut; the valve is confirmed to sit well with no gaps, which could become leaks, and the coronary ostia are approved patent. Retraction sutures are cut, the aortotomy is reapproximated and closed with running polypropylene suture in two layers. Trendelenburg positioning, CBP circuit manipulation, venting, and transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) are all used to de-air the heart and safely remove the aortic cross-clamp. TEE is also used to confirm excellent valve function with no paravalvular leak. Chest tubes and pacing wires are placed, hemostasis assured, and the patient is weaned off CBP, heparin reversed, and decannulated in the usual fashion, and the chest is closed.

When selecting a suitable bioprosthetic valve, the surgeon considers multiple variables. The most obvious variable is size. Prostheses range from 19 mm to 31 mm; however, size does not correspond between manufacturers; a 21 mm in one brand may be a 23 mm in another.

Supraannular bioprosthetic valves tend to have better hemodynamics than infrannular bioprosthetics. Stentless bioprosthetic valves lack a metal stent, so thus lack an intrinsic gradient and are considered to have better hemodynamic performance, but they also require more time to implant properly.

In a tight annulus which still is at risk of PPM, despite trialing different sizes from different manufacturers with better iEOA, then one of three aortic enlargement procedures may be performed. The Nicks-Nunez procedure enlarges the aorta posteriorly by incising the aorta between the left and non-coronary sinuses vertically up into the aortic root, then closing the incision with a patch.

Postoperatively, valve replacement patients are recovered similar to other cardiac surgery patients. Patients with severe ventricular hypertrophy may have their cardiac compliance temporarily worsened coming off CPB so that they may need increased preload and central venous pressures maintained higher at 15 to 18 mmHg in the immediate postoperative period. Post-op valve patients also need to execute the anticoagulation plan made preoperatively. Although the advantage of a bioprosthetic valve is less need for anticoagulation, they should still be maintained on anticoagulation with an INR target of 2.5 for a minimum of three months while the valve is undergoing endothelialization. Anticoagulation should be extended to a goal of six months for further stroke risk reduction. Indefinite daily aspirin 75 to 100 mg is recommended.