**Dosage Forms:**Minocycline is available in oral tablets, capsules, intravenous injection, and topical foam**.**

- Oral capsule: 50 mg, 75 mg, and 100 mg

- Oral capsule extended release (24 hour): 45 mg, 90 mg, and 135 mg

- Oral tablet: 50 mg, 75 mg, 100 mg

- Oral tablet extended release (24 hour): 45 mg, 55 mg, 65 mg, 80 mg, 90 mg, 105 mg, 115 mg, and 135 mg

- Intravenous, solution reconstituted: 100 mg (each vial)

- Topical, foam: 1.5% aerosol foam, 4% aerosol foam

**Adult Dose:**Ingestion of adequate amounts of liquid along with oral capsules or tablets for the tetracycline drug class is recommended to reduce the risk of esophageal irritation and/or ulceration. The usual recommended oral dosage of minocycline capsules or tablets is 200 mg initially, followed by 100 mg minocycline every 12 hours. For pediatric patients age****eight years or older, the usual oral dosage is minocycline 4 mg/kg,  followed by 2 mg/kg minocycline every 12 hours.

- Uncomplicated gonococcal infections other than urethritis or anorectal infections in men are treated for four days or more, with post-therapy cultures done within 2-3 days.

- Uncomplicated gonococcal urethritis in men is treated for five days.

- Syphilis is treated for 10 to 15 days with close follow-up, including laboratory tests.

- For treatment of meningococcal carrier state, the recommended minocycline dosage is 100 mg every 12 hours for a total of five days.

- Mycobacterium marinum infection treatment optimal doses are not established, but 100 mg every 12 hours for six to eight weeks has been used successfully in a limited number of patients.

- Uncomplicated endocervical, urethral, or rectal infections in adults caused by Chlamydia trachomatisor Ureaplasma urealyticum: 100 mg orally, every 12 hours for seven days or more.

**Extended-release Formulation Dose:**The recommended oral dosage of minocycline extended-release form is usually 1 mg/kg once daily for 12 weeks. Higher doses haven't shown additional benefit in treating inflammatory acne lesions and might be associated with a higher frequency of acute vestibular side effects.****

**Intravenous Dose:**IV therapy is indicated only when a patient can not take it orally or oral therapy is inadequate. Switch to oral therapy as soon as possible. If IV therapy is given over prolonged periods, thrombophlebitis may result. Rapid administration should be avoided.

- The initial adult dose is 200 mg, followed by 100 mg administered IV over 60 minutes every 12 hours, not to exceed 400 mg in 24 hours.

- The usual pediatric dose is  4 mg/kg of the first dose, then 2 mg/kg minocycline administered over 60 minutes every 12 hours, should not exceed the adult dose recommendations.

The lyophilized powder for injection should be reconstituted with 5 mL sterile water for injection USP and immediately further diluted in (100 mL-1,000 mL with dextrose injection USP, sodium chloride injection USP, and dextrose/sodium chloride injection USP, or 250 mL-1000 mL lactated ringer's injection USP). It should not be diluted with any solutions with calcium as precipitate might form especially in neutral or alkaline solutions. Once diluted into an IV bag, the injection may be stored at room temperature for up to 4 hours or refrigerated at 36 to 46°F for up to 24 hours. Any unused portions must be discarded after that period.

**Topical Foam:**It should be applied as a thin layer overall area of the face for the treatment of inflammatory lesions of rosacea in adults. It is applied approximately the same time each day, at least 1 hour before bedtime, and the patient should not shower, bathe, or swim for at least 1-hour post-application of medicine.

**Specific Patient Population**

- **Patients with Renal Impairment:**In patients with renal impairment, the total daily dosage of minocycline should be decreased by either reducing the indicated individual patient doses and/or extending the time intervals between the doses.

- **Pregnancy:**It is classified as FDA-pregnancy category D medicine. Due to their potential for permanent discoloration of teeth and impairment of long bone growth in the fetus, pregnant women should avoid tetracyclines.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**Available literature indicates that short-term use of minocycline in nursing mothers is acceptable as minocycline is excreted in low amounts and further absorption by the infant is inhibited by the calcium in breastmilk. Avoid prolonged or repeated courses during breastfeeding. Consider monitoring the breastfed infant for rash, diarrhea, or candidiasis (thrush, diaper rash). Black discoloration of breastmilk is reported with the use of minocycline.