Managing alkalosis requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including a nurse, laboratory technologists, pharmacists, and several physicians in different specialties.

Immediately upon identifying alkalosis, the primary clinician is responsible for coordinating the care, which includes the following

- Ordering serial blood gas analysis, blood, and urine chemistries.

- Monitor the patient for signs and symptoms of neuromuscular depression, cardiac arrhythmias, hypertension, and volume depletion.

- Performing various maneuvers to help limit the severity of alkalosis and boost the body's buffering mechanisms.

- Consult with the pharmacist about the correct dose and method of correcting electrolyte abnormalities.

- Consult with a nephrologist on further management, which may include dialysis.

- Consult with the radiologist about imaging tests to evaluate the causes of persistent emesis.

- Consult with the intensivist about ICU care and monitoring while in hospital.

- Nurses monitoring the patient with metabolic alkalosis should be aware of the potential complications, including arrhythmias, and promptly inform the team members.

The management of alkalosis does not stop with the correction of alkalosis. Once the patient achieves a stable state, one has to determine how and why the patient became alkalotic and also determine risk factors for recurrence of alkalosis. The morbidity and mortality of alkalosis in hospitalized patients are significant.

Only by working as an interprofessional team can the morbidity of alkalosis be decreased. This process will include ongoing monitoring by the nursing staff, who will alert the attending regarding any change in status. The pharmacist can perform medication reconciliation and be involved in the ordering and administration rate of fluids, bicarbonate, and other pharmaceutical measures to correct alkalosis. Their expertise should be used as a tool by the clinicians managing the case in a collaborative interprofessional effort with the primary aim of achieving optimal patient outcomes.