Restenosis may occur as a result of an excessive reaction to the vascular injury sustained from the PCI. The first vascular response following the trauma of PCI includes elastic recoil, platelet plug, and thrombus formation, occurring in the initial minutes and hours following intervention. This initial response is followed by a complex inflammatory and reparative process that lasts weeks to months or even years in the case of DES-ISR. The acute phase is characterized by the deposition of platelets and fibrin, with the adhesion of circulating neutrophils and monocytes. Over weeks, chronic inflammatory cells (macrophages and giant cells) will gradually replace the acute inflammatory cells at the site of vascular injury. These processes occur over a relatively short period (weeks to months), unlike the slow progression (years) of atherosclerotic disease in native coronary lesions. The two principal biologic mechanisms of ISR are neointimal hyperplasia and neoatherosclerosis.

Neointimal hyperplasia is a reparative process whereby various coagulation and inflammatory factors and cells stimulate vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation and extracellular matrix (ECM) formation at the site of injury. In addition to initial inflammatory response, platelet- and leukocyte-related growth factors stimulate further VSMC proliferation and migration from the media to the inceptive neointima with the formation of ECM. At about two weeks after stent implantation, a neointimal layer, composed of VSMCs and a proteoglycan-rich ECM are visible above the stent struts. Subsequently, endothelial cells proliferate and cover the ECM from the luminal side.

A diffuse pattern of ISR, characterized by a predominance of VSMCs surrounded by lesser amount ECM, is typical of BMS-ISR. Peak BMS-ISR is observed at 3 to 6 months and remains relatively stable beyond one year. DES implantation, on the other hand, enables the local release of antiproliferative agents [paclitaxel or “-limus” drug group (sirolimus, everolimus, zotarolimus, biolimus, etc)] resulting in delayed vessel wall healing, characterized by the presence of chronic fibrin deposits, incomplete neoendothelization, and prolonged inflammatory changes that persist for up to 48 months. This process prevents excessive neointimal hyperplasia after DES stent implantation and leads to a reduction in the occurrence of ISR.

Neoatherosclerosis, on the other hand, is related to incomplete regeneration of the endothelium leading to excessive uptake of circulating lipids and accelerated development of atherosclerotic plaques in the nascent neointima. Intimal thickening, intracellular lipid deposition with thin-cap fibroatheroma (TCFA), or the presence of necrotic tissue has been detected using histopathological or optical coherence tomography (OCT) evaluations. Nakazawa, et al. found in their histopathological autopsy study that neoatherosclerosis as a result of persistent endothelial dysfunction and incomplete neoendothelization occurs more frequently (31% vs. 16%; P < 0.001) and earlier (median: 420 vs. 2160 days; P < 0.001) following DES than BMS implantation.

Moreover, neoatherosclerosis in DES shows unstable characteristics (TCFA or plaque rupture) earlier (about two years) after implantation, whereas similar features in BMS occur relatively later (about six years). Independent predictors of neoatherosclerosis include younger age, longer implant durations, sirolimus- or paclitaxel-eluting stent implantation, smoking, chronic kidney disease, and LDL-cholesterol greater than 3.9 mmol/l. The belief is that neoatherosclerosis, along with the rupturing of the TCFA, are among the predominant causes of late stent failure (i.e., delayed ISR and late or very late stent thrombosis).p < 0.001).