The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have classified biological weapons into three categories based on various factors, including the morbidity and mortality caused by the disease in humans:

- Category A: Highest priority. Pose a risk to national security. They are easily transmitted from person to person and have high morbidity and mortality. They would have a major public health impact, cause panic, and result in special public health preparedness requirements.

- Category B: Second highest priority. These include diseases with lower morbidity and mortality as compared to category A. They are also more difficult to disseminate.

- Category C: Third highest priority. They have the potential to cause significant morbidity and mortality but consist mostly of emerging pathogens that could potentially be engineered for mass dispersion in the future.

For the purpose of this review, the biological weapons and agents which can be used in bioterrorism have been broadly classified as bacterial, viral, fungal, protozoal, and toxins. A brief overview of specific agents which have been used in prior attacks as well as have the potential to weaponized are discussed in this review. The agents being discussed are summarized below:

- Bacterial: Bacillus anthracis (anthrax), Brucella species (brucellosis), Burkholderia mallei (glanders), Burkholderia pseudomallei (melioidosis), Franciscella tularensis (tularemia), Salmonella typhi (typhoid fever), and other Salmonella species (Salmonellosis), Shigella species (shigellosis), Vibrio cholerae (cholera), Yersinia pestis (plague), Rickettsial agents including Coxiella burnetii (Q fever), Rickettsia prowazekii (typhus fever), Rickettsia rickettsii (Rocky Mountain spotted fever), and Chlamydia psittaci (Psittacosis).

- Viral: Variola major (Smallpox), viral hemorrhagic fevers, viral encephalitis.

- Fungal: Coccidiodes immitis (coccidioidomycosis), Histoplasma capsulatum (histoplasmosis).

- Protozoal: Cryptosporidium parvum (Cryptosporidiosis).

- Toxins: ricin, abrin, Clostridium perfringens toxins, Clostridium botulinum toxins, tetrodotoxin, nerve agents