Likely the most clinically significant abnormalities involving the numerous physiologic variations of the aortic arch, in general, are vascular rings, which are abnormalities of the aortic arch and great vessels that cause tracheal and/or esophageal compression. A true vascular ring involves the presence of a right-sided or a double aortic arch with a left-sided ligmentum arteriosum and an aberrant or retroesophageal left subclavian artery. These rings can involve several innominate artery variations. As previously discussed, one type of variation that is possible is a right aortic arch with a “mirrored” branching pattern (distal innominate artery gives rise to the left common carotid and left subclavian). This variation occurs in over a third of patients with a right-sided aorta and causes symptoms of tracheoesophageal compression.

Innominate artery compression syndrome is another cause of tracheal compression that is not considered a true vascular ring. It is caused by abnormal compression of the anterior aspect of the trachea as the artery crosses it; therefore, it is usually not involved with any abnormal variation of the artery.

As previously discussed, damage to the innominate artery is a major consideration when performing a tracheostomy. One of the major delayed complications of the procedure is the formation of a tracheo-innominate artery fistula and can occur in up to 1% of patients who undergo a tracheostomy.

Other vascular anomalies can affect the innominate artery, such as aneurysm or stenosis, due to atherosclerotic disease. However, these are relatively uncommon when compared to other locations. Supraaortic aneurysms, in general, are quite uncommon, and innominate artery aneurysms comprise only about 3% of these.