Glomerulonephritis is associated with many diagnoses that are differentiated by histopathology or clinical presentation.

Hypervolemia (overfill) associated with nephrotic syndrome is due to tubular dysregulation, which increases sodium absorption and water retention. In these patients, hypoalbuminemia and decreased oncotic pressure are not the cause of edema.  Therefore, it is important to understand each patient's volume status before initiating therapy that addresses edema.

In children, MCD is the most common cause of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome. Minimal change disease is the third most common cause of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome in adults after focal segmental glomerular sclerosis and membranous nephropathy. An early kidney biopsy is crucial to making the diagnosis of MCD in adults.

In children, MCD is primarily a clinical diagnosis, and biopsy is only required in the presence of atypical clinical features:

- Age of onset before 1 or after12 years old

- Gross hematuria

- Low serum C3

- Marked Hypertension

- Elevated creatinine

- Renal failure without hypovolemia

- Positive history or serology for secondary causes

- Steroid resistance

A successful response to steroids might be anticipated in children how to present with typical clinical findings of MCD and are:

- Age 1-12 years old

- Normotensive

- Normal Renal Function

- +/- Microscopic hematuria

**Basic labs:**

- **Urinalysis/ Urine microscopy**: Dipstick will show 3+/4+ proteinuria. A urine dipstick and urinalysis (UA) are often the initial tests obtained to screen for MCD. In MCD, the urine typically looks frothy secondary to proteinuria, and the microscopy shows oval fat bodies and fatty casts. Dysmorphic RBCs, acanthocytes, abnormal casts, and proteinuria are findings suggestive of glomerular injury not frequently seen in MCD.

- **Urine collection:**A spot protein/creatinine ratio greater than 200 mg/mmol in children and protein/creatinine ratio>300-350mg/mmol in adults is consistent with nephrotic syndrome, as is a 24-hour urine collection that reveals a total protein greater than 3 to 3.5 g/24hour in adults. A report of measuring protein output as gms/m2/hr accounts for differences in body mass. A measurement of 40mg/m2/hour or greater (1gm/m2/24hour) is indicative of proteinuria consistent with nephrotic syndrome in children. Microscopic hematuria is present in 10% to 30% of adults.

- **Complete metabolic panel (CMP):**CMP demonstrates a low total protein, low albumin (frequently <2.5 g/dl), and low total calcium (ionized calcium binds to albumin, and albumin is low).

- **Complete blood count (CBC):**CBC****will show hemoconcentration and thrombocytosis. This is seen due to the intravascular volume contraction from fluid sequestration into the interstitial space.

- **Total cholesterol and triglyceride levels:**These are increased due to an increase in hepatic lipoprotein synthesis as a result of low oncotic pressures.

**Labs to rule out secondary causes:**

- Antinuclear antibodies

- Hepatitis B and C serologic tests

- Serologic test for syphilis (e.g., rapid plasma reagin)

- HIV antibody test

- Complement levels (CH50, C3, C4)