For centuries, anatomists have studied the complex nature of the fat pads of the face. Many functions are attributed to the buccal fat pad. It is a prominent structure in neonates, thought to be utilized primarily to support the suckling function. As children age and begin chewing, the buccal fat pad facilitates the gliding function among the muscles of mastication. The buccal fat pad also serves as a cushion to protect neurovascular structures from external forces. These adipose structures also play an important role in facial aesthetics in people ranging from neonates to the elderly.

Anatomists have extensively researched the structure of the buccal fat pad for many years. Bichat first described it in 1802. It is thus referred to as the boule de Bichat in the non-English-speaking world.

After its initial anatomical description by Bichat, it has since been described by several anatomists, including Gaughran in 1957, Dubin in 1989, and most recently Zhang in 2001.

The buccal fat pad is confined by the buccinator muscle medially. Anterolaterally it is confined by the muscles of facial expression and the deep cervical fascia. Posteriorly it is confined to the masticator space. The anterior, intermediate, and posterior lobes of the buccal fat pad are encapsulated by independent membranes. The buccal fat pad is fixated by ligaments to the maxilla, posterior zygoma, temporalis tendon, buccinator membrane, and rim of the infraorbital fissure. The ligaments serve as conduits for the entry of multiple vessels that provide a rich blood supply to the different lobes of the buccal fat pad.

The anterior lobe of the BFP is a triangular mass that lies inferiorly to the zygoma and is confined to the buccal space. Its anterior vertex extends to the front border of the buccinator, where it meets the orbicularis oris. The superior vertex of the anterior lobe extends to the inferior margin of the orbicularis oculi, where it enters the infraorbital foramen and encapsulates the infraorbital vessels. The front of the anterior lobe is bordered by the facial artery. The buccal branches of the facial nerve either overlie or lie within the anterior lobe (as well as the buccal extension of the posterior lobe). The duct of the parotid and the facial vein passes through the anterior lobe. The anterior lobe extends posteriorly and joins with the intermediate and posterior lobes via loose connective tissue.

The intermediate lobe lies lateral to the mid maxilla and joins the anterior and posterior lobes. In adults, it is a membranous structure composed of thin, fat tissue that runs superiorly to inferiorly, segregating the anterior lobe from the posterior lobe. It is not always identified in adults, but it is a more substantial fatty mass in children.

The posterior lobe of the buccal fat pad, synonymous with the body, is the most substantial. It is confined to the masticatory space. It consists of four extensions: the buccal, pterygoid, pterygopalatine, and temporal extensions. The buccal extension and body account for roughly 50 percent of the buccal fat pad volume.

The posterior lobe or body spans superiorly to the inferior orbital fissure, surrounds the temporalis muscle, spans inferiorly to the superior mandibular body, and courses posteriorly to the anterior ramus and tendon of the temporalis.

The buccal extension lies inferior to Stenson’s Duct, and it is the most superficial process and is the portion removed during buccal fat pad resection.

The pterygopalatine extension lies within the pterygopalatine fossa and surrounds the pterygopalatine vessels. It also runs superiorly to the infraorbital fissure, encapsulates the infraorbital vessels, and fuses to the anterior lobe capsule.

The pterygoid extension is located within the pterygomandibular space and houses the mandibular neurovascular bundle to include the lingual nerve. It rests on the lateral aspect of the medial and lateral pterygoid muscles.

The temporal extension of the buccal fat pad spans deep to the temporalis. It is important to understand that both a superficial and deep body of fat is present concerning the temporalis. It is the deep portion that runs in continuity to the buccal fat pad. The superficial temporal fat pad is a separate entity from the buccal fat pad with a distinct vascular supply.