**Layers**

The layers can easily be remembered by the mnemonic SCALP: S (Skin); C (sub-Cutaneous tissue); A (Aponeurotic layer); L (Loose areolar tissue); P (Pericranium). It is helpful to remember that the aponeurotic layer is also referred to as the galea and the loose areolar tissue is also known as just loose connective tissue.

The skin of the scalp is the same thickness of the rest of the body making it a potentially useful donor site for skin grafts. The vessels, lymphatics and nerves course through the subcutaneous layer.

The majority of scalp mobility is in the layer of the loose areolar tissue layer. During dissection, this pocket can be easily dissected and is a relatively safe plane, and nerves lie superior to this plane and vasculature generally lying superiorly and in the layer of the dense connective tissue. An important area where this mobility lessens is the superior temporal septum in the lateral frontal region. This thick ligamentous area is also known as the conjoined tendon or sometimes the conjoint tendon. It represents a confluence of the frontal periosteum, the deep temporal fascia, and the temporoparietal fascia. To gain tissue from these areas, the ligamentous adhesions must be divided, for example as in the endoscopic browlift.

The best replacement for scalp tissue is scalp tissue. Identical hair-bearing qualities of the scalp are difficult to reproduce. Hair transplantation can be used at a later time to reestablish hairlines or camouflage scars.

**Vascular supply**

Five large arteries perfuse the scalp bilaterally. Flaps rely on these arteries either via random pattern or axial blood supply. The scalp can be broadly divided into four different vascular territories

- Anterior: supratrochlear and supraorbital artery (terminal branches of the internal carotid)

- Lateral: superficial temporal artery

- Posterior: occipital artery

- Posterolateral: posterior auricular artery

The veins anastomose with each other and enter the diploic veins of the skull bones and the dural sinuses. The veins accompany the arteries and as such generally have the same names as above.

**Innervation**

The scalp has innervation from branches of the three divisions of the trigeminal nerve (CN V), cervical spinal nerve and branches from the cervical plexus. From anterior to posterior the nerves are:

- Supratrochlear nerve and supraorbital nerve (V1)

- Zygomaticotemporal nerve (V2)

- Auriculotemporal nerve (V3)

- Lesser occipital nerve (V3)

- Greater occipital nerve (C2, C3)

- Occipital nerve (C3)

**Lymphatic drainage**

The skin from the frontal part of the scalp drains into the parotid nodes, submandibular nodes, and deep cervical lymph nodes. The skin from the posterior portion drains into the posterior auricular nodes and occipital lymph nodes. This fact is important as malignancies can metastasize to these lymph nodes.