The diagnosis of cerebral arterial gas embolism is clinical and based on history consistent with the possible introduction of gas into a patient’s vasculature (e.g., pulling a CVL or surfacing from a dive) and neurological findings on exam or syncope within 10 minutes of the possible insult.  No radiographic evaluation is absolutely indicated if the history and findings are clear.  Given the remarkable rapidity with which a modern ED can get a chest x-ray (to evaluate for pneumothorax or another injury which might require attention prior to recompression) and even non-contrasted CT imaging of the head, either of these may be indicated for evaluation of the patient’s complaints if the etiology is in question. A finger-stick blood sugar test is recommended as crossed deficits are common with hypoglycemia as well as gas embolism, and it does not result in a delay to recompression.

It is critical to remember that divers get all the same diseases non-divers get when evaluating a chief complaint, so the differential diagnosis should remain broad.  A golden rule of thumb in diving medicine is to never delay recompression if the clinical diagnosis supports arterial gas embolism.

Large gas loads often result in multiple emboli in no distinct pattern on CT or MRI. While it is possible to see gas on non-contrasted CT of the head, its absence does not imply that no embolism occurred.  MRI may show nothing at all or diffuse infarcts with surrounding edema.  No current theory adequately explains this disparity, but evidence from Air Force high altitude chamber research clearly demonstrates this often frustrating disparity in radiographic imaging of confirmed gas emboli.