Physicians should provide patients an explanation of the cause of their lesions. The patient should be advised to inform all current and previous sexual partners in the past six months of their genital warts. Patients should be counseled on the importance of condom usage, as condoms have been shown to protect against HPV infection, which causes genital warts.

The primary care clinicians and infectious disease nurses should educate patients on the benefits of the HPV vaccine. The HPV infection is preventable with a highly efficacious vaccine. This vaccine protects against HPV6 and HPV11, which is the causative agent behind around 90% of genital warts. The vaccine also protects against viral strains that cause cervical cancer, including HPV16 and HPV18.

Cervical cancer screening guidance comes from the American Cancer Society guidelines and does not require modification with the presence or absence of genital warts. There are no indications for females younger than 21 to be screened for cervical cancer. Females aged 21 to 29 should receive screening with a cytology pap smear alone every three years. Between the ages of 30 to 65, females should undergo either cytology testing every three years, or a combination of HPV viral testing and cytology testing every five years. Cervical cancer screening after age 65 is not a recommendation if the patient has had adequate negative testing.

Finally, the patient should receive education on safe sex practice; this means using barrier protection, avoiding anal sex, and multiple partners. The patient should be encouraged to be tested for other sexually transmitted infections and maintain long term follow up.