Multiple conditions can cause HF, including systemic diseases, a wide range of cardiac conditions, and some hereditary defects. Etiologies of HF vary between high-income and developing countries, and patients may have mixed etiologies.

- Coronary artery disease (CAD): chronic and acute ischemia causes direct damage to the myocardium and leads to remodeling and scar formation, resulting in inadequate relaxation in diastole and impaired contraction in systole, which decreases contractility and cardiac output (CO). This scar formation may also correlate with aneurysm formation, and that further impairs contractile performance and relaxation. Myocardial infarction (MI) also causes dyssynchronous contraction of the infarcted segment, subsequent remodeling of the ventricle, ventricular dilatation with annular dilation, and mitral regurgitation that predispose to HF and decrease the CO. Several tachyarrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation/atrial flutter or non sustained ventricular tachycardia is common in patients with CAD and can deteriorate the cardiac function more. More than 70% of cases with HF have CAD.

- High blood pressure (HBP): HBP is an independent risk factor for CAD. The high prevalence of HBP makes it a possible cause of HF in around one-fourth to one-third of cases. The heart must pump up blood against a higher afterload caused by HBP, which increases the myocardial mass as a compensatory mechanism to maintain a normal CO and that causes left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). If blood pressure (BP) remains uncontrolled, apoptosis and fibrosis may result. LVH increases myocardial stiffness and can cause ischemia, which leads to HFpEF or HFrEF. Control of BP is of paramount importance in improving the prognosis of HF. The Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial (SPRINT) has shown that lowering the systolic BP to a target goal of less than 120 mmHg in HBP patients without diabetes had lower rates of HF with 38% lower relative risk compared to systolic BP goal of less than140 mmHg.

- Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): COPD increases the risk of CAD and other smoking-related illnesses, and cardiac dysrhythmias and can cause pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure.

- Valvular heart disease: degenerate valve disease in developed countries and rheumatic valve disease in low-income countries can cause HF. Aortic and pulmonary stenosis increases the ventricular afterload and may cause HF. In valve regurgitation, a persistent volume overload can cause ventricular enlargement and functional impairment that may lead to HF.

- Cardiomyopathies (CMP): CMP is a disease in which there are functional and structural heart muscle abnormalities in the absence of CAD, HBP, valvular, or congenital heart disease. CMP categorizes into five types, which can be genetic or acquired: dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM), arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), and other unclassified cardiomyopathies (isolated noncompaction of the left ventricle [INLV] and Takotsubo syndrome are also in this category). CMP can cause HFrEF, HFpEF, or HFmrEF.

Other possible causes of HF include congenital heart disease, myocarditis, infiltrative disease, peripartum cardiomyopathy, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), connective tissue disease, amyloidosis, substance abuse, long-standing alcohol use, obesity, diabetes mellitus (DM), hyperthyroidism (can cause high-output HF), pulmonary hypertension (can cause right HF), constrictive pericarditis (can cause HFpEF), pulmonary embolism (can cause right HF), and chemotherapies (like doxorubicin).