Presenting symptoms of a cerebellar infarction are often nonspecific and overlap with other neurologic, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and systemic conditions. Particular attention paid to thoracic, abdominal, and systemic complaints and findings can lessen concern for other immediate life-threatening conditions such as trauma, aortic dissection, acute coronary syndrome, pulmonary embolism, hypovolemia, or sepsis. Other common misdiagnoses include vestibular neuronitis, migraine, syncope (potentially due to orthostasis or arrhythmia), hypertensive emergency, renal failure, hypoglycemia, and ethanol or drug intoxication. As with other strokes, historical features guide risk stratification and treatment planning.

The time of onset and progression of symptoms can be particularly helpful along with provoking and mitigating factors in the determination of cerebellar strokes and differential diagnoses. As a general rule, symptoms starting over seconds to minutes are attributable to benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV), vasovagal syncope, or arrhythmia. Symptoms starting over minutes to hours are often due to hypoglycemia, migraine, or psychological causes. Finally, symptoms starting over hours to days are attributable to labyrinthitis or medication side effects but are also suspicious for cerebellar infarct. Even longer-lasting symptoms can be concerning for a growing posterior fossa mass. Symptoms triggered by loud noises can point towards peripheral inner ear disease, those extinguished by eye closing can point towards an ophthalmologic cause, those arising from changes in body posture (as opposed to head movement) can point towards a cardiovascular condition, but those triggered by walking are most suspicious for a cerebellar infarct. Risk factors for vascular disease such as age, smoking, obesity, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension can increase concern for cerebellar infarcts as well.

Commonly, about 75% of patients will report "dizziness" of some form, with a sensation of vertigo or of falling towards one side. Many patients will complain they cannot walk or can do so only with difficulty, either due to ataxia or to focal or systemic "weakness." More than 50% report nausea or vomiting. Most often symptoms are more severe than examination findings. These neurologic findings can include localizing signs such as truncal or limb ataxia, cranial nerve defects such as diplopia or nystagmus (often direction-changing or gaze-evoked, more worrying if vertical or torsional), and dysarthria. In contrast to cerebral strokes, these are usually ipsilesional (occurring on the same side of the patient as the cerebellar stroke). For patients with larger strokes or with advanced features of elevated intracranial pressure or brainstem compression, patients can present simply with lethargy, frank coma, or cardiovascular collapse, each of which portends a poor outcome.

In some cases, as the symptoms are non-specific usually the diagnosis of cerebellar stroke is missed. The presentation mainly depends on the location and extent of the lesion. So, a thorough history and neurological exam are key to diagnose the cerebellar lesions.