# Continuing Education Activity

Spinal cord stimulator implantation is an essential procedure for the treatment of chronic neuropathic pain. In select patient's spinal stimulators can be effective pain relievers with a relatively low complication rate. This activity outlines the spinal cord stimulator implantation. It includes the indications and contraindications to implantation. It also highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients who undergo implantation of spinal cord stimulators.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications and contraindications for spinal cord stimulator implantation.
- Describe the technique of spinal cord stimulator implantation.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of the potential complications of spinal cord stimulator implantation.
- Outline the interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance spinal cord stimulator implantation and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Spinal cord stimulators are designed to treat chronic pain. The implantable device offers a nonpharmacological approach to various pain conditions. Stimulators have been used for the treatment of both neuropathic and ischemic pain. Spinal cord stimulator implantation is usually reserved for patients who have failed various forms of conservative and pharmacological treatment options. After a percutaneous trial, a permanent stimulator is installed. Patients can have long-lasting pain relief following the procedure. There are various indications for implanting a stimulator, but it is most commonly done following failed back surgery. Although severe complications following the installation of a spinal cord stimulator are rare, they can be significant. Various types of stimulators and electrical impulses are used to provide pain relief.

Further research will determine if one type of stimulator is superior compared to another. Many insurance companies require psychological screening before the placement of the stimulator. Mental healthcare disorders are associated with worse outcomes after spinal cord stimulator implantation.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Spinal cord stimulator leads are placed within the epidural space. The dura mater lies anteriorly and the vertebral wall posteriorly to the epidural space. Blood vessels, lymph nodes, and fat also make up the posterior wall. The epidural space anatomically lies within the dural sac. Nerve roots are bathed with cerebrospinal fluid lie within the sac. The epidural space is at its fullest at the L2 vertebra; it starts superiorly with the base of the skull at the foramen magnum, then descends inferiorly until the sacrum at the sacral hiatus. Stimulator leads can be implanted within the level of cervical, thoracic, lumbar vertebra, and the sacrum. Electrical signals, either persistent our pulsatile, are applied to the epidural space once the spinal cord stimulator is installed.

Spinal cord stimulators function by neuromodulating the spinothalamic tract within the spinal cord. The spinothalamic tract regulates pain. When this pathway becomes disrupted as in the case of chronic pain, it is said to be dysregulated.

# Indications

Ischemic back pain, such as symptomatic peripheral vascular disease and refractory angina, are possible indications for spinal cord stimulation implantation in inoperable cases. Spinal cord stimulators can improve New York Heart Association (NYHA) classification and enhance the quality of life.

Separately, failed back surgery syndrome is the most common indication for spinal cord stimulator implant. Spinal cord stimulation is an effective analgesic. Implantation is used for persistent radicular pain following surgery.

Implantation of a stimulator is more effective than medical treatment for greater than fifty percent pain reduction for a multitude of chronic pain disorders, including diabetic neuropathy, chronic back pain, peripheral vascular pain (ischemic pain), failed back surgery syndrome, complex regional pain.

# Contraindications

Pacemakers and defibrillators are often compatible with spinal cord stimulator implants. However, a history of a prior pacemaker or cardiac defibrillator requires the approval of stimulator implantation by a cardiologist before the procedure. Having either a pacemaker or defibrillator remains a relative contraindication to the implant. Both devices require close follow up following stimulator implants.

# Equipment

The equipment needed for spinal cord stimulator implantation includes stimulation leads, a cable to connect the leads to a generator, and an implantable pulse generator. The pulse generator’s electrical impulse can be modified to help provide pain relief. There are various types of generators. Paresthesia-based and paresthesia-free (high frequency or burst) stimulators are two types of generators.

# Personnel

- Primary care provider

- Pain medicine specialist

- First assistant for the spinal cord implantation.

- Nursing team

- Anesthesiologist

# Preparation

The management of antiplatelet and anticoagulant medications should be discussed with the primary medical team prior to implantation. Patients taking anticoagulants may be at increased risk of developing spinal epidural hematomas.

# Technique or Treatment

Stimulators that are paraesthesia based or paraesthesia free are the two main types of stimulators. There are persistently activated stimulators, high frequency, and burst stimulators. Electrical impulse control determines either persistent or tonic delivery.

The technique of installation is relatively comparable from one type of stimulator to another. When surgical leads are placed, it is typically done with spinal anesthesia using bupivacaine. Paresthesia testing can still be complete despite the anesthesia.

Stimulator implantation requires fluoroscopy to determine proper lead placement. Lead placement depends on the location of the patient's back pain. A small cut is made to insert an epidural needle and to insert the leads. For example, in the case of chronic low back pain, the leads would be placed at the levels of T8 to L1. For neck pain, the leads are positioned above C3 in the epidural space.

# Complications

The complication rate following spinal cord stimulator implantation is relatively high, between 5.3 to 40 percent of cases. The majority are due to the hardware malfunction, such as lead migration, requiring revisions.

# Clinical Significance

Pain relief can continue for even weeks after a stimulator has been turned off.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Spinal cord stimulator implantation is an outpatient procedure and can provide pain relief to patients with various chronic pain syndrome. The procedure has minimal serious complications, but lead migration and breakage are common. It is imperative to identify the risk factors to the procedure and perform a thorough mental health assessment of the patient before any surgery. A team approach is an ideal way to limit the complications of this procedure. Before and following surgery, the patient should have the following done:

- Evaluation of the patient's back pain and symptoms of peripheral neuropathy by the primary care provider. Conservative management options should be exhausted before stimulator implantation.

- Workup and treatment of the primary pain complaint often include the need for further evaluation by a neurologist, orthopedic surgeon, or neurosurgeon.

- Following unsuccessful back surgery, the surgeon should address the possible need for a spinal cord stimulator for pain further pain relief.

- A pain medicine specialist should be consulted for spinal cord stimulator implantation.

- An interprofessional team should address comorbid mental health disorders before implantation of the stimulator.

- Before implantation, anticoagulation is typically held. The duration of holding anticoagulation should be coordinated with the primary care team, and for high-risk patients, the patient's cardiologist.

- Patients with pacemakers and cardiac defibrillators require approval by cardiology before stimulator implantation.

- Postoperative complications should be monitored closely, including postoperative infection and spinal epidural hematoma formation.

- Following implantation, stimulator settings should be adjusted to provide optimal pain relief.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Mental health disorders must be optimized before spinal cord stimulator implantation. Comorbid major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder are prevalent comorbidities associated with chronic pain. The treatment of underlying anxiety and depression can have a lasting impact on the efficacy of a spinal cord stimulator and the treatment of the primary pain disorder. A primary care provider, cognitive-behavioral therapist, and psychiatrist are often needed to address the patient's mental healthcare. Both pharmacological and nonpharmacological treatment options are often necessary.

Many patients who are candidates for a spinal cord stimulator suffer from failed back surgery syndrome. Coordination of care between the primary care provider, orthopedic or neurosurgeon, and the pain medicine physician is needed.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

- Following implantation of the spinal cord stimulator, the healthcare team must be cognitive of lead migration over time, as well as the possible need for further adjustments of the settings of the stimulator to maximize pain relief.

- Complications following the procedure should be monitored closely, especially in the first few weeks postoperatively.

- For patients with a cardiac defibrillator or pacemaker, they should be monitored by cardiology following spinal cord stimulator implantation, in case of malfunction of the devices.

- If there is a concern for lead migration, such as a sudden reduction in pain relief following stimulator implantation. X-rays should be obtained to determine the stimulator lead location (AP and lateral views).

- Postoperative follow up after implantation usually occurs one week after the procedure. Close monitoring and adjustments of the stimulator settings following the procedure are routine.