Glycopyrrolate, also known as glycopyrronium, is an anticholinergic drug. It is a synthetically created quaternary amine with pyridine and a cyclopentane moiety within the compound's structure. Glycopyrrolate has been widely used as a preoperative medication to inhibit salivary gland and respiratory secretions. The most frequent reasons for administering anticholinergics include producing an antisialagogue effect, creating a sedative and amnesic effect, and preventing reflex bradycardia. Anticholinergics are not predictably effective in increasing gastric fluid pH or decreasing gastric fluid volume. Glycopyrrolate is among the most commonly used anticholinergic medications.

- It is used perioperatively as a muscarinic receptor antagonist.

- The topical formulation of glycopyrrolate is indicated to treat primary axillary hyperhidrosis in nine and older patients.

- It is also helpful to reduce severe or chronic drooling in pediatric patients with neurologic conditions, such as cerebral palsy. The intravenous formulation of glycopyrrolate classically works to reverse vagal reflexes and bradycardia intraoperatively and reverse the muscarinic effects of cholinergic agents such as neostigmine or pyridostigmine.

- Glycopyrrolate may be administered to reverse the neuromuscular blockade due to nondepolarizing muscle relaxants postoperatively and is frequently used in conjunction with neostigmine, a cholinesterase inhibitor.

- Various oral inhalation formulations of glycopyrrolate are indicated for the long-term maintenance treatment of airflow obstruction in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Other commonly used anticholinergics include atropine and scopolamine. Most frequently, clinicians use glycopyrrolate to reduce pharyngeal, tracheal, bronchial, and sialagogue effects preoperatively; decreased secretions are the desired effect during anesthesia when a tracheal tube is in place. A blockade of reflexive vagal cardiac inhibition reflexes during intubation and anesthetic induction may also occur.