The best diagnostic test readily available to assess for cervical spine injury in the emergency setting is a CT scan. Plain radiographs are limited in the geriatric patient because of osteopenia and osteoarthritis. Further, the most commonly injured areas of the cervical spine in the geriatric patient (C2 and C1) are poorly visualized on plain films. Therefore, when a decision to image a geriatric patient is made, the provider should obtain a CT scan.

Since the overall incidence of injury to the spine is low, and CT scanning is costly and exposes patients to ionizing radiation, several validated decision rules provide guidance as to which patients can safely forego advanced imaging. The 2two most common decision rules used to clear the cervical spine are the Canadian C-spine Rule and NEXUS (National Emergency X-radiography Utilization Study). Unfortunately, the Canadian C-spine Rule mandates imaging of any patient age 65 or older and further requires the patient has a Glasgow coma score (GCS) of 15. This makes it useless in reducing imaging in the geriatric trauma patient.

The NEXUS decision rule (absence of focal neurologic deficit, absence of intoxication, absence of midline neck tenderness, and absence of distracting injury in a patient with normal alertness) has been validated in geriatric patients for detection of clinically important injuries. However, data are conflicting, and many providers are reluctant to use this decision rule in the geriatric patient. NEXUS also suffers from difficulty with reproducibility of results. "Normal alertness" and "absence of distracting injury," in particular, are subject to interpretation by the evaluating provider. One prospective study on geriatric patients used "baseline mental status" as a substitute for "normal alertness" and "signs of trauma to the head or neck" as a substitute for "distracting injury" and found NEXUS to be 100% sensitive in detection of cervical injury, but the incidence of injury in this study was low.

The weight of the evidence supports clinical decision rule use to clear the geriatric cervical spine, but given that the geriatric trauma patient has double the risk of cervical spine injury as compared to younger patients, the provider should have a low threshold to image these patients.

Geriatric patients with a cervical spine fracture have a high rate of fractures to other vertebrae in the spinal column. Therefore, diagnosis of a fracture in the cervical spine should prompt imaging of the spine in its entirety.