- Overall, Addisonian crisis is a life-threatening emergency requiring the healthcare providers to recognize the underlying adrenal insufficiency and to treat with IVF resuscitation and IV hydrocortisone promptly while simultaneously working up the etiology which triggered the acute decompensation.

- In the setting of shock, oftentimes, adrenal insufficiency is low on the differential. A key to diagnosis is hypotension resistant to vasopressor and IV fluid support.

- Severe cortisol deficiency is the main driver of acute adrenal insufficiency. It is usually released during times of stress to assist with homeostasis, vasoconstriction, and immune function. Aldosterone deficiency is also present, contributing to electrolyte imbalances such as hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and hypercalcemia.

- The most common triggering event is GI infection. Any other condition that can cause stress on the body can lead to an acute crisis.

- Addisonian crisis can occur both in those previously undiagnosed or those diagnosed with adrenal insufficiency.

- Primary adrenal insufficiency (Addison Disease) is characterized by low cortisol and high ACTH from the destruction of the adrenal glands. Secondary adrenal insufficiency is characterized by low cortisol and low to normal ACTH caused by decreased ACTH secretion from the pituitary.

- An ACTH stimulation test can be performed to diagnose adrenal insufficiency. Those with concurrent endocrinopathies or auto-immune disease or who have a family history of such diseases are at high risk for adrenal insufficiency.

- Patients and their families will need to be educated on strategies to prevent acute decompensation and how any triggering event will require an adjustment of their steroid doses.

- A team-based approach between healthcare providers and the patient is essential in maintaining control of this condition.