A good history concerning the mechanism of injury is important. Follow advanced trauma life support protocol and perform primary, secondary, and tertiary surveys. Once the patient is stabilized, a neurologic examination should be conducted. CT scan is the diagnostic modality of choice in the initial evaluation of patients with head trauma.

The GCS is used to describe the level of consciousness. Patients who are intubated are only evaluated for motor scores and eye-opening and the suffix T is added to the final score. The maximal GCS score is 10T and the lowest is 2T.

Classification of TBI is as follows:

- Clouding of consciousness, where there is a mild deficit in processing by the brain. It may persist for many months and the patient may have a loss of recent memory, but long-term memory remains intact.

- Lethargy is a state of depressed alertness and can result in an inability to perform tasks that are usually done without any effort. The patient may be aroused by stimuli but then settles back into a state of inactivity. Awareness of the environment is present.

- Obtundation is a state of decreased alertness and awareness. The patient will briefly respond to stimuli and only follow simple commands, but will not be aware of the surroundings.

- Stupor is when the patient cannot communicate lucidly and requires painful stimuli to be aroused. Once the stimulation is withdrawn, the patient returns to the inactive state.

- Coma is when the patient is not able to respond to any type of stimuli.