With rapid and adequate treatment and monitoring, the risk of morbidity and mortality is low. Rapid access to medical care and rapid acknowledge of the disease process are essential to patient prognosis. As stated above, the first hour after symptoms exposure is responsible for half of the related fatalities.

Hospital admission is required in 4% or less of acute allergic reactions diagnosed in the emergency department. If epinephrine is required, as in cases of anaphylaxis, complete resolution is noted. Emergency department (ED) observation for 4 hours is recommended. If no further intervention is required, the patient can be discharged home with a prescription for an epinephrine autoinjector, and follow-up is appropriate. If the patient requires airway intervention, is refractory to treatment, or is deemed unstable, admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) for close monitoring is advised. Patients with a history of biphasic reactions, severe reactions, beta-blocker use, older, those who live alone, or those with poor access to health care or deemed at risk should be monitored longer.

Along with the prescription for an epinephrine pen, antihistamines and corticosteroids are appropriate for 3 to 5 days. If the inciting source is unknown and the patient will have a prolonged time before follow-up, consider corticosteroid use for 1 to 2 weeks with an appropriate taper. Also, consider writing for multiple epinephrine autoinjectors to ensure they are kept in various locations (home, school, work, and vehicle). Educate and document the need for 24-hour access to the epinephrine autoinjector if symptoms begin to recur.

Patients with severe allergic reactions and anaphylaxis who take beta-blockers are at greater risk for prolonged or more severe symptoms; consider other classes of medication if possible. Patients may also consider obtaining medical alert bracelets or the like for assistance in the future.