Vaccine coverage is considered high among infants, children, and adolescents, but clinical data shows that adults have reduced immunity. Vaccine coverage declines with increasing age, resulting from waning immunity or non-vaccination. Vaccines with acellular pertussis do not protect for as long as the prior whole-cell pertussis vaccines. In 2005, the ACIP recommended that adolescents and adults over ten years of age receive a single dose of tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis (TdaP) vaccine. After receiving Tdap, the recommendation for adolescents and adults is to receive a booster dose of tetanus and diphtheria toxoids (Td) vaccine every ten years or when indicated for wound management. [Level 1]

In 2012, to reduce the burden of pertussis in infants, ACIP recommended a dose of Tdap for women during each pregnancy. Clinical studies indicated that newborn infants of mothers vaccinated during pregnancy had higher concentrations of pertussis antibodies at birth compared to newborns of unvaccinated mothers during pregnancy. [Level 1]

In various healthcare settings, exposure to pertussis can occur to healthcare providers, patients, or hospital visitors. The management of exposure or pertussis outbreak can be complicated and costly depending on the approach. [Level 3] Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) is recommended for healthcare personnel in contact with persons at risk for pertussis. This prophylaxis includes antibiotic treatment with a macrolide such as azithromycin and immediate evaluation of persons with an illness that presents with a cough.

Vaccination programs, in general, require the efforts of an interprofessional team approach. The treating physician (MD, DO, NP, or PA) will order these, and they are often administered by nursing staff. Pharmacists will assist in dose preparation and must know the vaccination schedules or have access to them; many states permit pharmacists to administer vaccines subject to age limitations. This scope of practice for pharmacists continues to expand, depending on the state.