Muscarinic receptors are primarily on the postsynaptic cell membrane of smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and exocrine gland cells. Muscarinic receptors are activated by acetylcholine and increase the activity of the parasympathetic nervous system. Muscarinic agonists mimic the action of acetylcholine on muscarinic receptors and cause cardiac slowing, contraction of smooth muscles (intestinal tract, bronchioles, detrusor muscle, urethra, and iris muscle), and increased secretion from exocrine glandular tissues (salivary, gastric acid, and airway mucosal gland). Muscarinic agonist has different indications depending on how potent and selective each agonist is.

Muscarinic agonists divide into two groups: direct agonist and indirect agonist. Direct agonists resist acetylcholinesterase, thus preventing its breakdown. Indirect agonists work by inhibiting the acetylcholinesterase enzyme preventing the degradation of acetylcholine. Direct and indirect agonists both increase acetylcholine concentration in the synapse, prolonging acetylcholine effects on the receptor.

**Direct Agonists**

Bethanechol's indications include postoperative ileus, neurogenic ileus, and urinary retention. Bethanechol increases the smooth muscle tone of the gastrointestinal tract to promote motility and restores peristalsis in the absence of obstruction. Bethanechol also increases the tone of the detrusor muscle to increase bladder emptying.

Carbachol is indicated to treat open-angle glaucoma, acute angle-closure glaucoma, and increased intraocular pressure. Carbachol contracts the ciliary body muscle and opens the trabecular meshwork. Opening the meshwork increases aqueous humor outflow from the eye to reduce intraocular pressure.

Pilocarpine is indicated for open-angle glaucoma, acute angle-closure glaucoma, and ocular hypertension. When given topically, pilocarpine contracts the ciliary body muscle and opens the trabecular meshwork to increase the outflow of aqueous humor. Oral pilocarpine can be used to increase secretion of the salivary glands to treat dry mouth in patients with Sjogren's syndrome or salivary gland dysfunction.

Methacholine is most commonly used to diagnose asthma or bronchial hyperactivity. Methacholine stimulates the muscarinic receptor in the airway when inhaled and induces bronchoconstriction, and increases tracheobronchial secretions. The lower the dose it takes for methacholine to induce bronchoconstriction, the more reactive the bronchial airway is.

**Indirect Agonists (Cholinesterase Inhibitors)**

Neostigmine is indicated for postoperative and neurogenic ileus, urinary retention, myasthenia gravis, and reversal of neuromuscular junction blockade.

Physostigmine indications include glaucoma and anticholinergic toxicity, such as atropine overdose.

Galantamine, donepezil, and rivastigmine are indicated for Alzheimer disease. The medications help with memory loss as well as decrease plaque build-up. Galantamine, donepezil, and rivastigmine do not cure Alzheimer disease and can only delay the progression of the disease.

The indirect agonists listed below have indications that that require activity on nicotinic receptors of the skeletal muscle rather than muscarinic receptors.

Edrophonium is a short and rapid-acting anticholinesterase commonly used to evaluate and diagnose patients with myasthenia gravis.

Pyridostigmine is indicated for the treatment of myasthenia gravis.