The fundamental anatomy in performing radionuclide cystography (RNC) includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The resolution of modern gamma cameras is as low as several millimeters to nearly a centimeter; thus, structures that are smaller than this resolution limit are not detectable during RNC. Typically, the kidneys excrete urine into the renal pelvis, which then drains into the ureter at the ureteropelvic junction (UPJ). The ureters are paired structures that contain a muscular layer in their walls along with a mucosal layer. This muscular layer intermittently contracts, which results in a wave-like contraction running from the UPJ to its connection with the bladder, known as the ureterovesical junction (UVJ); these contractions, along with the assistance of gravity, help propel urine forward and into the bladder. At the insertion into the bladder, the ureters traverse the bladder wall's posterolateral aspect in an oblique orientation. This key anatomic relationship allows for a one-way passage from the ureters into the bladder.

When the bladder is filled with urine, sensory nerves initiate a reflex arc called the micturition reflex. This launches a series of events that include bladder wall contraction by the detrusor muscle and relaxation of the internal urethral sphincter at the bladder neck. Urine voiding is controlled voluntarily by contraction or relaxation of the external urethral sphincter.

For the usual retrograde RNC examination, there is a clear delineation of the urinary bladder's architecture, which should be mostly round with a possible slight V-shaped taper towards its base. The paired ureters insert posterolaterally into the bladder, and if reflux is present, these are seen as thin curvilinear extensions of increased radiotracer activity running superiorly to the renal pelvis. In cases of severe or chronic reflux, the ureters may dilate and become more tortuous. If increased activity is present outside the expected region of the bladder or ureters or if there is an unexpected deformity of the bladder contour, correlation with other imaging or non-imaging procedures may be necessary to exclude intrinsic lesions such as bladder diverticula or extrinsic compression by adjacent structures.

RNC is also frequently performed in the setting of a prior renal transplant. It is important to note that most transplanted kidneys are placed within the pelvis and are anastomosed to the iliac vessels. The transplanted organ in this region results in an expected extrinsic compressive deformity on the appearance of the bladder during RNC. Urinary reflux is a common finding in renal transplants given the absence of the standard UVJ valve in these cases.