**Regulation**

Glycogen is either synthesized or broken down depending on the needs of the body.  It is an essential molecule for maintaining glucose homeostasis. Two major peptide hormones involved in its regulation are insulin and glucagon, which promote anabolism and catabolism. Understanding the broad effects of these two hormones is important in the context of glycogen metabolism. Insulin signals a high-energy state; thus, its downstream effects include the synthesis of lipids and glycogen. Glucagon signals a low energy state; therefore, its downstream effects are the reverse of insulin actions. Thus, increased glucagon release will result in the downstream effect of increased lipolysis and glycogenolysis to meet the body’s needs.

Specifically, insulin and glucagon’s downstream effects alter the activity of several enzymes oppositely involved in glycogen metabolism via dephosphorylation and phosphorylation, respectively. Insulin is associated with the activation of protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) and Protein Kinase B (PKB). Glucagon is associated with the cAMP-mediated pathway that activates Protein Kinase A (PKA). In glycogen synthesis, glycogen synthase is the primary enzyme regulated by PP1, PKB, and PKA enzymes.

Glycogen synthase has two major forms, which are glycogen synthase and glycogen synthase b.  They are the active and inactive forms, respectively.

Two major forms of glycogen phosphorylase are glycogen phosphorylase a and b, which are the active and inactive forms, respectively.

There is glycogen metabolism regulation specific to skeletal muscle. Muscle glycogen phosphorylase kinase increases its activity in the presence of calcium in the cytoplasm released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum during muscle contraction. It contains calmodulin subunits, which have a high affinity for calcium. Also, low energy state compounds such as AMP, IMP, and Pi are known to be positive allosteric regulators of skeletal muscle glycogen phosphorylase.