Healthcare workers including the nurse practitioner may come across patients with a variety of skin lesions. In most cases, it is best to refer the patient to a dermatologist to confirm the diagnosis.  Angioma serpiginosum is a benign vascular condition characterized by pinpoint violaceous to coppery-red punctate maculopapular eruptions that cluster together in linear, serpiginous or gyrate patterns on an erythematous background, chiefly on the lower limbs in females. It starts as one or more small asymptomatic lesions that coalesce and enlarge by developing new lesions at the periphery with central clearing, and this leads to serpiginous or gyrate or annular patterns.

They are typically asymptomatic without any bleeding or inflammation. It is predominantly seen on the lower limbs and rarely can be extensive. Lesions occurring on the upper limb, face, and neck have also been reported. Palms, soles, and mucous membranes are usually not involved, although there are a few isolated reports of involvement of acral areas. Involvement of the trunk is also rare but has been reported. The lesions usually follow the Blaschko lines. The growth is slow and irregular, and it may sometimes evolve over months to years. Exclusion of purpura from the differential diagnosis is important to prevent unnecessary investigations. These lesions usually stop growing after puberty and remain stable. Spontaneous regression is usually partial. Depending on the site of occurrence, the rare patient may develop an ocular or CNS complication.