Medical management: Corneal protection and amblyopia management is the primary goal of medical treatment. Artificial tears and ointment, moist chamber optical bandages, and bedtime patching will help protect the cornea. Arrange for an interprofessional evaluation to rule out systemic deformities. Amblyopia should be anticipated in all patients with lid coloboma, as astigmatism is common. Epibulbar dermoids seen in Goldenhar syndrome induce astigmatism and can obstruct the pupillary axis and cause amblyopia.

Surgical management: The surgical technique and timing of the surgery depend upon the size of the defect and the presence of corneal exposure, and the general well-being of the infant in terms of fitness for general anesthesia. If the defect is small with no corneal exposure or obstruction of the visual axis, the surgery can be delayed until 3 or 4 years of age. Moreover, there could be contraindications for general anesthesia due to defects in the palate or poor general conditions to thrive.

**Surgical Management**

**1) Upper Eyelid Reconstruction**

Small defects: Direct appositional closure, direct appositional closure with lateral cantholysis, direct appositional closure with Tenzel’s semicircular flap

Moderate defects: Direct appositional closure with Tenzel’s semicircular flap, Mustarde’s lid switch flap, and Cutler-Beard reconstruction

Severe defects: Cutler Beard Method and Mustarde’s lid switch flap

**2) Lower Eyelid Reconstruction**

Small defects: same as upper eyelids

**Moderate Defects**

- Posterior lamella: Hughes tarsoconjunctival flap

- Anterior lamella: Advancement of cheek skin, full-thickness skin graft, Tripier Flap unipedicle

**Large Defects**

- Posterior lamella: Chondromucous graft, palatal mucoperiosteal flap

- Anterior Lamella: Mustarde’s cheek rotation flap, nasolabial flap, medial forehead flap, lateral temporal flap

The surgical principles of commonly used surgical techniques are as follows:

- Direct closure: Direct closure is the choice for small defects. The defect is closed in layers and is especially useful in upper eyelid congenital simple colobomas. Cantholysis of the upper crux of the lateral canthal tendon helps relieve sutural tension. Tense lids interfere with lid movement and can cause entropion/ectropion, depending on the repair.

- Tenzel “semicircular” flap: For central defects that cannot be closed directly, a superiorly/inferiorly based semicircular flap can be transposed from the lateral canthal area.

- Cutler-Beard “bridge flap” procedure: First described in 1955, it is used to repair full-thickness upper eyelid defects. The principle is to bring full-thickness lower eyelid tissue, harvested from 4 mm below the lower eyelid margin, over the cornea to fill the upper eyelid defect. The full-thickness flap is divided two months following surgery at the level of the upper eyelid margin. Disadvantages are the long time lag required for lid separation, so it is not useful for monocular patients and is amblyogenic. Other disadvantages are the risk of entropion and loss of eyelashes.

- Hughes “tarsoconjunctival” flap: Dr. Wendel Hughs, in 1937, described this procedure to repair full-thickness lower eyelid defects involving more than 50 percent of the lid length. It is a two-stage procedure, with the first stage involving the advancement of tarsoconjunctival flap from the upper eyelid and the second stage involving the reconstruction of the posterior lamella of the lower eyelid. The flap width should be less than the defect size. Reconstruction of the lower lid anterior lamella is done using a skin-muscle advancement flap, local skin, or free full-thickness skin graft. In the second stage of the procedure, severance of the flap is done 3 to 4 months after the initial stage. The modified Hughes procedure includes sparing of the marginal (4 mm) upper lid tarsus (provides stability to upper eyelid margin) and removal of the levator muscle aponeurosis from the tarsoconjunctival flap.

- Mustarde’s cheek rotation flap: This flap is particularly useful for reconstruction involving larger, especially vertical defects of the lower lid. Lower eyelid defects involving the entire lower eyelid may be reconstructed using a Mustarde’s cheek rotation flap. A large skin muscle flap is rotated from the cheek to repair large lower eyelid defects. The posterior lamella can undergo reconstruction with tarsoconjunctival, nasal cartilage, or mucous membrane grafts.