Acute HCV infection is self-limited, or it may lead to chronic infection. Treatment of chronic HCV infection is achieved by eradicating HCV RNA by the attainment of a sustained virologic response (SVR). SVR is achieved when HCV RNA is no longer detectable in the blood after 12 weeks of therapy, with a decline in antibody titers and improved liver pathology. Before the development of the all-oral DAAs, the mainstay of therapy was injectable pegylated interferon and ribavirin. In addition to only having a cure rate of 40% to 60%, this form of treatment led to numerous adverse effects, including flu-like illness, hematological effects like neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, severe anemia, and neurocognitive effects. With the advent of DAAs, immense progress has been seen toward shortening the duration of treatment from 48 weeks to 12 weeks, improving the adverse effects, increasing cure rates to 90% to 97%, and eliminating the need for injectable agents. Currently, three classes of DAAs include (1) second-generation protease inhibitors that inhibit the NS3/4 serine proteases, (2) the NS5A inhibitors which interfere with the structural protein NS5A, a crucial element in the formation of the replication complex, and (3) the NS5B polymerase inhibitor which inhibits the enzyme responsible for transcription of a negative-strand intermediate for future viral progeny. These three classes are used in different combinations to make a robust treatment regimen against the various genotypes of hepatitis C.

The standard regimens are anywhere from 12 weeks to 24 weeks with or without ribavirin based on the genotype, treatment experience, and presence or absence of cirrhosis. With the current DAAs, it is the Genotype 3 infection, which is the least responsive, that is associated with rapid accelerated fibrosis progression and a higher incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma. Genotype 1, the most common genotype present in the United States, has four different treatments approved, two of which require only a single pill per day. For example, the combination of sofosbuvir and ledipasvir in a single pill and the combination of grazoprevir and elbasvir as a single pill. There are many more drugs in phase III and IV clinical trials that appear to have a pan-genotypic potential such that it will eliminate the need to check the hepatitis C genotype. Defining each regimen for the various genotypes is beyond the scope of this article.