Treatment modalities for PMDD can be divided into 2 categories:

- 
**Non-Pharmacological Methods**

- **Exercise:**Improves symptoms through elevation of beta-endorphin levels; however, the evidence is not based on randomized controlled trials.

- **Dietary modifications:**Increased intake of complex carbohydrates or proteins ("slow-burning fuels") is believed to increase tryptophan availability, leading to increased serotonin levels. Randomized controlled trials have demonstrated the superiority of calcium in improving emotional and physical symptoms over placebo. Meta-analysis has demonstrated some benefits of vitamin B6 over placebo. Chaster-berry/Vitex agnus-castus also has been shown to be somewhat efficacious by exerting some dopaminergic effect.

- **Stress management**:****Relaxation/ meditation/ yoga/ breathing techniques.

2. **Pharmacological Methods**

- **Psychotropic agents**
- Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SRIs): SRIs have been proven to be effective in the treatment of severe mood and somatic symptoms of PMDD. The ones that have been particularly linked with the relief of symptoms are Clomipramine (a tricyclic antidepressant),
- Benzodiazepines (BZDs): BZDs like alprazolam have been found to be effective only in women with severe anxiety and premenstrual insomnia. However, since there is a risk of dependence, careful monitoring is required, especially in cases with reported prior substance abuse.

- **Suppression of Ovulation**
- Hormonal therapies: For very severe symptoms, clinicians can use hormonal therapies to provide relief. The aim of hormonal therapy is to inhibit the hypothalamic-gonadal cycle; however, this causes medical menopause and leads to hot flashes and an increased risk of osteoporosis. Thus, to prevent these adverse effects, patients are also started back on estrogen and gestagen (a hormone with progesterone-like activity). Some patient reports suggesting recurrence of symptoms with the add-back gestagen therapy. Hence, as an alternative, clinicians can combine GnRH agonist with tibolone (a synthetic steroid with weak estrogenic, progestogenic, and androgenic activity).
- Danazol: This is a synthetic partial androgen agonist/ antagonist and gonadotropin inhibitor that has also been shown to be efficacious in treating PMDD by inhibiting ovulation. However, it is associated with hirsutism and teratogenicity and thus not preferred as an initial agent.
- Oral contraceptive pills (OCPs): Although widely used in clinical practice, their efficacy in treating PMDD has not been strongly supported by evidence. Women on OCP experience more hormone-related symptoms on hormone-free days, and hence OCP treatment with fewer hormone-free days might be beneficial to these women. Drospirenone (a gestagen) was particularly found to be effective in treating PMDD symptoms because of its anti-aldosterone and anti-androgenic effects.