In the event of toxicity, establishing a patent airway is a priority. There is a need to watch for signs of respiratory insufficiency and provide ventilation assistance if needed. Also, the healthcare provider needs to monitor for shock and treat if necessary. They should anticipate seizures and treat if necessary, and initiate supportive and symptomatic treatment. When overdosage occurs in patients prescribed cyclosporine therapy, the healthcare provider may withhold the drug for a few days or initiate alternate-day therapy until the patient stabilizes.

Hemodialysis only eliminates 1% of the dose. Monitoring serum CsA levels is mandatory, and patients may need multiple dose adjustments during the treatment period. The CVC (central venous catheter) line is not used to infuse CsA and can be safely used to collect blood samples for serum CsA levels. The procedure can be performed immediately after interrupting the infusion if using the appropriate technique for discarding 5 mL of blood.

Drugs that can decrease CsA levels include rifampicin, rifabutin, isoniazid, barbiturates, phenytoin, carbamazepine, intravenous trimethoprim, intravenous sulfadimidine, imipenem, cephalosporins, terbinafine, ciprofloxacin, ticlopidine, octreotide, and nefazodone. Conversely, drugs that can increase CsA levels include verapamil, diltiazem, amlodipine, nicardipine, ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole, erythromycin, clarithromycin, azithromycin, saquinavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, methylprednisolone.