Since autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease is a rare condition and difficult to predict, it is prudent for health care providers to consider this disease, especially if the patient has signs and symptoms of renal failure at a young age with a family history of end-stage renal disease. However, even with limited knowledge, nephrologists can obtain the diagnosis and improve patient care with the help of the following criteria:

**Criteria for Suspecting a Diagnosis of ADTKD**

- Family history is compatible with the autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance of CKD in line with clinical characteristics (as mentioned above).

- In the absence of a family history of CKD in line with clinical characteristics, demonstration of relevant histology on renal biopsy or extrarenal features compatible with HNF1B mutation, or history of early-onset hyperuricemia with or without gout.

**Criteria for Establishing the Diagnosis of ADTKD**

- Family history is compatible with the autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance of CKD in line with clinical characteristics (as mentioned above) and relevant histology in at least one affected relative. (Of note, it is not possible to establish a definitive diagnosis by kidney biopsy alone)or

- Demonstration of mutation in at least one of the four genes in the patient or at least one family member

The variable rate of decline in renal function with the mean age of end-stage renal disease is approximately 45 years, but the range is 17 years up to 75 years.

In ADTKD-MUC1, genetic diagnosis is not straightforward. It is essential to know that testing for the MUC1 gene mutation is not a direct mutational analysis, and this test is not performed at commercial clinical laboratories at this time. A recent study was conducted to detect MUC1fs protein by immunostaining the MUC1fs protein on the epithelial tissues and the urinary cell smears in individuals with ADTKD-MUC1, and the result is promising. Still, it is not readily available at the clinical lab yet.

In ADTKD-UMOD, the diagnosis may be made based on the appropriate and relevant clinical scenario and the knowledge that another family member has been identified with a UMOD mutation on genetic testing. However, uromodulin genetic analysis is readily available at commercial clinical laboratories.

In ADTKD-REN, genetic analysis of the REN gene should always be used to make the diagnosis. When the renin and aldosterone are stimulated, the levels are in the low normal range in most patients, making this type of measurement inadequate for making the diagnosis.

In ADTKD-HNF1B, this condition's clinical scenario is widely variable, with different renal and extrarenal clinical manifestations. The cost-effective NGS-based strategies allow rapid and simultaneous sequencing of several genes, including HNF1B.

In ADTKD-SEC61A1, very few families have been diagnosed with this condition. Currently, the diagnostic criteria are still under development.