The physical exam for a suspected knee injury should include inspection, palpation, range of motion, neurovascular examination, and strength. The range of motion can be divided into active and passive components. An inspection may show deformity, or hemarthrosis of the knee, ecchymoses, abrasions, or open fractures. Depending on the injury, a joint effusion may or may not be present. Patients may also have an asymmetric patella (patella baja or patella alta) compared to the unaffected knee due to a tear of the supporting tendon.

The most specific physical exam finding for a complete quadriceps or patellar tendon tear is the loss of the extensor mechanism, i.e., the inability to raise the leg against gravity while extended. Patients with partial tears may demonstrate a painful and impaired extension of the knee.

Patients with patellar fractures may have point tenderness over the patella, knee effusion, limited range of motion, limited or nonexistent leg extension, or patella alta or baja.

Patients with patellar dislocations usually present with a laterally dislocated patella, with a limited range of motion and knee extension. They may give a history of prior dislocations or patellar instability or a direct injury. The exam may be limited due to an effusion, which indicates a potentially more complicated injury pattern, such as an osteochondral injury. It is important to evaluate distal pulses to ensure there is no vascular compromise.

In the case of non-traumatic knee pain such as Osgood-Schlatter and idiopathic chondromalacia patellae, patients may report a long history of anterior knee pain, worse with activities and knee extension. The pain will improve with rest. Patients with ICP may give a history of typical symptoms such as anterior knee pain worse with standing up after prolonged sitting (“movie-goer’s knee”).

Patients with Osgood Schlatter will typically have point tenderness over the tibial tubercle at the insertion of the patellar tendon, and symptoms can be reproduced by knee flexion or resisted knee extension. This is a clinical diagnosis, and imaging is not usually necessary to confirm the diagnosis.