The blood sample is collected via venipuncture in a plastic vial with 3.2% buffered sodium citrate with a citrate-to-blood ratio of 1:9. The vial is inverted several times to mix the blood and citrate. Maintaining this citrate-blood ratio is crucial for test accuracy. Citrate binds calcium, an important cofactor of coagulation, preventing the blood from clotting before the beginning of the test. A clotted specimen, reflecting a vial overfilled with blood, cannot be used. For TEG testing, the collected non-clotted samples are considered stable and usable for up to 2 hours at room temperature. Non-citrated whole blood (native blood TEG or NATEM) can also be tested, but it must be used immediately. The test and reagents used are at room temperature. A volume of 340 uL of citrated blood is pipetted to the study cup, recalcified by the addition of 20 uL of 0.2M calcium chloride, and then activated with a kaolin-cephalin reagent. Cephalins, or phosphatidylethanolamines, are a class of phospholipids commonly present in membranes of human cells. They are an important cofactor of the coagulation cascade, enabling the assembly of tenase and prothrombinase complexes on the surface of platelets that are critical for thrombin generation. Kaolin is a mineral primarily composed of hydrated aluminum silicate, a negatively charged molecule that can initiate the intrinsic coagulation pathway by activating Factor XII. Precise proportioning of the blood and kaolin-cephalin reagent is important for accurate and reproducible TEG results.

Several modifications of the classic TEG assay have been developed to improve its diagnostic value. Rapid TEG (r-TEG) utilizes tissue factor instead of the kaolin-cephalin reagent to activate blood coagulation. Because tissue factor triggers the extrinsic coagulation pathway, which involves a smaller number of coagulation factors, the test can be performed faster than conventional TEG. Rapid TEG can be completed within 15 minutes and thus helps manage massive transfusions in trauma patients.

Rotational thromboelastography, also known as rotational thromboelastometry (RoTEM), utilizes an oscillating pin that rotates +/- 4 degrees 45' every 6 seconds while maintaining the cup in a stable position. In this assay, some different activator reagents are utilized to investigate specific components of the coagulation pathway (Table 1).