The testes are a pair of reproductive organs that are responsible for hormone and sperm production. They are ovoid-shaped smooth structures located in the scrotum and separated by a fascial septum.

Embryologically, the testes develop from the genital ridge in the dorsal mesentery. They descend from the retroperitoneum through the inguinal canal to their final position in the scrotum directed by a primordial structure called the gubernaculum. At birth, a majority of fetuses have their testes already descended in the scrotum.

The histology of the testes shows three main types of cells. 1. Germ cells that produce spermatozoa. 2. Sertoli cells that provide support. 3. Interstitial cells of Leydig that produce testosterone.

The blood supply to the testes is robust and well collateralized. The major arterial blood supply is supplied by the testicular/gonadal artery, which is a direct branch of the abdominal aorta inferior to the superior mesenteric artery (SMA). The collateral blood supply comes from the cremasteric artery (a branch of the inferior epigastric artery) and anastomoses with the testicular artery in the testis.

In non-testicular surgery, the gonadal artery sometimes requires ligation, but due to the collateral blood supply, there is low concern for vascular compromise. The venous drainage of the testes is through the pampiniform plexus of veins in the scrotum, which coalesce to form the testicular veins. The right testicular vein drains into the inferior vena cava while the left testicular vein drains into the left renal vein.

The lymphatic drainage of the testes is along the testicular arteries to the para-aortic group of lymph nodes. The scrotum is, in contrast, drained through a different lymphatic pathway to the inguinal lymph nodes.