Laboratory evaluation can help evaluate and differentiate between the causes of tenosynovitis. However, it is not always necessary. When suspecting infectious causes of tenosynovitis, findings of elevated WBC, bacteremia, and culture may be helpful. Autoinflammatory diseases may demonstrate specific markers to assist in the diagnosis. Microscopic evaluation can further help in distinguishing crystalline pathology from infection or inflammation when suspected.

Imaging evaluation is helpful yet not always necessary when diagnosing tenosynovitis. Plain film radiographs often show calcifications of the synovial membrane or, at times, periosteal reaction, suggesting inflammation; however, they may be negative altogether. Computed tomography can be useful for detecting bony abnormalities such as bony erosions or structural anomalies, but its soft tissue sensitivity for synovitis and tenosynovitis remains low.

Ultrasound can often add diagnostic benefits, particularly in the hands where it can show echotexture changes in 15% of tendons and blurring of the tendon margins in 62%.

When ultrasound is limited or additional fine detail evaluation is required, further evaluation with MRI is an option. Contrast should be a consideration in cases concerning for infectious etiologies for abscess visualization. MRI features of tenosynovitis can vary based on etiology; however, they commonly demonstrate peritendinous edema and increased thickening of the extensor brevis longus (EBL) and abductor pollicis longus (APL) tendons in cases of de Quervain tenosynovitis.