When born, drying and warming the baby is vital for the avoidance of hypothermia. While skin-on-skin contact between mother and baby is considered the standard form of initial warming, aids in feeding and temperature control, further warming may be needed. If additional temperature-controlling methods are needed, then wraps, radiant warmers, warm rooms, and heated, humidified air can all be utilized. If the birth occurs in a resource-poor environment, a plastic bag placed around the newborn’s body to the neck (leaving the head exposed) and then wrapping the baby is an acceptable method of warming. In neonates, to reduce the risk of decompensation, cord clamping should occur no sooner than 30 seconds after birth and can even be delayed up to one minute. This decreases the need for cardiovascular support and is a simple preventative step. However, if a neonate is in significant distress immediately after birth, cord clamping should not delay resuscitation.

While cord milking has occasionally been advocated for in the past, newer studies have shown that it is not beneficial. In preterm neonates, cord milking can actually cause significant harm and increase mortality. Studies are not yet conclusive on neonatal susceptibility to COVID-19. This includes instances where the patient is born to a COVID-19 positive mother. Hence, recommendations vary greatly between countries on subjects such as skin-to-skin contact and cord clamping. These changes differ from what is suggested by the AHA guidelines outlined in this article and do not have sufficient evidence to support widespread adoption at this time.

If a patient's O2 saturation does not adequately increase, O2 delivery via nasal cannula is recommended as a first-line. Suction is not empirically recommended. O2 delivery can be started at 30% and titrated to a SpO2 saturation above 94%.

If this fails, intubation may be required. The head-tilt with chin-lift maneuver is the most reliable way to access the pediatric airway if this decision is made. However, when in spinal precautions, the jaw-thrust is the preferred option, with the head-tilt with chin-lift as a secondary option.

CPR and airway management should not be withheld if a patient meets the criteria mentioned in the indication section. The two-finger or two-thumb methods of chest compressions are both acceptable means of performing CPR. The compression-to-breath ratio is 30 to 2 for a single provider and 15 to 2 if assistance can be provided. Approximately 20 to 30 rescue breaths should be given per minute for adequate ventilation accompanied by 100 to 120 chest compressions.

Fluid status is, therefore, an important consideration in pediatric management. There is not sufficient clinical evidence to support choosing balanced versus unbalanced crystalloid fluids. These can be administered at 10 to 20 mL/Kg, with a maximum of 60 mL/Kg, with a vasopressor added as necessary for refractory cases.

Medication dosing for children is almost always weight-based. The use of length-based tapes can assist in rapid calculations if actual weight cannot be obtained. Route of administration does have some more variability than adults. In neonates under 14 days old, a 5 F IV into the umbilical vein is a first-line and reliable option. Epinephrine, atropine, vasopressin, naloxone, and lidocaine can be administered through an ET tube, although both IV and IO routes are preferred.

Naloxone should not be used unless opioid overdose is suspected.

Suffocation from household objects and foreign body ingestion are common etiologies of decompensation in pediatric patients. In a choking patient, coughing and/or wheezing is a sign that the airway is likely still patent, whereas cyanosis or a lack of sound indicates no air passage. If a foreign object is visible during the airway examination and can be easily extricated, the object can be removed. If no object is visible or able to be extricated easily, utilize back blows, abdominal thrusts, or, if necessary, chest compressions to aid the patient in dislodging the obstructing body. If available, ENT, pulmonology, gastroenterology, or, possibly, surgery should be contacted to evacuate the object. Do not perform blind finger sweeps as this may further impact the offending object. If it is not visible or extractable, imaging studies and specialist care may be required. Common resuscitative medications such as sodium bicarbonate and calcium, unless indicated by the cause of decompensation, should not be given empirically or without reason, as they have been associated with a higher mortality rate.