**Intravitreal Anti-VEGF Therapy**

The first FDA-approved intravitreal anti-VEGF agent for wet ARMD was Pegaptanib sodium, a VEGF(165)-specific antagonist.

Brolucizumab is a low molecular weight VEGF antagonist that allows for a higher molar concentration of medication with each injection. It was recently approved by the FDA and found to be non-inferior to aflibercept with every twelve-week dosing.

Faricimab is an antibody with affinity for both VEGF and angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2), an additional factor that may drive inflammation and contribute to CNV development. Early reports of faricimab are promising, with extended dosing intervals of 16 weeks shown to be non-inferior to ranibizumab every four weeks.

Although approved for monthly (ranibizumab), bimonthly (aflibercept), every three months (brolucizumab), or up to every 16-week (faricimab) injections, several different dosing regimens have been suggested in the literature, these include a pro re nata (PRN or as needed) schedule where a patient receives injections only when the disease appears active (such as in the presence of subretinal/intraretinal fluid on OCT, retinal hemorrhage, or leakage on FA) or a treat-and-extend protocol, where injection frequency is slowly extended as long as disease activity remains controlled.

Although monthly injections are more effective than PRN regimens, there is inconclusive evidence comparing PRN versus treat-and-extend. Endophthalmitis is likely more common with monthly injections, and patients receive more injections with monthly and treat-and-extend dosing than with PRN. However, patients require more frequent clinic visits with PRN dosing than with treat-and-extend.

Long-term data suggest that PRN dosing may result in slightly worse visual outcomes than monthly injections after a year. Although this difference may be clinically insignificant after a year, it may become significant after several years of treatment. Ultimately, the physician and patient should work together to choose the best treatment option for the patient.

Intravitreal anti-VEGF agents come with several risks. Common adverse effects include subconjunctival hemorrhage and discomfort during or after the procedure, usually from the iodine-based antiseptic used to clean the ocular surface. Floaters may be caused by bubbles in the syringe or the medication itself. Rarely serious adverse events occur, including vitreous hemorrhage or endophthalmitis.

Other treatments are still under investigation. Abicipar pegol is a non-monoclonal antibody developed with designed ankyrin repeat proteins (DARPin) technology, with VEGF binding affinity similar to aflibercept.

Conbercept is a VEGF decoy protein, similar to aflibercept, that appears to have increased binding capacity to VEGF with an extended intraocular half-life, and FDA studies are currently underway.

**Other Treatments**

Before the widespread use of anti-VEGF therapy, several other treatment modalities were employed for wet ARMD. Laser photocoagulation is beneficial for fovea-sparing CNV lesions, although failure to adequately cover the entire lesion can lead to treatment failure and vision loss.

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is another treatment for CNV where the photosensitizing drug verteporfin is injected intravenously, and a low-intensity laser light treats the CNV tissue through a photochemical reaction that damages vascular endothelial cells, causing thrombosis.

Submacular surgery for patients with wet ARMD has shown no benefit in patients with subfoveal CNV, and it comes with the risk of cataract progression and retinal detachment.

Pneumatic displacement of submacular hemorrhage, using intravitreal air or gas injection with face-down positioning, may improve a patient’s visual acuity in the short term, but the long-term benefit may not be achieved if the underlying CNV remains active.

Radiation therapy has been considered for CNV in wet ARMD, but studies have not shown a clear benefit.

An exciting new avenue of treatment for wet ARMD is the use of gene therapy. RGX-314 is an AAV8 vector expressing an anti-VEGF-A Fab similar to ranibizumab, and subretinal delivery of the medication has been shown to be generally safe and well-tolerated.