Os peroneum is an accessory ossicle bone, or “extra bone,” in the foot. It is found next to the cuboid bone and within the peroneus longus tendon in the lateral region of the foot. While they are generally painless, pathological conditions such as fractures, tendonitis, or tendon tears of the peroneus longus related to this accessory ossicle are generally referred to as os peroneum syndrome. A radiograph of the affected foot and possibly an ultrasound or MRI are often necessary to determine the extent of bone and soft tissue involvement. Symptoms of os peroneum syndrome include swelling, tenderness, and instability to the outside of the foot with weakness in eversion and plantarflexion of the foot.

Conservative treatment is usually attempted first, focusing on the peroneus longus tendon pathology, with immobilization, oral anti-inflammatories, steroid injections, and physical therapy. Surgical management is considered in severe pain, debilitation, or failed conservative therapy. Surgical options include primary tendon repair or grafting, excision of the fractured os peroneum if present with tendon repair or tenodesis, internal fixation of the fractured os peroneum, or tendon debridement/tenosynovectomy.

Patients can benefit from a directed home exercise program and, in some cases, wearing orthotics; this can prevent exacerbation of existing cases and occasionally help mitigate symptoms. If os peroneum is found incidentally, these measures can help patients prevent it from becoming symptomatic.