ADEM is difficult to differentiate from an initial attack of multiple sclerosis (MS) based on a single clinical encounter or radiographic evidence alone in adults. It is important to diagnose a patient with either condition accurately because the approach to the treatment of the two conditions differs significantly. Though MS is characterized by repeated attacks of neurological dysfunction separated in both time and space, there is a significant overlap between the two conditions regarding CNS symptoms and radiographic evidence. Patients with ADEM are more likely to have a history of prodromal viral illness, along with fever, neck stiffness, ataxia, and impaired consciousness and/or encephalopathy. In contrast, MS patients typically do not present with these complaints. Additionally, MS is more often monosymptomatic (e.g., optic neuritis alone) and has a chronic, relapsing, and remitting course.

A brain MRI may help distinguish between the two. ADEM typically involves larger, bilateral, asymmetric lesions that are also higher in number than those typically seen with MS. Brain lesions tend to be more well-defined when seen in MS vs. the ill-defined lesions seen in ADEM. MS is more likely to be associated with brain lesions of varying ages, while ADEM typically has lesions that are all approximately the same age. Lesions in the thalamus are seen more commonly in ADEM, while periventricular lesions are more common in MS.

**Acute hemorrhagic encephalomyelitis (AHEM),**or acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis, acute necrotizing hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis of Weston-Hurst) is a hyperacute variant of ADEM that rapidly progresses to coma and may be fatal. AHEM is triggered similarly to ADEM following exposure to an infectious organism or vaccination.  Symptoms of AHEM include asymmetric multifocal neurologic deficits, meningismus, headache, and seizures.

A head CT or MRI of a patient with AHEM may reveal focal hemorrhagic lesions, in addition to edema, petechial and perivascular hemorrhages, vascular destruction and fibrin deposition, and neutrophilic infiltration.

Convergence with other CNS demyelinating disorders and multiphasic presentation:

Other demyelinating disorders like MS, optic neuritis (ON), and neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders can have overlaps in presentation as well as convergence with ADEM. This has increasingly been recognized and considered in the diagnostic criteria for ADEM. There are multiphasic ADEM cases with an event of ADEM occurring more than 3 months following the initial ADEM diagnosis.