To facilitate a successful procedure with the desirable result, the following steps should be taken:

- Ensure that the patient is positioned in the standard fashion as described.

- Adequate and optimal visibility is important; this sometimes involves removing any wax within the ear canal and subsequent insertion of the biggest aural speculum comfortable into the ear to facilitate optimal visualization of the tympanic membrane.

- Administer the required anesthetic agent. The clinician needs to remember that topical anesthetic agents have bacteriostatic properties; thus, the removal of the excess anesthetic solution before a culture is required.

- Connect the 3 cc syringe to the 20 or 21 gauge spinal needles, aspirate 1cc of air, and make a 45-degree bend on the spinal needle to ensure adequate visualization past the needle while it is in the external ear.

- With great care, advance the needle to the anesthetized portion of the tympanic membrane.

- When you arrive at the tympanic membrane, advance the needle 2 mm through the inferior aspect of the tympanic membrane with the maximum bulge, only placing the needle into the anterior inferior or posterior inferior quadrants.

- Aspirate the fluid gently from the middle ear with the tip of the needle.

- For patients requiring an intratympanic administration of medication, a secondary perforation should be made on the tympanic membrane, the so-called borehole, which serves to relieve pressure while the medication is been injected to avoid barotrauma to the round window. Alternatively, a pressure-equalization tube (grommet) can be placed for patients requiring intratympanic medication.

- Once the procedural purpose is achieved, retract the needle and speculum from the patient’s ear with care.

- The ear canal is subsequently irrigated with a 3% solution of hydrogen peroxide and a tissue wick to absorb extra fluid in the EAC.

- The aspirated fluid is then sent for appropriate laboratory pathogen analysis and sensitivity.