Cetirizine is available as tablets, capsules, solutions, and orally disintegrating tablets. The dosing of cetirizine depends on the patient's age. In adults and children 12 years or older, the recommended dose is 5 or 10 mg per day orally, depending on symptom severity.

- In children 6 to 11 years old, 5 or 10 mg (1 or 2 teaspoons) once daily in syrup form is recommended depending on symptom severity.

- In children 2 to 5 years old, the recommended dose is 2.5 mg (half a teaspoon) in syrup form once daily.

- In children six months to 23 months old, the recommended dose is 2.5 mg (half teaspoon) in syrup form once daily.

- One drop (0.24% cetirizine hydrochloride ophthalmic solution) is instilled in the affected eye twice daily for patients with allergic conjunctivitis.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Occasional and small doses of cetirizine are acceptable while breastfeeding. Prolonged use of larger doses may cause a decrease in the milk supply or drowsiness and other adverse effects in the infant, particularly in combination with pseudoephedrine. The use of an ophthalmic formulation of cetirizine by the mother is hypothesized to have minimal risk to the breastfed infant. Clinicians should advise the mother to apply pressure over the tear duct by the corner of the eye and remove the leftover solution to decrease the amount of drug that reaches the breast milk.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Cetirizine is a former US FDA pregnancy category B medicine.****The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists & the American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology (ACOG-ACAAI) suggests cetirizine for pregnant women who requires antihistamine treatment. Cetirizine should be used in pregnancy only when necessary.

**Hepatic Impairment:**According to manufacturers prescribing information, 12 years and older patients with hepatic impairment should reduce the dose to 5 mg once daily. The manufacturer also recommends lowering the dose for 6 to 11 years old patients with hepatic impairment.

**Renal Impairment:**According to manufacturers prescribing information, 12 years and older patients with decreased renal function (CrCL 11-31 mL/min) and patients on hemodialysis (CrCL less than 7 mL/min) should reduce the dose to 5 mg once daily. The manufacturer also recommends lowering the dose for 6 to 11 years old patients with renal impairment.

**Ophthalmic Formulation:**Each bottle of 0.24% cetirizine hydrochloride contains benzalkonium chloride and can be absorbed by contact lenses. Manufacturers advise patients to remove contact lenses before instilling eye drops and wait for 10 min until the reinsertion of lenses. If irritation or redness persists after this precaution, then avoid the use of contact lenses. It is proven safe and effective for pediatric patients two years and above in clinical studies.