Medical therapy with risk factor modification is the cornerstone of the treatment and management of this patient population. Treatment initially consists of administering nitrates or calcium channel blockers. Nitrates cause relaxation of vascular muscle by activating the guanylate cyclase to increase the production of cGMP. Coronary artery vasospasm (CAVS) should also be treated with calcium channel blockers that lower the calcium intake into the vascular smooth muscle. Alternative therapies that have been studied include nicorandil (a nitrate and K-channel activator), statins, fasudil (a rho kinase inhibitor), aspirin, magnesium, vitamins C and E, iloprost, alpha-receptor blockade, selective serotonin receptor inhibitors, and selective thromboxane A2 synthetase inhibition.

Usually, CAVS can be relieved by vasodilatation. However, there are instances when the vasospastic disease is resistant to drug therapy including long-acting medications. This scenario is met in approximately 20% of the patients with CAVS. In these cases, percutaneous balloon angioplasty has not led to favorable results. The percutaneous coronary intervention has also been studied with the continuation of medications as long-term. However, some of these patients have recurrent vasospasm in another location. Thus, coronary stenting with long-term medical therapy should only be considered in patients who have significant stenosis from CAVS.

The application of implantable cardioverter-defibrillators in patients with CAVS who present with ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation remains unknown. However, there have been reports of favorable outcomes in implanting the device in patients who survive fatal ventricular arrhythmias due to CAVS.