# Continuing Education Activity

Medial epicondyle apophysitis (MEA) is an overuse injury prevalent among adolescent athletes whose sport involves repetitive overhand throwing, racket use, or other overhead arm motions. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of medial epicondyle apophysitis (little league elbow) and highlights the role of the healthcare team in evaluating and managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the risk factors for developing medial epicondyle apophysitis/little league elbow.
- Outline the epidemiology of medial epicondyle apophysitis/little league elbow.
- Describe the presentation of a patient with medial epicondyle apophysitis/little league elbow.
- Describe the treatment considerations for patients with medial epicondyle apophysitis/little league elbow.

# Introduction

Medial epicondyle apophysitis (MEA), also known as little league elbow, is an overuse injury prevalent among adolescent athletes whose sport involves repetitive overhand throwing, racket use, or other overhead arm motions. The medial epicondyle is a bony protrusion on the medial elbow with its own ossification center, separate from the main distal humeral physis, known as an apophysis. This growth center at the medial epicondyle develops around 6-7 years of age and typically fuses by age 15.

Medial epicondyle apophysitis occurs due to excessive and repetitive valgus stress placed on the apophysis before its closure. Over time, the repetitive strain results in a traction-type injury and may cause pathologic widening and inflammation of the apophysis or even an avulsion fracture.

# Etiology

The biomechanics of a typical overhead throw or serve places significant valgus stress on the elbow.

# Epidemiology

Medial epicondyle apophysitis occurs only in children 6-15 years of age due to fusion of the apophyseal ossification center around age 15. Of all youth sports injuries, about half are due to overuse.

In baseball, the prevalence of medial elbow pain increases with age, and the prevalence of medial epicondyle apophysitis peaks between the ages of 11 to 12, with a rate of about 30 percent. X-ray screening of Little League Baseball regional and national championship contenders showed that 57 percent had radiographic evidence of medial epicondyle displacement.

# Pathophysiology

Medial epicondyle apophysitis results from repetitive valgus stress of the ulnar collateral ligament exerting traction on the medial epicondyle of the humerus. Excessive stress on this kinetic chain causes injury at the weakest point – the open apophysis, which is five times weaker than the UCL. With repetitive, highly forceful valgus stress, as seen in baseball pitching or another overhead throwing, particularly in the late cocking phase of the throw, the apophysis can get inflamed and partially separate from the distal humerus. Continued stresses on this weakened connection can complicate the injury with an acute avulsion fracture.

# History and Physical

Prompt and accurate diagnosis of medial epicondyle apophysitis requires a thorough history and physical of young athletes presenting with medial elbow pain. Important historical clues include an age range between 6 to 15 years old with a history of a sporting activity requiring repetitive overhead motions. If the patient regularly plays a sport, providers should inquire about the position played, frequency and duration of athletic activity, and type of overhead arm motion required for the sport. The typical presentation of medial epicondyle apophysitis is an insidious onset of progressively worsening medial elbow pain associated with overhead throwing and decreased throwing performance and endurance.

The physical exam is vital for the diagnosis of medial epicondyle apophysitis. The patient will typically have medial epicondyle point tenderness, medial elbow pain with valgus stress, and sometimes subtle elbow contractures.

Avulsion fractures of the medial epicondyle can have additional exam findings, including elbow instability, reduced ROM, and ulnar neuropathy.

# Evaluation

Imaging is a vital part of evaluating young athletes with risk factors and an exam concerning medial epicondyle apophysitis. Initial studies should include bilateral anterior, posterior, and lateral plain radiographs of the elbows in addition to a lateral image of the elbows flexed at 90 degrees with the application of valgus stress.

Accurate diagnosis of medial epicondyle apophysitis requires bilateral radiographs to compare the patient’s anatomy and better evaluate for an avulsion fracture. The ossification centers (physes) close at inconsistent ages during adolescence, and bilateral comparison allows the radiologist to evaluate whether the patient’s physes are still open. Bilateral imaging is also helpful in identifying a missing ossification center. Avulsion fractures should be suspected if an ossification center is missing unilaterally or if the medial epicondyle apophysis is missing, but the trochlear, olecranon, or lateral epicondyle ossification centers are present. Computerized tomography and magnetic resonance imaging are only indicated for medial epicondyle avulsion fractures or apophysitis not responding to therapy. They are helpful in more accurately determining the degree of epicondylar displacement and the need for operative versus non-operative management.

# Treatment / Management

The foundation of treatment for medial epicondyle apophysitis is rest from the exacerbating sport and cessation of its repetitive overhead arm motion. Athletes should fully rest the affected arm for 4 to 6 weeks. The use of ice and analgesics such as acetaminophen or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications may be used for pain control. After refraining from overhead motions for at least 6 weeks, if pain-free, athletes may begin physical therapy focusing on elbow and shoulder strengthening exercises and can initiate a gradual return to a throwing program over the subsequent 6 weeks, with set limitations on throws/pitches.

A common complication of medial epicondyle apophysitis is an avulsion fracture of the medial epicondyle, which responds well to nonoperative treatment. Treatment begins with a long arm cast for 2 to 4 weeks followed by a posterior splint accompanied by passive range of motion exercises 3 to 5 times daily. Once the patient has no tenderness to the medial epicondyle, the patient wears a hinged elbow brace for 6 to 8 weeks. After brace removal, the patient can begin physical therapy to avoid strengthening the flexor and pronator muscle groups until the bony union has been confirmed.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential for medial elbow pain remains narrow, given its specific anatomical location. Important diagnoses to rule out are ulnar collateral ligament tear, medial epicondylopathy, ulnar neuropathy, or local muscular injury. Partial or full thickness UCL tear presents similar signs and symptoms as medial epicondyle apophysitis, but the patient is usually greater than 15 years old.

Ulnar neuropathy should be suspected if there is associated paresthesia in an ulnar nerve distribution.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of medial epicondyle apophysitis is generally excellent, with most cases resolving with armrest or when the apophysis closes.

# Complications

Medial epicondyle apophysitis complications can include the common complication of medial epicondyle avulsion fracture and the less common complications of entrapment of the avulsed bone in the elbow joint space, ulnar nerve entrapment, residual ossicles, and persistent pain. Nonunion of an avulsed epicondyle can result in residual bone remaining in the joint space, causing locking of the joint, persistent pain, or entrapment of the ulnar nerve. Each of these complications is an indication for evaluation for surgical management.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Prevention of injury is primarily achieved through avoidance of overuse and appropriate rest between high-risk activities. Coaching youth on the correct form and biomechanics theoretically may decrease stress on the elbow and decrease injury.

These recommendations have been further validated by demonstrating a positive correlation between pitching guidelines adherence and reducing youth athlete elbow injuries.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Prevention of medial epicondyle apophysitis (MEA) requires intentional adherence to pitching guidelines by athletes, parents, and coaches and placing the athlete’s health above performance in any particular game or showcase. Athletes are often initially evaluated by their primary care physician, athletic trainer, or coach.

The evaluation and treatment of medial epicondyle apophysitis require an interprofessional healthcare team of healthcare professionals. A primary care physician should see any athlete with persistent medial elbow pain for radiographical imaging. The radiologist's role is vital for accurate interpretation of the imaging, determination of the degree of epicondylar separation, and determination of the need for referral to orthopedic surgery for operative management. Physical therapists play an important role in non-operative management and safe return to exercise. A sports injury's psychological toll can be significant since many high-level athletes place their identity in their sport and their performance. A sports psychologist can help counseling athletes through the uncertainties and pain of having a sports injury.