CIN-1 can undergo observation and co-testing repeated in 1 year. If CIN-1 is persistent after 2 years or progresses within that time, treatment is the recommendation.

As stated earlier, CIN -2 or higher requires treatment. Treatment is also recommended when there is more than one degree of difference between pap results and biopsy results. For example, if the pap smear is high-grade intraepithelial lesion (HGSIL), but the biopsy is negative, the potential reasons are a misread of the specimen, or there was a missed a lesion at the time of colposcopy. In this case, a diagnostic excisional procedure is the preferred mode of treatment because it is both therapeutic and diagnostic. The margins of the cervical specimen may then undergo evaluation for complete removal of any abnormal cells.

The usual treatment is via ablation or excision of abnormal cells. Ablation of abnormal cells includes cryosurgery or laser ablation (CO2 laser). Ablation is only acceptable when the endocervical sampling is negative, there are no glandular abnormalities, the entire borders of the lesion are visible, and the patient has not failed other treatments. These techniques were more common before the development of LEEP (loop electrosurgical excision procedure). Ablative procedures have a higher recurrence rate in the setting of severe dysplasia when compared to LEEP.

Excisional procedures for the treatment of CIN include LEEP, cold knife conization, and laser conization. Whether any of these procedures increase a patient’s risk for preterm labor is controversial since the risks for preterm delivery and dysplasia overlap considerably. That said, in women younger than 25 with CIN-2 or 3, there may be a role for close observation with colposcopy in 6 months rather than excision.  However, that is not the currently preferred treatment option. During pregnancy, treatment is postponed until after delivery unless colposcopic surveillance during pregnancy reveals progression to invasive cervical cancer.

Women treated for CIN-2, or greater should have a Pap smear and HPV testing 12 and 24 months after the procedure. Even with positive endocervical margins on an excised specimen, the procedure is deemed 70 to 80% effective. When margins are positive, repeat cytology testing in 4-6 months accompanied by an endocervical curettage is the course of action.  A repeat excisional procedure is one option for treatment of persistent or recurrent CIN-2 or 3. In some circumstances, patients will opt for a hysterectomy, which is also appropriate for recurrent CIN.