Neurologists and other healthcare providers historically utilized edrophonium to aid in diagnosing MG. In rare situations, it can be a reversal agent for non-depolarizing NMBA after a surgical procedure. Edrophonium’s adverse effects manifest due to its cholinergic profile. The adverse effects of edrophonium can progress to fatal outcomes secondary to respiratory muscle weakness or cardiac arrhythmias. Therefore, it is imperative that healthcare workers utilizing edrophonium monitor vital signs closely and have atropine readily available; this requires working as an interprofessional healthcare team that includes clinicians, specialists, nurses, and pharmacists. Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a chronic medical condition requiring high coordination among professionals and disciplines. The care pathway model has been described. A study examined the comprehensive and multidisciplinary care for diagnosing and treating patients with myasthenia gravis. The study concluded that the interprofessional care pathway model for myasthenia gravis could help achieve better patient outcomes.

The administration of edrophonium and the management of its adverse effects is enhanced when using an interprofessional healthcare team approach. Pharmacists should be consulted for information regarding dosing, drug-drug interactions, and contraindications for patients with extensive comorbidities. Nursing staff must be educated on the adverse effect profile of edrophonium and recognize when the patient is decompensating since, in many situations, they are the sole healthcare worker caring for the patient. Ultimately, an interprofessional approach to using and monitoring edrophonium will ensure appropriate administration, adequate management of adverse effects, and prevention of fatal outcomes. [Level 5]