**Utilization Management (UM)**

Managed care emanates from the basic concept of monitoring and controlling the utilization of medical services by a team approach. In simple economic terms, total healthcare costs are the result of two variables: price and volume. As discussed previously, capitation, reimbursements of providers, bundled payments, etc.., describes price concept, whereas volume mainly speaks about medical services utilization. In the organizational context, utilization management is interchangeable with utilization review (UR). Shi & Singh (215) defines utilization review as "the process of evaluating the appropriateness of services provided." Depending on the type of services provided, UR can be used in various sectors of healthcare. For instance, Drug UR practices address the utilization and cost of prescription drugs. UM or UR broadly divides into three categories: 1) Prospective, or before the event occurs; 2) Concurrent, or while the event is occurring; 3) Retrospective, or after the event has occurred; and all these reviews serve to identify cases for case management intervention, where cases with chronic illness with multiple complications or catastrophic events requires larger expenses and result in substantial costs.

**Prospective Utilization Review:**This concept applies to major categories such as health risk appraisals, demand management, referral services, and institutional services. A classic example is the advanced Medicare HMO. A managed care organization intervenes in cases where patients or members require extra services to lower overall costs. For instance, when a new member joins the plan, in addition to data-gathering forms, patient history, physical exams, a nurse will be sent to home aid to check nutritional assessment, prescribed medications, and other simple interventions such as providing bathmat to prevent falls for older patients and save costs of care later in their treatment.

**Concurrent Utilization Review:**This review solely referred to inpatient care and case management, where the continuous review is necessary, such as inpatient cases. Assignment and tracking of the length of stay (LOS), review and rounding by UR nurses, and discharge planning are commonly used techniques for concurrent review. For example, if the patient is admitted with a hip fracture, the UM nurse on-site should gather information and plan discharge accordingly to home with subsequent home health services and need for durable medical equipment (DME) or to skilled nursing facilities (SNF). In a nutshell, UM/UR nurse plays a key role in gathering the information and coordinate medical services to the patient from admitting to discharge while complying with the LOS guidelines and help in cost savings and generate revenue of the hospital.

**Retrospective Utilization Review:**This review refers to the quality of care at the right time in the right place, billing errors. MCOs usually intervene in regular review of providers to see any patterns of over or under-utilization of medical services or providers continuously making errors in the care plan and testing etc..; MCOs usually provide physician performance data to individual physicians to compare their performance with peers. That feedback would help them modify their practices as appropriate and help curtail overall healthcare costs and improve the quality of care.