The hallmark of the pathophysiology of CAD is the development of atherosclerotic plaque. Plaque is a build-up of fatty material that narrows the vessel lumen and impedes the blood flow. The first step in the process is the formation of a "fatty streak." Fatty streak is formed by subendothelial deposition of lipid-laden macrophages, also called foam cells. When a vascular insult occurs, the intima layer breaks, and monocytes migrate into the subendothelial space where they become macrophages. These macrophages take up oxidized low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles, and foam cells are formed. T cells get activated, which releases cytokines only to aid in the pathologic process. Growth factors released activate smooth muscles, which also take up oxidized LDL particles and collagen and deposit along with activated macrophages and increase the population of foam cells. This process leads to the formation of subendothelial plaque.

Over time, this plaque could grow in size or become stable if no further insult occurs to the endothelium. If it becomes stable, a fibrous cap will form, and the lesion will become calcified over time. As time passes, the lesion can become hemodynamically significant enough that not enough blood would reach the myocardial tissue at the time of increased demands, and angina symptoms would occur. However, symptoms would abate at rest as the oxygen requirement comes down. For a lesion to cause angina at rest, it must be at least 90% stenosed. Some plaques can rupture and lead to exposure of tissue factor, which culminates in thrombosis. This thrombosis could cause subtotal or total occlusion of the lumen and could result in the development of acute coronary syndrome (ACS) in the form of unstable angina, NSTEMI, or STEMI, depending on the level of insult.

Classification of coronary artery disease is typically done as under:

- Stable ischemic heart disease (SIHD)

- Acute coronary syndrome (ACS)

- ST-elevation MI (STEMI)
- Non-ST elevation MI (NSTEMI)
- Unstable angina