The soft tissues of the head and face are divided into 8 distinct aesthetic and functional units with unique characteristics a clinician must understand to optimize laceration repair.

**Scalp**

The scalp has 5 layers. From superficial to deep, the layers are skin, subcutaneous fat, galea aponeurotica, loose areolar tissue, and periosteum. The acronym SCALP can be used to help remember the layers.

The skin is the most external layer, containing hair follicles with a highly vascularized, fatty connective tissue layer underneath. Below this connective tissue is the galea aponeurotica; the galea overlies the vertex of the skull, carries the vessels that supply the subdermal plexus of the scalp, and serves as the insertion point for the occipitalis and frontalis bellies of the occipitofrontalis muscle. Laterally, the galea aponeurotica joins with the temporoparietal or superficial temporal fascia. This fascia is a loose areolar layer external to the fascia of the temporalis muscle or deep temporal fascia and the more superficial subcutaneous tissue. Beneath the galea aponeurotica is a layer of loose areolar tissue. Finally, the innermost layer of the scalp is the periosteum or pericranium, which is tightly adherent to the skull itself.

The scalp is a highly vascular region perfused by anastomoses of external and internal carotid artery branches; this robust vascularity is required to support the hair follicles, of which there are approximately 100,000. The superficial temporal, posterior auricular, and occipital arteries arise from the external carotid artery. These branches supply the frontotemporal scalp, the area superoposterior to the auricle, and the posterior scalp, respectively. The ophthalmic artery arises from the internal carotid artery and gives off the supraorbital and supratrochlear arteries, which perfuse the forehead and the anterior portion of the scalp. Outflow is supplied by superficial veins that run with their respectively named arteries. Because of this rich vascular network, the scalp can bleed profusely when injured due to the tight adherence of the vasculature to the fibrous galea aponeurotica, which impedes reactive vasoconstriction.

**Forehead**

The forehead extends from the supraorbital rims inferiorly to the hairline superiorly or to the superior edge of the frontalis muscle if the natural hairline is not apparent. The forehead comprises layers analogous to the scalp; skin, subcutaneous connective tissue, the frontalis muscle contiguous with the galea aponeurotica, loose areolar tissue, and periosteum. Because the frontalis muscle contracts vertically, relaxed skin tension lines (RSTL) and skin creases or rhytids form transversely in the forehead. However, in the glabella, the action of the corrugator supercilii muscles causes vertical rhytids and RSTL. Therefore, orienting laceration repairs along RSTL, when possible, can be helpful for camouflaging scars.

The forehead is also supplied by branches of the internal and external carotid arteries. The paired supratrochlear and supraorbital arteries travel with their homonymous nerves to supply the central forehead. The supratrochlear artery exits the skull through a notch at the superomedial orbit roughly 2 cm from the midline and then courses through the corrugator supercilii muscle to reach the frontalis muscle and, ultimately, the skin.

The supraorbital and supratrochlear nerves, branches of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve (CN V Division V1), provide sensory innervation to the forehead and anterior scalp; the frontal or temporal branch of the facial nerve (CN VII) provides the motor innervation. This motor nerve lies within the subgaleal space and controls the frontalis, the superior portion of the orbicularis oculi, and corrugator supercilii muscles. The course of the frontal branch may be approximated by the Pitanguy line running from a point 5 mm inferior to the tragus to a point 15 mm above the lateral brow.

**Cheek**

The cheek extends from the infraorbital rim inferiorly to the jawline, laterally to the preauricular crease, and medially to the nose. The layers of the cheek comprise the skin, subcutaneous tissue, superficial musculoaponeurotic system (SMAS), sub-SMAS areolar space, and the deep parotidomasseteric fascia.

The blood supply to the cheek comes from multiple sources. Branches of the ophthalmic artery, such as the zygomaticofacial, zygomaticotemporal, and infraorbital arteries, supply the medial cheek. The transverse facial artery, a branch of the superficial temporal artery, supplies the lateral cheek. Finally, the angular artery, the terminal branch of the facial artery, runs along the nasolabial fold to supply the inferomedial cheek and lateral nose.

Branches of the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve (CN V Division V2) supply the sensory innervation to the cheek. The lateral cheek contains the parotid gland and the extratemporal facial nerve. Therefore, the parotid gland, duct, and extratemporal facial nerve must be evaluated in any soft tissue cheek injury. The facial nerve exits the stylomastoid foramen and enters the parotid gland, dividing the gland into superficial and deep lobes. The facial nerve divides within the parotid gland into the superior temporozygomatic and inferior cervicofacial divisions, which run beneath the SMAS on the superficial surface of the masseteric fascia until the branches reach their target muscles of facial expression. The terminal branches of the facial nerve include the frontal, zygomatic, buccal, marginal mandibular, and cervical nerves.

All branches of the facial nerve should be assessed at the time of cheek injury; injuries proximal to the branching point of the nerve can lead to weakness in all divisions. Damage to facial nerve branches medial to the lateral canthus typically does not require repair, as cross-innervation among branches prevents significant deficits and promotes consistent recovery.

The parotid gland lies within the parotidomasseteric fascia inferior to the zygomatic arch and superficial to the masseter muscle. The parotid or Stenson duct extends anteriorly from the parotid gland and courses medially with the buccal division of the facial nerve and the transverse facial artery. At the anterior border of the masseter muscle, the duct travels medially through the buccal fat pad, piercing the buccinator muscle. The duct then enters the oral cavity through a punctum adjacent to the second maxillary molar. The course of the parotid duct can be generally approximated by a line drawn from the tragus to the midline of the upper lip. Injury to the lateral cheek can violate the integrity of the parotid gland and duct. This must be addressed before laceration repair to prevent saliva from leaking into and collecting within the subcutaneous space, forming either a sialocele or cutaneous salivary fistula.

**Periorbital Region**

The upper and lower eyelids are multilayered structures anchored to the medial and lateral orbital periosteum or periorbita by the canthal tendons. For convenience, the eyelids are often conceptualized as comprising anterior and posterior lamellae; some describe the orbital septum and tarsal plates as the middle lamella. The anterior lamella of the eyelid comprises the skin and underlying orbicularis oculi muscle. Eyelid skin is the thinnest in the body, contains no subcutaneous fat, and therefore requires gentle handling during laceration repair. Beneath the anterior lamella is the orbital septum, a fibrous connective tissue layer extending from the periosteum and inserting onto the tarsal plate. The orbital septum retains the orbital contents, particularly the fat, within the orbit. The tarsal plates are dense connective tissues that support the eyelids and contain the eyelash follicles.

Beneath the tarsal plates lies the posterior lamella, comprising the levator palpebrae superioris muscle of the upper eyelid, capsulopalpebral fascia analogous to the levator palpebrae muscle in the lower eyelid, and conjunctiva. The conjunctiva lines the inner aspect of the eyelid and is closely associated with the globe to lubricate and protect the eye. Laterally, the lateral canthal tendons are bands of connective tissue that anchor the tarsus to the surrounding periosteum and suspend the eyelid in its appropriate position. The medial canthal tendon has a more complicated anatomic configuration than the lateral, surrounding the lacrimal drainage system and contributing to the lacrimal pump mechanism. The upper and lower eyelids each have one punctum along their margins, roughly where the lashes start medially, and these puncta communicate with the superior and inferior canaliculi that drain into the common lacrimal canaliculus. The common canaliculus collects into the lacrimal sac and drains tears through the nasolacrimal duct into the nose, underneath the inferior turbinate.

Medial canthal lacerations, therefore, should raise the index of suspicion for damage to the nasolacrimal drainage system, which must be evaluated before laceration repair. Physical examination findings indicative of medial canthal injuries are lateral displacement of the eyelid puncta, rounding of the medial canthal angle, telecanthus, and transverse shortening of the palpebral aperture.

The eyelid receives a rich blood supply primarily from branches of the internal carotid artery, including the lateral palpebral artery from the lacrimal artery and the medial palpebral artery from the ophthalmic artery.

**Nose**

The nasal soft tissue envelope comprises the skin, SMAS, fat, periosteum and perichondrium, bone and cartilage, and internal nasal mucosa. Functionally, the nose can be divided into upper, middle, and lower thirds. The nasal bones and frontal processes of the maxillae constitute the bony vault or upper third. The midvault or middle third comprises the paired upper lateral cartilages and dorsal septum. The lower third of the nose, or the tip, is supported by the 2 lower lateral cartilages.

For reconstructive purposes, the nose is often divided into 9 aesthetic subunits, following the work of Burget and Menick in 1985.

A robust anastomosis of arteries contributed by branches of the ophthalmic, maxillary, and facial arteries supply the external nose.

The external nasal nerve from CN V Division 1 supplies sensory innervation to the nasal dorsum and nasal alae. The infraorbital nerve from CN V Division 2 supplies sensory innervation to lateral portions of the nose. The zygomatic and buccal branches of the facial nerve supply motor innervation.

**Ear**

The auricle comprises 6 subunits: tragus, antitragus, helix including the helical crus, antihelix including the antihelical crura, conchal bowl divided into cymba concha and cavum concha by the helical crus, and lobule. From superficial to deep, the layers of the auricle are the skin, perichondrium, and underlying cartilage. The auricular lobule is unique as it comprises fibroadipose tissue without underlying cartilage.

Auricular blood supply is from the external carotid artery through the superficial temporal and posterior auricular arteries, which supply the perichondrium and that, in turn, nourishes the relatively avascular cartilage.

Several sensory nerves innervate the external ear: the auriculotemporal nerve from the trigeminal nerve, the lesser occipital nerve, and the greater auricular nerve.

**Lip**

The perioral unit has 6 subunits, 4 in the upper lip and 2 in the lower. The perioral unit is dominated by the lips and spans the area between the nasolabial folds laterally, the labiomental sulcus inferiorly, and the nasal base superiorly. The subunits of the lower lip are the cutaneous lower lip or white lip and the vermillion or red lip. The subunits of the upper lip are the vermillion and the cutaneous portions, the latter of which is divided into bilateral lateral segments and a central philtrum. The transition from the white lip to the red lip is called the vermillion border, which must be precisely recreated when repairing a laceration, as this is a prominent aesthetic subunit boundary of the face. The white roll, just above the vermillion border, is less apparent in older patients but is a critical landmark in cleft lip repair. Another important transition zone is the wet-dry junction, where the red lip meets the labial mucosa.

The lips comprise 3 main layers, the skin or outer mucosal layer of the dry lip, the orbicularis oris muscle, and the oral mucosa.

The blood supply to the lips comes via the superior and inferior labial arteries, which are branches of the facial artery located deep to the muscle and are typically only injured in full-thickness lacerations.

Separate branches of the trigeminal nerve supply the sensory innervation to the upper and lower lip. The infraorbital nerve from CN V Division 2 supplies the upper lip, and the mental nerve from CN V Division 3 supplies the lower lip. The buccal and marginal mandibular branches of the facial nerve provide motor innervation to the perioral musculature.

**Chin**

The chin lies at the inferior central aspect of the mandible, just inferior to the labiomental sulcus. Much of the bulk of the chin comes from subcutaneous fibroadipose tissue and the mentalis muscle, which originates on the mandible and inserts into the dermis. Sensory innervation to the chin is supplied by the mental nerve of CN V Division 3, which exits the mental foramen of the mandible anterior to the first premolar. The marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve provides motor innervation to the mentalis muscle.