Testing for latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI) should be reserved for those who are at increased risk for progression to active TB. Examples include people who were recently in close contact with an affected person with TB, immunocompromised individuals, healthcare workers, or workers/persons of correctional facilities. Testing should not be performed in individuals who are otherwise healthy with little to no risk for progression to active disease. Also, it should be taken into consideration whether detection would be beneficial in the specific patient, as medications for the treatment of TB can come with adverse effects.

IGRAs are an in vitro method aimed at measuring a type IV cell-mediated immune response to antigens of M. tuberculosis. Antigenic peptides derived directly from the DNA genome of M. tuberculosis are used to perform testing. These antigens are specific to M. tuberculosis and are not encoded in the genome of BCG vaccine strains or most species of non-tuberculosis mycobacteria. Exceptions and overlaps include M. marina, M. kansasii, M.szulgai, and M. flavescens, which have little to no prevalence in society.

IGRAs are available as two different tests: The QFT-GIT assay and the T-SPOT.TB assay. The QFT-GIT assay is an ELISA test that uses whole blood and combines it with antigens of M. tuberculosis, namely ESAT-6, CFP-10, and TB7.7, into a test tube. Measurement of the IFN-γ is reported in international units (IU) per milliliter and is considered positive when ranging above the test cutoff. The T-SPOT.TB assay is an ELISPOT assay where ESAT-6 and CFP-10 are incubated with peripheral blood mononuclear cells. The specificity of both exceeds >95%, however the T-SPOT.TB has greater sensitivity than QFT-GIT at 90% rather than 80%.

IGRAs are beneficial in the setting of high BCG vaccination populations because it does cause false positives in these individuals, unlike TST.