The pathophysiology of the intrinsic vocal cord or arytenoid scarring and damage is relatively straightforward: it is a replacement of normally mobile tissues with fibrosis and scar that creates a mechanical tethering of these mobile tissues, preventing normal movement.

As RLN damage is the most common cause of bilateral vocal cord paralysis, we will review this pathophysiology in more detail. Vagal motor efferent fibers originate in the medulla oblongata. The nucleus ambiguous contains cell bodies of nerves that innervate the soft palate, pharynx, and larynx, while the dorsal nucleus contains visceral efferent fibers to the abdomen and thorax. The vagus nerve exits the cranium through the jugular foramen. The accessory nerve joins the vagus as it exits the jugular foramen.

The superior laryngeal nerve (SLN) branches off the vagus as it passes between the common carotid artery and internal jugular vein. Subsequently, the SLN divides into the external and internal branches. The internal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve provides sensory innervation to the mucosa above the true vocal cords. The external branch innervates the cricothyroid muscle (essential in changing the pitch of the voice). The right vagus nerve travels anterior to the subclavian artery into the abdomen, while the right RLN branches off and loops around the subclavian artery, ascending back into the neck to reach the larynx. The right RLN enters the larynx and provides sensory innervation to the laryngeal mucosa below the vocal folds and motor innervation to all the laryngeal muscles except the cricothyroid. The left vagus nerve takes a similar course into the abdomen, posterior to the aorta near the take-off of the ductus arteriosus, with the left RLN branching off and wrapping around the aorta before ascending into the neck and traveling in the tracheoesophageal groove to reach the larynx. The left RLN is more prone to injury due to its longer course.

Bilateral vocal cord paralysis can be caused by injury to the vagus nerve from its cerebral origins to its branches in the thorax and abdomen, and due to some redundancy, the position of the vocal cords (especially in bilateral paralysis) does not always reliably predict the site of the lesion.