More than 50 percent of all venomous vertebrates are fish, and which pose a threat to divers around the world. The family Scorpaenidae includes the most venomous fish. Lionfish, scorpionfish, and stonefish are members of this family. All of these fish possess spines on their dorsal, pelvic, and anal fins. These spines are encapsulated by glandular venom-producing integumentary sheaths that release venom when mechanically disrupted through contact with a victim. Lionfish are common residents of aquariums and commonly injure the fingers and hands of those who handle them. Scorpionfish are commonly encountered by divers or fishermen and likewise, often injure the hands of those who touch them. Stonefish are bottom-feeders commonly found in the coastal waters of Australia, Indonesia, and India that cause injury when they are stepped on. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of lionfish, scorpionfish, and stonefish envenomation and highlights the role of interprofessional team members in collaborating to provide well-coordinated care and enhance outcomes for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the frequency of encounters with poisonous fish.
- Describe the venom producing organs associated with lionfish, scorpionfish, and stonefish.
- Outline the management of a patient that has received envenomation from lionfish, scorpionfish, and stonefish.
- Explain the role of interprofessional team members in collaborating to provide well-coordinated care and enhance outcomes for affected patients.