It is essential to understand the relevant anatomy and physiology of hair, and the hair cycle, in order to maximize the outcomes of hair transplantation. Key elements in hair restoration include

- Hair follicle – composed of a hair shaft, two surrounding sheaths (inner and outer), and a germinative bulb. The follicle divides into three sections: infundibulum (from the skin surface to the sebaceous gland duct), the isthmus (from the sebaceous duct to the arrector pili muscle insertion), and the inferior segment (from the muscle insertion to the base of the matrix)

- Bulb – the deepest segment of the hair follicle which contains the hair matrix (creates the hair shaft), dermal papilla (regulates growth), and melanocytes (produce color).

- Terminal hair – thick, pigmented hairs at the top of the scalp, beard, axillary, and pubic regions, all of which are androgen-sensitive. The hair elsewhere on the body, including the parietal and occipital scalp, are androgen-independent.

- Vellus hair – this is fine, short, non-pigmented hairs ("peach fuzz") found on the adult that covers much of the body.

- Follicular Unit (FU) – a naturally occurring group of hair(s) seen on the scalp consisting of several terminal hairs (usually 1 to 4), a sebaceous gland and duct, and an arrector pili muscle. The collagen band which surrounds the FU is called the perifolliculum.

**Scalp Hair Growth Cycle**

- Anagen – the 2- to 6-year active growing phase of the hair follicle. Approximately 90 to 95% of scalp hairs are in anagen at any given time.

- Catagen – this is the 2- to 3-week involutional phase of the hair follicle characterized by acute follicular regression. Less than 1% of scalp hairs are in catagen at any given time.

- Telogen – the 2- to 3-month resting phase of the hair follicle characterized by a stop in all activity. Approximately 5 to 10% of scalp hairs are in telogen at any given time.

- Exogen – the daily shedding phase of the hair follicle characterized by a loss of 25 to 100 telogen hairs, which are replaced by new anagen hairs.

Androgenetic alopecia (AGA) – the most common etiology of hair loss wherein androgenetic effects, namely testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT), disrupt the growth cycle (the anagen to telogen ratio decreases). Hallmark characteristics of AGA include thinning and subsequent miniaturization of terminal hairs to vellus hairs.

Donor site: the non-alopecic areas (not influenced by androgenic alopecia) where donor terminal hairs can be harvested for implantation. The safe donor site of the scalp lies in the mid-occipital region between the upper and lower occipital protuberances. In general, there are 65 to 85 FUs per square centimeter (cm) in the occipital donor scalp.