Serotonin plays a critical role in the human body. Over the last 70 years, researchers have been able to obtain a great understanding of which disease processes are influenced by this neurotransmitter, as well as its therapeutic properties in potential medical interventions.

It appears to play an essential role in the central nervous system (CNS) and the body's general functioning and, in particular, the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Studies have shown links between serotonin and bone metabolism, the production of breast milk, liver regeneration, and cell division.

Serotonin influences the brain cells both directly and indirectly.

**Bowel Function**

Most of the body's serotonin is in the GI tract, where it regulates bowel function and movements. The human digestive tract is composed of several layers of enterochromaffin cells. These cells sense food in the stomach and release serotonin as a response. Increased serotonin levels in the gut cause digestive processes to increase in speed, which often occurs as a result of digesting toxins or noxious substances. It also plays a part in reducing appetite while eating.

**Mood**

Serotonin plays a significant role in the nervous system and, therefore, largely affects mood. In the brain, serotonin changes mood, anxiety, and happiness by increasing nerve stimulation and electrical impulses. Drugs like ecstasy and LSD increase the levels of serotonin in the brain to produce effects like increased appetite, increased sexual drive, euphoria, and even hallucinations.

**Clotting**

When serotonin is released into the blood, it is often absorbed by platelets rather than remaining free serotonin. The effect serotonin has on the platelets is similar to those produced by the interaction of platelet factor 2 and platelets. Serotonin accelerates the metabolism of fibrinogen to fibrin. This action causes platelet aggregation leading to vasoconstriction, and the result is a reduction in the blood flow and an increase in clot formation; this is one of the earliest defined functions of serotonin.

**Nausea**

When serotonin is released into the gut faster than it can be digested, it is oven reabsorbed into the bloodstream. In the bloodstream, the neurotransmitter can interact with 5-HT3 receptors, which in turn activate chemoreceptor trigger zones. The activation of these sites causes stimulation of the brain to cause expulsion of the substance eaten; this is perceived as nausea by us.

**Bone Density**

Several research studies have shown that it may have links to a decrease in bone density, but the relationship lacks sufficient proof. This correlation has been hypothesized by an early study that measured the changes in mice that lacked brain serotonin. The researchers found that these mice have severe osteopenia, while mice that only lack intestinal serotonin have regular bone density. Humans with increased levels of blood serotonin have been linked to increased or regular bone density. The belief is that the 5-HT1B receptor is the link between blood serotonin and bone density.

**Sexual Function**

Serotonin has been linked to increased sexual drive but decreased sexual function; this can be rather detrimental to patients who have received a prescription for selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). As these drugs are commonly given to patients suffering from depression, they can often exacerbate the underlying problem due to sexual tension. The main course of serotonin's role in decreased sexual function is increasing retrograde ejaculation and erectile dysfunction. The cause of these symptoms is due to overstimulation of the 5-HT2C receptors, which promote erection and inhibit ejaculation, and the under-stimulation of the 5-HT1A receptor, which has the inverse functions.