In addition to the physiological findings, the EEG analysis can highlight several findings, such as excessive slowdowns identified with the presence of slow delta waves (polyphasic and monophasic shapes) of 1 to 4 Hz, 50 to 350 microV occurring in the depression of the state of consciousness (e.g., general anesthesia), in encephalopathy and dementia, and a wide range of wave patterns. Some of these waves are nonspecific (e.g., sharp epileptiform waves); others are diagnostic, such as the continuous spike-wave pattern with a frequency of 1.5 to 2.5 spikes/sec in Landau Kleffner syndrome or periodic sharp waves at 1 Hz in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

In the context of physiological findings, apart from the mu rhythm and certain delta waves, other waveforms have been illustrated, including K complex (large-amplitude delta frequency waves), V waves (sharp waves that occur during sleep), positive occipital sharp transients of sleep (POSTS), and lambda waves (LWs). These latter are of bi- or tri-phasic morphology (the predominant positive component is preceded and followed by a negative component), appearing on the occipital regions in awake subjects during visual exploration and are usually detected as a response to moving an object in the visual field. The main component is generally positive. The amplitude varies but is generally less than 50 microV, whereas duration is 200 to 300 msec, except in 1 to 3 years children when it can be up to 400 msec. LWs decrease significantly or disappear; when the eyes are closed, the lighting decreases, and a white sheet is presented. This data is crucial because, in the suspicion of an epileptic correlate, the disappearance of the waves replacing a geometric multicolor image with a blank surface clearly indicates the finding of non-pathologic LWs.

Because LWs are sharp waves, they can be misinterpreted as pathological epileptiform findings, especially when present unilaterally (rarely). However, LWs do not have correlations to epilepsy or other pathological conditions. Although LWs do not have pathological features, it is appropriate to characterize their features and distinguish them from the POSTS. While LWs and POSTS are both normal EEG patterns and have many similarities in morphology and location, LWs occur in wakefulness and as an evoked response, whereas POSTS appears typically during physiologic sleep. Yet, POSTS, also termed as 'lambdoid waves,' are usually monophasic. In a recent investigation, the authors found a significant association between LWs and POSTS and, in turn, suggested that both normal EEG findings have a common occipital generator.