The lipid transport pathway starts in the small intestine when the dietary lipids (mainly triglycerides) are packaged into chylomicrons utilizing Apo B-48 as its backbone structure. Chylomicrons are then secreted into the lymphatic system to later travel throughout the systemic circulation. As they travel throughout the body, chylomicrons obtain Apo C-II and Apo-E from circulating HDL. The recently acquired Apo C-II acts as an activating cofactor for lipoprotein lipase (LPL), which hydrolyzes the triglycerides found in the chylomicrons’ core and allows it to release free fatty acids to the peripheral tissues. As chylomicrons lose their triglycerides by the action of peripheral LPL, they transform into chylomicron remnants. These remnants use their Apo-E as high-affinity ligands to bind to hepatic receptors and internalize into the liver

In the hepatocytes, triglycerides and cholesterol esters are transferred to Apo B-100 by the action of the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTTP). This lipidated Apo B-100 is now called nascent VLDL and is secreted to the circulation.

The Apo C-II in mature VLDL activates LPL in the capillary endothelium of tissues to cleave their stored triglycerides into one monoglyceride and two free fatty acids, releasing them from the VLDL and allowing them to be delivered to the tissues to be used for storage or energy production.

The alteration or deficiency of the enzymes involved in this complex metabolic process may lead to lipid disorders known as hyperlipoproteinemia. Depending on the pathophysiology and clinical presentation, these diseases are divided into five subtypes. Type I hyperlipoproteinemia (familial hyperchylomicronemia) is caused by a deficiency in LPL or Apo C-II, resulting in a significant increase in triglyceride concentration. These patients present with eruptive xanthomas, steatosis, recurrent episodes of acute pancreatitis, and no increased risk of atherosclerosis.