NODAT is predictable by evaluation of the risk factors such as pre-diabetic status and obesity. Some studies suggest that assessment of preoperative insulin resistance, insulin sensitivity, and beta-cell function (c-peptide levels) may be helpful to predict NODAT but remains unconfirmed by other studies.

Guidelines that define the criteria for the diagnosis of NODAT are identical to the diagnostic criteria in DM:

- Symptoms of diabetes and random plasma glucose greater than or equal to 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L)

- Fasting plasma glucose greater than or equal to 126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L) which requires repetition on another day

- Two-hour plasma glucose greater than or equal to 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) during an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)

OGTT is the gold standard for NODAT diagnosis, especially in the early stages of transplantation. Because of the reduction of red blood cell survival after transplant, the diagnosis of NODAT based on HbA1c is not accurate in the first 3 months after the transplantation and is therefore not recommended. Beyond 3 months, the new hemoglobin would be synthesized and glycated for the appropriate period, and HbA1c greater than or equal to 6.5 percent can be utilized to diagnose NODAT. Even many studies don't recommend HbA1c alone as a screening tool for NODAT in the first year after transplant.

Although hemoglobin A1c can be used is some patients to diagnose diabetes mellitus, in the setting of ESRD, RBC turnover makes this unreliable.

Early detection of NODAT is helpful as it reduces the risk and complications of DM. The recommendation is for post-transplantation screening for NODAT in all patients undergoing solid organ transplants. Transplantation centers perform the screening tests weekly in the first month and continue screening at months 3, 6, and 12 post-transplantation. After the first year, the risk of NODAT is lower, and the recommendation is for yearly screening.