**Physiological Anatomy of Neuromuscular Junction**

The structure of NMJ of a skeletal, smooth, or cardiac muscle vary a little from each other, but all have three main parts; a motor nerve ending, also termed the presynaptic part; postsynaptic part, the motor endplate, which is a part of the muscle membrane; the synaptic cleft; an area between the motor nerve ending and the motor endplate.

**Neuromuscular Junction of Skeletal Muscle**

A skeletal NMJ is formed between the nerve endings of a motor neuron that arise either from the ventral horn of the spinal cord or from the medulla and the part of plasma membrane skeletal muscle called motor endplate. On reaching the target muscle, the myelinated motor neuron loses its myelin sheath to form a complex of 100-200 branching nerve endings called nerve terminal/ terminal boutons. Each nerve terminal lies against the motor endplate and is covered by Schwann cells. The nerve terminal is the presynaptic part of skeletal muscle NMJ. Its structure is quite different from that of the rest of the axon. It has voltage-gated calcium channels and potassium channels on its membrane and contains mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, and synaptic vesicles (SVs) in its cytoplasm.  The membrane of SVs has synaptotagmin and synaptobrevin proteins. SVs store acetylcholine (ACh), the neurotransmitter at skeletal NMJ. Each SV has around 5000-10000 molecules of Ach. The amount of neurotransmitter stored in each vesicle is sometimes referred to as “quanta. The SVs are concentrated around the active zones, the areas of membrane thickening at the nerve terminal that contains many proteins and rows of voltage-gated calcium (Ca) channels. The nerve terminal membrane also contains a family of SNAP proteins, syntaxin, and synaptosomal-associated protein 25 (SNAP-25). These proteins(syntaxin and SNAP-25) along with synaptic-vesicle protein synaptobrevin are referred to as SNARE (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive) proteins and are essential for docking and fusion of SVs to active zones and resulting exocytosis of ACh in the synaptic cleft. The space between the nerve terminal and the motor endplate on the plasma membrane of muscle is called the synaptic/junctional cleft and measures ∼50 nm. It is the site where presynaptic neurotransmitters, ACh is released before it interacts with nicotinic ACh receptors on the motor endplate. The synaptic cleft of NMJ contains acetylcholinesterase enzyme, responsible for the catabolism of released ACh so that its effect on the post-synaptic receptors is not prolonged. Motor endplate forms the postsynaptic part of NMJ. It is the thickened portion of the muscle plasma membrane (sarcolemma) that is folded to form depressions called junctional folds. The nerve terminal does not penetrate the motor endplate but fits into the junctional folds. Junctional folds have nicotinic ACh receptors concentrated at the top. The binding of ACh to these receptors opens the ion channels allowing the influx of sodium ions from the extracellular fluid into the muscle membrane. This creates endplate potential and generation and transmission of AP to muscle membrane.

The neuromuscular junction of the smooth muscle is not as highly structured as skeletal muscle NMJ. Smooth muscle NMJ is formed between the autonomic nerve fibers that branch diffusely on smooth muscle to form diffuse junctions. The autonomic nerve in smooth muscle NMJ does not have typical nerve terminals as seen in skeletal NMJ, but instead, it has multiple varicosities distributed along its axis. Unlike skeletal NMJ that always has Ach as a neurotransmitter, the SVs present in the varicosities may contain ACh or norepinephrine, or another transmitter. The Schwann cells are interrupted at the points where varicosities are present so that neurotransmitters can diffuse to the cells. The smooth muscles have many layers of muscle cells, but the nerve fibers often innervate only the outer layer. Muscle excitation travels from this outer layer to the inner layers by action potential conduction in the muscle mass or additional diffusion of the transmitter substance. In body parts where smooth muscle activity is relatively slow, like intestines, one neuron controls a large number of muscle fibers, but parts where the activity is fast, such as iris, the autonomic nerve branch less extensively and controls fewer muscle fibers.

**Neuromuscular Junctions of Cardiac Muscle**

Cardiac muscle fibers are connected by multiple gap junctions that provide a rapid spread of contraction within the muscle. Each cardiac muscle fiber is innervated by postganglionic parasympathetic and sympathetic nerve endings, which lose the myelin sheath closer to the individual muscle fiber; this allows free diffusion of the neurotransmitter from the innervated nerve axon to the muscle fiber. The parasympathetic and sympathetic nerve fibers end on the sinoatrial node, the atrioventricular node, and the bundle of His to form NMJ. Sympathetic fibers also innervate the ventricular muscle. The exact nature of the endings on nodal tissue is not known. In the ventricle, the contacts between the sympathetic fibers and the cardiac muscle fibers resemble those found in smooth muscle.