Poor long-term outcomes have correlated with infants with prenatal opioid exposure. Research exists about adverse changes in neurodevelopment, cognition, school performance, behavior, vision, and mortality. However, researchers have inferred many of these results from observational studies. The presence of multiple prenatal confounders such as polysubstance exposure, prematurity, intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR), and postnatal confounders like NAS pharmacotherapy, continued maternal drug abuse, maternal socioeconomic and environmental factors, makes it challenging to attribute prenatal opioid exposure as the cause for the poor outcomes.

Studies have consistently shown a significant difference in neurodevelopmental outcomes in opioid-exposed infants versus their counterparts.

Prenatal opioid exposure has been linked to psycho-behavioral problems, as well. These children are two times more likely to be identified with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorders, and adjustment disorders. They are also more likely to be aggressive and have anxiety disorder compared to their controls. Infants with NAS are reportedly at increased risk of rehospitalization during childhood due to maltreatment, trauma, and behavioral problems. The mortality rates have been consistently higher among opioid-exposed infants for many decades and across many developed countries, with rates as high as four times in New York City. These indicate the need for continued support for this highly complex and vulnerable population.

Despite all these findings, a large randomized control trial called MOTHER (Maternal Opioid Treatment: Human Experimental Research) study evaluated the neurodevelopmental and growth outcomes among NAS infants and found conflicting long-term outcomes.