It is important to take an adequate history and physical is determining when the radiation therapy was given, what type of ionizing radiation, and what was the accumulative dose of radiation that the tissue had received. Also, when the patient presents with a problematic wound, it is important to consider other factors that may be causing poor wound healing, for example, malnutrition, macro-vascular disease, tobacco use, diabetes, age, and repeated trauma to the tissue from shear injury and pressure. For example, a pressure ulcer in the pelvic area may not be healing not only from not offloading the tissue but also from the previous radiation therapy that the patient had for pelvic cancer. It is also important what surgical procedures have been done to the problematic wound, and one should anticipate problem wound healing in a surgical wound if the tissue has had previous radiation therapy, especially if there are fibrotic changes to the tissue.

The acute effects of radiation to soft tissues in the development of erythema, tissue edema, pigmentation changes to the skin, hair loss, and skin or mucosal ulceration. The acute effects of radiation therapy are usually self-limiting and are treated with supportive care and use of antibiotics if cellulitis infection develops because of the skin ulcerations becoming infected. Usually, the acutely damaged radiated tissue will recover within about one month with reduction of the inflammation, edema, and repair of the damaged endothelial cells. If the arterioles do not recover, then this precipitates a hypoxic environment to the tissue with fibrotic changes that can become permanent and lead to the delayed effects of radiation therapy. The delayed effects can cause wounds that are difficult to heal, and the tissue develops a progressive endarteritis and obliterative process of the arterioles which decreases the blood supply to the tissue, and the hypoxic environment causes the typical fibrotic change. Clinically the damaged skin tissue has a contracted look, woody feel to the tissue, and a waxy look to the skin. Telangiectasias are frequently seen in the surface and it is common for this skin to ulcerate with minor trauma or spontaneously. The delayed effects of radiation therapy can develop within 6 weeks to many years after the radiation therapy.