# Introduction

The rectum initiates the terminal section of the large intestine at the level of the S3 vertebra, just after the sigmoid colon. Approximately 15 cm long, it is characterized by the cessation of the omental appendices and the absence of teniae coli and haustra. It is distally continuous with the anal canal as it protrudes through the pelvic diaphragm/levator ani. The rectum plays a significant role in fecal continence and the storage of feces via the ampulla. The anal canal is the final portion of the large intestine and is approximately 3 cm long. The anal canal also contributes to the maintenance of fecal continence and has great clinical significance due to the different embryological origins of the superior and inferior sections of the canal. Disruption in the development of the hindgut either environmentally or genetically can cause many disorders of the rectum and anal canal.

# Development

The gastrointestinal tract arises by the beginning of the third week of embryonic development. During a process called gastrulation, the three germ layers form. The germ layers include the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm, which together compose the embryonic disc. The cranial end of the embryonic disc consists of the oropharyngeal membrane, which ultimately forms the mouth, and the caudal end includes the cloacal membrane, which forms the anus.

Towards the caudal end of the cloaca is an area called the cloacal membrane, which is a boundary between the endoderm layer and the ectoderm layer with no mesoderm in between; this ultimately forms the proctodeum. A mesoderm-derived urorectal septum divides the cloaca into the ventral urogenital cavity and the dorsal anorectal canal by week seven or eight.

# Cellular

**Rectum**

- The rectum derives from the endoderm.

- The layers of the rectum include the mucosa (which itself includes the simple columnar epithelial cells, lamina propria, and muscularis mucosa), submucosa, muscularis propria, and serosa.

**Anal Canal**

- The anal canal divides into superior and inferior parts. The superior two-thirds are derived from the endoderm and are lined by simple columnar epithelial cells. The inferior one-third is derived from ectoderm and is lined by stratified squamous epithelial cells.

# Molecular Level

**Sonic Hedgehog**

- This sonic hedgehog signal transduction pathway is associated with the development of the gastrointestinal tract. The thought is that the development of the concentric layers of the gut tube, including the mucosa, submucosa, and muscularis propria are due to the expression of sonic hedgehog proteins in the endoderm.

- The sonic hedgehog gene also has a role in inducing other gene expressions such as Bmp4 (bone morphogenetic protein) and Hoxdl3 in the hindgut. These genes seem to play an important role in the morphology of the hindgut, as well.

**Homeobox Gene**

- The HOX genes are expressed along the lateral plate mesoderm of the GI tract during development and might play a role in the growth and differentiation of the epithelium. Some mice studies have shown that misaligning sequences of these genes or ectopic expression of hox genes have resulted in the development of hamartomas in the gastric mucosa. Inactivation of some hox genes has correlated with absence anal sphincters, lumen blockage, and disruption of GI musculature, which demonstrates the importance of these genes in the development of the GI tract.

- The cranio-caudal development of the gut and differentiation into various organs depends on the expression of many genes, including the hox genes. The expression of these genes appears to be highly regulated by the concentration gradient of retinoic acid.

**Para-Hox Cluster**

- Cdx1 and Cdx2 gene expression is upregulated during gut maturation and gets transcribed in the endoderm of the hindgut. A relationship exists between the expression of these genes and the development, differentiation, and maintenance of the intestinal epithelium. Disruption in the Cdx2 gene has links to various hindgut abnormalities such as failure of colon development, terminal blockage, colonic polyps, and intestinal metaplasia in mice.

**Sox Family**

- There is evidence showing that the Sox genes play a critical role in the development of the intestines and its stem cell function. These DNA-sequence specific transcription factors, specifically Sox9, Sox2, and Sox17, get expressed in the intestinal epithelium. These genes also get expressed in Paneth cells, enteroendocrine cells, and intestinal crypts, all of which contribute to the development of stem cells.

- The Sox genes also seem to play a role in cancer. Some Sox genes, including Sox7 and Sox 9, have tumor suppressive functions and are sometimes down-regulated in colorectal cancer.

**GDNF**

- The enteric nervous system is a system of neurons embedded in the lining of the GI tract and derive from neural crest cells. It has a significant role in the regulation of GI motility (peristalsis) and secretion of enzymes through an autonomous operation.

**Endothelin**

- Endothelin also contributes to the development of the enteric neural crest cells. Endothelin has associated with the prevention of premature neuronal differentiation. ETB receptors seem to play a role in smooth muscle development, and it works together with endothelin to regulate the development and differentiation of the enteric nervous system.

# Function

The rectum plays a role in fecal continence and the storage of feces. Directly above the pelvic diaphragm or the levator ani and the anococcygeal ligament is a dilation of the terminal rectum known as the ampulla. This area is the location where feces accumulate and remain until defecation. The ampulla of the rectum is very distensible and is capable of regulating the movement of fecal material into the anal canal for expulsion. The shape of the rectum, in conjunction with the flexures created along the way, also aids in the mechanism of fecal continence.

The anal canal also helps with the storage and expulsion of feces. The superior portion of the anal canal contains a circular muscle layer called the internal anal sphincter, which is tonically contracted most of the time to prevent leakage. The involuntary contraction of this muscle gets stimulated by the sympathetic nervous system and gets inhibited by the parasympathetic nervous system. As feces or gas passes through, the distension in the rectal ampulla causes a temporary relaxation of the internal anal sphincter and a voluntary contraction of the external anal sphincter, which is in the inferior portion of the anal canal.

# Testing

**Anorectal manometry**: Measures and assesses the anal sphincter (internal and external) and rectal pressure and its function. This method is used to evaluate patients with fecal incontinence and constipation. It can directly measure the luminal pressure, including the high-pressure zone, resting pressure, squeezing pressure, rectal sensation/compliance, and the anorectal inhibitory reflex.

**Defecating proctography/Defecography**: A study using X-ray imaging to evaluate anatomic defects of the anorectal region and function of the puborectalis muscle. A contrast filled paste gets initially introduced to the rectum, and the patient is instructed to defecate in a series of stages (relaxation, contraction, tensing of the abdomen, and evacuation).

**Balloon capacity and compliance test**: Evaluates the function of the rectum using a device (plastic catheter with a latex balloon attached), which is inserted into the rectum and gradually filled with warm water. During this process, the volume and pressure are measured.

**Balloon evacuation study**: This test is similar to the balloon capacity and compliance test in which a catheter with a small balloon gets inserted into the rectum and filled with water. Different volumes of water get loaded inside the balloon, and the patient is instructed to evacuate the balloon. This procedure is done to evaluate the opening of the anal canal and to assess the relaxation of the pelvic floor.

**Pudendal nerve terminal motor latency**: A probe designed to stimulate and record nerve activity is placed on the physician's gloved finger, which is then inserted into the rectum to measure pudendal nerve activity (latency to contraction of the anal sphincter muscle). The pudendal nerve innervates the anal sphincter muscles; therefore, this test can be used to assess any injury to that nerve.

**Electromyography**: A test to measure the ability of the puborectalis muscle and sphincter muscles to relax properly. An electrode is placed inside the rectum, and the activity of these muscles gets evaluated throughout a series of stages (relaxation, contraction, and evacuation).

**Endoanal Ultrasonography**: The use of ultrasound imaging to examine rectal lesions, defects, or injuries to the surrounding tissues.

**Suction rectal biopsy**: Gold standard for the diagnosis of Hirschsprung disease. A biopsy is taken two cm above the dentate line, and the absence of ganglion cells on histology confirms the diagnosis. Hypertrophic nerve fibers may be present in addition to this finding.

**Contrast enema**: Used as one of the diagnostic methods for Hirschsprung disease. Useful for localization of the aganglionic segment by looking for a narrowed rectum. Diagnostic confirmation is via a rectal biopsy.

# Pathophysiology

The pectinate or dentate line is the junction between the superior and inferior anal canal. There are many differences between these two regions, including their embryological origins, innervation, venous and arterial supply, and lymphatic supply. Above the pectinate line, the anal canal has an endodermal origin and is lined by simple columnar epithelia. Blood supply is from the superior rectal artery, which originates from the inferior mesenteric artery and returns via the superior rectal veins into the inferior mesenteric vein.

Below the pectinate line, the anal canal has an ectodermal origin and is predominantly lined by stratified squamous epithelium. The inferior rectal canal obtains its blood supply from the inferior rectal artery, which originates from the internal iliac artery. Blood returns via the inferior rectal vein, which ultimately drains into the inferior vena cava.

# Clinical Significance

- Anorectal malformations result from any disruption or abnormality during the process of embryological development of the gut tube. By the completion of the fifth week of development, the endoderm proliferates and occludes the lumen of the entire GI tract. The lumen becomes recanalized via apoptosis during the seventh week and completes by the ninth week.

- Hirschsprung's disease

- During the development of the GI tract, enteric neural crest cells migrate from the anterior foregut caudally throughout the entire GI tract and form the enteric nervous system. Disruption of this migration results in an aganglionic segment of the colon, which causes physiologic obstruction most commonly in the distal portion of the colon.

- Imperforate anus

- Failure in the breakdown of the anal membrane before birth. This congenital defect disrupts the opening to the anus.

- Adenocarcinoma

- Superior to the pectinate line, the lining of the anal canal is simple columnar epithelium. Therefore, the superior anal canal is more likely to develop adenocarcinoma.

- Squamous cell carcinoma

- Inferior to the pectinate line, the lining of the anal canal is stratified squamous epithelium. Therefore, the inferior anal canal is more likely to develop squamous cell carcinoma.