The average cluster headache patient can take approximately five years to diagnose, often only after visiting several different clinicians. Cluster headaches are often confused with migraines. The only way to improve diagnosis and management is with an interprofessional healthcare team dedicated to treating headaches.

The clinician (i.e., MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs) must strive to recognize the episodic nature of cluster headaches, autonomic dysregulation, and even the patient's activity during an attack.

Unfortunately, though oxygen is a level A recommended treatment for cluster headaches, it may not be covered by insurance - this may be due to a lack of understanding about cluster headaches by the insurance companies or a misunderstanding about the price differential between prescribing a triptan versus prescribing oxygen. The out-of-pocket cost for a patient buying oxygen depends on the state and can be anywhere from $500 to $10000 per year. Some patients ask about welder's oxygen, which is non-medical grade oxygen; however, this is usually not any cheaper than medical oxygen and may have impurities. Practitioners should refer insurers to the American Headache Society Guidelines during peer-to-peer conversations. Medicare and Medicaid have ruled that they will not cover oxygen for cluster headaches. Because oxygen is an excellent abortive treatment, the social worker may be involved in the care to ensure that the patient does not lack this therapy because of finances.

The neuroscience or pain nurse should educate the patient on avoiding alcohol and the importance of getting good sleep. In addition, the patient should be told that smoking cessation is important. The nurse should also emphasize the importance of a stress-free lifestyle and avoiding hot temperatures. Finally, close follow-up is essential in preventing future attacks. Interprofessional team members should communicate if anyone changes the medication, as one of the common causes of recurrent attacks is a low dose of prophylactic medication. Pharmacists should review medication dosages, check drug interactions, and educate patients about side effects.

All interprofessional team members must be prepared to communicate with other team members regarding any concerns or patient status changes and are all tasked with accurately documenting their findings and interactions in the patient's medical record so that everyone on the care team has access to the same accurate and up to date information.

**Outcomes**

Despite only a level C recommendation, healthcare providers generally consider verapamil prophylactic maintenance therapy. There is discordance between evidence-based medicine and provider activity.

Cluster headaches require an interprofessional team approach, including clinicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results.