# Continuing Education Activity

Lamivudine is a medication used in the management and treatment of HIV-1 and hepatitis B. It is in the nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) class of medications. This activity outlines the indications, mechanism of action, and contraindications for lamivudine as a valuable agent in the therapy for HIV (and other disorders when applicable). This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of the healthcare team in the care of patients with HIV and hepatitis B.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of lamivudine.
- Describe the adverse effects of lamivudine.
- Review the appropriate monitoring of lamivudine.
- Outline some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance lamivudine and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Lamivudine is a prescription nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) that is used in combination with other drugs as antiviral treatment for human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) and as a monotherapy for hepatitis B virus (HBV).

Lamivudine, also termed 2',3'-dideoxy-3'-thiacytidine or 3TC, was approved to treat HIV-1 in 1995, then for HBV in 1998.

Treatment of HIV-1 by lamivudine is in combination with lamivudine, raltegravir, or zalcitabine.

As a virustatic agent, lamivudine has been studied as a possible treatment for SARS-CoV. However, in all known published trials and research, lamivudine has not been shown to be an efficacious treatment for SARS-CoV.

# Mechanism of Action

Lamivudine is a dideoxynucleoside cytosine analog that inhibits viral DNA synthesis via reverse transcriptase DNA chain termination post phosphorylation. Once inside the cell, lamivudine, 2'-deoxy-3'-thiacytidine, is metabolized to the triphosphate form, lamivudine triphosphate (abbreviated as 3TC-TP or L-TP), and the monophosphate form, lamivudine monophosphate (abbreviated as 3TC-MP or L-MP), during intracellular kinase phosphorylation. Both forms, L-TP and L-MP, inhibit viral DNA synthesis. It is advantageous as an antiviral drug because it is primarily not recognized by human polymerase as a substrate. As an L-(-)-nucleoside enantiomer instead of a D-enantiomer, active lamivudine (3TC) is not primarily recognized by human polymerases as a substrate but actively competes with natural cytidine triphosphate to inhibit reverse transcriptase DNA synthesis seen in both HIV-1 and HBV infection.

Lamivudine is absorbed rapidly, with a maximum lamivudine concentration of 0.5 to 1.5 hours following oral dose administration and absolute bioavailability of approximately 82% in adults and 68% in children.

Lamivudine distributes into the total body fluid/extravascular spaces. It has a long intracellular half-life of as long as 15.5 hours for HIV-infected cells and 19 hours for HBV-infected cells.

Lamivudine is eliminated in the urine as an active organic cation secretion.  The mean elimination half-life was 5 to 7 hours.

Lamivudine does not undergo metabolism via the CYP450 pathway and minimally binds to plasma protein. Therefore, CYP450 inducers and inhibitors will not affect its metabolism, nor does it have many drug interactions with protein-bound medications. While lamivudine has some drug-drug interactions, like interferon-alpha-blockers, ribavirin, zidovudine, and drugs that inhibit MATE-1, MATE-2K, OCT2transporters, like trimethoprim and indinavir, which increases the plasma concentration of lamivudine, no interactions have clinical significance.

There are no known pharmacokinetic differences related to gender or race. Pharmacokinetic differences have not been sufficiently studied to extrapolate adjustments for either older age or glomerular filtration rate (GFR).

# Administration

Lamivudine is available in 150 mg scored tablets, 300 mg tablets, and 5 mg or 10 mg/ml oral solutions. It may be taken with or without food and should be stored at room temperature. The patient should take a missed dose when they remember, but doses should not be doubled up.

Doses should be adjusted accordingly for the patient's kidney function. Creatinine clearance greater than or equal to 50 mL/min should have a lamivudine dose of 150 mg twice per day or 300 mg once per day. Creatinine clearance of 30 to 49 mL/min should have a lamivudine dose of 150 mg once per day. If a patient's creatinine clearance is between 15 to 29 mL/min, they should receive 150 mg as a first dose, then 100 mg per day thereafter. Creatinine clearance of 5 to 14 mL/min equates to 150 mg as a first dose, then 50 mg per day thereafter. With a creatinine clearance of less than 5 mL/min, the patient would receive 50 mg as the first dose and then 25 mg per day.

Additional dosing is not necessary after either 4-hour routine hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis.

Pediatric patients should be able to swallow tablets safely and should use a separate dosing schedule. If the child cannot swallow the tablet, the oral solution dosage may need to increase because of the decrease in bioavailability.

Lower dose lamivudine is a once-daily 100 mg dose of lamivudine only indicated for HBV treatment without co-infection of HIV-1. Pre-administration testing and counseling are necessary, as well as subsequent testing while taking lower dose lamivudine.

Care is necessary if the patient is currently resistant to other previously prescribed antiviral medications. Chronic co-administration with sorbitol should be avoided to prevent a decrease in lamivudine concentration and a resultant decrease in lamivudine potency. Pharmacokinetic changes are minor with ZDV, ddI, cotrimoxazole, and interferon-alpha-2b, so no dose adjustment is recommended.

Resistance to lamivudine, as well as cross-resistance to other NRTIs, such as didanosine, abacavir, and emtricitabine, are seen in 10% of patients after treatment with lamivudine as a monotherapy or combined therapy after 48 weeks of treatment.

# Adverse Effects

Severe side effects include:

- Pancreatitis, particularly in children

- Hepatic decompensation

- Peripheral neuropathy

- Muscle pain

- Weakness

- Aplastic anemia

- Lactic acidosis with hepatomegaly and steatosis

- Stevens-Johnson syndrome*

- Immune reconstruction syndrome

- Fat redistribution

*Patients with HIV are already at a higher risk of acquiring Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS). Combined therapies also make it difficult to discern if one drug alone contributed to SJS or not. No direct cases appear in the literature.

Severe adverse effects occurred in about 5% of patients enrolled in all clinical trials. Children seemed to show a higher prevalence of fever and pancreatitis than adult patients.

Several case studies have shown that lamivudine can cause unusual adverse effects like thrombocytopenia and paronychia.

Common side effects:

- Headache

- Nausea

- Vomiting

- Diarrhea

- Weight loss

- Abdominal pain

- Fever

- Cough and nasal signs and symptoms

# Contraindications

Lamivudine should not be administered to patients with known hypersensitivity.

# Monitoring

NRTIs as a class have more cases with resulting hepatomegaly, with some fatalities. Lactic acidosis, a usual NRTI toxicity, is not seen as frequently with lamivudine; however, females who are obese and have been on immunotherapy for an extended time seem to be at an increased risk. If a patient presents with symptoms, lamivudine should be discontinued immediately.

Patients treated with interferon-alpha inhibitors with or without ribavirin when they are co-infected with HCV should be monitored closely for liver toxicities, especially hepatic decompensation, due to their pyrimidine phosphorylation reduction effects.  If decompensation or increased liver toxicity occurs, interferon-alpha inhibitors with or without ribavirin should be decreased or discontinued.

A patient using lamivudine for HBV should have testing for HIV-1, and patients with HIV-1 should be tested for HBV.  If the patient has a co-infection, the lower dose of lamivudine (EPIVIR-HBV) is not adequate for patients and could lead to increased antiviral resistance of either virus for both adults and children.

CD4+ cell count and viral load should have frequent checking to determine HIV-1 disease progression and efficacy and extent of virologic failure resulting in lamivudine resistance in combination therapy.

Kidney indicators require monitored throughout treatment, especially in chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients. CKD is a natural occurrence as we age, so special attention may be necessary in the treatment of older patients.

Pediatric patients who have a history of antiviral therapy or a history of pancreatitis need monitoring for lamivudine-induced pancreatitis. Pediatric patients should also know to avoid sorbitol-containing medicines when using oral lamivudine because antiviral resistance and lower virologic suppression rates can occur due to lower plasma lamivudine exposure.

Fat redistribution in a "cushingoid appearance," lipoatrophy, and insulin resistance should also be monitored in patients using NRTIs.

# Toxicity

Lamivudine is usually well tolerated with milder toxicities compared to other NRTIs.

No human trials to date have provided evidence of carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, or fertility impairment.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Proper patient education on dosage, monitoring, and stopping treatment will help improve outcomes. Proper physician education on considerations when prescribing, comorbidities, monitoring, and stopping treatment is also necessary. Care is essential when prescribing the oral solution for pediatric patients due to the possibility of pancreatitis or worsening existing pancreatitis. Consideration is also required when prescribing the correct formula for the proper condition(s). Lower dose lamivudine is indicated for patients with HBV only. If a patient is co-infected with HIV-1, a larger dose of lamivudine is necessary to prevent HIV-1 mutation and resistance. Additionally, co-administered sorbitol-containing medicines should be avoided to limit the sub-exposure of medication. All these factors require the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team that includes clinicians (MDs, DOs, PAs, NPs), specialists (particularly with infectious disease and HIV specialized training), nurses, and pharmacists, collaborating so that lamivudine and other antiviral measures can be optimized and issues that can limit therapeutic effectiveness avoided. This will result in better patient outcomes. [Level 5]