Given the profound effects of cyanide toxicity, the provider must prepare to stabilize the patient's airway, breathing, and circulation. Of note, mouth-to-mouth resuscitation is contraindicated in cyanide poisoning because of the risk to the provider of CPR.

Decontamination is a vital part of the management of a patient with cyanide exposure through topical and inhalation routes. They must be removed from the source and have their clothing removed and discarded appropriately. Gastrointestinal decontamination must be administered quickly. Although lab studies have demonstrated that activated charcoal binds poorly to cyanide, animal studies report decreased mortality when subjects were given activated charcoal. It is suggested that a single dose of activated charcoal of 50g in adults and 1 g/kg, up to a maximum of 50 g in children, be given.

Antidotes for cyanide poisoning must be given immediately if no contraindications are present.

Hydroxycobalamin is the antidote of choice for acute cyanide poisoning, especially if the patient has coexisting carbon monoxide poisoning. Other antidotes, which will be discussed later, impair oxygen-carrying capacity and worsen cellular hypoxia and acidosis. The standard dose is 5 grams given intravenously (IV over 15 minutes, Be aware that this antidote turns urine dark red; this is not due to myoglobinuria.

A cyanide antidote kit may be used in place of hydroxocobalamin if it is not available. The kit that is currently available contains sodium nitrite and sodium thiosulfate. Sodium nitrite 300 mg ampule or 10 mg/kg given IV for 3 to 5 minutes in adults. The pediatric dose is 0.2 mL/kg, not to exceed 10 mL in pediatric patients. The dose of sodium thiosulfate is one ampule or 12.5 grams in 50 mL, given intravenously for 30 minutes in adults. The dose for pediatric patients is 7 g/m2 and not to exceed 12.5 grams.

Hyperbaric oxygen treatment remains controversial due to inconsistent findings in the literature overall. Two animal studies did show some improvement in hyperbaric oxygen in addition to antidotal therapy.