Tonsillar cancers can have a highly variable clinical history. Patient's may have complaints of a sore throat, unilateral otalgia, or sensation of a mass in the throat, with trismus being a concerning sign of local invasion. Others may be asymptomatic and referred as an incidental finding of asymmetrical tonsils. The tonsil's rich lymphatic supply means many tumors present as an occult lesion with enlarged cervical nodes, in particular within the jugulodigastric region. It is vital to ask the patient about red flag symptoms including weight loss, odynophagia, dysphagia, and persistent hoarseness. Thorough past medical history and discussion of etiological factors including smoking, increased alcohol intake and risk behaviors (e.g., intravenous drug use) may help elicit an underlying cause.

HPV-positive tumors will typically present in younger non-smoking patients of either gender, while HPV-negative tumors will present in older male smokers with more co-morbidities, and thus have a poorer prognosis overall.

Patients require a full ear, nose, and throat examination by an experienced otolaryngologist, including palpation of the neck for cervical lymphadenopathy and close inspection of the oropharynx. Particular attention should be paid to the tonsil beds as primary cancers can be missed within the tonsil crypts. Flexible nasal endoscopy should be performed in all patients for a thorough assessment of the oropharynx including inspection of the tonsils, tongue base, vallecula, and lateral pharyngeal wall for signs of local invasion.