**Classification**

Primary orbital tumors can be classified according to the tissue of origin (Table 1).

**Table 1.**Benign orbital tumors and their tissues of origin.

**Category**

**Tumors**

**Cystic**

- Epidermoid cyst

- Dermoid cyst

- Mucocele

- Hematic pseudocyst

- Meningoencephalocele

- Apocrine hidrocystoma

- Colobomatous cyst

**Vasculogenic**

- Cavernous hemangioma

- Lymphangioma

- Orbital varix

- Capillary hemangioma

- Intravascular papillary endothelial hyperplasia

**Neural**

- Schwannoma

- Neurofibroma

- Granular cell tumors

- Meningioma

- Optic nerve glioma

- Paraganglioma

**Fibrocystic**

- Fibrous histiocytoma

- Giant cell angiofibroma

- Hemangiopericytoma

- Myofibroma

**Osseous or fibro-osseous**

- Fibrous dysplasia

- Osteoma

- Ossifying fibroma

- Chondroma

- Giant cell granuloma

**Lipomatous**

- Dermolipoma

- Lipoma

**Lymphoid**

- Plasmacytoma

- Benign reactive lymphoid hyperplasia

**Cystic Tumors**

- Epidermoid cyst

- Dermoid cyst

- Mucocele

- Hematic pseudocyst

- Meningoencephalocele

- Apocrine hidrocystoma

- Colobomatous cyst

**Epidermoid cysts**rarely form in the orbit but must be considered in the differential for deep orbital cystic lesions. They may present as primary congenital lesions or form following the traumatic displacement of surface epithelium.

Epidermoid cysts should not be confused with **dermoid cysts**, which are characterized by the presence of mesodermal elements. Dermoid cysts account for nearly half of childhood orbital tumors but are rarely diagnosed in adulthood.

**Mucoceles**are cystic cavities that contain sterile mucus. They typically form secondary to outflow obstruction of the frontal and ethmoidal sinuses. These masses rarely form and are slow-growing. However, when large enough, they can invade the orbit and cause symptoms similar to those seen in other orbital masses. Mucoceles have been more often reported in patients with a history of trauma or sinus surgery.

**Hematic pseudocysts**are also rarely-reported orbital lesions. The most common presentation of a hematic cyst is acute-onset proptosis following remote trauma to the orbit.

Defects in the orbital roof allow for the herniation of intracranial tissue into the orbit, forming **meningoencephaloceles.**Although rare, these intraorbital masses are important to consider in patients presenting with signs of a superior or superonasal orbital mass. Meningoencephaloceles are on the differential for pulsatile proptosis, along with carotid-cavernous fistulas and vascular tumors.

**Apocrine hidrocystomas**are common lid lesions but rarely reported inside the orbit.

**Colobomatous cysts**of the orbit are rare, congenital anomalies that occur secondary to embryogenesis abnormalities. Since these cysts appear at birth and are diagnosed in infancy or childhood, they will not be discussed in detail here.

**Table 2.**Key features of cystic orbital tumors.

**Tumor**

**Clinical features**

**Radiographic features**

**Histopathology**

**Epidermoid cyst**

- Variable presentation

- Congenital or acquired following trauma

- Lobulated lesions, often with a hypodense center and sclerotic border

- Stratified squamous epithelial cell wall containing a granular layer and keratin lamellae

****Dermoid cyst****

- 3 to 9% of all orbital masses

- More common in children

- Subcutaneous mass near orbital rim; firm, fixed, painless

- Most often superotemporal or superonasal rim, corresponding to bony sutures

- Well-circumscribed cystic lesion

- Keratinized epithelium capsule with internal adnexal structures (e.g., hair follicles, sweat glands)

**Mucocele/Mucopyocele**

- ~1% of all orbital tumors

- Adults with symptoms of chronic rhinosinusitis

- Variable, depending on contents of mucocele

- Adjacent sinus opacification, bony erosion

- Cystic mass lined by pseudostratified ciliary/columnar epithelium

**Hematic pseudocyst**

- May present with acute-onset proptosis following remote trauma to the orbit

- Chronic lesions present with similar signs and symptoms as other slow-growing orbital masses

- Well-circumscribed, hypodense, non-enhancing cystic structure on CT

- High-intensity lesion on T1 and T2 MRI

- Cystic mass containing blood and/or blood breakdown products

**Meningoencephalocele**

- <1% of all orbital tumors

-  Congenital in children or acquired after craniofacial trauma

-  Anterior mass: fluctuant, smooth swelling near the medial canthus

-  Posterior mass: pulsating proptosis, strabismus

- Cystic or solid mass

- May locate defects in medial orbital wall or roof with herniation of intracranial contents

- Brain tissue, meninges

**Apocrine hidrocystoma**

- Common lid lesions rarely grow within the orbit

- Presentation varies depending on the location of the mass

- Thin-walled, well-circumscribed cystic mass

- Capsule composed of bilaminar, columnar epithelium

- Contain areas of luminal outpouching ("apocrine snouts")

**Vasculogenic Tumors**

- Cavernous hemangioma

- Lymphangioma

- Orbital varix

- Intravascular papillary endothelial hyperplasia

- Capillary hemangioma

Tumors of vasculogenic origin constitute approximately 17% of all orbital masses.

The **cavernous hemangioma,**also known as a cavernoma, is the most common benign primary orbital tumor in adults.

**Lymphangiomas**, also known as lymphatic malformations, involve both vascular and lymphatic systems. They have no vascular flow and are most prevalent in the 1st-2nd decade of life.

In contrast to lymphangiomas,**orbital varices**typically present with intermittent proptosis or diplopia during Valsalva maneuvers due to their venous flow. These vascular malformations can bleed and are the most common cause of spontaneous orbital hemorrhage.

Secondary orbital varices may form in the setting of intracranial arteriovenous malformation and carotid-cavernous fistulas. Imaging in conjunction with the clinical exam is often sufficient to diagnose orbital varices, and these lesions are classified histologically as dilated venous channels lined by endothelial cells. Chronic inflammatory changes and fibrosis may also be present on histology.

Another rare vascular mass with a propensity to bleed during resection is a Masson tumor, also known as **intravascular papillary endothelial hyperplasia**. These tumors have been rarely reported in the orbit and typically require histopathologic confirmation. Histologically, the lesion is characterized by papillary proliferation of vascular endothelial cells, both on the surface of the mass and within lumens of blood vessels.

**Capillary hemangiomas**are rarely diagnosed in adulthood. They are typically lobular masses that enhance on imaging and reveal well-developed capillary channels on histology.

**Table 3.**Key features of vasculogenic orbital tumors.

**Tumor**

**Clinical features**

**Radiographic features**

**Histopathology**

**Cavernous Venous Malformation/Cavernous Hemangioma**

- Most common benign orbital tumor

- 2nd-4th decades

- 60% of patients are female

- Accelerated growth during pregnancy

- Painless, progressive proptosis

- Well-circumscribed intra- or extra-conal mass

- Contrast-enhanced imaging early stippled pattern with late homogeneous enhancement

- Encapsulated cavernous spaces with smooth muscle walls

**Orbital Lymphatic Malformation/ Lymphangioma**

- 0.3 to 4% of all orbital tumors

- 1st-2nd decade of life; affects men and women equally

- Progressive mass effect

- Proptosis does not worsen with Valsalva

- Multiple loculations with air-fluid levels

- Large serum-filled lymphatic channels lined by lymphatic endothelium; interstitial lymphoid tissue

**Distensible Venous Malformation**/**Varix**

- 0 to 1.3% of all histopathologically proven orbital masses

- 1st-3rd decade of life; affects men and women equally

- Intermittent, positional proptosis that worsens with Valsalva

- Irregular mass or dilated, tortuous vessel

- Lack internal septae

- Vascular channels lined with endothelial cells, interstitial fibrosis

**Intravascular Papillary Endothelial Hyperplasia**

- Rarely reported

- Variable presentation depending on location

- Round/oval-shaped, well-defined mass that is iso- to hyper-intense on T1 and T2 MRI

- Exuberant endothelial papillary proliferation, both on the surface of the mass and within lumens of blood vessels

****Capillary Hemangioma****

- Most common benign orbital tumor in children

- 3% of all orbital tumors

- Variable presentation depending on location

- Lobulated, enhancing mass

- Ultrasound: hyperechoic, compressible; high internal reflectivity

- MRI: hypo-intense on T1 and iso- to hyper-intense on T2 with serpiginous flow voids

- Lobular mass composed of well-developed capillary channels

**Neural Tumors**

- Schwannoma

- Neurofibroma

- Meningiomas

- Optic nerve glioma

- Paraganglioma

**Orbital Schwannomas**, also known as neurilemomas, are peripheral nerve sheath tumors and account for only 1% of all orbital tumors.

Another peripheral nerve sheath tumor that is more classically associated with NF is the **neurofibroma**. The plexiform neurofibroma, a mass of large tortuous nerve fascicles, is the most common subtype diagnosed within the orbit, accounting for 2% of orbital tumors.

Modified Schwann cells have also been reported as the origin of **granular cell tumors**(GCTs).

**Meningiomas**are common primary intracranial tumors that rarely arise from within the orbit. Orbital meningiomas account for approximately 4% of all orbital masses.**Optic nerve sheath meningiomas**(ONSM) arise in orbit, often present during middle age, and are three times more common in females.

Another orbital tumor commonly seen in NF is the **optic nerve glioma**(ONG), which is histologically consistent with a pilocytic astrocytoma, most often low-grade with variable cytology and cellularity. ONG is important to consider as the differential when a young patient presents with acute-onset vision loss. Although generally considered benign, it is often difficult to distinguish between reactive and neoplastic resection margins, as these tumors are more aggressive with malignant potential.

**Paragangliomas**of the orbit are extremely rare neoplasms of neuroendocrine tissue. Similar to other slow-growing orbital masses, the reported cases presented with gradually worsening proptosis.

**Table 4.**Key features of neural orbital tumors.

**Tumor**

**Clinical features**

**Radiographic features**

**Histopathology**

**Schwannoma/Neurilemmoma**

- 1% of orbital tumors

- 2nd-6th decade of life

- Gradual non-pulsating proptosis; EOM restriction, optic neuropathy

- Smooth, round/elongated, homogenous lesions

- Grow along the orbital axis

- Biphasic with patches of Antoni A and Antoni B patterns

- Strongly positive S-100 stain

**Neurofibroma**

- 2 to 4% of orbital tumors

- Plexiform: 1st decade, almost always associated with NF1

- Localized: 3rd-5th decade

- Progressive proptosis, EOM restriction, ptosis, optic neuropathy

- Smooth ovoid lesions with variable contrast enhancement

- Loosely arranged bundles of perineural cells, fibroblasts, and Schwann cells with surrounding pseudocapsule

- Positive S-100 stain

**Granular Cell Tumor**

- Rare; 3% arise in the orbit

- Most often arise inferiorly and may involve extraocular muscles (e.g., inferior rectus)

- Localized: around the 4th decade

- No gender preference

- Often well-defined/well-circumscribed; may be fusiform in appearance

- Hypo-intense to muscle on T1 MRI

- Significant peripheral enhancement in post-contrast imaging

- Polygonal cells, clear nuclei, highly eosinophilic

- Lesions with higher mitoses, nuclear pleomorphism, necrosis, and spindled cells are concerning for malignancy

- Stains positive for S-100, P0, and Myelin Basic Protein

**Optic nerve sheath meningioma**

- 2% of all orbital tumors

- 4th-5th decade of life

- Women 3x more likely affected

- Gradual painless vision loss, optic atrophy; optociliary shunt vessels

- Smooth, tubular, enhanced with calcifications

- "Tram tracking" sign (axial) or "doughnut" sign (coronal) on MRI

- Arise from optic nerve sheath meningeal cells

- May have psammoma bodies

**Sphenoid wing meningioma**

- NF2 patients

- 2.5x more common in females

- Proptosis, vision loss, temporal fullness, ptosis, restricted EOMs

- Homogeneously enhancing with calcification

- Conform around and compress surrounding structures

- Whorls of meningothelial cells, ovoid nuclei

- May have psammoma bodies

**Optic Nerve Glioma**

- 1.5 to 4% of orbital tumors

- Often in children (90% within the first two decades of life)

- MRI is the imaging of choice and reveals relative iso- to hypo-intense enlargement of nerve on T1

- Proliferation of astrocytes with pilocytic appearance and spindle-shaped nuclei

- May contain microcystic areas, Rosenthal fibers, calcification

****Paraganglioma****

- Extremely rare

- Proptosis, change in vision, EOM restriction

- Well-defined homogeneous lesion

- Salt and pepper appearance on T1 MRI

- Epithelioid chief cells in clusters; neuro-secretory granules

**Fibrocystic Tumors**

- Fibrous histiocytoma

- Giant cell angiofibroma

- Hemangiopericytoma

- Myofibroma

An assortment of benign and malignant mesenchymal tumors can arise within the orbit. **Solitary fibrous tumors**(SFT) encompass a spectrum of lesions with similar histopathologic morphology. These include fibrous histiocytoma, hemangiopericytoma, and giant cell angiofibroma.

In adults, **fibrous histiocytoma**is considered the most common mesenchymal tumor of the orbit.

**Giant cell angiofibromas**are benign, highly-vascularized soft tissue tumors found in the head and neck region and rarely arise within the orbit. While they may have an indolent course, some grow more rapidly and can resemble malignancy.

**Hemangiopericytomas**account for about 1% of all orbital tumors and most often occur around middle age. Up to nearly half of hemangiopericytomas can metastasize, and their malignant potential is difficult to predict.

Another rare soft tissue mass that can arise in the orbit is the **myofibroma**. These are more often seen in children, but cases have been reported in adults.

**Table 5.**Key features of fibrocystic orbital tumors.

**Tumor**

**Clinical features**

**Radiographic features**

**Histopathology**

**Fibrous Histiocytoma**

- Most common primary mesenchymal tumor of the orbit

- Middle age (40-60 years)

- ****Well-circumscribed, mixed solid and cystic components; mildly enhancing on T1 and T2 MRI

- Cellular and stromal components are arranged in a "patternless pattern" with "staghorn" vessels

**Giant Cell Angiofibroma**

- More often affects women

- Presents within the first two decades of life

- Well-circumscribed, uniformly-enhancing with intermediate signal intensity on MRI

- Patternless spindle cell proliferation with rich vasculature

- Stains positive for vimentin and CD34

**Hemangiopericytoma**

- 1-3% of all biopsied orbital lesions

- 4th decade of life

- Affects men and women equally

- Proptosis, restricted EOMs, visual decline

- Difficult to differentiate from other SFTs on imaging

- Well-circumscribed, isointense to gray matter on T1 and T2 MRI

- Typically in superior orbit

- Spindle-cell proliferation with thin-walled, branching vessels ("staghorn" vessels)

- Encapsulated

**Myofibroma**

- Most often diagnosed in children

- Well-circumscribed; isointense to muscle on T1 MRI, hyperintense on T2 MRI

- Spindle cells arranged in short fascicles with scant cytoplasm and thin-walled, branching vessels

**Osseous and Fibro-osseous Tumors**

- Fibrous dysplasia

- Osteoma

- Ossifying fibroma

- Chondroma

- Giant cell granuloma

Osseous and fibro-osseous tumors of the orbit constitute about 2% of all orbital masses.

**Fibrous dysplasia**is a disorder of bone that can affect the craniofacial skeleton. It represents up to 7% of all primary orbital bone tumors.

**Osteomas**are common paranasal sinus tumors that can involve the orbit. Primary orbital osteomas are very rare, making up less than 1% of orbital tumors. Depending on the location of the mass, surgical intervention may include sculpting or repair of the bone to restore the natural orbital contour.

**Ossifying fibromas**(OF) are benign bone lesions with three different variants: cemento-OF (COF), juvenile trabecular OF (JTF,) and juvenile psammomatoid OF (JPOF). Of these, COF and JTOF are almost exclusively present in the jaw. JPOF often presents by the 3rd decade and can involve the orbit.

**Chondromas**are benign cartilaginous tumors that very rarely occur in the head and neck region and constitute less than 1% of all orbital tumors. Chondromas may arise within the orbit from the trochlea, which is the only purely cartilaginous structure present.

**Giant cell (reparative) granulomas**(GCRG) have been defined as benign fibro-osseous proliferation and are most often reported in the jaw. Rarely these lesions can rarely arise in the orbit.

**Table 6.**Key features of osseous and fibro-osseous orbital tumors.

**Tumor**

**Clinical features**

**Radiographic features**

**Histopathology**

**Fibrous dysplasia**

- Monostotic form presents in 2nd-3rd decade of life

- Polyostotic form presents in childhood and is seen in McCune-Albright Syndrome

- "Pagetoid" pattern of radiolucent and radiopaque areas on CT

- MRI reveals isointense lesions that moderately enhance with gadolinium

- Dense fibrous stroma, low to moderate cellularity

- Stroma may contain myxomatous areas, bone cysts

**Osteoma**

- Very rarely primary orbital tumors

- May extend from sinuses

- CT is modality of choice and demonstrates focal area of lucency, surrounded by sclerotic bone

- Mature lamellar and woven bone mixture

- Osteoblasts outline the rim and osteocytes within the matrix

**Ossifying fibroma (JPOF variant)**

- JPOF variant presents by the 3rd decade of life

- Well-circumscribed lesion with varying degrees of soft tissue and bone density on CT

- Psammomatoid bodies embedded in the stroma with spindle and stellate cells

**Chondroma**

- Very rare

- Present in 3rd-4th decade of life

- Well-defined, minimal enhancement

- Mature chondrocytes

**Giant cell granuloma**

- Present by 2nd decade of life

- Female predominance

- Well-defined osteolytic mass arising from the orbital wall with varying degrees of mineralization

- Most often affect the orbital roof and lateral orbital wall

- Multinucleated foreign body giant cells intermingled with inflammatory cells, lymphocytes

**Lipomatous Tumors**

- Dermolipoma

- Lipoma

**Dermolipomas**constitute approximately 3% of all orbital tumors and may be mistaken for orbital fat prolapse as both occur in the lateral canthal area. Dermolipomas are often unilateral and occur in younger patients.**lipomas**, which account for less than 1% of all orbital tumors due to the difference in management. While lipomas are often excised in full, surgical excision of dermolipomas is often conservative and confined to portions of the mass that are readily visible.

**Table 7.**Key features of lipomatous orbital tumors.

**Tumor**

**Clinical features**

**Radiographic features**

**Histopathology**

**Dermolipoma**

- 3% of all orbital tumors

- Present similarly to orbital fat prolapse

- Smooth, well-demarcated

- Bright on T1 and T2 MRI

- Mature adipose tissue and dermal-like connective tissue

**Lipoma**

- 0.6% in the orbital region

- The average age is 35 years

- Proptosis

- Well-circumscribed

- Displaces surrounding structures

- Lobulated, mature adipose tissue

**Lymphoid Tumors**

- Plasmacytoma

- Benign reactive lymphoid hyperplasia

**Plasmacytomas**are plasma cell tumors that can arise from soft tissue or bone. More commonly, secondary metastatic plasmacytomas arise as a consequence of multiple myeloma. Importantly, primary plasmacytomas cannot be differentiated from metastatic lesions on histopathology.

Lymphocyte proliferation in the orbit can present in one of a few entities. The first is **benign reactive lymphoid hyperplasia**(BRLH), which has been categorized under inflammatory or granulomatous as opposed to neoplastic.

When considering the diagnosis of BRLH, it is crucial to consider more aggressive processes such as atypical lymphoid hyperplasia, lymphoma, and other malignancies on the differential. Treatment of BRLH involves corticosteroids, external beam radiation therapy, and rituximab.

**Table 8.**Key features of lymphoid orbital tumors.

**Tumor**

**Clinical features**

**Radiographic features**

**Histopathology**

**Plasmacytoma**

- Rare; may be metastatic in patients with multiple myeloma

- Well-defined lytic lesion

- Extraconal in 90% of cases

- Arise in posterior orbit 69% of the time

- Heterogeneous plasma cells with scant stroma

- Stain positive for CD138

**Benign reactive lymphoid hyperplasia**

- Predilection for male gender

- Often in superior orbit

- Heterogenous, low attenuation on CT; conform to the shape of the globe

- Follicles composed of reactive lymphocyte proliferation

- Negative Bcl-2 marker