**Immediate**(within two weeks of surgical repair)

- Postoperative airway obstruction due to tongue edema: When using an improperly-sized mouth retractor or when the mouth gag exerts enough pressure to compromise perfusion, the tongue may swell substantially and obstruct the oral airway.

- Prolonged intubation: Patients with multiple comorbidities, syndromic patients, or patients with intraoperative cardiopulmonary instability may not tolerate immediate postoperative extubation and will require transfer to the pediatric ICU for monitoring.

- Laryngospasm: As with many other procedures involving the upper aerodigestive tract, a persistent spasm of the larynx may occur upon extubation. While this condition is often controlled with positive-pressure mask ventilation, reintubation may be required.

- Postoperative hemorrhage: In some situations, when the patient emerges from general anesthesia or begins to cry vigorously, a substantial increase in blood pressure may dislodge clots from the raw hard palate or along the palatal edges' flaps. In most of these scenarios, gentle pressure for five minutes with a small piece of gauze will stop the bleeding.

- Wound dehiscence: A partial or total separation of the previously approximated tissues can occur if there is excessive tension across the repair or if the repair is traumatized postoperatively.

- Infection: This complication usually manifests as a fistula formed in part of the palate repair. However, it may present as an overt infection, with redness, warmth, purulent exudate, and pain.

**Long-Term**(≥ 2 weeks after surgical repair)

- Fistula: Communication between the oral and nasal cavities may occur due to localized repair failure, infection, or trauma. Fistulas may run between the palate and the nasal cavity (palatal fistula), between the dental alveoli and the nasal cavity (nasoalveolar), or between the oral cavity and the nasal cavity (oronasal fistula). Oronasal fistulas usually present with the passage of fluids and solid foods from the oral cavity into the nasal cavity. The diagnosis of a fistula, regardless of its location, is clinical. The condition is confirmed by visualizing the communication or introducing a cotton-tipped applicator gently through the nostril and observing its passage into the oral cavity. Treatment of fistulas requires additional surgery to separate the oral and nasal cavities; these surgeries, while appearing comparatively simple, are often complicated by recurrence of the fistula, even for very small ones.

- Partial dehiscence and bifid uvula: This complication may appear a few weeks following the surgical repair and is often related to improper technique when closing the uvula. Since the uvula has both muscular and mucosal layers, both layers' raw surfaces need to be carefully approximated in order to prevent wound dehiscence or uvular bifidity. Some classification schemes consider this complication on the palatal fistulae spectrum.

- Inadequate palatal movement: The palate should move cephalically and posteriorly to close the velopharyngeal port. Inadequate movement may be due to improper management of tissues, excess scarring or suboptimal healing, or neurological conditions.

- Palatal necrosis: This is a devastating complication resulting from injury to the greater palatine artery during palatal flap elevation; it may occur immediately or in a delayed fashion.