For women with ideal procedure selection characteristics, a high symptom control rate, procedure satisfaction rate, and self reported quality of life rate can be achieved for up to 10 years after treatment, as discussed below.

The SIR guidelines indicate that about 90% of women should experience a reduction in bulk symptoms and that more than 90% should expect the elimination of abnormal uterine bleeding.

Causes of UAE failure include but are not limited to:

- Poor patient selection

- Large fibroids

- Inability to catheterize the uterine arteries

- Incomplete artery embolization

- Arterial spasm leading to poor flow of embolic arterial

- Clumping of embolic material leading to false embolization endpoint

- Uterus anatomic variants

- Presence of important collateral arteries (e.g., ovarian arteries) feeding the uterus

- Coexisting adenomyosis or leiomyosarcoma

- Recanalization of embolized arteries

**Trials and Guidelines for Treatment of Fibroids**

There have been seven RCTs including 793 women comparing UAE versus surgery for fibroids. Three trials compared UAE against abdominal hysterectomy, two against myomectomy, and two against either type of surgery. In a meta-analysis of these patients, Gupta et al. (2014) found no significant difference between UAE and any type of surgery concerning patient satisfaction or major adverse events.  UAE had a higher rate of minor complications and need for additional surgical interventions.  Gupta calculated that within 2 years of initial therapy, 7% of women require further surgery after hysterectomy or myomectomy, whereas 15% to 32% require further surgery after UAE.  UAE patients were found to have a lower likelihood of requiring a blood transfusion, shorter procedural time, shorter length of hospital stay, and faster resumption of usual activities.

The first randomized controlled trial (RCT), Embolization versus Hysterectomy for Symptomatic Uterine Fibroids (EMMY), enrolled patients between 2002 and 2004. This multicenter trial has the longest follow-up to date (ten years).  Enrolled patients had both fibroids and menorrhagia and were all eligible for hysterectomy.  One hundred seventy-seven patients were randomized to UAE (n = 88) or hysterectomy (n = 89).  Ten years after treatment, 33% of UAE patients had undergone secondary hysterectomy for recurrent symptoms (8% of initial hysterectomy patients also required a second procedure), but there were no significant differences between hysterectomy and UAE with respect to successful eradication of pain, bulk-specific complaints, complications, or overall satisfaction.  The study authors concluded that hysterectomy is better at achieving a certain cure for bleeding problems but that patients with the appropriate combination of indications and lack of contraindications should be allowed to choose UAE instead of a hysterectomy.

The Randomized Controlled Trial of Embolization versus Surgical Treatment for Fibroids (REST) is the largest study to date. It was a multicenter RCT comparing all surgical interventions to UAE and achieved 80% power with 1-year follow-up.  It found no statistically significant difference between UAE and surgery in quality of life or major complications.  UAE had a higher minor complication rate (34% versus 20%) but also had a statistically significant reduced length of hospitalization, 24-hour pain score, and cost.

In one study, patients having intramural fibroids larger than 4 cm were randomized to UAE (n = 58) or to myomectomy (open or laparoscopic according to surgeon preference; n = 63) and followed for two years. This is the primary study used as the rationale for making myomectomy the first-line invasive therapy in women who still wish to conceive, as 50% of UAE versus 78% of myomectomy patients were able to conceive.  UAE in this study had an increased calculated relative risk compared to myomectomy for (1) inability to conceive and (2) miscarriage (95% CI of [1] 1.11 to 4.44 and of [2] 1.25 to 6.22).  However, Gupta (2014), included Mara's patients with others having undergone myomectomy in RCTs and deemed the evidence that myomectomy provides a fertility benefit over UAE to be "low-quality evidence" that "should be regarded with extreme caution."  Another systematic review on myomectomy concluded that there is currently insufficient evidence that myomectomy improves fertility compared to UAE whether by the laparoscopic or open approach.

A Cochrane systematic review of 15 prospective cohort studies and RCTs found that loss of ovarian function after UAE occurred primarily in women older than 45 years of age.

Despite the conclusions of Gupta (2014), guidelines by gynecological societies in France and the United States recommend myomectomy over UAE for symptomatic intramural and subserosal fibroids in women who wish to have a subsequent pregnancy.  In the United Kingdo, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists does not have guidelines on the subject, but the British National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidelines do not favor UAE or surgery over the other even for patients considering future pregnancy.

**Trials and Guidelines not for the Treatment of Fibroids**

Outside of the setting of treatment of fibroids, there are no RCTs comparing UAE to other treatments and almost no society or national guidelines regarding the use of UAE over other therapies.

For the control of PPH, emergent UAE has about a 90% to 95% success rate (with failures usually requiring hysterectomy), and the morbidity of UAE is less than with emergent laparotomy.