Anterior segment examination is predominantly within normal limits for patients of this age.

The pattern is most striking on autofluorescence, which shows a typically well-circumscribed area of small densely-packed hyper and hypoautofluorescent spots.

On OCT, the co-localized yellowish pigment on fundus examination and the hyperautofluorescent lesions correspond to nodular RPE abnormalities and excrescences, which cast a shadow onto the underlying choroid (thereby differentiating them from drusen).

Near Infrared Reflectance (NIR), which is co-acquired with OCT, is often highly effective in showing the characteristic lesions in mild forms of the disease, including when FAF findings are inconclusive.

On OCT-A, PPSM additionally has many characteristic findings which may hint at the ultimate pathophysiology of the disease. PPSM is associated with abnormal foveal avascular zone (FAZ) configurations and decreased choriocapillaris perfusion in patients with later stages of the disease. These areas of decreased perfusion were shown to have a flow void average of 54%, compared to 14% in non-PPSM patients, and they correspond to areas of outer retinal atrophy.

A separate analysis of the stroma on OCT-A found a decreased stromal choroidal area with a preserved stromal luminal area, yielding an increased choroidal vascularity index. These changes on OCT-A may be utilized to detect patients with forme fruste PPSM, as increased flow voids were found in 15 patients with greater than 1000 g of PPS exposure who had no other findings on retinal imaging.

When tested on electroretinography (ERG), patients can have nonspecific responses ranging from normal to mild attenuation of amplitude in code and rod responses with variable delay in response.

Multiple studies have included genetic testing for patients with PPSM to rule out other maculopathies. While none have found clear associations, some wonder if there may be a genetic predisposition to having a more severe phenotype.RP1 gene who presented with geographic atrophy and count fingers vision.

Based on these results, Barnes and colleagues proposed six diagnostic criteria:

- Macular hyperpigmented spots with yellow-orange deposits and patchy RPE atrophy on fundus photography.

- Densely packed clusters of hyperautofluorescent and hypoautofluorescent areas within the posterior pole on FAF.

- Focal thickening of the RPE with hyper-reflectance on NIR.

- The peripapillary hypoautofluorescent halo.

- Maximum size of the hyperautofluorescent spots of two venule widths.

- Absence of typical drusen.

Further, based on their work, Wang and colleagues proposed the following guidelines for defining disease severity:

- Mild: Speckled pattern on FAF without well-demarcated atrophic lesions on FAF and no evidence of complete RPE and outer retinal atrophy.

- Moderate: The lesions are well-demarcated, nummular, and co-localized with RPE and outer retinal atrophy, but there is no central foveal involvement.

- Severe: Well-demarcated lesions with associated hypoautofluorescent atrophy with RPE and outer retinal atrophy, which involves the central fovea.

Hanif and colleagues proposed a similar classification of severity:

- Disease within the vascular arcades and without areas of atrophy.

- Disease extending to the vascular arcades but not more than two-disc diameters beyond or the presence of non-central atrophy.

- Disease which extends more than two-disc diameters beyond the temporal arcades or the presents of central foveal atrophy.

Of these, the former group found a correlation between disease severity and cumulative dosage; however, the sample size was too small to make any conclusion.