# Continuing Education Activity

Pyocystis is a severe form of lower urinary tract infection that results from the collection of purulent debris within the bladder. Pyocystis is sometimes referred to in the literature as ‘empyema cystis’ and ‘vesical empyema.’ Pyocystis is an uncommon condition that occurs exclusively in the defunctionalized bladder. It can cause a severe systemic infection and result in prolonged hospital stays, surgery, and death. To optimize outcomes and reduce morbidity, early identification and treatment must occur. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of patients with pyocystis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the pathophysiology of pyocystis.
- Identify the risk factors that make a patient susceptible to developing pyocystis.
- Summarize the treatment options for patients with pyocystis. 
- Describe the Spence-Allen procedure and its role in the management of pyocystis.

# Introduction

Pyocystis is a rare but severe lower urinary tract infection resulting in a collection of infected debris accumulating within the bladder.

In the context of bladder cancer, patients who have supra-vesical diversion usually have a cystectomy.

Though mild cases of pyocystis can be managed with conservative treatments of broad-spectrum antibiotics and intermittent bladder irrigation, a cystectomy may be necessary in cases with resistant infection. There is some debate about whether a cystectomy should be offered at the time of urinary diversion procedures in some cohorts of patients. This is not currently a recommended preventative intervention due to the rarity of pyocystis occurring even in cohorts most at risk relative to the risks of cystectomy.

As pyocytis is a rare condition, there are limited case reports describing it and low numbers of patients involved in the published meta-analysis. This may affect the statistical validity of analysis on occurrence and treatment outcomes.

# Etiology

Pyocytis most likely occurs due to the inability of a defunctionalized bladder to expel the epithelial cells and debris that accumulate in the bladder without the flow of urine.

In a fully functional bladder, the flow of urine prevents the accumulation of debris and subsequent inflammatory and infective processes occurring. Causative organisms are frequently the same as those that most commonly cause lower urinary tract infections, such as E.coli and other gram-negative bacteria. Other common organisms include P. mirabilis, P. aeuginosa, and Enterococcus.

The bladder can become defunctionalized either iatrogenically or physiologically. Physiological defunctioning occurs because of anuria secondary to end-stage renal failure. Iatrogenic defunctioning results from supravesical urinary diversion. Both result in a lack of urine flushing through the bladder, putting the patient at risk of pyocystis.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of pyocytis rose following the introduction of supravesical urinary diversion procedures in the 1960s. Reported cases prior to this were rare. The incidence of pyocytis in patients with end-stage renal disease is unclear in the published literature, but it is a known complication secondary to anuria in this patient cohort.

Pyocystis resulting from iatrogenic bladder defunctioning is more common than from end-stage renal failure.

Culturing of proteus mirabilis in the urine prior to supravesical diversion has been implicated with higher risks of developing pyocystis.

Pyocystis is also described as empyema cystis and vesical empyema, though these terms are infrequently used and often used in older descriptions of the condition.

# Pathophysiology

The accumulation of cellular debris provides a focus for bacterial infection.

Much like with an abscess or empyema, the body will struggle to get control of the infection due to the difficulty of getting white cells into the purulent fluid. Therefore to manage pyocystis, the purulent tissue must be drained.

# History and Physical

Pyocytis will typically present with suprapubic pain, malodorous discharge from the urethra, and fevers for several days prior to admission.

Patients presenting with signs of systemic infection and accompanying risk factors should be investigated and treated for pyocystis. These risk factors include surgical defunctioning of the bladder or end-stage renal failure. Alternatively, patients with pyocystis may present with a low-grade fever and some abdominal or pelvic discomfort and may be systemically well. There is a spectrum of presentations for this condition depending on the severity and duration of infection.

On examination of the abdomen, there may be a palpable, tender suprapubic mass and inguinal lymphadenopathy.

# Evaluation

Blood tests often show leukocytosis and a raised C-reactive protein (CRP).E. coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterococcus faecalis. Proteus mirabilis and Serratia marcescens have also been isolated.

The diagnosis of pyocytis can be aided by using computed tomography (CT) and ultrasound. The benefit of ultrasound is that it is more easily accessed and can be performed at the bedside. Ultrasound will show a thickened bladder wall and a heterogeneous echogenic collection.

Investigation and diagnosis of pyocytis may also include cystoscopy to aid bladder access, evacuate toxic collections, and biopsy thick-walled bladder to exclude malignancy.

# Treatment / Management

In patients displaying signs of urosepsis, initial treatment should include fluid resuscitation and administration of broad-spectrum IV antibiotics.

Immediate catheterization of the patient is important in patients with suspected pyocystis. This has dual therapeutic and diagnostic benefits through drainage of infected tissue and acquiring pus for culture, respectively. Once sensitivities are obtained, the antibiotic choice can be tailored to reflect this.

Following catheterization, bladder irrigation should be used to prevent the re-accumulation of infected debris and to assist in clearing the initial collection. This can be continuous irrigation using a three-way catheter or can be done using frequent bladder washouts. Irrigation should be continued in the community for up to 3 months, several times a week, to attempt to eradicate any infection.

The previous positive urine culture of Proteus mirabilis is a significant risk factor for the development of pyocystis following urinary diversion procedures.Proteus mirabilis should be considered for a cystectomy.

Cystectomy may be necessary for patients not responding to IV antibiotics and irrigation. The need for cystectomy in patients with pyocytis is reportedly up to 25%.

# Differential Diagnosis

In females with pyocytis urethral discharge can be accidentally misidentified as vaginal discharge, leading to misdiagnosis.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of pyocystis depends on the severity of the infection and systemic involvement. Milder cases may be managed in the community with antibiotics and intermittent bladder irrigation. Severe non-resolving infections require surgical management with either the Spence-Allen procedure or total cystectomy.

The need for a cystectomy in patients diagnosed with pyocytis is reported to be between 18.7% and 25%, however, due to the relative rarity of the condition, the number of cases in the studies was low, and a meta-analysis of a larger patient cohort is required to establish more accurate figures.

# Complications

Complications of pyocytis include the need for surgical management, including the need for a total cystectomy. Sepsis and the corresponding complication can also occur in patients with pyocystis and can result in death.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Pyocystis is a severe condition that can result in prolonged hospital stays, significant additional surgery, and death. Patients at risk of it should be informed of this and the common symptoms. These symptoms include suprapubic pain, malodorous discharge, and fevers. Patients at risk of pyocystis include those who have had surgical defunctioning of the bladder or have anuria because of renal failure.

High-risk patients of these groups include those who are also on dialysis, immunosuppressed, or have a previous culture for proteus mirabilis. Management of other medical conditions and lifestyle factors such as smoking and diabetes may also be of benefit.

Rapid identification and treatment of pyocystis are crucial to the successful medical management of pyocystis. Delayed intervention may result in the need for surgical intervention and a poorer prognosis.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Many of these patients have a complex urological history with multiple, complex procedures throughout childhood into adult life. The patient may not be aware or able to communicate their anatomical bladder remains in situ hence why it can be ignored as a source during septic episodes. Always consider pyocystis in atypical or recurrent infections in patients with prior urinary diversion.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

All members of the interprofessional health care team involved in the care of the above patient cohorts who are susceptible to developing pyocytis must be aware of it as a complication. They should also be aware of what puts those patients at higher risk of developing it. The team can be comprised of clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), specialists (infectious disease, urology), nursing staff, and pharmacists, which may include an infectious disease specialty pharmacist. All team members must engage in open communication and meticulous record keeping of each patient encounter and report to other team members if there are any patient status changes or concerns. This interprofessional paradigm will help optimize patient outcomes. [Level 5]

The importance of identification of urethral discharge as opposed to vaginal discharge is an important differentiator for pyocystis to allow correct management to occur. Rapid identification in the community of the condition as a differential is essential for timely investigation, diagnosis, and intervention. Education about this rare condition is crucial to avoid potential complications in this patient cohort.