The most important goal is to prevent secondary brain injuries. This can be achieved by the following:

- Maintain airway and ventilation

- Maintain cerebral perfusion pressure

- Prevent secondary injuries (by recognizing and treating hypoxia, hypercapnia, or hypoperfusion)

- Evaluate and manage for increased ICP

- Obtain urgent neurosurgical consultation for intracranial mass lesions

- Identify and treat other life-threatening injuries or conditions (if they exist)

A relatively higher systemic blood pressure is needed:

- Increase in intracranial pressure

- Loss of autoregulation of cerebral circulation

Priorities remain the same:  the ABC also applies to TBI. The purpose is to optimize perfusion and oxygenation.

**Airway and Breathing**

Identify any condition which might compromise the airway, such as pneumothorax.

For sedation, consider using short-acting agents having minimal effect on blood pressure or ICP:

- Induction agents:  Etomidate or propofol

- Paralytic agents: Succinylcholine or Rocuronium

Consider endotracheal intubation in the following situations:

- Inadequate ventilation or gas exchange such as hypercarbia, hypoxia, or apnea

- Severe injury (GCS score of = 8)

- Inability to protect the airway

- Agitated patient

- Need for patient transport

The cervical spine should be maintained in-line during intubation.

Nasotracheal intubation should be avoided in patients with facial trauma or basilar skull fracture.

Targets:

- Oxygen saturation > 90

- PaO2 > 60

- PCO at 35 - 45

**Circulation**

Avoid hypotension. Normal blood pressure may not be adequate to maintain adequate flow and CPP if ICP is elevated.

Target

- Systolic blood pressure > 90 mm Hg

- MAP > 80 mm Hg

Isolated head trauma usually does not cause hypotension. Look for another cause if the patient is in shock.

**Increased ICP**

Increased ICP can occur in head trauma patients resulting in the mass occupying lesion. Utilize a team approach to manage impending herniation.

Signs and symptoms:

- Change in mental status

- Irregular pupils

- Focal neurologic finding

- Posturing: decerebrate or decorticate

- Papilledema (may not be apparent with a rapid elevation of ICP)

CT scan findings:

- Attenuation of sulci and gyri

- Poor gray/white matter demarcation

General Measures

Head Position: Raise the head of the bed and maintain the head in midline position at 30 degrees: potential to improve cerebral blood flow by improving cerebral venous drainage.

Lower cerebral blood volume (CBV) can lower ICP.

Temperature Control: Fever should be avoided as it increases cerebral metabolic demand and affects ICP.

Seizure prophylaxis: Seizures should be avoided as they can also worsen CNS injury by increasing the metabolic requirement and may potentially increase ICP. Consider administering fosphenytoin at a loading dose of 20mg/kg.

Only use an anticonvulsant when it is necessary, as it may inhibit brain recovery.

Fluid management: The goal is to achieve euvolemia. This will help to maintain adequate cerebral perfusion. Hypovolemia in head trauma patients is harmful. Isotonic fluid such as normal saline or Ringer Lactate should be used. Also, avoid hypotonic fluid.

Sedation: Consider sedation as agitation and muscular activity may increase ICP.

- Fentanyl: Safe in intubated patients

- Propofol: A short-acting agent with good sedative properties, the potential to lower ICP, possible risk of hypotension and fatal acidosis

- Versed: sedative, anxiolytic, possible hypotension

- Ketamine: Avoid as it may increase ICP.

- Muscle relaxants: Vecuronium or Rocuronium are the best options for intubation; Succinylcholine should not be used as ICP may rise with fasciculations.

ICP monitoring:

- Severe head injury

- Moderate head injury with increased risk factors such as abnormal CT scan finding

- Patients who cannot be evaluated with serial neurological examination

- ICP monitoring is often done in patients with severe trauma with a GCS of less than 9. The reference range for normal CIP is 2-15 mmHg. In addition, the waveform of the tracing is important.

Hyperventilation:

Normocarbia is desired in most head trauma patients. The goal is to maintain PaCO between 35-45 mmHg. Judicious hyperventilation helps to reduce PaCO2 and causes cerebral vasoconstriction. Beware that, if extreme, it may reduce CPP to the point that exacerbation of secondary brain injury may occur. Avoid hypercarbia: PaCO > 45 may cause vasodilatation and increases ICP.

Mannitol:

A potent osmotic diuretic with net intravascular volume loss

Reduces ICP and improves cerebral blood flow, CPP, and brain metabolism

Expands plasma volume and can improve oxygen-carrying capacity

The onset of action is within 30 minutes

Duration of action is from two to eight hours

Dose is 0.25-1 g/kg (maximum: 4 g/kg/day)

Avoid serum sodium > 145 m Eq/L

- Serum sodium > 145 m Eq/L

- Serum osmolality > 315 mOsm

Relative contraindication:  hypotension does not lower ICP in hypovolemic patients.

Hypertonic saline:

May be used in hypotensive patients or patients who are not adequately resuscitated.

The dose is 250 mL over 30 minutes.

Serum osmolality and serum sodium should be monitored.

Hypothermia may be used to lower cerebral metabolism but it is important to be aware that hypothermia also makes the patient susceptible to infections and hypotension.

**Mild Head Trauma**

The majority of head trauma is mild. These patients can be discharged following a normal neurological examination as there is minimal risk of developing an intracranial lesion.

Consider observing at least 4 to 6 hours if no imaging was obtained.

Consider hospitalization if these other risk factors are present:

- Bleeding disorder

- Patient taking anticoagulation therapy or antiplatelet therapy

- Previous neurosurgical procedure

Provide strict return precautions for patients discharged without imaging.