Alcohol affects multiple organ systems and can cause complications with both acute and chronic use. Patients under the influence of alcohol are more likely to be involved in trauma-related injuries. Trauma patients under the influence of alcohol have a longer length of hospital stay, higher mortality, and are more likely to have traumatic injuries in the future. Alcoholic liver disease is one of the primary causes of chronic liver disease. Acute alcohol intoxication can cause alcoholic hepatitis and acute on chronic liver failure. This is usually in patients who are chronic alcohol abusers or patients already affected by alcoholic cirrhosis. Active excessive alcohol consumption is the second most frequent precipitating event for acute on chronic liver failure, with bacterial infection being the first. The most effective therapy for alcoholic liver disease is prolonged abstinence from alcohol. Alcohol can cause both acute and chronic effects on the cardiovascular system. Acutely, it can precipitate dysrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation, supraventricular tachycardia, and ventricular tachycardia and can lead to lethal arrhythmias in patients with myocardial infarction. Also, it can cause contractile dysfunction leading to heart failure, stroke, and increased risk of cardiac death.

Heavy drinkers have a much higher risk of heart failure when compared to non-drinkers. Wernicke syndrome, also known as Wernicke encephalopathy, is due to thiamine deficiency and is characterized by the triad of ataxia, oculomotor abnormalities, and global confusion. It develops over days to weeks. While it is most commonly seen in conjunction with patients with alcohol use disorder, it can occur in any disorder leading to a thiamine deficiency. Neurobehavioral findings with Wernicke syndrome include decreased attention, impaired memory, and disorientation. In its severe form, it can lead to coma. Untreated, Wernicke encephalopathy can progress to Korsakoff syndrome, characterized by anterograde and retrograde amnesia without impaired alertness and attention or extraocular movement findings. Chronic alcohol use can lead to dementia, cerebellar degeneration, and peripheral neuropathy.