Several grading scales are used in clinical practice to standardize the classification of patients with aSAH and to monitor progression and change in condition. These scales are based on the initial clinical neurological examination and the appearance of blood on the initial head CT. These scales include the Glasgow Coma Scale, the Hunt and Hess grading scale, the WFNS scale, the Fisher grading scale, and the modified Fisher grading scale.

I) The **Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)**, introduced in 1974, is designed as a reliable and objective scale of neurological function in three subscales of level of consciousness, eye-opening, and motor function.

II) The World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies (WFNS) developed the **WFNS grading scale**, which describes the clinical presentation of SAH patients. The scale includes consciousness and motor deficits in its scoring system. The WFNS grading system uses a combination of consciousness and motor deficits from the GCS and the presence of focal neurological deficits to grade the severity of SAH.

III) The **Hunt and Hess grading scale**, introduced in 1968, helps to classify the severity of aSAH based on the patient's clinical condition. It is used as a predictor of a patient's prognosis and outcome. A higher score (grade) correlates to a lower survival rate.

IV) The**Fisher grading scale**is a numerical scale from 0 to 4 that provides insight into the amount of subarachnoid blood on a CT scan. These grading scales correlate to the hemorrhage's severity, the IA's clinical grade, and the vasospasm's incidence after the SAH. In comparison, the**modified Fisher grading scale**provides more specific descriptions of the amount and location of blood seen on a CT scan.