**Candidiasis**

In patients with suspected oral candidiasis, it is essential to identify the predisposing factor. Predisposing factors can be local, e.g., topical steroid use, salivary hypofunction, the uninterrupted wearing of dentures, and tobacco use. Systemic factors include immunodeficiency, nutritional deficiency, and chronic corticosteroid or antibiotic therapy.

The diagnosis of oral candidiasis is mainly based on clinical features. A swab or smear obtained from the lesion may reveal Candidal hyphae when stained with the periodic acid-Schiff method. A biopsy is required in chronic hyperplastic candidiasis cases to rule out malignancy.

Histopathology of the lesional tissue reveals the increased thickness of the parakeratin layer with Candidal hyphae embedded in it, micro abscess in the superficial spinous cell layer, and elongated rete ridges. The underlying connective tissue contains chronic inflammatory infiltrate.

Antifungal susceptibility testing is essential in patients who relapse or do not respond to conventional antifungals.Candida. Production of germ tubes in the germ tube test indicates the presence of C. albicans or C. dubliniensis. Immunological methods to detect mannan antigen and anti-mannan antibodies, antimycelial antibodies, or β-D-glucan can be employed in immunocompromised patients when it is challenging to obtain deep samples. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry reduces the culture time and is helpful in the identification of candidal species.

**Aspergillosis**

Diagnosis is mainly based on clinical, microbiological, and histopathological features. Histopathology of aspergillosis reveals septate hyphae, branching at acute angles, of size 3 to 4 µm.

Special stains like Grocott-Gomori's methenamine silver stain and galactomannan can be employed to confirm the diagnosis. Galactomannan is a fungal cell wall marker relatively specific for aspergillus, which can be identified in the serum.

**Mucormycosis**

Mucormycosis is an opportunistic infection in patients with underlying diseases like uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, AIDS, leukemia, and lymphoma. Other systemic risk factors include burns, bone marrow transplant patients, and those taking deferoxamine. History of tooth extraction, periodontal surgery, and abscess drainage can be local risk factors for mucormycosis.

Radiographs reveal opacification of the sinuses and effacement of the sinus walls. Scrapings examined with 10 to 20% potassium hydroxide shows non-septate fungal organisms. The final diagnosis is confirmed by pathologic examination, which reveals necrosis and non-septate fungal hyphae of size 6 to 30 µm branching at 90 degrees. Culturing on Sabouraud's glucose agar can identify mucor.

**Histoplasmosis**

Diagnosis is based on clinical presentation, histopathology, and cultures. Histopathology reveals diffuse lymphohistiocytic infiltrate with fungal elements of size 1 to 2 µm within the cytoplasm of histiocytes. A well-formed granuloma with macrophages and multinucleated giant cells is a rare observation. Stains like Periodic acid- Schiff and Grocott-Gomori methenamine silver can be used to highlight the cell wall of Histoplasma capsulatum. The cytoplasm retracts from the thick cell wall giving a classic "halo" appearance.

**Blastomycosis**

Many methods can be used to visualize Blastomyces, including 10% potassium hydroxide, calcofluor white, Gomori methenamine silver, and periodic acid-Schiff. The diagnostic feature is yeast cells of size 8 to 20 µm with double-refractive capsules and broad bud attachment to the parent cell. Histopathology reveals pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia with granulomatous reaction and acute inflammation.

**Cryptococcosis**

India ink is a rapid method to visualize encapsulated yeast cells in cerebrospinal fluid, but false negative results are common.

**Paracoccidiomycosis**

Histopathology reveals pesudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia associated with connective tissue containing epithelioid macrophages and multinucleated giant cells. The organisms may be seen as parent cells with multiple offshoots (daughter buds) resembling 'Mickey mouse ears,' giving a steering-wheel appearance.

**Geotrichosis**

Multiple hyphae with rectangular anthroconidia long with acute inflammatory cells are evident in the histopathological section. It is also characterized by rectangular anthroconidia with rounded borders called clavata cells in KOH mounts. Culture is essential for diagnosis.