The national incident management system (NIMS) is a framework under which numerous agencies from many different areas can work together during disasters. NIMS is adaptable to large and small scale incidents but is very structured in the way the incident is managed. NIMS is based on five elements: preparedness, communication and information management, resource management, command and management and ongoing management and maintenance. The ICS is a part of the command and management element.

ICS served to fix many of the problems encountered in past disasters. Common terminology was instituted to make communications easier and more functional. A modular organization for the disaster response was developed that builds from the top down and can be expanded or contracted to fit any size response.  ICS necessitates that event management be by incident objectives with specific plans and assignments of personnel to address these objectives. The incident action plan communicates the objectives formally. The number of people that can be supervised by one person is limited to 3-7 persons as above this number effective leadership and supervision is difficult. ICS also designates specific types of facilities to be set up for operations. All resources, including personnel, are kept track of in real time with full accountability. ICS makes plans for communication to be interchangeable from organization to organization. Formal processes for establishment and change of command procedures are described. Chain of command is clearly laid out in this system.  The many different agencies that respond to an event are expected to work together and provide an incident command. This is known as a unified command.  ICS also controls which resources are deployed and where they are going.  Information is managed in an orderly fashion from the individual responders to the command staff. This gives the command staff a complete picture of the response so they can better manage it.