The presentation, diagnosis, and management of ADEM is very complex and best done with a team that includes an infectious disease expert, emergency department physician, pathologist, nurse practitioner, neurologist, psychiatrist, and intensivist.  ADEM is classically seen following an illness (or less frequently, a vaccination) with a lag time ranging from a few days to up to 60 days (mean is 26 days). Although in about 25% of affected individuals, there may not be an obvious preceding event. The onset of ADEM is acute and rapidly progressive, and it is characterized by multifocal neurologic symptoms that require early hospitalization. The decision to treat with an antiviral agent requires clinical judgment. ICU monitoring of these patients is required, and nurses need to provide close monitoring and, at the same time, provide prophylaxis against DVT, pressure sores, and stress ulcers. Any new neurological change must be reported to the team.

The pharmacist should provide medication reconciliation and assist with acyclovir and high-dose intravenous glucocorticoid therapy dosing. If a patient is not improving, the pharmacist may assist in correct dosing and monitoring of intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) or cyclophosphamide. In addition, the pharmacist can assist in educating the patient and family in regards to medication compliance.

Specialty trained nurses assist in patient care, administer treatments, aid in the education of patients and their families, and keep the team informed about changes in patient status.

There are rare cases of severe hemorrhagic necrosis leading to rapid progression and death, especially if affecting the brainstem. Only through such an interprofessional team approach can the morbidity and mortality of this disorder be lowered.

The outlook of patients with ADEM is otherwise fair to good, but those who present with severe neurological deficits may have residual defects after recovery. The recovery period can take weeks or months.