Thus, in conclusion, the fibrinogen concentrate is a great alternative to other ways of providing fibrinogen in clinical states of coagulation abnormality that results from either qualitative or quantitative deficiencies of fibrinogen. Studies have proven that fibrinogen concentrate delivers a safe and reliable dose of fibrinogen.

The key to optimizing clinical care in patients requiring fibrinogen replacement therapy is judicious use of the drug and adequate monitoring. An interprofessional team of clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists is required to accomplish this goal. The clinician must review the patient scenario and laboratory parameters thoroughly prior to initiating this therapy. The critical care nurse is essential in monitoring the patient during therapy and to ensure no adverse reactions occur. Many patients requiring this therapy are critically ill and receive multiple intravenous transfusions. Close cardiopulmonary observation by the bedside nurse is needed to prevent fluid overload and other complications. Communicating with the clinician when signs of fluid overload or thrombosis occur can help minimize adverse outcomes. The pharmacist can assist the medical team in adjusting the dosage and rate of transfusion in complicated cases to decrease patient morbidity and mortality. A collaborative interprofessional team can greatly increase the efficacy of this treatment and help improve patient outcomes in a variety of clinical scenarios. [Level 5]