Bernard-Soulier syndrome is a rare inherited bleeding disorder. It is most commonly misdiagnosed as immune thrombocytopenia, which leads to unnecessary interventions like splenectomy. The most common presentation is that of bleeding child, presenting with thrombocytopenia and giant platelets. The most common differential diagnosis is vWD, especially type IIB vWD and platelet-type vWD, that have a similar presentation. Low to complete absence of platelet aggregation in response to ristocetin, strongly points towards a diagnosis of BSS. Flow cytometry usually clinches the diagnosis of BSS.

Preventative measures are the best for preventing bleeding complications from BSS. Patients diagnosed with BSS and their families must be educated about the nature of the disease and the potential bleeding complications. They must be taught about the environmental (contact sports, trauma, using a soft toothbrush, etc.) and medicinal (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, aspirin, etc.) factors that can increase the risk of bleeding, and how to avoid them. The patients and the families should be educated on techniques to stop bleeding (pressure application for epistaxis, gum bleeding, etc.).

Healthcare teams involved in the management of patients diagnosed with BSS must plan ahead of time to mitigate bleeding. HLA-matched platelets must be made available for patients requiring elective surgeries. All patients must be registered in a hospital that can provide 24-hour emergency care in the advent of uncontrolled bleeding.