Protein intolerance is a disorder that requires an interprofessional team approach for both diagnosis and management. From taking the histories, performing investigations, to reaching a correct diagnosis, good communication and diagnostic skills are required for the health professionals. Compliance from the patient is equally important in the management of this condition. As diet elimination remains the mainstay management of protein intolerance, regular consultation with a dietitian or a nutritionist must be highly considered. Management is individualized to each patient. In patients who develop acute reactions (ex. hypersensitivity reactions in IgE mediated conditions, severe dehydration or shock in FPIES), the nurses and the paramedics play a vital role in the interprofessional group as they will monitor patient's vital signs, administer fluids and medications, and assist with the education of the patient and their family.

Allergists also play an important role in diagnosing protein intolerances as the disorder is frequently attributed to sensitization to food proteins. Often times, the parents or caregivers of pediatric patients or adult patients themselves with chronic or severe protein intolerances experience significant burden, anxiety, worry, and stress, which should be taken care of with the help of counselors, psychologists, or psychiatrists whenever needed.

The prognosis of protein intolerance is favorable. Proper identification of the offending agent and its avoidance helps to control the disorder. Recent evidence has suggested that sensitization to cow's milk leading to intolerance and allergies are primarily preventable by avoiding cow's milk-based formula supplementation for at least the first 3 days of life.