Non-traumatic cases will typically present with mechanical pain of variable onset and severity and are often difficult to localize. In early disease, the physical examination is usually normal and inevitably causes a delay in diagnosis.[4] A focused history should include recent trauma, steroid use, autoimmune disease, sickle cell, alcoholism, tobacco use, manual labor, change in gait, connective tissue disorders, insidious onset pain, and decreased range of motion.

Osteonecrosis of the hip often has early stages that are often asymptomatic. Hip and groin pain is the most common presenting symptoms and usually indicate late-stage progression. Associated symptoms can include referred pain in the buttock and thigh. The majority of patients have pain at rest. Others include stiffness and changes in gait.

Osteonecrosis of the knee most commonly presents as acute onset knee pain that occurs while weight-bearing and at night. A history of osteoporosis or osteopenia and no recent trauma are typical responses. On physical exam, pain with palpation over the medial femoral condyle and decreased range of motion is observed.

Osteonecrosis of the shoulder, involving the proximal humerus, is often associated with trauma and osteonecrosis elsewhere in the body. Pain is characterized as pulsating with radiation to the elbow and a decreased active range of motion.

Osteonecrosis of the talus is associated with polyarticular disease and trauma. Patients often complain of pain and difficulty ambulating well beyond the expected recovery time following a traumatic event.

Osteonecrosis of the lunate and scaphoid most often presents without a history of trauma. Patients are usually skilled laborers and complain of unilateral pain in the wrist's dorsal and radial aspects. Other common findings include decreased range of motion, wrist swelling, and weakened grip strength.