Comprehensive understanding of the anatomy of the globe and surrounding structures is critical for a provider performing point of care ocular ultrasound.

Fat and muscle within the orbital cavity surround the globe which is comprised of the sclera, uvea, and retina which all surround the aqueous and vitreous humor.

- The sclera is the outermost layer of the eye. It acts as a protective barrier which surrounds the entire globe and is contiguous with the dural sheath of the optic nerve posteriorly.

- The uvea lies below the sclera and consists of the iris, ciliary body, and choroid plexus. The iris is a pigmented ring with a central opening, the pupil, and connects to the ciliary body peripherally. This creates a separation between the anterior and posterior chambers of the globe. The lens is positioned just posterior to the iris. The ciliary body connects the iris to the ciliary muscle, and the choroid forms a center vascular layer between the sclera and the retinal pigment epithelium. The choroid is also attached to the lens via the zonular fibers.

- The retina is the innermost layer of the eye. It is comprised of a sensory layer that contains photoreceptors, ganglion cells and the retinal pigment epithelium layer attached to the choroid. Of note, the retinal layers are attached only to the optic disc and the ora serrata. Intraocular pressure holds the retina otherwise in place. Two important parts of the retina are the optic disc, where the central retinal artery and vein enter, and the macula which is the thinnest portion of the retina.

Important vasculature of the eye includes the central retinal artery, which originates from the ophthalmic artery, and the central retinal vein. The optic nerve provides sensory innervation to the eye. These three structures travel together in the optic nerve sheath which contains cerebrospinal fluid and communicates directly with the subarachnoid space.