NETs mostly arise sporadically, but they also may arise as part of inherited familial syndromes such as multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN-1), which include neoplasia of the anterior pituitary, parathyroid glands, and pancreas. NETs might be symptomatic (functioning) or silent (non-functioning) depending on hormonal secretion. NETs can originate from different organs and from different cell types. Gastroenteropancreatic NETs (GEP-NETs) are subdivided into carcinoid tumors of the luminal GI tract and pancreatic NETs.

**Carcinoid Tumors of the Luminal GI Tract**

Many functioning NETs secrete massive amounts of vasoactive peptides and amines, including serotonin and tachykinins, into the blood, causing symptoms called carcinoid syndrome. Classic symptoms include flushing (63%–94%), diarrhea (68%–84%), abdominal pain (10%–55%), and bronchoconstriction (3% to 19%).****Carcinoid syndrome typically manifests in cases of hepatic or systemic metastasis because serotonin is metabolized in the liver before reaching the systemic circulation. Exposure of the heart to a high level of active peptides causes carcinoid heart disease, characterized by fibrous thickening of the endocardium.

**Pancreatic NETs**

Pancreatic NETs cause different variable clinical syndromes depending on the type of hormones secreted. For example, beta-cell neoplasm or insulinoma, the most common GI NETs, secretes excess insulin causing hypoglycemia, with the relief of symptoms after glucose administration (Whipple triad) and hypokalemia. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is caused by gastrinoma secreting gastrin hormone characterized by multiple peptic ulcers in atypical sites such as the duodenum and jejunum, typically resistant to proton pump inhibitors, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Glucagonomas produce excess glucagon hormone, typically cause diabetes, dermatitis (necrolytic migratory erythema), deep vein thrombosis, and depression. VIPoma produces excess vasoactive intestinal peptide associated with voluminous watery diarrhea (10–15 L/day) and flushing.