Histologically, a lobular capillary hemangioma consists of lobular aggregates of capillary-sized vessels, with each lobule containing a central feeder vessel. These develop within highly vascular granulation tissue, with the lobules or tufts of thin-walled capillaries embedded within a loose fibrous stroma, with scattered fibroblasts and a variegated inflammatory infiltrate.

At low power, the architecture resembles a well-circumscribed, exophytic, polypoid mass. The overlying epidermis is variably involved but often thinned or atrophic, progressing to erosion and ulceration with severity. Features of superadded infection may be seen. An epidermal collarette is often present, composed of either acanthotic elongated rete ridges or hyperplasia of adnexal structures that separate these lesions from the underlying dermis. Within the papillary and upper reticular dermis, collections of these capillary-sized vessels are arranged into lobules and separated by fibromyxoid stroma.

Within the stroma, a scarce, mixed inflammatory infiltrate is noted, consisting of lymphocytes, neutrophils, plasma cells, or mast cells, resembling normal granulation tissue. A study noted a normal number of mast cells within these lesions compared to increased numbers in the proliferative phase of a typical hemangioma.

Immunohistochemistry staining is often unnecessary, given the characteristic clinical history and histologic architecture. Atypical lesions may, however, necessitate the use of IHC stains. The lesion stains are positive for vascular markers like CD31, CD34, and factor VIII antigen, but unlike infantile hemangioma, they are negative for glucose transporter-1 (GLUT­1).

When seen, intravascular pyogenic granulomas typically occur within a vein and resemble cutaneous lesions with a lobular capillary proliferation set in a fibromyxoid stroma. The lesion hangs from a fibrovascular stalk that connects to the intima of the vein.

On the other hand, a granuloma is represented by an aggregation of macrophages with or without surrounding inflammatory infiltrate.lobular capillary hemangioma.