Transdermal patches administration should follow a proper physical examination of patients and considerations of any associated comorbidities. The following steps are a general overview for administering a transdermal patch:

- Proper disinfecting and cleaning of skin where the patch is applied

- Application of patch in the desired area

- A follow-up appointment to ensure that the patient experiences no adverse skin reactions

- Proper adherence to the guidelines of the transdermal patch for future use

The administration of transdermal patches varies based on the drug administered via the patch.

- The patient should clean and disinfect the area where they will apply the patch with clear water, patting the area until it is completely dry. They should avoid using any soaps, alcohols, lotions, or oils immediately before applying the patch.

- They should open the pouch containing the patch and remove it from the pouch. Then peel off both parts of the protective liner from the back of the patch, being careful not to touch the adhesive side of the patch.

- The patient should then immediately press the adhesive side of the patch onto their skin with the palm of their hand.

- Hold or press the patch firmly for at least 30 seconds, ensuring the patch sticks well to the skin, especially at the edges.

- If the patch does not adhere well or becomes loose following application, they can use first-aid tape to tape the edges to their skin. If the patch still fails to adhere well to the skin, they can try using see-through dressings but should not cover the patch with any other type of bandage or tape.

- If a patch falls off before it is time to remove it, the patient must dispose of the patch properly and apply a new patch, following the same dosing interval as per the original patch. It is advisable to contact their clinician's office or pharmacist in such cases.

- Following the successful application of the patch, the patient should wash their hands with water immediately.

- When it is time to change the patch, the patient will peel off the old patch and apply the new patch to a different area of the skin.

- After removing the patch, the patient should fold it over with the adhesive sides together and dispose of it properly.

The patient should select different sites for consecutive applications to avoid skin irritation. Some patches are only meant to be worn for part of a day (e.g., 12 hours), while other patches are meant to be worn for several days. For example, fentanyl patches are worn for 72 hours and then removed and re-applied.

Patients need to understand that a removed patch can still contain enough medication to cause problems if they do not dispose of them properly. This is especially true if children can get a hold of them. Patches should not be used if they are damaged or torn, as this may cause a "dose dumping" phenomenon where the medication is dispensed more rapidly and at a greater dose than intended. If the patient has any questions about their transdermal patches, they should immediately contact their clinician or pharmacist.