Central vertigo is a clinical condition in which an individual experiences hallucinations of motion of their surroundings, or a sensation of spinning, while remaining still, as a result of dysfunction of the vestibular structures in the central nervous system (CNS).

The peripheral vestibular system consists of the saccule, utricle, and semicircular canals. The neuroepithelial hair cells within the peripheral vestibular apparatus send projections to the vestibular nuclei in the caudal pons and rostral dorsolateral medulla by way of the vestibular division of the VIIIth cranial (vestibulocochlear nerve). The vestibular nucleus on each side is divided into 4 sub-nuclei with three lateral nuclei and one medial nuclear column, they are labeled as the superior vestibular nucleus, lateral vestibular nucleus, medial vestibular nucleus, and descending vestibular nucleus. Some nuclei receive only primary vestibular afferents, but most receive afferents from the cerebellum, reticular formation, spinal cord, and contralateral vestibular nuclei. The projections from the vestibular nuclei extend to the cerebellum, extraocular nuclei, and spinal cord. With these neuroanatomic arrangements, it will be easy to understand the functions of the vestibular system i.e. maintaining visual fixation through the vestibulo-ocular reflex with changing head and body positions in space and extended or erect body posture. The maintenance of visual fixation also requires the normal function of the oculomotor central neural integrator which consists mainly of the medial vestibular nucleus and the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi.

Any lesion affecting the vestibular nuclei or their projections especially those to and from the cerebellum will result in symptoms of vertigo and associated signs of nystagmus.