Adenomyosis is a problematic diagnosis due to its variable presentation and shared features with other common gynecologic conditions. The primary care clinician, obstetrician, nurse practitioner, gynecologist, diagnostic radiologist, and interventional radiologist are all possible team members who might diagnose and manage this disease. While the differential diagnosis is broad for women presenting with abnormal uterine bleeding, a transvaginal ultrasound which is the diagnostic imaging of choice for adenomyosis will likely be obtained during the initial workup. It is important to recognize that every test has its limitations to include the ultrasonographer and interpreter. It is vital that the ordering provider does not dismiss the diagnosis of adenomyosis if it is not mentioned in the report, as the diagnostic criteria have been variable for many years until the recent establishment of more standardized imaging features.

For patients who are refractory to the standard medical therapies and desire future fertility, minimally invasive therapies offered by gynecologists or interventional radiologists should be an option. Recent data show promising results, but data demonstrating head-to-head comparisons and long-term outcomes are still lacking.

Similarly, medical therapies beyond the most commonly used levonorgestrel IUD and OCPs have yet to be validated and should only be used in refractory cases and under the supervision of a clinician who understands the hormonal side-effects of these medications.

Regardless of the course of treatment and severity of the disease, an interprofessional approach with collaboration between clinicians, nursing, and pharmacy is the optimal approach to ensure the best patient outcome. [Level 5]