Lifestyle is central to a person's disease risk and overall health. Numerous health conditions are caused or exacerbated by unhealthy behaviors such as smoking, physical inactivity, excessive alcohol consumption, and poor dietary habits.

Day-to-day behaviors have profound implications for both short- and long-term health outcomes and quality of life.

On the other hand, negative or health-compromising behaviors refer to those which increase the risk of developing disease, reduce well-being, and worsen the quality of life. Health-compromising behaviors include physical inactivity, substance abuse, and chronic excess calorie intake.

While the importance of maintaining healthy behaviors has been extensively documented in the medical literature, habits and behaviors remain unchanged at the population level. Studies have shown a decrease in the number of adults adhering to healthy behaviors in the United States.

Over the last decades, organizations, public health agencies, and healthcare professionals have started to highlight the importance of maintaining healthy habits. There have been many awareness and health promotion campaigns at the population level. However, the efficacy of these campaigns on behavioral outcomes remains controversial.

Understanding the factors influencing behavior is crucial to developing effective interventions and improving adherence to a healthy lifestyle. Human behavior is a complex phenomenon that involves changes or actions related to external circumstances.

**The Intention-Behavior Gap**

A person's intention is the motivation to perform a behavior or attain a goal.

Even though the behavior is considered to be voluntary, it is not always aligned with a person's intentions. Health-compromising behaviors are hard to stop, and health-promoting behaviors are challenging to adopt, so intention alone is not necessarily a predictor of behavior change.

Understanding the intention-behavior gap can help healthcare professionals understand the difficulties that patients encounter when seeking behavior modification and allow for implementing strategies that address such problems and improve adherence to a healthier lifestyle.

Interventions targeting health behaviors should be tailored to the patient's place on the intention-behavior spectrum, promoting intention formation when patients don't feel ready to change or don't recognize the need for modifying behavior (increasing motivation), facilitating initiation when intentions have been formed (making a plan), reinforcing behavior when action has been taken (staying on course), and providing support when lapses occur (getting back on track).