Aniseikonia has not been measured in the general population. One hospital-based survey for aniseikonia of patients with binocular vision complaints showed that 7.8% had measurable aniseikonia, and 4% had disruption of fusion and stereopsis. This same report surveyed orthoptists in the USA and recorded that the majority evaluate aniseikonia and that their treatment was limited to the fitting of contact lenses and occlusion or fogging of one of the eyes.

Aniseikonia has been studied in specific populations, such as in patients after undergoing a scleral buckle procedure. One report showed that 6% of patients experienced aniseikonia after a scleral buckle procedure, and only 1% had persistent aniseikonia that could not be treated.

Aniseikonia is also more common after unilateral cataract surgery. Second-eye cataract surgery is done in about 70% of cases leaving 30% at risk for aniseikonia.

Anisometropia is one of the most common conditions leading to aniseikonia and, by definition, occurs when there is more than 1 diopter difference in the refractive error. In one study, the prevalence of anisometropia was 1.96% at six months, 1.27% at five years, and 5.77% for those 12 to 15 years.

Aniso-astigmatism is present when the amount of astigmatism is over 1 diopter. While less well studied, aniso-astigmatism also occurs when there is more than one diopter of difference in one of the meridians. This can occur when there are relatively low amounts of astigmatism in each eye, but one eye has "with the rule" and the other eye "against the rule" astigmatism. In one study, the amount of aniso-astigmatism was 7.7% in 6 to 7-year-olds and 5.6% in 12 to 13-year-olds.

The Sydney Myopia Study reported that in 6-year-olds, anisometropia and aniso-astigmatism were more common in myopes and associated with amblyopia, exotropia, low birth weight, and older maternal age. The same study revealed that anisometropia was associated with increased axial length and aniso-astigmatism with higher corneal astigmatism.

Researchers found that 31% of patients with congenital glaucoma also had anisometropia of 2 diopters or more.