Patients with SANRT are usually asymptomatic. In rare cases, patients might present with symptoms of intermittent palpitations secondary to abrupt onset and cessation of the rhythm. Other symptoms patients might present with include dizziness, shortness of breath, pain/discomfort in the neck, pain/discomfort in the chest, anxiety, and polyuria secondary atrial natriuretic factor secreted mainly by the heart atria in response to atrial stretch. Although, uncommon patients with  SANRT and a known history of coronary artery disease may present with a myocardial infarction secondary to the stress on the heart. Patients with SANRT and known history of heart failure may come in with acute exacerbation with possibly reduced ejection fraction secondary to tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy.

Patients with SANRT usually present with a heart rate within the range of 100 to 150 bpm. If a patient has known heart failure or coronary artery disease, he may complain of chest pain and may also have symptoms of heart failure such as wheezing or swelling in the lower extremities and tachypnea on physical exam. In rare instances, patients with SANRT might present with complaints of syncope secondary to tachycardia-induced reduced ventricular filling as less filling of the ventricles leads to the reduction in the cardiac output, which leads to decreased perfusion of the brain. Tachycardia-induced depression of the sinoatrial node may also contribute to syncopal symptoms. Hypotension secondary to decrease ventricular filling may be a significant physical exam finding in patients presenting with SANRT.