The linear growth of an individual depends on the equilibrium between proliferation and senescence of cartilage cells at the growth plate. Multiple mechanisms regulate this process-

- Endocrine pathways – The hormones which promote chondrogenesis are GH, IGF-1, androgens, T3/T4 (thyroid hormones), while glucocorticoids inhibit chondrogenesis. Estrogen stimulates the release of GH and IGF-1 but also promotes chondrocyte senescence and epiphyseal fusion, and suspension of linear growth. Therefore, precocious puberty is associated with an initial growth spurt but an ultimate short adult height.

- Proinflammatory cytokines – The chronic inflammatory conditions have elevated proinflammatory cytokines, which negatively impact the linear growth. As inflammation ceases, the cytokine levels drop, and the patient can catch up on growth.

- Paracrine mechanisms – GH-IGF-1 axis is only one of the many regulatory pathways of height gain. Many autocrine and paracrine pathways are under research; mutation of these can lead to short stature or tall stature. These include many intracellular and extracellular matrix proteins like fibroblast growth factors (FGF), bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP), parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTH-RP), collagens, and proteoglycans in the cartilage extracellular matrix.

-  Intracellular pathways – SHOX gene codes for transcription factors that regulate the activity of other genes and its mutation is associated with a spectrum of clinical manifestations with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) on the critical end, and nonspecific short stature on the other. LWD is a classical triad of short stature, mesomelia, and Madelung deformity.