Opioid receptor antagonists block one or more of the opioid receptors in the central or peripheral nervous system. Opioid receptors are specific transmembrane neurotransmitter receptors that couple G-proteins, which upon stimulation by endogenous or exogenous opioids, leading to the intracellular process of signal transduction.

The most recent classification scheme identifies three major classes of opioid receptors, with several minor classes. The three most clinically relevant opioid receptors are the mu, kappa, and delta receptors. Stimulation of central mu receptors causes respiratory depression, analgesia (supraspinal and peripheral), and euphoria.

The two most commonly used centrally acting opioid receptor antagonists are naloxone and naltrexone. Naloxone comes in intravenous, intramuscular, and intranasal formulations and is FDA-approved for the use in an opioid overdose and the reversal of respiratory depression associated with opioid use. Naltrexone is available in both oral and long-acting injectable formulations and is FDA-approved to treat opioid and alcohol use disorders as a maintenance treatment. The most commonly used peripheral opioid receptor antagonist is methylnaltrexone, which is a potent competitive antagonist acting at the digestive tract and is also FDA-approved for the treatment of opioid-induced constipation.

Opioid antagonists such as naloxone have come into the public spotlight with the emergence of the opioid epidemic and the need for readily accessible reversal agents in the setting of an acute opioid overdose. Various communities have experimented with naloxone dispensaries or over-the-counter availability at pharmacies without the need for a prescription. These communities have shown promising results in lives saved.