Cetirizine is a fast-acting, highly selective antagonist of the peripheral histamine H1 receptor. The H1-receptors inhibited by cetirizine are primarily on respiratory smooth muscle cells, vascular endothelial cells, immune cells, and the gastrointestinal tract. Unlike first-generation antihistamines such as diphenhydramine and doxylamine, cetirizine does not cross the blood-brain barrier to a large extent, avoiding the neurons of the central nervous system. As a result, cetirizine produces minimal sedation compared to many first-generation antihistamines.

Given its antagonism with histamine H1-receptors, cetirizine effectively reverses many of the effects of histamine. Like other second-generation antihistamines, cetirizine decreases vascular permeability, decreasing fluid escaping to tissues from capillaries. Cetirizine is also an inhibitor of histamine-induced bronchospasm.

Cetirizine has been found to exert significant anti-inflammatory activity, reducing the infiltration of inflammatory cells in the setting of allergic rhinitis.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Cetirizine is absorbed rapidly in the gastrointestinal tract and undergoes substantial excretion by the kidney. Cetirizine reaches peak plasma concentration after approximately one hour. Its effects typically begin after 20 to 60 minutes and persist for at least 24 hours. Food does not affect the extent of exposure (AUC) of cetirizine, but the time to attain peak concentration is delayed by 1.7 hours.

**Distribution:**The mean plasma protein binding of cetirizine is 93%.

**Metabolism:**Cetirizine undergoes oxidative O-dealkylation to a metabolite with negligible antihistaminic activity. Cetirizine is not a substrate of the CYP450 system.

**Excretion:**The elimination half-life of cetirizine is 8.3 hours. Cetirizine is primarily excreted through the kidney.