Alterations in the serum osmolality will cause many clinical implications. It is essential to think about all differential diagnoses; ultimately, further laboratory testing will be necessary to reach a diagnosis. Clinicians should monitor the patient for seizures, peripheral edema, lung edema, or intracranial pressure changes.

Pathologies include:

- Diabetes insipidus: A disease characterized by lack of ADH (central) or failure of response to circulating ADH (nephrogenic), resulting in diluted, hypoosmolar urine (less than 300mOsm/liter) and concentrated, hyperosmolar plasma (over 300 mOsm/liter).

- Congestive heart failure: Is a pathology characterized by the dilation and hypertrophy of the left ventricle of the heart that prevents forward blood flow, resulting in decreased end-organ perfusion and elevation of the hydrostatic oncotic pressure, which leads to pulmonary edema and hepatic congestion. These events will decrease renal perfusion, activate the RAAS system, and change the concentrations of solutes in the blood and urine.

- Dehydration: In an acute setting, this will lead to a hypertonic state.

- Kwashiorkor: The lack of amino acids in an individual's diet due to severe malnutrition results in the liver's inability to synthesize proteins leading to decreased plasma oncotic pressure.

- Liver cirrhosis: This is the final stage of various hepatic insults that render the liver damaged, and therefore it will be ineffective at completing the essential hepatic functions, which include synthesizing proteins, clearing bilirubin, and metabolizing drugs for excretion.

- Psychogenic polydipsia: Characterized by self-induced water intoxication.

- Nephrotic syndrome: A disorder in the kidney that results in the loss of proteins in the urine leading to hypoosmolar serum.