Baricitinib is a relatively new drug, and our knowledge about its safety and efficacy profile will build over time. Baricitinib is orally administered and gets rapidly absorbed leading to a peak concentration within 60 minutes, food appears to have no effect on the pharmacokinetics of the medication. The pharmacokinetics of Baricitinib follows a linear curve and there is no accumulation of clinical significance. It is moderately distributed into tissues with 50% binding to plasma proteins and a volume of distribution of 1.1L

Jorgensen et al

Baricitinib has also been associated with a dose-dependent increased tendency to have venous as well as arterial thromboembolism, which is similar to other disease-modifying anti rheumatoid drugs (DMARD’s). It is for this reason that the FDA approved a 2 mg/day dose of Baricitinib for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, as the benefit of administering a 4 mg/day dose was unclear with an increased risk of thromboembolic events

Based on the guideline issued by the FDA for the administration of Baricitinib, dose adjustment should be made for renal impairment. For eGFR between 30-60, the recommended dose is 2 mg /day. For eGFR between 15-30 the recommended dose is 1 mg /day while evaluating risks and benefits and its use is not recommended for eGFR below 15. Its use is also not recommended in patients with severe hepatic impairment. As hematologic derangements have been noted with Baricitinib use, its administration is not recommended in patients with a hemoglobin of <8gm/dl, an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of <1000 cells/mm, and an absolute lymphocyte count of <500 cells/mm.