Accessory spleens arise due to the incomplete fusion of mesenchymal buds during development. Accessory splenic tissue can develop along the path from the midline that the spleen takes during development, or follow the path of gonad descent. Around the fifth week of development, a primitive spleen begins to form from the mesoderm of the dorsal mesogastrium. The dorsal mesogastrium initially is midline with the foregut but during early development rotates to the left side as the foregut begins to take a rounder shape. After the dorsal mesocardium rotates around the foregut, the mesenchymal tissue from the dorsal mesocardium which gives rise to the spleen migrates over to its predetermined location approximately between what will become the ninth and eleventh ribs. If mesenchymal buds moving away from the midline path do not fuse together, then accessory spleens can form. An accessory spleen, however, can also be formed by the descent of the gonads during development. The spleen initially forms near the urogenital ridge, the site of gonad development. Due to their proximity during development, the gonads can become fused to splenic tissue. The gonads, as they develop, descend through the abdomen. If the gonads fuse with the spleen, they can forcibly drag splenic tissue with them in their descent. This forcible descent of splenic tissue can create either a continuous or broken line of splenic tissue, resulting in a condition known as splenogonadal fusion which creates accessory splenic tissue located in the pelvis or groin.