Although pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy does have any absolute contraindications per se, a careful analysis of the underlying risks is necessary for the following conditions.

**Diabetes Mellitus**

Pancrelipase affects glycemic control. Hence patients diagnosed with diabetes mellitus or patients at risk for abnormal blood sugar levels should have strict glucose monitoring while taking pancrelipase.

**Immunocompromised States**

Pancrelipase derives from the pancreatic tissue of swine. Although rigorous measures are in place to ensure no risk of transmitting viral infections to the patient, there is a theoretical risk from unknown viruses in the swine. Therefore, patients who are immunocompromised/immunodeficient are at an increased risk of contracting infections while on this medication.

**Hyperuricemia and Renal Impairment**

As this medication is porcine-derived, it contains certain nucleic acids that tend to increase blood uric acid levels. Patients with pre-existing hyperuricemia or gout and patients with decreased renal functions are to be closely monitored when on the drug.

**Dysphagia**

As mentioned earlier, patients with a tendency to retain the contents of the medications higher up in the gastrointestinal tract may develop mucosal irritation and mucositis. Care is necessary while administering the drug to patients with esophageal strictures and dysphagia.

**Meconium Ileus, Intestinal Obstruction, Inflammatory Bowel Disease, and Surgery**

Patients younger than 12 years of age, patients who have taken more than 6000 lipase units/kg per meal for more than six months, or patients with a history of meconium ileus, intestinal obstruction, inflammatory bowel disease, or abdominal surgery have the highest risk for developing fibrosing colonopathy. It is a rare but serious complication of enzyme replacement characterized by GI obstruction, bloody diarrhea, abdominal pain, and poor weight gain.

Therefore, it has been recommended by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Consensus Conference Guidelines that the efficacy of lipase supplementation more than 2500 units/kg per meal be confirmed by a 3-day fecal-fat measure that indicated an increased fat absorption coefficient. The dose is then to be adjusted accordingly.

**Pregnancy**

There are not adequate numbers of human and animal reproduction studies for this drug. Therefore, its use in pregnancy should be limited to those patients with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency who have inadequate maternal weight gain; this may adversely affect fetal growth, and hence supplementation is justified.

**Breastfeeding**

All breastfeeding mothers should contact their healthcare provider before taking pancrelipase. Some proteins present in the product may undergo systemic absorption along with the dietary protein. There is no data available about the uptake of these substances into breast milk; it is only recommended when it is necessary to support the mother's nutritional status.

**Porcine Protein Sensitivity**

There are reports of anaphylactic reactions, hives, asthma, urticaria, and pruritus in patients with prior hypersensitivity to porcine protein. Caution is necessary for all these patients.