# Definition/Introduction

Outcome and Assessment Information Set (OASIS) was primarily a suggestion of the Center for Health Services Research and Policy at the University of Colorado in 1994.

OASIS is mandatory for all HHAs (or skilled care programs) with Medicare or Medicare managed insurance. Functional health, physical improvement, and adverse events serve as outcome measures.

# Issues of Concern

One of the challenges of OASIS is inter-rater reliability. Scores can be discordant due to the subjective nature of the evaluator's evaluation, interpretation, and experience. Inconsistent results reflect in the Medicare Prospective Pay System reimbursement.

Brown et al. studied the detection of depression among HHC patients, and the primary outcome of the study suggested that depression is underdiagnosed among the elderly at HHC.

There have been several versions of OASIS implemented since 1991. The OASIS-D is the current one effective January 1, 2019. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services delayed the implementation of OASIS-E, originally scheduled to take effect on January 1, 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. OASIS-E will delay until January 1 of the year that will be at least one full calendar year after the end of the pandemic. The updated version will include new standardized patient assessment data elements evaluating pain, comprehension, cognition, delirium, continence, self-care, mobility, and falls.

# Clinical Significance

OASIS becomes essential as the assessment performed, preliminarily impacts how patient management will proceed. For instance, depression is one of the under detected conditions of the HHC system of New York City. The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene found that if patients in HHC received adequate treatment, about 70 to 80% responded positively. If providers had adequate training, referrals for treatment would increase. Also, there should be sufficient coordination between providers and mental health services for the HHC have sufficient detection, treatment, and follow up for the patients.

When including symptoms of depression in screening with OASIS, which is mandatory, it increases the efficiency of diagnosing underlying depression in HHC patients and, at the same time, treat them.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Infection control is a challenge of HHC due to a lack of measurement methods. There are various areas where OASIS can help determine the course of treatment of the patient proposed. Because of its broad points of assessment, when used in the HHC setting, OASIS can help measure the rates of infection and increase the detection of infections.

Consequently, OASIS has helped increase the discharge to home health from hospitals for wound infections.