**Labs**

- The initial workup should include a complete blood count (CBC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and serum chemistry panel.

- Urine or blood cultures may be ordered if an infectious agent is suspected.

- Testing for suspected neurosyphilis, HIV, thyroid function, vitamin B-12, and folate levels may be ordered if indicated following detailed history and examination.

- Urine testing for elevated metabolic catecholamine by-products is important in the pediatric population with suspected neuroblastoma.

- Purified protein derivative (PPD) is warranted in suspected tuberculosis.

**Imaging**

- A chest X-ray followed by computed tomography (CT) scan must be ordered in patients when pulmonary malignancy is suspected.

- Head CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are advised in cases of possible stroke.

- MRI is warranted and preferred over ultrasonography when carotid artery dissection is a possibility (painful Horner syndrome).

**Pharmacological Testing**

This is the most helpful testing modality for diagnostic localization.

Topical Cocaine Test:****Cocaine acts as an indirect sympathomimetic inhibiting the reuptake of norepinephrine from the synaptic cleft. Cocaine solution (ranging from 2% to 10%) is instilled into both eyes. Both eyes are evaluated after at least 30 or more minutes for an optimal response. Denervation in the affected eye causes it to dilate poorly compared to the normal one. Anisocoria of 0.8 mm or more is considered diagnostic. However, the test does not help in identifying the level of the lesion.

The test has other disadvantages such as comparatively high prices of the compound, time-consuming, test yielding ambiguous results, and the metabolites of cocaine can be detected in urine.

Topical Hydroxyamphetamine Test:** **This test is particularly helpful in the localization of the lesion. Hydroxyamphetamine stimulates the release of stored norepinephrine from the postganglionic terminals into the synapse. Postganglionic third-order lesions can be differentiated from presynaptic second-order or first-order ones.

Two drops of 1% hydroxyamphetamine solution are instilled into both eyes. As a result, the affected eye (third-order lesion) will not dilate as well as the normal eye. While in the case of intact postganglionic fibers (first and second-order lesions), the affected pupil dilates to an equal or greater extent.

Disadvantages involving this test include it not being able to be performed on the same day as the cocaine test and false-negative results.

Topical Apraclonidine Test: This test is considered the test of choice due to its good sensitivity and overall practicality. Apraclonidine acts as a weak alpha1-agonist and strong alpha2-agonist. It is categorized as an ocular hypotensive agent. The upregulation of alpha1-receptors in Horner syndrome translates into an exaggerated response of the iris dilators (denervation supersensitivity) to an agonist agent like apraclonidine.

A 0.5-1% solution is instilled in both eyes. The affected eye will show mydriasis, while the normal eye is predominantly insensitive. Consequent instillation of the solution results in an evident reversal of anisocoria (the affected pupil dilates and the normal pupil constricts). This is because of the stronger alpha 2 agonist activity compared to the weaker alpha 1 agonist activity of apraclonidine.

Some disadvantages of this form of testing include false-negative results in acute cases, systemic side effects in the pediatric population, inability to localize the lesion, and relatively long half-life of the drug.

Other agents have been proposed but fall short of clinical relevance due to several reasons, such as:

- Pholedrine, an N-methyl derivative of hydroxyamphetamine, is roughly half as potent as hydroxyamphetamine and has shown comparable results, but due to limited availability, it has been restricted.

- Adrenaline, a direct-acting sympathomimetic, also has been proposed but has poor penetration through the cornea, and sensitivity to the drug is variable.

- Phenylephrine, a selective alpha1 agonist, also has been proposed but suffers from poor penetration through the cornea and varying results, depending on the degree of denervation.