The history in patients with exotropia is crucial as it gives a clue towards the amount stage of exodeviation and thus helps in better management. The essential points to include in history are the age of onset, duration of squinting, intermittent or constant, frequency of manifest deviation, change in the pattern of squinting, any individual predisposing factors like fatigue, health problem, bright light, day-dreaming, drowsiness, or visual inattention.

The characteristics of congenital exotropia include a large angle constant exodeviation of more than 35 prism diopters and poor fusional reserves. Amblyopia incidence is much higher in these patients as compared to intermittent exotropia. Like infantile esotropia, these patients also require surgical intervention in most cases, but a higher level of binocular function is achieved. Associations like oblique muscle overaction and dissociated vertical deviation are common, though these often manifest after one year.

The patients with intermittent exotropia may have variable presentation depending on the stage and presence or lost bifoveal fixation.

- **Transient diplopia**- Occasional double vision can be the presenting complaint among the patients in the early stages of intermittent exotropia. Over time, suppression and abnormal retinal correspondence develop, thus preventing double vision.

- **Diplophotobia**– Bright light often affects the fusional convergence, thus disrupting the balance between convergence and divergence forces and leading to the exodeviation. The usual history is the closure of one eye in bright light. It might happen as a response to prevent transient double vision also.

- **Asthenopia**– Patients often complain of eye strain, headache, or other asthenopic symptoms, especially after prolonged reading. These are more often experienced when the eyes deviate momentarily in the early phases. Asthenopic symptoms result when the patient attempts to return the eyes to fusion.

- **Micropsia**– Though a less common complaint, this results from the accommodative convergence to keep the deviation of eyes under control.

- **Exodeviation**– This is often the most common presenting complaint by the parents. The deviation is typically noticed for distance in the beginning. Over years as the disease progresses, the deviation becomes more frequent and of prolonged duration. Ultimately, the deviation starts appearing for near also before it becomes a constant deviation.

**Factors that Affect the Progression of Different Stages of Exotropia**

- Decreasing tonic convergence with increasing age

- Gradual loss of accommodation power

- Development of sensory adaptations like suppression, abnormal retinal correspondence

- Divergence of orbits with advancing age

There have been many classification systems for intermittent exotropia. The first classification was given by Burian, which Kushner later modified.

**Kushner Describes the Following Types**

- **Basic**– Near and distance deviations are equal

- **Tenacious proximal fusion**– Distance deviation exceeds the near deviation in initial measurements, but near deviation increases following the occlusion test.

- **High AC/A ratio**– Distance deviation exceeds the near deviation, and a high AC/A ratio is present.

- **Proximal convergence**- Distance deviation exceeds the near deviation, which remains the same even after the patch test. AC/A ratio is normal

- **Low AC/A ratio**- Near deviation exceeds the distance deviation. AC/A ratio is low

- **Fusional convergence insufficiency**- Near deviation exceeds the distance deviation, and patients exhibit low fusional convergence amplitudes

- **Pseudo-convergence insufficiency**- Near deviation exceeds the distance deviation, but distance deviation increases following the occlusion test.

Additionally, the New Castle scoring system assesses the control among intermittent exotropia patients. This is divided into scores for home control and clinic control for near and distance.

**Scores for Home Control**

- Squinting/ monocular eye occlusion never noticed

- Squinting/ monocular eye occlusion occasionally noticed

- Squinting/ monocular eye occlusion is frequently noticed for distance (50% of the waking hours)

- Squinting/ monocular eye occlusion frequently noticed for distance and near

**Scores for Clinic Control for Near**

- Squinting is noticed only after the cover test and regains fusion without the need for blinking

- Squinting is noticed only after the cover test and regains fusion after blinking

- Squinting is noticed after fusion disruption but do not regain fusion

- Squinting manifests spontaneously

**Scores for Clinic Control for Distance**

- Squinting is noticed only after the cover test and regains fusion without the need for blinking

- Squinting is noticed only after the cover test and regains fusion after blinking

- Squinting is noticed after fusion disruption but do not regain fusion

- Squinting manifests spontaneously

Total score = Score for Home Control + Scores for Clinic Control for Near + Scores for Clinic Control for Distance