Altogether, bile salts comprise a broad variety of different molecules, each being a steroid with the following basic components: (1) 4 rings, (2) a 5-/8-carbon side chain that ends with a carboxylic acid, and (3) a number of hydroxyl groups (whose position/number changes among the various salts). The rings are ascribed the letters A, B, C, and D based on their distance from the side chain with the -COOH group, the D ring being the most distant (as well as being 1 C smaller than the other rings). Beta hydroxyl groups face up/out, alpha groups down, and every bile acid has a 3-hydroxyl group that came from their cholesterol precursor.

Primary bile acids are made by hepatocytes either by the classic or acidic pathway. The former, which constitutes 95% of bile acid synthesis, is via cytochrome P450-mediated oxidation of cholesterol that requires NADPH and oxygen and occurs in a series of steps, the most important of which is the rate-limiting hydroxylation of the 7th steroid nucleus of cholesterol by cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) to create 7alpha-hydroxycholesterol. That then gets metabolized into 7alpha-hydroxy-4 cholesten-3-one in the second step. In sum, primary bile acid synthesis requires 14 enzymatic steps. The most common bile acids are cholic and chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA). Cholic acid (3alpha, 7alpha, 12alpha-trihydroxy-5beta-cholan-24-oic acid) is the commonest bile acid, and CDCA is the prototypical and most basic of bile acids produced and is also known as 3alpha,7alpha-dihydroxy-5beta-cholan-24-oic acid.

The alternative/acidic pathway acts via mitochondrial sterol 27-hydroxylase (CYP27A1), found in the liver, macrophages, and other tissues. Before secretion of bile acids, hepatocytes conjugate them with the amino acids taurine or glycine, thereby creating eight different conjugated bile acids/salts (including cholic and chenocholic acids). CYP27A1 significantly adds to bile acid synthesis by facilitating the oxidation of sterol side chains, followed by a peroxisomal cleavage of a 3-C unit to generate a C24 bile acid. Miscellaneous pathways, in addition to these two, include those started by the liver's 25-hydroxylase and the brain's 24-hydroxylase.

The purpose of conjugation is so that the bile acids can become water-soluble and thereby emulsify fats.