The technique and the need for sedation during transesophageal echocardiography expose the patient to a variety of risks. These may include damage to the esophagus such as perforation, aspiration, and complications related to anesthesia. These complications are very rare, especially at experienced centers.

Cardiac CT leads to exposure to ionizing radiation, which is well-known to have harmful side effects. The risk for malignancy following exposure is difficult to determine and likely small, nonetheless remains a possibility. Risk versus benefit must be discussed when considering these imaging modalities, and consideration of cumulative exposure should also be ascertained especially with repeat imaging studies and in performing these tests in patients at a young age.

The use of contrast agents has a substantial impact on the diagnostic value of radiologic imaging and is commonly used for cardiac CT, cardiac catheterization, and CMR. The most feared complication remains contrast-induced nephropathy. In those with normal renal function, it is a self-limiting side effect. However, in those with baseline renal abnormality, especially with those that are diabetic; progression to chronic kidney disease remains high.

Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging uses a magnetic field to generate an image. As a result, the presence of metallic hardware remains a major risk during testing. In 2011, the first CMR compatible pacemaker became available, however, at this time a permanent pacemaker remains a contraindication to CMR. The same goes for implantable defibrillators.

Cardiac catheterization remains the most invasive modality and has the most potential for harmful side effects. These include as mentioned renal injury and possible renal failure from contrast exposure, myocardial infarction, stroke, induction of arrhythmias and vascular complications such as bleeding. There are no absolute contraindications to cardiac catheterization. However, relative contraindications do exist. They include decompensated heart failure, bacteremia, acute stroke, and acute renal failure.