Early management of primary injury and prevention of secondary insults such as hypoxia, hypotension, seizures, infection, etc. play a paramount role while managing these patients with herniation syndrome.

There is no silver bullet in managing raised ICP and associated herniation syndrome. The outcome depends on multimodality monitoring in managing primary insult and minimizing secondary insults.

All clinicians who manage patients with brain herniation should be familiar with its treatment and potential complications. Nurses play a vital role in the monitoring and should immediately consult with the physician if there are abnormal signs. Nurses also need to ensure that the patients have deep venous thrombosis and stress ulcer prophylaxis. Urinary output must be closely monitored to avoid over or under hydration. The blood pressure has to be adequate to perfuse the brain, and the ventilatory settings should be adjusted to provide hyperventilation. Pharmacists review the prescribed medications including barbiturates, mannitol, and antiseizure drugs, and check for drug interactions.

Targeted resuscitation, early specialist management, a timely intervention targeting primary insult, thereby minimizing secondary insults and target-driven care (ICP reduction below 20 mm Hg and CPP of around 60 mm Hg) are the cornerstones in efficiently managing patients with brain herniation.

Patient-centered 'care bundle' by an interprofessional team that includes physicians, specialty-trained nurses, and therapists, is vital during all stages of diagnosis and care, including the rehabilitative phase to achieve optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]