Primary and secondary causes of nonallergic rhinitis exist. Primary causes include eight subtypes: drug-induced rhinitis; gustatory rhinitis; hormonal induced rhinitis; nonallergic rhinitis with eosinophilia syndrome; senile rhinitis; atrophic rhinitis; cerebral spinal fluid leak; and idiopathic nonallergic rhinitis.

Drug-induced rhinitis is often further divided into three categories: neurogenic, inflammatory, and idiopathic. Numerous medications list rhinitis as a side effect. The most notable offenders are antihypertensive medications, erectile dysfunction medications, and some psychiatric medications. Overuse of topical decongestants leads to rhinitis medicamentosa by a different mechanism. Systemic anti-hypertensive drugs cause rhinitis through neurogenic mechanisms. They induce a parasympathetic dominance of the nasal mucosa by inhibiting norepinephrine release, which leads to congestion and rhinorrhea.

Hormone-induced rhinitis is associated with nasal congestion secondary to elevated estrogen and progesterone. Up to 65% of women self-report nasal congestion at some time during their pregnancy.

Occupational rhinitis (OR) is a nasal irritation and inflammation that occurs from workplace exposures. Causes of rhinitis in the workplace can classify as either allergic, irritant, or a combination. Occupational rhinitis causes often get subdivided into high molecular weight compounds such as plant or animal-derived proteins and low molecular weight compounds, which are often hapten associated. Certain occupations are at an increased risk: bakers, livestock breeders, industry workers, veterinarians, etc.