The dose of bupivacaine depends on the procedure, the vascularity of the tissue, the area, the number of segments blocked, the depth or duration of anesthesia needed, and the patient's physical condition. Bupivacaine may interact with ergot medications used for migraine headaches, blood thinners, antidepressants, or monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Immunologic reactions to local anesthetics are rare. Allergic reactions to preservative-free amide-type local anesthetics are rare and usually not reported. A true anaphylactic response appears more common with ester local anesthetics or preservatives; epinephrine-containing local anesthetics reactions are often misdiagnosed as allergic reactions. Patients may also react to preservatives such as methylparaben, which are included with local anesthetics.

Methemoglobinemia is typically associated with benzocaine or prilocaine; however, case reports exist implicating bupivacaine in rare instances. At low levels (1% to 3%), methemoglobinemia can be asymptomatic, but higher concentrations (10% to 40%) may accompany cyanosis, cutaneous discoloration (gray), tachypnea, dyspnea, exercise intolerance, fatigue, dizziness, syncope, and weakness.

Some more common adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, chills or shivering, headache, back pain, dizziness, sexual dysfunction, restlessness, anxiety, vertigo, tinnitus, blurry vision, tremors which may precede more severe adverse effects such as convulsions, myoclonic jerks, coma, and cardiovascular collapse.