The vertebral column derives from somites, part of the paraxial mesoderm.  More than forty pairs of somites develop in a craniocaudal fashion alongside the notochord during the process of body axis elongation. Under the direction of local factors secreted by the notochord, neural tube, ectoderm, and visceral mesoderm, the somites rapidly undergo endothelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) to form the sclerotome, dermatome, and myotome. The vertebral column ultimately derives from the mesenchymal sclerotome, whereas the dermomyotome forms muscle cells and overlying dermis.

During the fourth week of embryogenesis, sclerotome cells quickly develop around the notochord and the neural tube, signifying the initiation of the true vertebral column and skull base development. Under the direction of multiple factors produced by the notochord, segmentation of the column progresses. Cells that will ultimately form the annulus fibrosus and nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral discs coalesce between collections of sclerotome cells, and aggregations of these sclerotome cells will later fuse to give rise to independent vertebrae by the sixth week of embryonic development. Subsequently, ossification begins at three main ossification centers in the individual vertebra and will progress to five ossification centers through the first year of life. The two secondary centers of ossification that develop later will contribute to the formation of the vertebral growth plate.

The ossification centers of the odontoid process are particularly important since they are often misidentified as fractures in the pediatric population. The junction between the dens and the axis vertebral body does not fuse until around six years of age, whereas the secondary ossification centers appear around the age of three and fuse to the cranial aspect of the dens by age twelve.