A carefully collected history and thorough physical examination lay the foundation for a diagnosis. They also help decide on which investigations to carry out. The provider should inquire about any history of malignancy, organ transplantation, use of corticosteroids, or any condition necessitating prolonged immunosuppressive drugs, intravenous drug use, and the patient’s sexual practices to find out the cause of immunodeficiency. The history and physical examination findings will also give clues towards the probable etiology of the disease.

Routine laboratory investigations should be ordered, which include:

- Complete blood count (CBC) with differential. In the case of bacterial etiology, leukocytosis, along with the raised neutrophil count, might be seen, provided the patient does not have immunodeficiency due to neutropenia. In the case of viral pneumonia, the leukocyte count can be elevated, decreased, or normal.

- Inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and procalcitonin will be raised due to ongoing inflammation. Procalcitonin and CRP can also help predict the severity of pneumonia and prognosis early on in the disease.

- A chemistry panel will help in determining the patient’s hydration status.

- Sputum smear and culture should be obtained, if possible. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) may have to be performed in case of inadequate sputum production, for example, in the case of PCP or tuberculosis. A transbronchial lung biopsy can also be performed to reach a definitive diagnosis.

- Blood cultures should be obtained before initiating any antibiotics.

- CD4 count should be done in patients with HIV.

Imaging modalities for evaluation of pneumonia include:

- Chest X-ray (CXR). This is the first-line imaging of choice in the evaluation of a suspected case of pneumonia. Posteroanterior (PA) and lateral radiographs should be obtained. However, CXR may be normal for up to 72 hours in immunocompromised patients despite having symptoms.

- Computed tomography (CT) of the chest should be obtained in patients with high suspicion of pneumonia and normal findings on CXR. In neutropenic patients, CXR will have minimal or no abnormalities and so performing a CT scan is highly recommended.

Other investigations for specific etiologies include:

- Urine antigen testing for pneumococcus and Legionella

- ELISA and PCR for viruses such as Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV), Influenza A and B, and Cytomegalovirus (CMV)

- Serum antigen testing for Cryptococcus and Aspergillus

- Beta-D-glucan testing if a fungal pathogen is suspected.