Illness anxiety disorder is a diagnosis of exclusion. A comprehensive medical examination and appropriate testing according to the patient's symptoms should be conducted to exclude organic diseases before diagnosing a patient with IAD.

**The DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Illness Anxiety Disorder****:**

A. Excessive worry about having or developing a debilitating or life-threatening illness.

B. Somatic symptoms are absent. If somatic symptoms are present, they are only mildly distressing to the patient. If a medical condition is present or a high-risk for developing a medical condition is present (due to family history), the anxiety regarding the medical condition (or potential impending medical condition) is excessive.

C. Excessive concern and anxiety regarding health-related issues.

D. The individual exhibits disproportionate and redundant health-related behaviors, such as repeatedly checking his or her body for indications of disease.

E. Symptoms have been present for at least 6 months

F. The illness-related preoccupation is not better explained by another psychiatric condition

Specify if:

- Care-seeking type: Medical care, including physician visits or undergoing tests and procedures, is over-utilized.

- Care-avoidant type: Medical care is rarely used or avoided.

A structured, interviewer-administered assessment titled "The Health Preoccupation Diagnostic Interview" is available, which aids in the diagnosis of IAD. This tool allows the interviewer to clarify a patient's responses and assists in the diagnosis of IAD. It also differentiates IAD from somatic symptom disorder and healthy controls. The main limitations of this interview tool are that it is time-consuming and labor-intensive, and therefore is typically reserved for research purposes.

As described above, a diagnosis of a general medical condition does not preclude a diagnosis of IAD. A general medical illness and IAD can be comorbid diagnoses. When a medical disorder is present, IAD is considered when health-related anxieties or preoccupations are out of proportion or excessive relative to the general medical disease.