Benazepril is available in the market as oral tablets in 10 mg, 20 mg, 40 mg strength. It should be taken once or twice a day at consistent times, and patients can take it with or without food.

**Adults**

The recommended starting dosage is 10 mg once a day, with a maintenance dosage ranging from 20 to 40 mg per day. Benazepril should be taken once or twice a day at consistent times.

**Children**

The recommended starting dosage is 0.2 mg/kg once daily, and the maintenance dosage is 0.1 to 0.6 mg/kg once daily. Benazepril should be taken once a day at consistent times.

**Renal Impairment**

The recommended starting dose is 5 mg/day in one dosage in patients with renal impairment (CrCL LT 30ml/min). The dose is increased in a stepwise manner to achieve the desired blood pressure and the maximum daily dose is 40 mg daily.

**Pregnant Women**

Benazepril is contraindicated in pregnancy, and failure to cease an ACE inhibitor can result in fetal teratogenicity and death. Use of benazepril in the second and third trimesters is associated with fetal and neonatal injury, including hypotension, neonatal skull hypoplasia, anuria, reversible or irreversible renal failure, and death. Infants who have histories of in utero exposure to benazepril should be closely monitored for hypotension, oliguria, and hyperkalemia.

**Breastfeeding Women**

Minimal amounts of benazepril and its metabolites are detected in the breast milk of lactating women using benazepril. Maternal use of benazepril does not cause any adverse effects in breastfed infants.