As a non-prescription drug, calcium carbonate is easily accessible "over the counter" and often used. Proper patient education by clinicians and pharmacists is needed to avoid improper use. Symptomatic relief provided by calcium carbonate often masks underlying gastrointestinal disorders that will not improve by using the drug. Patient awareness is necessary to hasten the correct diagnosis and treatment. Furthermore, patients on polypharmacy need to understand calcium carbonate's drug interactions. Clinicians should advise their patients to take their medications at separate times of the day and limit additional calcium intake that could lead to overdose and milk-alkali syndrome. Working with a pharmacist to assist with medication reconciliation would be a prudent choice to prevent any adverse drug-drug interactions. Nursing can also work with the patient to answer questions, review appropriate dosing and ensure patient compliance. These are examples of how interprofessional teamwork and communication can improve patient results with calcium carbonate therapy, respective of the reason the patient takes it. [Level 5]

Proper clinician education on considerations when prescribing, monitoring, and stopping treatment is also necessary. Vigilance is essential, and routine monitoring should occur when prescribing calcium carbonate to patients with hyperphosphatemia due to the possibility of calcification of vascular tissues. Care is also necessary when prescribing calcium carbonate to infants and the elderly because of renal function changes. Additionally, calcium carbonate should not be coadministered with ceftriaxone because of an increased risk of end-organ failure.

Nurses and other healthcare team members can improve healthcare outcomes by ensuring patient compliance. Patient compliance is problematic with calcium carbonate because of its interactions, adverse effects, and frequency of administration. Calcium carbonate can be inconvenient because it must be taken alone, except for vitamin D and other drugs that do not require a low stomach pH. Calcium carbonate has many gastrointestinal side effects, especially for the elderly. Calcium carbonate prescriptions can also translate to a high pill burden, like patients with hyperphosphatemia that may require more than 17 doses per day. Encouraging patient compliance and proper scheduling would greatly help improve patients on polypharmacy, those with comorbidities, and those that need to limit dietary electrolytes.