**Skin**

**Epidermis**

- Seborrheic keratosis can appear similar to melanoma, squamous and basal cell carcinoma. In one study of 9204 lesions clinically diagnosed as SK, 0.7% were later histologically identified as melanoma.

- Dermatosis papulosa nigra (DPN) appears like pigmented forms of seborrheic keratoses, acrochordons, verrucae vulgaris, melanocytic elevated nevi, several vascular and adnexal lesions such as trichoepitheliomas, tricholemmomas, and syringomas.

- Inverted follicular keratosis can be mistaken for squamous cell carcinoma, keratoacanthoma, seborrheic keratosis, verruca vulgaris, and trichilemmoma. Pathophysiological and histopathological criteria such as whether the lesion is exophytic vs. downward growing, the presence of squamous eddies, basal palisading, and atypical and dysplastic cells can help distinguish among these lesions.

- Verruca vulgaris can appear similar to actinic keratosis, cutaneous horn, SCC, molluscum contagiosum, seborrheic keratosis, and dermatosis papulosa nigra.

- The differential diagnosis of molluscum contagiosum in children includes syringoma, closed comedones, and verruca vulgaris. In immunocompromised people, molluscum lesions may be larger and more atypical, and the differential diagnosis includes BCC, keratoacanthoma, cryptococcosis, and histoplasmosis.

- Squamous papilloma can look like nevi, fibroma, actinic keratosis/SCC, BCC, sebaceous cell carcinoma, verruca vulgaris, seborrheic keratosis, chalazion/hordeolum, epidermal inclusion cyst, molluscum contagiosum, and xanthelasma.

- Epidermal inclusion cysts. Milia are small epidermal inclusion cysts. Dermoid cysts of the skin, also called cutaneous dermoid cysts, appear similar but have histological differences.

- Cutaneous dermoid cysts of the eyelid and orbit need to be differentiated from epidermoid cysts, lipoma, pilar cysts, neurofibroma, lymphoma, abscess, trichilemmal cyst, and pilomatrixoma.

- The differential of keratoacanthoma includes SCC, BCC, amelanotic melanoma, molluscum contagiosum, prurigo nodularis, metastatic lesion to the skin, Merkel cell carcinoma, Kaposi sarcoma, lichen planus, fungal infection or mycobacterial infection, foreign body reaction, and verruca vulgaris.

- Cutaneous horn can be caused by several underlying benign and malignant lesions. The most common benign lesion to cause a cutaneous horn is seborrheic keratosis. The most common malignant lesion is squamous cell carcinoma, and the pre-malignant lesion is actinic keratosis. Lesions that may be similar in appearance to a cutaneous horn are pigmented filiform verruca.

**Melanocytic**

- Ephelis (freckles), lentigo simplex, solar lentigo, all types of nevi, and melanoma are on the differential when assessing a pigmented lesion of the eyelid. When differentiating melanoma from other lesions, it is important to realize that only 30 percent of melanomas develop from a pre-existing nevus. One assessment method that is commonly applied is evaluation for ABCDE criteria of malignancy (**A**symmetry, irregular**B**orders,**C**olor variation,**D**iameter greater than 6 mm,**E**volving). Other warning signs are if a lesion bleeds or oozes, causes itching or pain, or causes swelling beyond its borders, as well as the "Ugly Duckling" sign which considers a lesion that does not mirror surrounding ones suspicious for malignancy.

- Spitz and Reed nevi resemble melanoma in that they grow rapidly, can bleed or ooze, and can be multicolored, including dark black in the case of Reed nevi. Spitz nevi tend to occur in patients under 20 years of age, while melanoma is more common in older patients. Spitz nevi tend to be smaller (<6 mm) and more symmetrical. Biopsy and histopathological analyses are usually required to make a definitive diagnosis.

**Adnexal Lesions**

- External hordeolum needs to be differentiated from internal hordeolum, chalazion, preseptal cellulitis, BCC, SCC, and sebaceous gland carcinoma.

**Hair Follicles**

- Trichoepithelioma: BCC, intradermal nevus, trichoblastoma, syringoma, trichofolliculoma, trichilemmoma, milia, epidermoid cyst, molluscum contagiosum, pilomatrixoma, cylindroma, sebaceous hyperplasia, lupus pernio.

- Trichofolliculoma: BCC, epidermal inclusion cyst, trichoepithelioma

- Trichilemmoma: BCC, acne vulgaris, Bowen disease, Cowden disease, cutaneous horn, schwannoma, trichofolliculoma, trichoepithelioma, folliculoma.

- Pilomatrixoma: BCC, branchial cleft cyst, calcinosis cutis, chondromyxoid fibroma, melanoma, pseudolymphoma, SCC, T-cell lymphoma, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, Merkel cell carcinoma, metastatic carcinomas, schwannoma, dermoid cyst, eruptive vellus hair cysts, follicular infundibulum tumor, folliculitis, folliculoma, insect bites, keratoacanthoma, osteoblastoma, osteofibrous dysplasia, osteoma cutis, trichilemmoma, trichoepithelioma, trichofolliculoma, tuberculosis.

**Sweat Glands**

- Apocrine and eccrine hidrocystoma: BCC, blue nevus, melanoma, milia, eccrine hidrocystoma, epidermoid cyst, syringoma.

- Trichilemmal (pilar) cysts: cutaneous lipomas, dermoid cyst, epidermal inclusion cyst.

- Syringoma has a differential diagnosis of trichoepitheliomas, BCC, and xanthelasma.

- Pleomorphic adenoma has a differential diagnosis of chalazion, dermoid cyst, and epidermal inclusion cyst.

- Eccrine spiradenoma has a differential diagnosis of epidermal inclusion cyst, schwannoma, and dermatofibroma.

**Accessory Lacrimal Glands**

- Pleomorphic adenoma and oncocytoma, when in the glands of Wolfring or Krausse, may appear as a deep skin lesion such as chalazion, dermoid cyst, or epidermal inclusion cyst. When it presents on the caruncle nevus, BCC, SCC, and granuloma are also on the differential.

**Sebaceous Glands**

- All sebaceous gland lesions (chalazion, internal and external hordeolum, Zeis cyst, sebaceous cyst, sebaceous gland hyperplasia, and adenoma) need to be differentiated from each other.

- All sebaceous gland lesions need to be differentiated from malignant lesions of the eyelid, including BCC, SCC, and sebaceous cell carcinoma.

**Stromal Lesions**

Xanthelasma is usually easy to differentiate from other skin lesions; however, at times may appear similar and may need to be differentiated from xanthogranuloma, syringoma, palpebral sarcoidosis, sebaceous hyperplasia, Erdheim-Chester disease, and lipoid proteinosis.

**Vascular Lesions**

- Pyogenic granuloma can appear similar to hemangioendothelioma, capillary hemangioma, Kaposi sarcoma, conjunctival Spitz nevus, and neurofibroma.

- Capillary hemangioma needs to be differentiated from nevus flammeus (port-wine stain)/Sturge-Weber syndrome, lymphangioma or other vascular malformations, and metastatic neuroblastoma.

- Angiofibroma can be confused with acne vulgaris, intradermal melanocytic nevi, acrochordons, basal cell carcinoma, and adnexal tumors.

- Nevus flammeus (port wine stain) can appear similar to salmon patches of the face, infantile hemangiomas and cavernous hemangioma.  It also needs to be differentiated from several syndromes, including Sturge-Weber, Klippel-Treneunay, Cobb, Proteus, Rubinstein-Taybi, and Megalencephaly capillary malformation polymicrogyria syndrome.

**Neurogenic**

- Plexiform and solitary neurofibroma, as well as schwannoma, should be differentiated from other deep neoplastic processes of the lid that include chalazion, pleomorphic adenoma, oncocytoma, sebaceous cell carcinoma, and eyelid lipoma.

**Lipomatous**

- Lipoma should be differentiated from plexiform and solitary neurofibroma, schwannoma, chalazion, pleomorphic adenoma, oncocytoma, sebaceous cell carcinoma, orbital fat prolapse, lacrimal gland inflammation, tumor, or prolapse.