**Dystrophic Calcification**

Dystrophic calcification is the most common type of calcinosis cutis. Serum calcium and phosphorus levels are normal. This condition is characterized by tissue damage that leads to the release of phosphate-binding proteins by dying cells. The phosphate-binding protein binds phosphate and results in calcification. This tissue damage also results in chronic inflammation and vascular hypoxia. High mitochondrial calcium and phosphate levels are released that further lead to crystal formation and cell necrosis. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF), IL-6, IL-1B, contribute to the formation of the calcium salts. The calcium salts are composed of hydroxyapatite and amorphous calcium phosphate. Dystrophic calcification is associated with diseases that lead to connective tissue damage. The most common diseases are systemic sclerosis, dermatomyositis, and systemic lupus erythematosus. It has also been reported in rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, and Sjogren syndrome. Rarely it is seen in porphyria cutanea tarda. Dystrophic calcification is seen in elastic pseudoxanthoma, Werner syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos, pilomatrixoma, trichilemmal cyst, basal cell carcinoma, trichoepitheliomas, pancreatic and lupus panniculitis, onchocerciasis, cysticercosis, histoplasmosis, cryptococcosis, trauma, and burns.

**Metastatic Calcification**

Metastatic calcification is deposition of calcium salts in the presence of abnormal serum calcium and phosphorus levels. Calcium deposition occurs when the calcium phosphate product exceeds 70 mg^2/dL^2. These abnormal levels precipitate the calcium salts and resolve with correction of the calcium and phosphorus levels. These deposits are usually located in periarticular regions. The most common cause of metastatic calcification is chronic kidney failure. Other causes include hypervitaminosis D, hyperparathyroidism, sarcoidosis, milk-alkali syndrome, and malignant neoplasms. Milk-alkali syndrome occurs with excessive ingestion of foods or antacids that contain calcium.

**Idiopathic Calcification**

Idiopathic calcification occurs when there is deposition of calcium salts without underlying tissue damage or abnormal calcium or phosphorus levels. There are three types: familial tumoral calcinosis, subepidermal calcified nodules, and scrotal calcinosis. Familial tumoral calcinosis is seen in healthy adolescent patients. There is increased uptake of phosphate in the proximal tubule of the kidney. Calcification occurs around major joints and can be subcutaneous or intramuscular. Subepidermal calcified nodules or Winder nodular calcinosis presents in children and can present at birth. It occurs on the head and extremities as solitary, hard, white-yellow papules. Scrotal calcinosis presents as nodules and masses on the scrotum. There is controversy about its etiology and whether the nodules are from calcification of epidermal cysts. Patients are usually asymptomatic, but pruritis or white chalky discharge can occur.

**Iatrogenic Calcification**

Iatrogenic calcification occurs in patients that are receiving calcium or phosphate containing substances. It has been seen with intravenous calcium gluconate, calcium chloride, and para-aminosalicylic acid during the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis. It is also seen after administration of electrodes with pastes containing calcium chloride for electroencephalography. Tumor lysis syndrome and calcinosis cutis after organ transplant fall under this category. Iatrogenic calcification can be prevented by diluting the calcium solution and lowering phosphorus levels before administration.