Simply put, the manifestation of angina is the result of an imbalance between the myocardial oxygen supply and the myocardial oxygen demand. It is important to understand the factors that contribute to each of these measures.

Endothelial cells line the coronary arteries; these cells are responsible for regulating vascular tone and preventing intravascular thrombosis. Any disruption in these two functions can lead to coronary heart disease. Multiple mechanisms can result in injury or impairment of the endothelial lining. These mechanisms include, but are not limited to, stress, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, viruses, bacteria, and immune complexes. Endothelial injury triggers an immune response, which ultimately leads to fibrous tissue formation. Smooth muscle remodeling/fibrous caps can lead to coronary artery stenosis or even acute coronary syndrome.

Coronary artery stenosis is the most common cause of myocardial ischemia. During times of increased myocardial oxygen demand, the stenosis prevents adequate myocardial oxygen supply. Four main factors contribute to oxygen demand: heart rate, systolic blood pressure, myocardial wall tension, and myocardial contractility. In states of increased demand such as illness, stress, and exercise – we rely on the body’s ability to up-regulate myocardial oxygen supply appropriately.

The four main factors that contribute to myocardial oxygen supply include coronary artery diameter and tone, collateral blood flow, perfusion pressure, and heart rate. While coronary artery stenosis is the most common, other conditions can lead to a decreased myocardial oxygen supply. These examples include, but are not limited, to coronary artery vasospasm, embolism, dissection, and micro-vascular disease.

When the myocardial oxygen demand exceeds the myocardial oxygen supply, this will often manifest with symptoms.  Myocardial ischemia stimulates chemosensitive and mechanoreceptive receptors within the cardiac muscle fibers and surrounding the coronary vessels. The activation of these receptors triggers impulses through the sympathetic afferent pathways from the heart to the cervical and thoracic spine. Each spinal level has a corresponding dermatome; the discomfort described by the patient will often follow the specific dermatomal pattern.

It is important to conduct a thorough workup and evaluation to determine the cause of angina in each individual, understanding the etiology will allow for medical optimization and appropriate management of risk factors.