Accelerated protocols for medically supervised management of withdrawal aim to reduce the transition time to naltrexone treatment, thereby reducing patient inconvenience, lengths of inpatient or residential stay, and treatment costs. This method has not found widespread use. During a supervised naltrexone-accelerated withdrawal, a “naloxone challenge” can be performed to ensure a complete system depletion of exogenous opioids prior to full-dose oral naltrexone or extended-release intramuscular naltrexone (Vivitrol). A low naloxone starting dose of just 0.1 mg intravenous is given, and the patient is monitored for up to 30 minutes for signs of withdrawal. Typically, symptoms present within 1-5 minutes. A doubled dose of 0.2 mg follows, and the patient undergoes observation. Thirty minutes following, a final dose of 0.4 mg is given, and if the patient is asymptomatic, the assumption is that the patient can safely receive naltrexone without fear of withdrawal symptoms. The extended-release injectable version of naltrexone has found increased favor among practitioners for opiate maintenance treatment as it only needs dosing every four weeks.

Buprenorphine, a partial mu agonist and kappa antagonist, can be combined with naloxone for effective therapy in a medically supervised opioid withdrawal. Naloxone, when combined with buprenorphine, has poor oral availability,

**Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act**

The Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act provision updates federal guidelines to expand the availability of evidence-based treatment to address the opioid epidemic. The MAT Act empowers all health care providers with a standard controlled substance license to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder (OUD), just as they prescribe other essential medications. The MAT Act is intended to help destigmatize a standard of care for OUD and will integrate substance use disorder treatment across healthcare settings.

As of December 2022, the MAT Act has eliminated the DATA-Waiver (X-Waiver) program. All DEA-registered practitioners with Schedule III authority may now prescribe buprenorphine for OUD in their practice if permitted by applicable state law, and SAMHSA encourages them to do so. Prescribers who were registered as DATA-Waiver prescribers will receive a new DEA registration certificate reflecting this change; no action is needed on the part of registrants.

There are no longer any limits on the number of patients with OUD that a practitioner may treat with buprenorphine. Separate tracking of patients treated with buprenorphine or prescriptions written is no longer required.

Pharmacy staff can now fill buprenorphine prescriptions using the prescribing authority's DEA number and does not need a DATA 2000 waiver from the prescriber. However, depending on the pharmacy, the dispensing software may still require the X-Waiver information in order to proceed. Practitioners are still required to comply with any applicable state limits regarding the treatment of patients with OUD.  Contact information for State Opioid Treatment Authorities can be found here: https://www.samhsa.gov/medicationassisted-treatment/sota.