Patient history should focus on the timeline of the pain, radiation of pain, aggravating factors, and inciting events. Classically, symptomatic cervical spondylosis presents as one or more of the following three primary clinical syndromes:

- **Axial Neck Pain**
- Commonly complain of stiffness and pain in the cervical spine that is most severe in the upright position and relieved with bed rest when removing the load from the neck
- Neck motion, especially in hyperextension and side-bending, typically increases the pain
- In upper and lower cervical spine disease, patients may report radiating pain into the back of the ear or occiput versus radiating pain into the superior trapezius or periscapular musculature, respectively
- Occasionally, patients can present with atypical symptoms of cervical angina such as jaw pain or chest pain

- **Cervical Radiculopathy**
- Radicular symptoms usually follow a myotomal distribution depending on the nerve root(s) involved and can present as unilateral or bilateral neck pain, arm pain, scapular pain, paresthesia, and arm or hand weakness
- Pain is exacerbated by head tilt toward the affected side or by hyperextension and side-bending toward the affected side

- **Cervical Myelopathy**
- Typically has an insidious onset with or without neck pain (frequently absent)
- Can initially present with hand weakness and clumsiness, resulting in the inability to complete tasks requiring fine motor coordination (e.g., buttoning a shirt, tying shoelaces, picking up small objects)
- Frequent reports of gait instability and unexplained falls
- Urinary symptoms (i.e., incontinence) are rare and typically appear late in disease progression

On the first appearance, the patient may appear immobile and stiff at the head and neck due to increasing axial neck pain with cervical spine movement. Tender “trigger” points are frequently present within the superior trapezius muscles, cervical paraspinal muscles, and/or periscapular muscles.

If there is radiating pain down the upper limb with head extension and ipsilateral head rotation to the affected side, then it is considered a positive Spurling test for cervical radiculopathy. In a 2011 study by Shabat et al., the Spurling test was found to be 95% sensitive and 94% specific for diagnosing nerve root pathology in 257 patients as confirmed by cervical spine CT and/or MRI

Electric shock-like sensations radiating down the spine and into the extremities with cervical flexion is a positive Lhermitte's sign, which is concerning for cervical spondylotic myelopathy (CSM). A more specific sign for CSM is Hoffman’s sign, which is elicited by flicking the patient’s distal phalanx of the middle finger and observing reflexive flexion of the thumb and/or index finger.

All physical exams should include a meticulous evaluation of bilateral extremities for muscle strength, sensation, and deep tendon reflexes in order to look for weakness in a myotomal distribution, sensory deficits in a dermatomal pattern, and reflex changes, respectively; all of which can help to identify the compromised nerve root(s) and/or myelopathy.

The clinician can evaluate the patient’s gait and balance with a toe-to-heel walk test and Romberg’s test. In the latter, the patient stands with eyes closed, and arms held forward. An increased loss of balance is interpreted as a positive Romberg’s test and is indicative of dysfunction involving the dorsal columns of the spinal cord.

The presence of upper motor neuron signs (e.g., spasticity, hyperreflexia, sustained clonus, extensor Babinski response) should raise the examiner’s clinical suspicion for spinal cord compromise. Another screening test for CSM is the grip and release test. Typically, a patient can make a fist and release it 20 times in 10 seconds, with decreasing cut-off values with increasing age and lower cut-off values in females compared to males.