Diabetes mellitus is characterized by insulin deficiency and increased plasma glucagon levels, which can be normalized by insulin replacement.

Insulin deficiency and increased counterregulatory hormones also lead to the release of free fatty acids into circulation from adipose tissue (lipolysis), which undergo hepatic fatty acid oxidation to ketone bodies (beta-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate), resulting in ketonemia and metabolic acidosis.

Diuresis induced by hyperglycemia, dehydration, hyperosmolarity, and electrolyte imbalance results in a decrease of glomerular filtration. Due to worsening renal function, hyperglycemia/hyperosmolality worsens. Potassium utilization by skeletal muscle is also impaired by hyperosmolality and impaired insulin function. This results in intracellular potassium depletion. Osmotic diuresis also leads to loss of potassium resulting in low total body potassium. The potassium level in patients with DKA varies, and a patient's normal plasma potassium level might indicate low total body potassium.

New data suggests that hyperglycemia leads to a severe inflammatory state and an increase in proinflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-beta, -6, and -8), C-reactive protein, lipid peroxidation, and reactive oxygen species, as well as cardiovascular risk factors, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and free fatty acids in the absence of apparent infection or cardiovascular pathology. After insulin therapy and IV fluid hydration, the pro-inflammatory cytokines return to normal values within 24 hours.