**Prognostication Tools**

Recursive partitioning analysis (RPA) developed by Gaspar et al. of the radiation therapy oncology group uses four different parameters: the Karnofsky performance status (KPS), the control of primary tumor, extracerebral disease, and age to classify patients into three different groups. While patients belonging to classes I and II are advised local control with either surgery, radiotherapy, or a combination of the two, those with RPA class III are advised best supportive care only. Disease-specific Gaspar analysis also uses the primary location of the tumor as an additional parameter in prognostication. While Karnofsky performance status and the number of metastasis remain constant across the disease spectrum, other factors differ across diseases. The presence or absence of extracellular matrix has been shown to impact prognosis in disease-specific graded prognostic assessment tools developed for use in gastric and colorectal adenocarcinomas and lung cancer.

There have been recent attempts to include molecular alterations in the tumor, as can be evidenced by the development of RPA scores for lung cancer using molecular markers such as EGFR mutations or ALK rearrangement, in addition to age, KPS, presence of extracranial metastasis, and the number of brain metastasis. The molecular factors found to have prognostic significance in breast cancer and melanoma include the ER/PR and HER2/neu status and the presence of the BRAFV600E mutation, respectively.

**Imaging and Response Assessment**

A close assessment of the various criteria used in the assessment of response to treatment in those with CNS metastasis (WHO, RECIST, and Mac Donald criteria) reveals critical gaps in understanding of the definition of disease status and assessment of response to treatment. Issues that are relevant in assessing the extent of disease and response to treatment upon imaging include modality and frequency of assessment, choice of method of assessment (linear, two dimensional and volumetric), differentiation between tumor-related and treatment-related change, the definition of quantum of change that defines treatment response or disease progression, the utility of corticosteroid use, degree of concordance between signs and symptoms and changes on imaging and the impact of systemic disease status on CNS disease progression.

The response assessment in neuro-oncology brain metastases (RANO-BM) committee reported consensus criteria, which defined measurable metastases as contrast-enhancing lesions less than 10 mm in diameter, and are based on the sum of the longest diameter of the target lesions (up to five lesions).

**Response Assessment in Target Lesions**

- Complete response: The disappearance of all lesions, which is sustained for at least four weeks, with no appearance of new lesions, without the use of corticosteroids, with stable clinical status or clinical improvement in the patient's condition.

- Partial response: 30 percent reduction in the sum of the longest diameter of target lesions from the baseline, which is used as a reference, which is sustained for at least four weeks with no new lesions, with stable corticosteroid use, stable clinical status, or clinical improvement.

- Progressive disease: At least a 20 percent increase in the sum of the longest lesion diameter, with the smallest sum on the study taken as reference. A single lesion should increase by a diameter of at least 5 mm to constitute progression.

**Response Assessment for Non-target Lesions**

These lesions include metastases with the longest diameter of less than 10 mm, lesions with borders that cannot be measured accurately, dural metastases, bony metastasis in the calvarium, cystic lesions only, and leptomeningeal metastasis has also been defined. These were not based upon measurement of individual lesions, but on qualitative measurements of evidence of disease progression on follow up imaging. Unequivocal progression of non-target lesions may constitute a basis for discontinuation of treatment. Pseudoprogression may be related to treatment response and requires advanced imaging investigations (in addition to routine MRI imaging).

Chemical exchange saturation transfer (CEST) imaging is a novel quantitative MRI technique that quantifies compounds, such as amide protons, amine protons, and fast exchanging hydroxyl protons, considered undetectable during structural MRI or even conventional MR spectroscopy. The principle underlying that technique involves the transfer of magnetization from aliphatic protons to labile protons known as the relayed nuclear Overhauser effect (rNOE). Reduced CEST signals and changes in the width NOE tumor peak and amplitude of peak on normal-appearing white matter, which predicted subsequent alterations in tumor volume, have been used to predict SRS response. CEST metrics involving rNOE and amide tumor magnetization ratios have been used to differentiate treatment-associated changes from tumor progression and assess treatment responses in areas such as the brainstem (which are not amenable to biopsy).

A major challenge to the inclusion of patients in clinical trials is the lack of standardization in measuring the extent of response assessment. According to RANO-BM criteria, patients in whom the metastases' size is less than 10 mm or 5 mm in diameter may be deemed to have an unmeasurable disease. Standardization of techniques involved in MRI acquisition parameters, including optimization of signal to noise ratios and specific contrast to noise ratios is necessary.

Definitions of survival which have been proposed by the RANO-BM consortium in relation to radiological response assessment in clinical trials include bicompartmental progression-free survival (includes CNS lesions, distant CNS lesions, and non-CNS lesions), CNS progression-free survival, which involves local and distant CNS lesions, non-CNS progression-free survival includes non-CNS lesions only and CNS local progression-free survival which includes CNS lesions only. The inclusion of other parameters that measure the HRQoL, the quantum of corticosteroid use, the progression of clinical neurological symptoms, and neurocognitive function also constitutes important parameters for judging response assessment in clinical trials.