Following investigations are required to assess the infection and follow up with treatment:

- 
**Gestational age estimation**

Ultrasound estimation in the first trimester is preferred over the LMP method for calculating the expected date of delivery (EDD).

- 
**CD4 cell counts**

Done on the first visit and then every trimester during pregnancy.

One physiological effect of pregnancy is a fall in the absolute CD4 count, but the percentage CD4 count remains unchanged and may be monitored instead. However, absolute CD4 counts are still used to check, e.g., ART response.

- 
**Viral load measurement**

According to the Panel of Antiretroviral Guidelines for Adults and Adolescents, viral load should be assessed at the time of the initial visit, again at the time of starting ART, two weeks after starting ART and then monthly until the patient achieves complete suppression of the virus after which it can be reduced to testing once every three months for the remaining pregnancy duration. At 34-36 weeks, another estimation of the viral RNA load is made to decide the mode of delivery and gestational age for delivery.

- 
**Drug resistance testing**

In the United States, the Panel on Treatment of HIV-infected Pregnant Women and Prevention of Perinatal Transmission recommends doing drug resistance testing before ART initiation and modification in all cases where the HIV RNA levels are >500 to 1000 copies/mL which is the threshold for drug resistance testing.

In cases where a pregnant HIV positive woman has never received ART, especially if she is presenting late in her pregnancy, ART should be started before the drug resistance testing results are available and can be later modified accordingly.

- 
**ART toxicity monitoring**

The Panel of Antiretroviral Guidelines for Adults and Adolescents in the United States suggests doing CBC, BUN, creatinine, and liver function tests before starting ART. These should then be repeated every three to six months. Additionally, urinalysis is recommended before starting a tenofovir-containing ART regimen and then every six months.

- 
**HLA-B*5701 testing**

This should be done if abacavir-containing ART regimen is to be initiated

- 
**Gestational diabetes screening**

For HIV positive pregnant women on ART regimens containing protease inhibitors, GDM screening should be performed earlier than the usual recommended age of 24-28 weeks because protease inhibitors tend to increase glucose intolerance in HIV-infected individuals.

- 
**Viral hepatitis testing**

Because of frequent coinfection, HIV positive pregnant women are screened for both HBV and HCV. In addition to the usual anti-HCV IgG and IgM, a patient with CD4 counts below 100/microL, and having a history of HCV risk factors should be given PCR testing for HCV RNA because serological testing for HCV can be falsely negative.

If the patient is HBV-negative, give them the recombinant HBV vaccination (considered safe in pregnancy). If HBV infection is confirmed, antivirals having activity against both HIV and HBV can be given.

Educate HCV negative patients about the risk factors for HCV. Acute HCV infection during pregnancy in HIV infected women increases the risk of vertical transmission of HCV to the fetus.

- 
**Tuberculosis testing**

Testing for tuberculosis is recommended for all patients with diagnosed HIV infection.

- 
**STI screening**

Because of the risk of stillbirth, low birth weight, premature preterm rupture of membranes, and preterm delivery, HIV positive pregnant women are screened for syphilis, gonorrhea, chlamydia, and trichomonas infection. Syphilis infection of HIV infected pregnant women has been found to increase vertical transmission risk of HIV.

- 
**Toxoplasma and CMV testing**

Unlike in HIV-negative women, serological testing for Toxoplasma gondii is recommended in HIV infected pregnant women. If T. gondii IgG is positive and CD4 count below 100/mL, then suppressive therapy is started.

Most HIV positive pregnant women have already been exposed to CMV, so no CMV serological testing is recommended.

- 
**Vaccination assessment**

In addition to the Tdap and influenza immunizations routinely given during pregnancy, HIV positive pregnant women should also receive pneumococcal and Hepatitis A & B (according to past infection status) vaccinations.

- 
**General Counselling**

This should include counseling about modifiable behaviors, which can lead to increased chances of perinatal HIV transmission, e.g., tobacco, alcohol, illicit drug use, unprotected sex in a non-monogamous relationship. Regular condom use should be encouraged.

- 
**Psychiatric evaluation**

Evaluate the patient for any history of difficulty adhering to medication regimens, depression, anxiety, and domestic/intimate partner violence. These should prompt the need for supportive care.

- 
**Evaluation for opportunistic infections**

TMP-SMX is given to pregnant patients with CD4 cell count below 100/mL (Toxoplasma gondii and PCP) and 200/miroL (PCP) for prophylaxis against these opportunistic infections. This is done after discussing the possible teratogenicity risk of TMP-SMX with the patient.

Azithromycin is used as a prophylaxis against disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex infection in pregnant patients with CD4 cell count <50/mL.