It is vital to obtain a thorough history and carry out a detailed physical examination before choosing any diagnostic measures. This includes but is not limited to, gathering the patient’s personal history, occupation, travel, place of origin, recent infections, or treatments. Certain risk factors promote the development of liver abscesses, such as diabetes, cirrhosis, male gender, elderly, immunocompromised states, and people with proton pump inhibitor usage.

After gathering a history, the review of systems and physical examination can provide a lot of additional information. On analysis of systems, patients may complain of the following symptoms: fever, chills, night sweats, malaise, nausea or vomiting, right shoulder pain (due to phrenic nerve irritation), right upper quadrant pain, cough, dyspnea, anorexia, or recent unexplained weight loss. Fever is present in 90% and abdominal pain in about 50-75% of patients.

On physical examination, a patient can have hepatomegaly with an enlarged mass and jaundice. Although Charcot triad (right upper quadrant pain, jaundice, and fever) is a sign of cholangitis, the physician will need to consider liver abscess as a differential.

In the case of Klebsiella liver abscesses, in addition to the symptoms mentioned above, it also sends septic emboli to the eye, meninges, and brain. Therefore symptoms of these organ systems can be present, and it can last after the liver abscess is drained.

In the case of Echinococcus infection, there is an initial asymptomatic phase in a child. Years later, some of these patients will show clinical symptoms from reactivation of the infection.