# Continuing Education Activity

Hot flashes are sudden-onset, spontaneous, and episodic sensations of warmth usually felt on the chest, neck, and face immediately followed by an outbreak of sweating. They are the most common reason women seek medical care during the perimenopausal period, especially if the symptoms impair their quality of life. The onset of hot flashes can be associated with perspiration, heart palpitations, headache, weakness, fatigue, faintness, and anxiety, and they can be triggered by warm environments, hot drinks, or emotional stress. This activity reviews the presentation, evaluation, and management of hot flashes and stresses the role of an interprofessional team approach to the care of affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of hot flashes. 
- Outline the history and physical exam findings typically seen in patients with hot flashes.
- Explain the management options for hot flashes. 
- Describe the modalities to improve care coordination among interprofessional team members in order to improve outcomes for patients affected by hot flashes.

# Introduction

Hot flashes are sudden-onset, spontaneous, and episodic sensations of warmth usually felt on the chest, neck, and face immediately followed by an outbreak of sweating. They are the most common reason women seek medical care during the perimenopausal period, especially if the symptoms impair quality of life.

# Etiology

The exact pathogenesis of hot flashes is unknown, but studies indicate that VMS (vasomotor symptoms) results from a central thermoregulatory function defect.

# Epidemiology

Hot flashes are among the most common types of menopausal vasomotor symptoms (VMS), affecting up to 74% of perimenopausal women.

# History and Physical

Screening for hot flashes should take place in all perimenopausal women. Hot flashes should also receive treatment if they impair a woman's quality of life, particularly daytime activities and sleep. At the same time, many women have hot flashes and do not need treatment. In the most severe cases, a woman can awake several times during the night, which, in the long term, can cause cognitive and anxiety disorders.

# Treatment / Management

Several treatment options exist, with only a few being FDA approved. When selecting a treatment option, the healthcare provider should encourage the safest option first, such as lifestyle changes, and then proceed to the following hormonal and/or non-hormonal treatments. The most effective treatment for hot flashes is systemic estrogen, with a 75% reduction of VMS frequency.

The Women's Health Initiative (WHI) is the largest study of its kind that evaluated hormone therapy risks in menopausal women. It was a multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of women age 50 to 79 years at baseline, designed to assess HT’s impact on cardiovascular disease. Initial findings of the WHI reported that combined HT was not cardioprotective.

Since 2002, after the initial findings of the WHI were published, the use of HT decreased substantially (as much as 80%) as patients and providers turned to alternate forms of managing VMS.

Prescription nonhormonal therapies include:

- Gabapentin/pregabalin

- Clonidine

- SSRIs (paroxetine)

- SNRIs (venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine)

These medications are more effective than placebos but not as effective as hormonal therapy.

Lifestyle changes such as exercise, layering clothes, maintaining lower room temperature, drinking cool drinks, and avoiding caffeine and alcohol are reasonable to consider for the management of VMS even if there aren't conclusive studies proving their efficacy.

# Differential Diagnosis

Hot flashes are most commonly associated with perimenopause and menopause. In any woman presenting with hot flashes, whether she is perimenopausal age or status-post surgical or medically induced menopause, pathology must be ruled out as the cause. Menopause can be confirmed by the cessation of menses for at least 12 months and estradiol and FSH levels.

The differential diagnosis for hot flashes includes

- Carcinoid tumors

- Systemic mastocytosis

- Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid

- Pheochromocytoma

- Hyperthyroidism

- Acromegaly

- Idiopathic anaphylaxis

Medications that can also cause hot flashes include

- Depo leuprolide

- Clomiphene

- Tamoxifen

- Raloxifene

- Tricyclic antidepressants

- Monoamine oxidase inhibitors

- Calcium channel blockers

- Serotonin uptake inhibitors

- Chemotherapy

Hot flashes are a common (up to 80%) side effect in women taking tamoxifen.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of hot flashes is good. Most women's hot flashes will resolve after 5 years. Only about 10% of women will have symptoms past 10 years.

# Complications

Nighttime hot flashes can awaken the patient and, over time, cause long-term sleep disruption. Research suggests that women with hot flashes may demonstrate an increased risk of cardiac disease and osteoporosis than women who do not have them.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

A patient's first source of information should be their primary care provider or obstetrician and gynecologist. Patients can access patient education material online at the American College of Obstetricians, the American Society of Reproductive Specialists, and the North American Menopause Society.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Hot flashes are the most prevalent vasomotor symptom that presents during perimenopause.

- The only FDA-approved nonhormonal prescription medication to treat hot flashes is low-dose paroxetine of 7.5 mg daily.

- Nonhormonal nonprescription therapies, including black cohosh, red clover isoflavones, soy extract, and Chinese herbs, are not effective.

- The Women's Health Initiative (WHI) found that combined HT raises the risk of breast cancer, venous thromboembolism, stroke, is not cardioprotective, and does not decrease mortality risk.

- The evidence is lacking to support the safety, effectiveness, and superiority of compounded bioidentical hormones over conventional hormone therapy.

- Although some SSRIs and SNRIs are safe and effective in treating hot flashes in patients with breast cancer, caution is necessary when used with tamoxifen. Gabapentin and clonidine can be alternatives in these patients.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Shared decision-making and communication between the gynecologist, nurse practitioner, primary care provider, nursing staff, pharmacy, and patient are critical in managing hot flashes. The patient should be well educated on her diagnosis, what to expect during the perimenopausal period, and her treatment options, including the risks, benefits, and alternatives of each therapy. They should receive counsel that HT is proved to be safe and effective in the treatment of VMS. They should receive education about the FDA approval status of the different forms of therapies. All these approaches are best handled by an interprofessional team incorporating the personnel outlined above to deliver optimal patient care during menopause. Ambulatory care nurses are often the first contact for patients. After diagnosis, nurses should monitor patients and provide follow up to the interprofessional team. Pharmacists educate patients about side effects, compliance, and check for drug interactions [Level 5]