Diagnosis of focal nodular hyperplasia consists of biopsy or imaging consistent with the characteristics of FNH and exclusion of other similar lesions. Lab work is largely unremarkable in the setting of focal nodular hyperplasia.

Ultrasonography is most often the first imaging modality used in the evaluation of liver lesions including focal nodular hyperplasia, but lacks an appropriate sensitivity (twenty percent) to be utilized as the gold standard imaging modality. FNH often appears as an isoechoic or hypoechoic mass with a hyperechoic central scar relative to the liver parenchyma.

Triphasic helical computed tomography with and without contrast, although not the gold standard imaging modality, is a cheap and reliable imaging modality. Pre-contrast, focal nodular hyperplasia appears hypodense or isodense with a central scar evident in approximately one-third of cases. FNH appears hyperdense during the hepatic arterial phase and isodense during the portal venous phase rendering the lesion indistinguishable from the rest of the liver parenchyma.

With magnetic resonance imaging, focal nodular hyperplastic lesions appear isointense to hypointense lesions on T1-weighted images and isointense to hyperintense on T2-weighted images. Similar to CT imaging, the lesion enhances on arterial phase images and is relatively obfuscated on venous and delayed phase images. Sensitivity and specificity of 99% and 100%, respectively, may be achieved with hepatobiliary contrast media consisting of administration of gadobenate dimeglumine. Thus, MRI with hepatobiliary scintigraphy is the best test to diagnose focal nodular hyperplasia.