Though the condition was first described in the literature as early as 1887, the etiology remains elusive. The advent of muscle electrophysiology and modern neuroimaging techniques such as MRI aided in the understanding that underlying abnormality in DRS is the absence or partial development of the abducent nucleus and nerve, resulting in aberrant innervation of the lateral rectus by the oculomotor nerve.

Myofibers of extraocular muscles (EOMs) are developed by a condensation of the mesoderm around the eye. When the embryo is 7 mm long, the EOMs form one mass supplied by the oculomotor nerve. When the embryo is 8–12 mm long, this mass divides into separate muscles. It is at this stage that the fourth and sixth nerves arrive. Due to disturbing influences of unknown origin, the abducent nerve fails to develop, causing branches of the oculomotor nerve to remain in contact with the muscle mass that would later become the lateral rectus.

Considering the other ocular and systemic anomalies associated with DRS, these disturbing influences are believed to affect the developing structures of the body between the 4 and 8 weeks of gestation.

Skeletal abnormalities include cleft palate, limb deformities, phocomelia, vertebral anomalies, and spina bifida. Auricular abnormalities include preauricular tags, pinna defects, and sensorineural deafness. Neural defects involve the third, fourth, and sixth cranial nerves. Ocular associations of DRS are numerous and include epidermal dermoids, ptosis, dysplasia of the iris stroma, iris heterochromia, pupillary anomalies, cataracts, colobomas, optic nerve hypoplasias, morning glory disk, and nystagmus.

DRS is commonly a sporadic disorder, but in 10% of cases, it may be familial. Both autosomal dominant and recessive forms of DRS have been documented. In cases of isolated DRS, the DURS1 gene on chromosome 2q31 has been identified.

DRS is also associated with mutations in the homeobox A1 (HOXA1) gene, which affects the creation or survival of cranial nerve neurons.