Neural crest cells (NCCs) are a vertebrate-specific multipotent population of migratory cells that have a fundamental role in craniofacial development. They arise secondary to interactions between the neuroectoderm of the fusing neural tube and the surface ectoderm in the early stages of embryogenesis. These transient cells detach from the ectoderm through a delamination process, during which NCCs undergo an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. They migrate throughout the entire embryo, where they accumulate and proliferate. NCCs gather in the cranial region, forming characteristic swellings known as the pharyngeal arches and the frontonasal process. The maxilla and mandible are derived from the first pharyngeal arch, and the pre-maxilla arises from the frontonasal process.

The formation of the dental lamina along the maxilla and the mandible occur during the six weeks of prenatal development and represents the first tooth development evidence. This horseshoe-shaped epithelial structure is externally bound by the similarly shaped vestibular lamina, which later gives rise to the oral vestibule.

This process is initiated through the proliferation of the dental lamina, which then invaginates to form an epithelial bud, extending inferiorly into the underlying mesenchyme during the bud stage. These swellings are termed enamel organs and eventually lead to the development of each tooth.

During the later stages, this entity develops to form an inner and outer enamel epithelium. The outer enamel epithelium maintains the shape of the enamel organ, and the inner enamel epithelium is responsible for the crown's shape. Further proliferation of these two layers creates a cervical loop where they later meet to produce Hertwig's epithelial root sheath, which determines the eventual form of the root. The underlying mesenchyme forms the dental papilla, giving rise to the pulp.

The enamel organ is surrounded by a fibrous capsule that develops into the periodontal ligament. Secondary folds occur during the bell stage, accounting for cusp formation in multicusped teeth. The inner enamel epithelium differentiates into ameloblasts during the late bell stage, responsible for enamel formation. Neural crest-derived odontoblasts also differentiate and secrete dentine. The formation of dental hard tissues commences, and the dental lamina disintegrates.