The incubation period is 10-30 days, with the peak age of occurrence around 3-4 months. The initial symptoms are linked to the GI tract and include nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.

Parents often describe their infant as having poor feeding, lethargy, a weak cry, and constipation. Babies can present with ptosis in the face and eyes, excessive drooling due to weak suck reflex, and shallow breathing due to respiratory suppression. The classic presentation is characterized by a “floppy baby.”

Progression of the infection shows advanced symptoms of toxin infestation including descending bilateral, symmetric paralysis and bulbar palsies (diplopia, dysarthria, dysphonia, and dysphagia). Many breastfed mothers notice breast engorgement due to their infant’s poor feeding and poor sucking ability. These symptoms can be subtle, especially since constipation, poor feeding, and drooling are all symptoms commonly brought up. The anal sphincter tone will be relaxed and decreased. Deep tendon reflexes can be either diminished or normal. Sensation will be intact but can be hard to distinguish due to weakened muscular tone. Usually, mental status will be preserved.

Some symptoms may not be obvious until neuromuscular fatigue sets in. Muscular fatigue tests include the following:

- Place the patient in a dark room and note the rapidity of the pupillary constriction with a light. Do this multiple times and note if there is sluggishness to the pupil constriction over two to three minutes.

- With a clean-gloved finger, note the infant’s suck reflex over time. If the patient is infected, the suck reflex will diminish over time.

The clues to the diagnosis include acquired hypotonia, constipation, weak sucking, hoarse crying, and symmetrical descending weakness. In addition, the infant will have marked head lag and diminished gag reflex. No time should be wasted with unnecessary testing as respiratory failure can occur suddenly.