For cardiac catheterization procedures that require arterial access, the 2 common sites used include the common femoral artery and radial artery.

The target for femoral puncture is the midpoint of the common femoral artery between the origin of the inferior epigastric artery and the bifurcation of the superficial and profunda branches, which is usually at the center of the femoral head. The femoral artery crosses the inguinal ligament at its midpoint, and an imaginary line joining the bony landmarks of the iliac crest and pubic symphysis defines the path of the inguinal ligament. Placing a metal clip at the proposed puncture site and performing a quick fluoro exam to confirm the relationship to the femoral head can improve the accuracy of the puncture site. Some centers routinely acquire femoral access under ultrasound guidance.

Optimizing vascular access using fluoroscopy or ultrasound to visualize the anatomical landmarks and accessing the artery using lower profile catheters, including micropuncture sheaths, can minimize the risk of access site complications.

When using the hand/wrist, the common site of access is the radial artery, even though the ulnar artery and brachial artery are also used in some situations.

**Transradial versus Transfemoral Approaches**

Since its first description in 1989, a transradial approach for coronary angiography has been increasing compared to the transfemoral approach. Several randomized controlled trials and meta-analyses have demonstrated reduced mortality, decreased major bleeding, access site complications, reduced length of stay, and comparable stroke rates using a transradial approach.