Diagnostic criteria of Fahr disease (adapted from Moskowitz et al. and Ellie et al.)

- Progressive neurologic dysfunction with onset at any age

- Radiographic evidence of bilateral calcification of basal ganglia and some other regions of the brain

- Absence of biochemical abnormalities suggestive of endocrinopathies, mitochondrial or other systemic disorders

- Absence of infections, toxin or trauma

- Family history with autosomal dominant inheritance

To meet the diagnostic criteria, the following investigations are usually done to exclude other causes of brain calcifications.

**Laboratory Investigations**: Routine lab results are within normal limits in a patient with Fahr disease. Any abnormality should prompt further investigations to rule out secondary causes of brain calcifications.

- Routine hemogram and complete metabolic panel

- Blood and urine heavy metal levels

- Serum calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), calcitonin, vitamin D, parathyroid hormone (PTH)

- Cerebrospinal fluid analysis for bacteria, virus, and parasites

- Ellsworth Howard test (following 200 U PTH injection, 10 to 20 fold increase in urinary cAMP levels)

**Imaging studies**: Bilateral basal ganglia calcification is visualized in both Fahr disease and secondary causes.

- Brain CT scan: Most sensitive modality in localizing and assessing the extent of calcium deposits. The most commonly affected area is the lenticular nucleus, especially the internal globus pallidus. Other areas where the calcifications have been observed include putamen, caudate, dentate nucleus, thalamus, centrum semiovale, subcortical white matter, cerebellum, and brain stem.

- MRI Brain: MRI provides better anatomic details but is less sensitive than a CT scan. Usually, calcified deposits give low-intensity signals on T2-weighted images and low to high-intensity signals on T-1 weighted images, but a study by Kozic et al. revealed that MRI had heterogeneous signal intensities for calcifications in some subjects which led to misinterpretations.

- FDG-PET: May show decreased F-FDG uptake, especially in basal ganglia.

- Plain skull radiograph: Calcifications can be visualized on a radiograph but is less sensitive than CT scan.

**Molecular Genetic Testing**:

This is done in an index case that meets the diagnostic criteria to establish the diagnosis of Fahr disease. There are three approaches to genomic testing:

- Serial gene testing: Sequentially testing for genes one at a time, based on the frequency of causation

SLC20A2>PDGFB>PDGFRB>XPR1

- Multigene panel: One-time analysis of all the four implicated pathogenic variants (SLC20A2, PDGFB, PDGFRB, XPR1) and other genes to rule out secondary syndromes

- Comprehensive genomic testing