# Continuing Education Activity

Tardive dystonia (TD) is one of the extrapyramidal syndromes caused by the use of dopaminergic receptor antagonists. If not recognized promptly and appropriately managed, symptoms can worsen or remain indefinitely. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of tardive dystonia and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in providing care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of tardive dystonia.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of tardive dystonia.
- Outline the most appropriate management options available for tardive dystonia.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the care of tardive dystonia and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) were first witnessed in the 1950s following the discovery of the then-novel class of medication known as neuroleptics.

In 1957, Schoenecker submitted the first report of what would later be identified as “tardive dyskinesia” as he described the bucco-oral movements of a patient on chronic neuroleptic therapy. It was he who articulated the distinction between this latent phenomenology and acute extrapyramidal side effects.

# Etiology

The precise pathophysiological mechanism of tardive dystonia is unknown.

# Epidemiology

Acute and tardive dystonic reactions occur less frequently than other related EPS manifestations, such as Parkinson's-like symptoms and akathisia. There is some debate regarding the chances of developing tardive dystonia, with studies suggesting it is somewhere between <1 to 2%  of patients taking antipsychotics.

One study revealed the interval between the age at first exposure to the neuroleptic and the age at onset of tardive dystonia ranged from four days to twenty-three years, with a mean of about six years. In this same study, researchers noted that younger patients experienced a shorter interval from neuroleptic exposure to symptom presentation.

# History and Physical

Tardive dystonia often has an insidious and progressive presentation. Although associated with a latent and thus “tardive” onset, the presentation may occur anywhere from days to years following initial exposure to dopamine receptor antagonism. Patients have reported that unusual sensory symptoms, along with strange somatic sensations, have preceded the onset of tardive dystonia. For example, neck pain has been found to precede the onset of cervical dystonia. Furthermore, research has determined that the development of tardive manifestations presents as focal dystonia, most notably torticollis or blepharospasm, followed by pharyngeal dystonia, oromandibular dystonia, and dystonia of the lips and tongue.

Dystonias of the arms, legs, and trunk are less frequent. On examination, pharyngeal dystonia will present as dysphagia, whereas oromandibular dystonia may present as a severe speech disturbance.

# Evaluation

Prompt recognition and subsequent intervention are paramount in the setting of tardive dystonia. Proper evaluation begins with reviewing the primary diagnosis, describing the precipitating motor abnormalities, assessing symptom severity, and finally, by developing a treatment plan based upon the specific phenomenology. It is important that the clinician review the full medical profile, as alternative dopaminergic antagonizing medications have been known to induce tardive syndromes. Such inciting agents include dopamine receptor blocking anti-emetics, including prochlorperazine, metoclopramide, and promethazine.

# Treatment / Management

Upon the proper identification of tardive dystonia, the offending agent(s) should be modified and if possible, discontinued. Clinical judgment will indicate whether abrupt cessation or a gradual taper is most appropriate. Some experts suggest simply cross-tapering to an alternative antipsychotic with a lower EPS profile, such as clozapine.

Drug-induced EPS are believed to precipitate following the blockade of nigrostriatal dopamine tracts, ultimately resulting in an increased ratio of cholinergic to dopaminergic activity. Therefore, drugs that antagonize cholinergic activity and increase striatal dopaminergic function will theoretically normalize the biochemical imbalance.

One study reviewed the therapeutic efficacy of specific pharmacologic interventions and revealed “at least some benefit” in 53% of patients following the administration of tetrabenazine, 44% with anticholinergic agents, 56% with benzodiazepines, and 56% with baclofen.

# Differential Diagnosis

The list of differential diagnoses for tardive dystonia is extensive and includes primary and secondary etiologies of dystonias. Secondary forms of dystonia include metabolic abnormalities, toxic states, neurodegenerative disorders, and structural abnormalities of the brain.

Drug-induced dystonic syndromes can be distinguished by acknowledging a history of neuroleptic treatment, negative family history of primary dystonia, and the absence of associated neurological signs. It is not uncommon for patients on chronic neuroleptics to present with tardive syndromes. Furthermore, patients can experience more than one of these tardive syndromes simultaneously, further complicating matters. These latent motor abnormalities can be further subdivided into three major subtypes, including tardive dyskinesia, tardive dystonia, and tardive akathisia.

Tardive dyskinesia is characterized by truncal, appendicular, or orobuccolingual choreiform movements; whereas tardive dystonia manifests as stereotyped twisting and turning muscle spasms. Tardive dyskinesia also tends to have a later age of onset than tardive dystonia.

# Prognosis

Once established, the progression of the dystonia tends to evolve in a stepwise fashion over months to years, with subsequent involvement of additional body parts. Studies reveal that progression to maximum intensity and distribution occurs within 2 years from onset. More rapid progression has been noted in the population with a younger age at onset.

One study attempted to demarcate outcome groups based upon symptom resolution following treatment. In this study of 107 patients being treated for tardive dystonia, 14% were in remission, 39% were improved, and 50% noted either no improvement or exacerbating symptomatology.

# Complications

The severity of tardive dystonia ranges on a spectrum from imperceptible to frank disability. Subtle impairments include muscle tightness and cramps, leading to mastication and speech discomfort. More intense complications include oculogyric crisis, dysphagia, dysarthria, as well as lethal respiratory stridor. In severe instances, dystonic reactions can induce apnea, leading to fatality. Less common complications include dystonic involvement of axial, limb, and truncal muscle groups leading to Pisa syndrome, camptocormia, and opisthotonus.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Prognosis improves when EPS symptoms are detected promptly.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Tardive dystonia can be debilitating and possibly even life-threatening. It is critical that the interprofessional team be knowledgeable and up to date regarding the possible precipitation of tardive dystonia. All members of the team must remain vigilant in the event the patient begins to experience prodromal symptomatology, as research suggests more rapid intervention results in better patient outcomes.