Cataract surgery is most commonly performed in the current era by utilizing the modern-day phacoemulsification technique. It helps to restore vision in patients developing cataracts due to any cause. Charles D Kelman first introduced phacoemulsification in 1948, and the concept was accepted in 1967. When Kelman first visited a dentist, he found dental enamel and debris being removed with ultrasound energy. Using a similar principle, he used a hollow 1 mm titanium needle with ultrasonic power to remove the lens at a speed of 40,000/s.

Phacoemulsification also uses surgeon-guided automated irrigation and aspiration system to aspirate the cortex and nuclear fragments. There was initial reluctance to accept the technique due to the high incidence of complications and the need to enlarge the incision to accommodate the PMMA IOL. The technique became popular in 1980 due to various innovations like ophthalmic viscosurgical devices (OVDs), foldable IOL development, continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis, and improved quality and performance of phaco machines.

While performing phacoemulsification, the ophthalmic surgeon makes a clear corneal incision with a 2.8 to 3.2 mm keratome along with two paracenteses. Then after staining the anterior lens capsule, capsulorhexis of the desired size is performed, and the nucleus is emulsified and aspirated through an ultrasonic phaco probe inserted through the main wound. Following this, the remaining cortical matter is removed from the capsular bag, and a foldable IOL is implanted. The surgery is performed under topical or local anesthesia or as an elective procedure, and the patient can be discharged the same day. Postoperatively on day 1, uncomplicated cases usually have a perfect visual outcome, and the vision gradually improves until 4 to 6 weeks as globe remodeling takes place.