# Introduction

The accommodation reflex is the visual response for focusing on near objects. It also has the name of the accommodation-convergence reflex or the near reflex.**convergence**of both eyes, contraction of the ciliary muscle resulting in a change of lens shape (**accommodation**), and**pupillary constriction**. Coordination of these three events changes the power of the eye, allowing the point of focus of the eye change from a distant object to a nearby object or vice versa.

# Issues of Concern

Given the synkinesis required to coordinate near vision properly, any pathology that hinders convergence, ciliary contraction, or pupillary constriction can disrupt the reflex.

Since parasympathetic fibers of the oculomotor nerve mediate ciliary contraction and pupillary constriction, parasympatholytics like atropine results in loss of accommodation and parasympathomimetics like pilocarpine induce accommodation.

Vision is not a prerequisite for accommodation reflex. In afferent pupillary defects as in optic nerve lesions, the pupil does not react to light reflex, but near reflex will be present. Interestingly, even though the same neural machinery is involved in both the accommodation reflex and the pupillary light reflex, certain conditions demonstrate a dissociation between the two pathways; this is called light-near dissociation.

Other pupillary defects that can disrupt accommodation include Gardener pupil,

In Horner syndrome, although there is miosis of the pupil, light reflex and near reflex will be normal. There are reports of some cases in which the accommodative amplitude has increased.

As part of normal aging, there is a gradual loss of accommodation termed presbyopia, which refers to the hardening of the lens expected with age, with decreased ciliary muscular tension, that contributes to the loss of accommodation

Recently, dry eye has been linked to accommodative microfluctuations as well,

# Cellular Level

On a cellular level, the accommodation reflex relies on neural signaling to conduct both afferent and efferent pathways. Impulses are carried along the fibers of the optic nerve, through projections of the cortex, and ultimately to the oculomotor and Edinger-Westphal nuclei. Moreover, the retinal neurons involved in the transmission of vision rely on phototransduction, which has a complex cellular mechanism.

Current understanding of accommodation has its basis in the capsular theory of accommodation or Helmholtz hypothesis. With accommodative effort, there is the contraction of the ciliary muscle, releasing the tension on zonules, that  “fatten” the lens, increasing the central thickness and optical power, aiding in near vision.

# Development

As with any other component of the eye, the important contributions of neural crest, homeobox genes, and growth factors are key to the development of the accommodation reflex. While neuroectoderm contributes to the retina and optic nerve required of accommodation, it is neural crest cells that compose connective tissue of the orbit and the ciliary ganglion. The lens itself is a derivative of surface ectoderm. Unlike the structures mentioned above, the extraocular muscles are derivatives of mesodermal tissue.

# Organ Systems Involved

As already mentioned, the accommodation reflex involves several different components of the central and peripheral nervous system. Unlike the pupillary light reflex, this requires the participation of visual association cortex and the cerebellum in addition to the parasympathetic nervous system.

The stimulus for accommodation reflex is either an 'out of focus' or blurred retinal image or conscious visual fixation on a near object. A The afferent limb of the reflex involves optic nerve, optic chiasm, optic tract, the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus and the visual cortex including the primary visual and visual association areas in the occipital lobe.

The efferent limb includes the Edinger Westphal nucleus and the oculomotor neurons. The Edinger Westphal nucleus in the midbrain is the parasympathetic preganglionic nucleus. It sends its axons through the oculomotor nerve to the ciliary ganglion and short ciliary nerve to control the pupil sphincter, ciliary muscles of the eye. The efferent fibers from the medial rectus subnucleus of the oculomotor complex innervate the medial rectus muscles, resulting in the convergence of the eyes.

# Function

The function of the accommodation reflex is to coordinate visual attention to near objects. Proper convergence prevents diplopia. Constriction of the pupil increases the depth of field.

# Mechanism

Light from the environment is brought to focus on the retina by the combined optical power of the cornea and the lens.

The mechanism of accommodation reflex involves three responses:

- **The convergence**of both eyes is such that the near object is in focus, whichaids in image projection on the fovea. This action involves contraction of the medial rectus muscles of both eyes, with the relaxation of lateral recti resulting in the adduction of both the eyes.

- **Constriction**of the sphincter pupillae muscles, pupils constrict, whichimproves the depth of focus. The divergent rays from distant objects scatter off the periphery of the cornea, and hence they do not fall on the fovea.

- **Contraction**of bilateral ciliary muscles results in thickening of the lens, whichshortens the focal length, which increases its refractive power (measured in diopters).

The afferent pathway begins with the transmission of the signal from the optic nerve to the primary visual cortex. This path involves phototransduction in the retina, thalamic interneurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus, and finally arrival at the visual cortex using optic radiations. From the visual cortex, the reflex initiates, and impulses get sent to the visual association cortex that in turn has projections to the superior colliculus and pretectal areas. From here, impulses swiftly relay to the oculomotor and Edinger-Westphal nuclei of cranial nerve III. The oculomotor nucleus stimulates contraction of the medial recti bilaterally, which results in convergence. Simultaneously the Edinger-Westphal nucleus coordinates parasympathetic pupillary constriction via the ciliary ganglion. The same general pathway is responsible for lens thickening, except that instead of arriving at the pupillary sphincter muscles, the short ciliary nerves from the ciliary ganglion terminate at the ciliary muscles and are responsible for muscle contraction. As the ciliary muscles contract, the suspensory zonules of the lens relax and release the tension of the lens. Thus, somewhat paradoxically, it is the contraction of the ciliary muscles that allows the lens to form a more spherical shape that facilitates accommodation.

Accommodative convergence is the convergence induced by accommodation as part of the near reflex. For each diopter of accommodation, there is an increase in convergence, the measurement of which is in prism diopters. The normal value is 3 to 5  prism diopters. Abnormalities of this ratio play an essential role in the etiology of strabismus and binocular vision problems.

# Related Testing

Examiners frequently check the accommodation reflex during a neurological exam by having the patient focus on a small target like the examiner's fingertip or a pen. The examiner asks the patient to focus on the target used for testing at a distance, and then gradually bring the finger within a few centimeters between the patient's eyes. Look for convergence of eyes and constriction of the pupils.

# Clinical Significance

Dysfunction of the accommodation reflex can be physiological like in aging and presbyopia, pathological or pharmacological. Accommodation deficits can occur in neurological conditions like supranuclear lesions, encephalitis, pineal tumors, or in neuromuscular disorders like myasthenia gravis.

Convergence

Damage to the medial rectus muscle itself can disrupt convergence. Moreover, a cortical or brainstem lesion can impair the neural machinery required to coordinate ocular convergence. Disorders of vergence can be due to organic causes or can be functional. It can be congenital, presenting with strabismus in childhood.

Near reflex insufficiency is a disorder of vergence; it can be mild paresis or complete paralysis. There is convergence or accommodation insufficiency. Mydriasis may present on attempted near fixation. For paresis, treatment involves reading glasses, or base in prisms.

Convergence insufficiency can occur in individuals with the increased use of near work, like in school-age children. It can occur as idiopathic or following viral illness.

Pupillary Constriction

Similarly, a disruption of the parasympathetic pathway can dysregulate the coordination of pupillary constriction.

Lens Accommodation

The most frequently encountered loss of accommodation is from presbyopia.