Interprofessional communication and parallel workflows are critical parts of stroke treatment and the safe and timely use of mechanical thrombectomy in stroke treatment. The length of time to successful revascularization is a vital metric in determining a successful outcome for the patient. The ESCAPE clinical trial (Endovascular Treatment for Small Core and Anterior Circulation Proximal Occlusion with Emphasis on Minimizing CT to Recanalization Times) demonstrated that improved workflow could improve both functional outcomes and mortality.

While the neuro interventionalist is responsible for performing the thrombectomy, technologists, nursing staff, procedure room assistants play a critical role in ensuring promptness and success of the procedure. The treatment team consists of an anesthesiologist, at least one neuro interventionalist, a technologist, and a radiology nurse. The parallel workflow model ensures that several of the roles carried out by these individuals occur simultaneously.

An example of a parallel workflow is as follows: device preparation by the neuro interventionalist occurs at the same time the groin puncture site is sterile prepared, and the technologist drapes the patient. The nurse simultaneously retrieves bags of heparinized saline. The technologist or neuro interventionalist helps in the connection of the bags. The anesthesiologist would, at the same time, work to administer conscious sedation or general anesthesia to the patient. Implementation of this improved parallel workflow, the primary use of conscious sedation (whenever possible over general anesthesia), and the stroke cart availability has shown to produce a reduction of 29 minutes from room entry to reperfusion compared to a process where steps take place in succession.