A standard mandible reconstruction set, as provided by many different vendors, is useful in mandibular reconstruction. Regardless of whether vascularized or non-vascularized grafts are used, a titanium reconstruction plate is needed to stabilize the bony segments. In some cases, a patient-specific plate can be planned before surgery to minimize surgical time and maximize the accuracy of bony positioning intra-operatively. Patient-specific plates can be expensive; however, a standard 2.0 mm thickness bar is sufficient in all cases; it simply requires intra-operative bending to fit a patient's jaw anatomy. Often, 10 mm to 18 mm bicortical screws are used to fixate the reconstruction bar, depending on the mandible thickness. Often monocortical, 8 mm titanium screws are used to fixate an osseous free flap, as bicortical screws increase the graft's risk of devascularization with subsequent necrosis. In the case of non-vascularized bone grafts, a titanium tray can be useful to hold the bone chips in position while they are healing. Some vendors also provide an alloplastic bone matrix that can be used alone or to enhance autologous transfer.

A bone mill is also helpful in grinding a single, solid piece of harvested bone into suitable chips. For patients with an infected wound bed, the surgeon may want to avoid placing a reconstruction bar to stabilize the mandibular segments, as the bar itself can become a repository for bacteria and a source for ongoing infection. In these cases, the mandible can be stabilized with an external fixator, a series of steel bars connecting posts seated in the different bone segments, and projects through the skin.

An external fixator, or "ex fix," provides excellent mandibular stabilization with minimal foreign body burden within the wound bed and can allow for infection resolution before definitive internal fixation and bone grafting. Whenever placing plates and screws, a drill is often needed to make pilot holes for the screws. Also, mechanical saws and rongeurs are used to shape and size the native mandible ends and transferred autologous bone.