Loratadine dosing is by tablet (chewable or ODT - orally disintegrating tablet), liquid-filled capsule, or syrup (1 mg/mL solution). The medication can be administered orally with or without meals, although the recommendation is to take the oral medication on an empty stomach. The dispersible tablet is placed in the mouth and allowed to dissolve. The patient may swallow it with or without water. Research is underway for other formulations designed to increase bioavailability.

**For allergic rhinitis:**

- In adolescents, adults, and geriatrics: 10 mg by mouth daily or 5 mg twice daily; do not exceed 10 mg in 24 hours.

- In pediatrics: age 2 to 5: 5 mg orally every day; over the age of 6: 10 mg orally daily. The ODT formulation is not recommended for younger children.

**For urticaria:**

- In adolescents, adults, and geriatrics: 10 mg by mouth daily: generally dosing should not exceed 10 mg in 24 hours. However, some patients may benefit from higher doses - clinicians should weigh the risk vs. benefit.

- In pediatrics over the age of 6: 10 mg by mouth daily as needed.

In both renal and hepatic insufficiency, the recommendation is to increase the dosing interval to 48 hours, as follows:

**Patients with renal impairment (GFR of less than 30 mL/min):**

- In adults: 10 mg orally every other day.

- In children age 2 to 6: 5 mg oral dosing every other day.

- In children over the age of 6: 10 mg by mouth every other day.

Patients on peritoneal or hemodialysis should be dosed every 48 hours; no supplemental dose following dialysis.

**Patients with hepatic impairment:**

- In adults: 10 mg orally every other day.

- In children aged 2 to 6: 5 mg orally every other day.

- In children over the age of 6: 10 mg by mouth every other day.

The drug's half-life increases with the increasing severity of the hepatic disease.

Loratadine is subject to half-life variability in the elderly, and clinicians need to be mindful of this factor when initiating therapy in this age group.