Zafirlukast received approval for asthma treatment in the United States in 1996, and it continues to be a widely used agent, with more than 2 million prescriptions filled yearly. Managing chronic asthma requires an interprofessional team of clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), pharmacists, laboratory technologists, nurses, and other healthcare providers. Asthma affects nearly 25 million people in the US, including 7.7% of all adults and 8.4% of all children.

Zafirlukast is a commonly prescribed medication in the outpatient setting for chronic asthma, which is not controlled or not treatable with short-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids. Since zafirlukast takes weeks to reach peak effect, follow-up with healthcare providers to monitor pulmonary function and symptomatic improvement are important. The interprofessional team, comprised of clinicians, specialists, nurses, respiratory therapists, and pharmacists, is essential in coordinating the care, including:

- Conducting follow-up appointments to assess for improvement

- Monitoring INR in warfarin patients taking zafirlukast

- Monitoring liver function tests in patients with decreased hepatic function or clearance

- Monitoring for symptoms related to an allergic reaction to the medication, eosinophilic vasculitis, neuropsychiatric complaints, and hepatic dysfunction

- Consult with a pulmonologist or allergy specialist for the treatment of chronic severe asthma

- Consult with a pharmacist for the safety of usage with other drugs

- Collaboration with multiple inpatient and outpatient teams for management of acute asthma exacerbations

- Knowledge of the latest guidelines, such as GINA guidelines, is essential for patient-centered care.

- Follow the evidence-based guidelines National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Coordinating Committee Expert Panel (NAEPP), supported by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. The goal is to optimize patient care and support informed decision-making about asthma management.

Any interprofessional team member who becomes aware of the issues listed above, any other adverse events, or therapeutic failure should record their findings in the patient's health record and report this information to the rest of the team to implement corrective actions. Utilizing a collaborative interprofessional methodology with open communication and information sharing will improve therapeutic results with zafirlukast, with fewer adverse events. [Level 5]