# Continuing Education Activity

Acanthamoeba is a rare and frequently misdiagnosed cause of corneal infection. Acanthamoeba keratitis most often occurs in contact lens wearers. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of Acanthamoeba keratitis and highlights the role of the interprofessional healthcare team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the findings on slit-lamp examination that may distinguish Acanthamoeba keratitis from other etiologies of keratitis.
- Summarize laboratory techniques available for the diagnosis of Acanthamoeba keratitis.
- Review the standard treatment regimen for Acanthamoeba keratitis (AK) and adjunct treatments that may be employed for treatment-resistant AK.
- Explain the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by Acanthamoeba keratitis.

# Introduction

Acanthamoeba is a genus of protozoans that are ubiquitously present in various habitats, including water, air, soil, and dust.

# Etiology

The genus Acanthamoeba is within phylum Amoebozoa, subphylum Lobosa and order Centramoebidae.Acanthamoeba species have been shown to thrive in soil and aquatic environments, including ponds, swimming pools, hot tubs, and contact lens solutions. Acanthamoeba species get classified via the 18s rDNA sequence analysis into T1-T12 genotypes.Acanthamoeba castellani and Acanthamoeba polyphaga.

Acanthamoeba species exist in two forms, an active trophozoite or a dormant cyst. The trophozoite form feeds on bacteria, algae, and yeasts. Trophozoites are also capable of slow locomotion and asexual reproduction.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of acanthamoeba keratitis has been rising over the past several decades.Acanthamoeba causes approximately 5% of cases of contact-lens-associated keratitis.Acanthamoeba.Acanthamoeba.

Acanthamoeba keratitis can happen at any age but mainly affects younger and middle-aged individuals.

# Pathophysiology

The initial steps of ocular infection involve adhesion of the pathogen to the corneal surface via mannose-binding protein and laminin-binding protein.Acanthamoeba proteases may induce damage to the corneal nerves, leading to significant pain and the characteristic finding on the slit lamp examination of radial keratoneuritis.Acanthamoeba is rare due to the intense response of polymorphonuclear leukocytes in the anterior chamber.Acanthamoeba are its ubiquity, absence of distinct morphology, ability to tolerate a wide range of temperatures and pHs, and ability to reversibly differentiate into a cyst or trophozoite.

Contact lens wear causes microtrauma to the corneal epithelium and upregulation of glycoproteins. Soft contact lenses have a more adherent surface than hard lenses, thereby providing the Acanthamoeba trophozoite greater access to the cornea.

# History and Physical

A detailed history is a requirement for all individuals with a presentation suspicious for ocular infection. Particular attention should apply to inquire about contact lens wear, recent corneal injury, and exposure to dust, soil, or contaminated water. Acanthamoeba keratitis usually presents unilaterally but may rarely occur in both eyes.

A comprehensive ocular examination is also necessary for patients with suspected ocular infection. Early findings on slit-lamp examination include an epitheliopathy with punctuate keratopathy, epithelial or subepithelial infiltrates, pseudodendrites, and perineural infiltrates.

# Evaluation

The plate culture technique is traditionally regarded as the gold standard for the detection of Acanthamoeba, though new developments support an increasing role of polymerase chain reaction (PCR), in vivo confocal microscopy (IVCM), and staining. Corneal scraping or biopsy is required to obtain a sample for culture. As Acanthamoeba trophozoites feed on bacteria, cultures will develop on 1.5% non-nutrient agar plates covered by E. Coli.Acanthamoeba in the setting of acanthamoeba keratitis is generally low, reported anywhere from 40 to 70%.

PCR has demonstrated significant improvement in the detection of Acanthamoeba over the past decade. The 18s rRNA region is most commonly employed to detect Acanthamoeba in clinical samples. Newer primer sets have demonstrated sensitivity and specificity of 100% and 96%, respectively.

Some authors recommend that clinicians retrieve patients’ most recent pair of contacts and lens case for culture and/or PCR.Acanthamoeba on PCR. The absence of Acanthamoeba on a culture of a contact lens case is highly suggestive of a diagnosis other than AK.

IVCM is also an extremely useful tool that allows for the non-invasive examination of individuals cells of the cornea in real-time. IVCM will only reliably detect cysts, which will appear as well-defined, round, double-walled, hyper-reflective bodies. The pooled sensitivity and specificity of IVCM in one study were found to be 85.3% and 100%, respectively. IVCM may also be used to monitor disease progression and response to treatment.

Cytology smears is a viable method to detect Acanthamoeba cysts on corneal scrapings or biopsied tissue. Cytology smears have the advantage of being fast, easily performed, and readily available in most facilities. Cytology smears additionally do not require live organisms as with culture or intact DNA as required for PCR.

Many newer diagnostic procedures have employed in diagnosing AK. Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) has been demonstrated to have a high sensitivity and specificity comparable to PCR for the diagnosis of AK. In contrast to PCR, the target sequence during LAMP is amplified at a constant temperature of 60 to 65 degrees Celsius, thereby eliminating the need for an expensive thermal cycler. Given its simplicity and low cost, LAMP could serve as an alternative to PCR for future diagnosis of AK.

# Treatment / Management

Acanthamoeba trophozoites are frequently sensitive to a variety of medications, including antibiotics, antiseptics, antifungals, and antiprotozoals. However, Acanthamoeba is resistant to most of the listed treatments in the cystic form, thereby allowing for prolonged infection.

Diamidines exert their therapeutic effect by altering the structure and permeability of the cell membrane, causing denaturation of cytoplasmic contents. Propamidine-isethionate, hexamidine-diisethionate, and dibromopropamidine are diamidines used for the treatment of acanthamoeba keratitis at 0.1% concentration.

Biguanides similarly cause alterations in cytoplasmic membranes, leading to loss of cellular components and inhibition of enzymes necessary for cell respiration. Polyhexamethylene biguanide (PHMB) and chlorhexidine are the two biguanides most widely used for the treatment of AK. PHMB is traditionally started at a concentration of 0.02% but may increase to 0.06% for AK that is unresponsive or severe at the initial presentation. Likewise, chlorhexidine is usually initiated at a concentration of 0.02% but can be increased to 0.2%, if indicated.

Most modern treatment regimens call for initiation of combination therapy of a biguanide and a diamidine, though there is some newer research to suggest that PHMB 0.08% monotherapy is as effective as combination PHMB 0.02% and propamidine 0.1%.Acanthamoeba cysts. Premature discontinuation of treatment could allow for any remaining dormant cysts to differentiate into trophozoites. Clinicians should tailor treatment regimens to the individual case to minimize risks of epithelial toxicity.

Neomycin was once used as a first-line treatment of acanthamoeba keratitis due to its anti-trophozoite activity but does not appear to achieve cysticidal levels in vitro.

Approximately 39% of patients with acanthamoeba keratitis fail initial therapy. Individuals with more clinically severe disease or a history of corticosteroid use before diagnosis are more likely to fail initial treatment.

The therapeutic value of antifungals appears to be limited. Among all antifungals, only newer generation azoles (voriconazole and posaconazole) appear to achieve cysticidal levels in vitro

Epithelial debridement may allow for improved penetration of topical medications.

At the time of writing, several promising novel therapeutic approaches remain on the horizon. A case series of four patients treated with photorefractive surgery resulted in excellent visual outcomes and no disease recurrence.Acanthamoeba castellanii, especially when conjugated to silver nanoparticles.Acanthamoeba species when compounded with chlorhexidine in vitro.

The development of extra corneal manifestations such as scleritis or limbitis indicates a worse outcome and warrants treatment with anti-inflammatory medications. Most cases of extracorneal inflammation are manageable with oral flurbiprofen 50 to 100 mg, two to three times daily.

Topical corticosteroid use in acanthamoeba keratitis is controversial and discouraged by many physicians. Though topical steroids are usually not required in early disease, their use may be necessary when there is significant anterior segment inflammation.

# Differential Diagnosis

One study found that clinicians initially misdiagnosed nearly half of all acanthamoeba keratitis cases as herpes simplex keratitis (HSK).

Acanthamoeba keratitis may occasionally be confused with bacterial or mycotic keratitis. Although classically associated with acanthamoeba keratitis, ring infiltrates may also present in both bacterial and mycotic keratitis.

Lastly, the multifocal stromal infiltrates of acanthamoeba keratitis may resemble the satellite infiltrates of fungal keratitis. However, AK may be distinguished from fungal keratitis on slit-lamp examination by translucent epithelial defects, perineural stromal infiltrates, and ring infiltrates. Fungal keratitis is more likely to extend beyond the cornea.

In contrast to patients infected with uncomplicated bacterial or fungal keratitis, patients with acanthamoeba keratitis are more likely to be younger and present with a longer duration of symptoms at the initial presentation.

The differential diagnosis includes:

- Contact lens associated keratitis

- Conjunctivitis

- Dry eye

- Herpes simplex virus keratitis

- Recurrent corneal erosion

- Staph marginal keratitis

# Prognosis

The most important prognostic factors for acanthamoeba keratitis are the severity of disease at presentation and the time required to initiate effective therapy.Acanthamoeba genus.

# Complications

Common complications of acanthamoeba keratitis include glaucoma, iris atrophy, broad-based anterior synechiae, cataract, and persistent endothelial defect. Rarer complications include scleritis, sterile anterior uveitis, chorioretinitis, and retinal vasculitis.Acanthamoeba.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As most cases of Acanthamoeba keratitis occur in contact lens wearers, patients should be educated to avoid wearing contact lenses overnight, using homemade saline solutions, and swimming or showering while wearing contact lenses. The use of daily disposable instead of reusable contact lenses would be expected to reduce the incidence of AK, though this is still unproven.Acanthamoeba would likely be of great value to clinicians.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Acanthamoeba is a rare cause of keratitis that is both difficult to diagnose and treat. The clinician should have a high suspicion for AK in the setting of keratitis that is not responsive to standard first-line treatments.

- Most cases of AK develop in contact lens wearers. Though poor lens hygiene is implicated, most multipurpose solutions are ineffective against Acanthamoeba.

- The classic findings of AK on slit-lamp examination are a ring-shaped infiltrate and radial keratoneuritis. Notably, ring-shaped infiltrates are only present in the advanced stage, and even then, only in 50% of patients.

- Biguanides and diamidines are the first-line treatment for AK. The use of topical corticosteroids is controversial and discouraged by many physicians.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Most patients with symptoms suggestive of ocular infection will present to their primary care physician or emergency department. Thus, these clinicians must know about acanthamoeba keratitis and its presentation. Direct referral to a cornea specialist rather than other ophthalmologists is associated with 3.2 times lower odds of treatment failure.Acanthamoeba. The primary care clinicians, including the nurse and pharmacist, should educate the patient on contact lens hygiene maintenance. The patients should remove contact lenses during water-related activities, and the storing solution should be fresh. Also, handwashing before touching the contacts cannot be over-emphasized. At any time, a patient with contact lenses develops eye redness, pain or photophobia, urgent consultation with the eye specialist is a strong recommendation. Pharmacists should also coordinate with the treating clinician regarding medical management, including appropriate agent selection, dosing, and checking for drug interactions. Nursing ophthalmology specialty trained nurses can also verify compliance, monitor therapeutic progress, and be vigilant for adverse events. Pharmacists and nurses need an open communication channel to the prescriber so they can bring any issues to the fore immediately. Only with this type of interprofessional collaboration can acanthamoeba keratitis have optimal results. [Level V]

Close follow-up by the entire interprofessional team is necessary to monitor clinical improvement following initiation of treatment. [Level 3]