Disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis (DSAP) is a disease of disordered keratinization. Disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis is one of six variants of porokeratosis. It has more extensive involvement than most other variants. These other variants include linear porokeratosis, porokeratosis of Mibelli, punctate porokeratosis, porokeratosis palmaris et plantaris disseminata, and disseminated superficial porokeratosis. Porokeratosis ptychotropica, facial porokeratosis, giant porokeratosis, hypertrophic verrucous porokeratosis, reticulate porokeratosis, and eruptive pruritic papular porokeratosis are other rare variants. The eruptive form of porokeratosis is associated with malignancy, immunosuppression, and a proinflammatory state. The lesions appear all over the body. A feature that is seen in all of these variants is the cornoid lamella. It is seen on histology as a column of parakeratotic cells and is characterized by a raised ridge circumscribing the porokeratotic lesions. Risk factors for porokeratosis include genetics, immunosuppression, and ultraviolet light. The lesions in disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis start as pink to brown papules and macules with a raised border in sun-exposed areas that can be asymptomatic or be slightly pruritic. There are many options for the treatment of disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis, including topical diclofenac, photodynamic therapy (PDT), 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), imiquimod, vitamin D analogs, retinoids, and lasers. These lesions are considered precancerous. There is a 7.5% to 10% risk of malignant transformation to squamous cell carcinoma or basal cell carcinoma.