The American Society of Interventional Pain Physicians (ASIPP) has a set of guidelines for prescribing opioids for the management of chronic non-cancer pain.  To monitor for adherence, abuse, and noncompliance, the ASIPP recommends utilizing UDT and PDMPs in addition to clinical and behavioral assessments.

The treatment plan for opioid use in chronic pain should include frequent assessment of pain level, origin, and function. The ASIPP recommends assessing whether pain relief and/or functional status is improved by at least 30% without adverse effects to continue opioid therapy.

- Affect

- Aberrant drug-related behaviors

- Activities of daily living

- Adverse or side effects

- Analgesia

Signs and symptoms, if present, that suggests treatment goals are not being achieved include:

- Decreased appetite

- Excessive sleeping or day/night reversal

- Impaired function

- Inability to concentrate

- Mood volatility

- Lack of involvement with others

- Lack of re-engaging in life

- Lack of hygiene

The decision to change, continue, or terminate opioid therapy is based on achieving treatment objectives without adverse effects. Therefore, physicians, wherever possible, should work with pharmacists.****

Side effects of opioids can include constipation, sedation, respiratory depression, immunosuppression, tolerance, physical dependence, sexual dysfunction, osteoporosis, and opioid-induced hyperalgesia. Constipation is one of the most common side effects. Therefore, clinicians should consider initiating a bowel regimen even before the onset of constipation and definitely after the patient reports constipation. Certain opioids require additional monitoring measures: patients on methadone should have an electrocardiogram periodically to assess for QT interval prolongation.

**Acute Overdose Management**

Accidental or deliberate overdose is always a risk factor in patients taking opioids. Therefore, the patient and family should be instructed on the signs and symptoms of an overdose and basic emergency management until emergency medical services can arrive.

The immediate response to overdose management is to secure the airway; however, survival depends heavily on the rapid administration of an opioid antagonist.

While opioid antagonists such as naloxone, naltrexone, and nalmefene are available, acute overdoses are usually treated with naloxone as it quickly reverses opioid-related respiratory depression. Naloxone competes with opioids at receptor sites in the brain stem, reversing desensitization to carbon dioxide and preventing respiratory failure.

The naloxone dose is 0.4 to 2 mg administered intravenously, intramuscularly, subcutaneously, or intranasally.