One of the common topics when reviewing the literature concerns the use of proton pump inhibitors with pancrelipase. These enzymes are enteric-coated to avoid the harsh conditions and low pH of the stomach. The goal of PEP therapy focuses on maximal drug delivery into the duodenum, which is where absorption occurs.

Given the known effect of low pH on enzyme delivery for PEP, previous groups have attempted to increase the efficacy of PEP. Previously, preparations of PEP included supplements such as sodium bicarbonate as a neutralizing agent.

Proesmans et al. have shown that concurrent omeprazole administration improved steatorrhea when used with PEP therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis.

The above-referenced literature may provide good clinical evidence for providers to begin PPI therapy in patients who are known hyper-secretors (produce too much stomach acid) or in patients who show minimal improvement with pancrelipase therapy for exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.

When using pancrelipase therapy for indicated conditions, the interprofessional healthcare team strategy will yield the best results. This team, comprised of clinicians, specialists, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists, can oversee the therapy, monitor for therapeutic results and adverse events, and provide patient counseling to optimize treatment. With open collaboration and communication, the interprofessional team can achieve the best patient outcomes with the lowest incidence of adverse events. [Level 5]