**Introduction**

Radiotherapy remains a crucial component in the treatment of cervical cancer. Randomized evidence from the 1990’s and early 2000’s has established radiotherapy in almost every facet of treatment. It may be utilized as a definitive or adjuvant treatment with or without platinum-based chemotherapy.

**Definitive Radiotherapy**

**Early Stage Cervical Cancer**

Radiotherapy may be utilized as the sole modality of treatment in early-stage cervical cancer IA1-IIA1. External beam radiotherapy with a brachytherapy boost has equivalent 5yr and 20-year overall survival (83% and 75% respectively) compared to radical hysterectomy with less morbidity.

**Advanced Cervical Cancer**

Locally aggressive and/or node-positive disease is usually treated with definitive concurrent platinum-based chemoradiotherapy followed by a brachytherapy boost. The addition of chemotherapy to definitive radiotherapy has resulted in considerable improvements in overall survival compared to radiotherapy alone with 8-year overall survival of 41% versus 67%.

**Post-operative Radiotherapy**

In the post-operative setting, radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy is recommended when specific surgical pathologic findings are present. These factors are thought to represent an increased risk of recurrence.

Conventionally, the Sedlis criteria provided guidance in the use of adjuvant radiotherapy without chemotherapy in post-radical hysterectomy patients with at least 2 of the following 3 features: >4cm tumor size, LVSI, or >1/3 stromal invasion.

Classically, the addition of chemotherapy to radiotherapy was guided by the Peters trial which randomized patients with positive nodes, involved parametria, or positive surgical margins to radiotherapy alone or with concurrent platinum-based chemotherapy. The addition of chemo resulted in a 10% improvement in overall survival at 4 years and almost a 20% improvement in progression-free survival over the same time frame.

**Delivery Techniques**

The two major delivery methods include external beam radiotherapy, directed at the primary and pelvic lymphatics, and brachytherapy, where a sealed radiation source is placed in close proximity to the tumor.

**External Beam Radiotherapy (EBRT)**

External beam radiotherapy techniques include 3D conformal or intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT). Intact cervical cancer patients’ plan can be employed. A reduction in gastrointestinal and hematological side effects has been documented with the use of IMRT in both the adjuvant and definitive setting.

**Brachytherapy (BT)**

Brachytherapy can be used alone in early-stage diseases or as a boost after external beam radiotherapy in more advanced diseases. This treatment technique is highly conformal and dose delivery is controlled by adjusting the dwell times within the delivery device. This technique will be discussed further in the Brachytherapy section.

**Simulation**

Patients undergoing external beam treatments can be placed in the supine position. Accounting for cervical motion is especially important when using IMRT. This is accomplished by taking two separate scans of the patients with full and empty bladder. Prone positioning may also be performed using a belly board however if there are large daily fraction shifts then IMRT may not be reproducible. Prone positioning may allow for a reduction in small bowel dose when using IMRT.

**Target Delineation**

Traditionally, pelvic fields were drawn on 2D x-ray consisting of AP/PA and opposed lateral fields which made up the four-field box. The superior edge of the field was the bottom of L4 and inferiorly drawn to the bottom of the obturator foramen or at least 3cm below the lowest extent of disease. The lateral fields have the same superior/inferior borders with the anterior border is the anterior pubic symphysis and the posterior border is the sacral hollow including S2.

In the era of CT-based planning, PET/CT fusions, and IMRT, more precise delineation of the gross disease and elective volumes can be accomplished. A GTV would consist of gross disease seen on CT scan, PET, and physical examination. An internal target volume (ITV) would account for variation in bladder filling can also be employed but this would require the patient to have two CT simulations (empty and full bladder). The CTV1 expansion would include the entire cervix and uterus (if intact). PTV1 on primary disease is typically 1.5cm. The CTV2 would include the parametrial tissue, paravaginal tissues, and at least the 1/2 upper vagina. If there is vaginal involvement, then consideration of covering the entire vagina should be given. This PTV2 expansion should be 1.0 cm. The elective nodal volumes in the CTV3 should include obturator nodes, external iliac nodes internal iliac nodes, and presacral nodes. Consideration should be given to coverage of the inguinal nodes should be given if there is lower vaginal involvement. PTV expansion on the elective nodes is typically 0.7 cm.

Coverage of the paraaortic nodes may be needed in cases where there is evidence of disease in the nodal chain or the patient has a positive pelvic node and will not be receiving systemic therapy. At which point, the superior boundary would then become the T12/L1 interspace w with the nodal strip ending at the top of the pelvic field L5/S1.

**Dosing and Dose Constraints**

The standard whole pelvic dose is 45-50.4Gy in 1.8 – 2.0Gy per fraction. Any gross nodal disease may be boosted to 60Gy if possible given OAR constraints are not exceeded.

External beam radiation therapy has greatly improved with the adoption of Intensity Modulated Radiotherapy (IMRT) resulting in a reduction in acute toxicity while maintaining oncologic outcomes. Typical organs at risk include the rectum, bladder, bowel, femoral heads, and bone marrow. QUANTEC dose constraints can be an excellent guide. Typically, with external beam therapy alone doses of 45-50Gy alone will not lead to significant rates of bladder or bowel acute toxicity. Trial protocols typically allow for V40<80% for the rectum and V45<35% for the bladder.

**Brachytherapy**

Brachytherapy is typically employed as a boost technique in Stage IB2-IVA cervical cancer. It allows for highly conformal dose delivery to the tumor while minimizing exposure of normal tissues. High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy (>12Gy/hr) is the most commonly used technique however it requires a radioactive source usually Iridium-192.

**Procedure**

Typically, brachytherapy is either started at the conclusion of the external beam portion of the treatment or interdigitated with EBRT in the last week of treatment. EBRT and brachytherapy should not be administered on the same day. Total treatment time (EBRT and Brachytherapy) should not exceed 8 weeks. Excessive treatment times can result in a 1%/day decline in local control and overall survival.

**Pre-implant**

Prior to undergoing brachytherapy, a review of the patient’s history, pathology, imaging, and physical exam should be performed. A complete blood and metabolic panel should be obtained within a week of the procedure. Metabolic derangements should be investigated and corrected prior to the procedure. Patients with Absolute Neutrophil Counts (ANC) less than 500 mm should not undergo the procedure until counts have recovered. Review of medications especially anticoagulants should be done and PT/INR obtained. Careful consideration should be given to holding anticoagulant medications prior to the procedure. Inpatients that are confined to bed should be given thrombopropylaxis while in house as well as calf compression devices. Bowel preparation should also be reviewed with the patient prior to the procedure.

**Applicators**

Several applicators exist which may be used for various clinical scenarios. The ring and tandem is the most common device used for intact cervical cancer. The tandem is placed in the cervical canal while the ring is placed inside the vaginal fornices. Tandem and ovoids are utilized in a similar way but are preferred in patients with a barrel shaped cervix. Interstitial applicators such as the Syed template can be used in patients with extensive parametria involvement, pelvic side wall involvement, lower vaginal involvement, or vaginal cuff recurrence. Tandem and cylinder applicators can be used in cases of vaginal stenosis, inability to place a ring or ovoid, or lower vaginal involvement <5mm thick. Modifications to the Tandem and Ring or Vaginal cylinder can be made to also accommodate interstitial needles.

**Anesthesia**

Patient discomfort experienced during the procedure can lead to suboptimal placement of the applicator, longer procedure times, and distress for the patient. An anesthetic is typically required to help optimize patient comfort and procedure mechanics. The types of anesthesia administered varies but can include general anesthesia, spinal anesthesia, epidural anesthesia, intravenous conscious sedation, and oral pain medication.

**Placement of an Intracavitary Applicator for an Intact Cervix**

The patient is placed in the dorsal lithotomy position in stirrups. After adequate sterile preparation of the area, a Foley catheter is inserted and the balloon inflated with dilute contrast to allow for detecting on CT. A speculum is then inserted to visualize the cervix and a uterine sound is then used to determine the length of the cavity. This will aid in determined the length and angle of the tandem. A Smitt sleeve is occasionally used to maintain the patency of the cervical os but if not present then serial dilations may be required. Once this is complete, the tandem is inserted followed by the ring or ovoid. Fiducial markers may also be placed at the time of procedure to outline the extent of disease or the opening of the cervical os so it is visible on CT. These applicators can be locked in place so that their relative positions do not change.

Displacement of the bladder and rectum are critical to reduce excess dose and limit toxicity. The packing material can consist of gauze soaked in a radiopaque solution. Applicators fitted with inflatable balloons or separate rectal blades are also available. Anterior packing displaces the bladder while posterior packing displaces the rectum. It is very important to ensure no packing is placed in front of the ring or ovoids as this will significantly reduce the dose.

Once complete, the patient will undergo a CT simulation for 3D brachytherapy planning. Three dimensional CT based planning has been shown to have improved overall survival (65% vs 74%) and lower rates of Grade 3-4 toxicity (23% vs 3%) compared to 2D planning.****A 1-5mm slice thickness is recommended.**.**Technically, low and high intensity magnetic field MRI machines can be utilized.  Patients can be given glucagon prior to MRI to reduce bowel motion. A pelvic coil is recommended to increase the signal-to-noise ratio. Ideally a 3mm slice thickness should be the obtained which helps improve detection of parametrial involvement, but <5mm is acceptable. The disadvantage of this approach is the increased costs, longer procedure times, and need for strict MR compatibility of the materials being used.

Proper placement of the applicator should be confirmed. This can be accomplished with plain radiography or more advanced imaging such as CT or MRI. Adequate placement includes the tandem bisecting the ring/ovoids on AP and lateral imaging, tandem 1/3-1/2 the distance between the sacral promontory and the pubic symphysis, the tip of tandem below the sacral promontory, no packing superior to the ring/ovoids, and no inferior displacement of the ring/ovoids relative to the flange.

**Target Delineation**

As part of 3D based planning, contouring of the targets is essential. GEC-ESTRO has established standardized terminology regarding target delineation.

Normal organs at risk (OARs) should be contoured to include the bladder, rectum, sigmoid colon, and vagina.

**Dose and Dose Constraints**

Ensuring adequate dose to the target is critical and has been shown to lead to improved local control and survival. Dose and fractionation schemes may vary by institutional preference but they must result in a total equivalent dose in 2 gray fractions (EQD2) of 85Gy or higher assuming 45Gy was originally delivered to the pelvis. There are several calculators that exist that allow for the EQD2 to be determined. The EQD2 spreadsheet utilized by the EMBRACE trial group colloquially known as the “Vienna Spreadsheet” allows for EQD2 calculations to the target structures as well as the organs at risk. The most common dose fractionation schemes include 4 X 7Gy, 5 X 6Gy, and 6 X 5Gy which have EQD2 of approximately 90.1, 88.6, and 83.7Gy respectively.

For 3D-based planning, the critical dosimetric parameter is the D90≥90%. The goal is for 90% of the HR-CTV to be covered by at least 90% of the prescription dose. The EQD2 should be calculated to ensure the total dose received is approximately 85Gy or higher. There are instances where it is acceptable for the EQD2 to be slightly lower. In cases of a complete response prior to brachytherapy or partial response with <4cm in residual disease then EQD2>80Gy may be used while those with >4cm residual disease >85Gy is recommended.

Despite the transition to 3D-based volumetric planning and the continued evolution of brachytherapy treatment, 2D dosimetric reporting systems persist and should be understood. Point A, where the uterine artery crosses the ureter, is located 2cm up the tandem and 2cm normal to the tandem and was originally part of the Manchester system. This point was traditionally where the prescription dose was prescribed, but more recently has become a starting point where dose coverage can be further manipulated in 3D to ensure coverage of the HR-CTV. Point B, also part of the original Manchester system, is located 2 cm up the tandem and 5cm from the patient’s midline. This represents the pelvic side wall lymphatics and typically received 1/3 of the prescription dose. It has fallen out of favor and is no longer reported. The isodose lines for typical tandem and ring/ovoid implant should appear pear-shaped. In addition, the ICRU 38 specified a bladder and rectal point. The bladder point is located posterior to the foley balloon that has been pulled down to the neck of the bladder. The rectal point is 5mm posterior to the vaginal wall.

Doses to OARs must also be carefully documented. Again, it is the cumulative dose EQD2 that is critical. The dosimetric parameter D, which represents the highest dose received by 2 cubic centimeters of tissue, is commonly used for evaluating a brachytherapy plan. The ABS guidelines allow for the D2cc of the bladder to receive **≤**90Gy EQD2 while the Dof the rectum and sigmoid should be ≤ 75Gy EQD2. However, recent data suggest that late rectal morbidity may be substantially lower even using a D2cc ≤ 65Gy.

**Complications**

Long-term toxicity is a concern with any patient that receives radiation therapy. The most frequent complications are bowel/rectal and urinary. There does not appear to be a difference in the frequency or severity of complications with respect to age. The greatest risk of late sequelae is typically within three years of treatment.

**Proctitis**

Radiation proctitis can result in tenesmus and intermittent bleeding with bowel movements. Treatment is the same with acute proctitis that can occur during radiation. It typically occurs at 3 months post-treatment at the earliest but may take years to develop. Treatments can include Mesalamine or steroid-based suppositories with the goal of relieving pain and stopping any bleeding. Randomized trials have suggested that mesalamine may be slightly more efficacious than steroid-based suppositories.

**Cystitis**

Radiation cystitis can lead to dysuria, urinary frequency, and in some cases hematuria. It can occur acutely within 2-3 weeks of starting radiotherapy up to 3 years post-treatment.

For acute cystitis, a urinary tract infection must be ruled out therefore a urinalysis is an appropriate first time. For dysuria relief, a short course of pyridium can be used although the urine color change may be alarming for some patients and they should be counseled ahead of time. Urinary frequency can be treated with anticholinergic drugs such as oxybutynin or mirabegron although caution is advised when used in elderly patients.

Chronic cystitis has an incidence of 5-10%.

In refractory cases, hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) has been utilized and has been shown to provide relief and control bleeding in 92% of cases however recurrences may occur.

**Secondary Malignancy**

Radiation-induced cancers tend to appear several decades after treatment. The overall risk of secondary malignancy is increased with the use of pelvic radiotherapy compared to those treated with surgery alone. Women treated under the age of 50 had a 40 year cumulative risk of 22% vs 16% for those treated over 50.

**Hormone Deficiency**

Radiation-induced ovarian failure typically occurs within 6-12 months post-radiation. Minimum doses for ovarian failure are inversely related to age ranging from 20.3Gy at birth to 14.3Gy at the age of 30.

**Vaginal Stenosis**

Vaginal stenosis and canal shortening can develop over months to years post-treatment. Stenosis can make it difficult for intercourse and to obtain gynecological exams. Consistent use of a vaginal dilator is typically recommended however compliance is highly variable. Sexual dysfunction is quite common ranging from a lack of desire for sexual activity to a lack of adequate vaginal lubrication.

**Bone Fracture**

Pelvic radiotherapy can increase the risk of pelvic fractures with most fractures occurring at dose levels of 45-63Gy. Bone health is another concern in patients that undergo radiation to the pelvis. Approximately 10% of patients radiated for cervical cancer experienced a pelvic fracture. The most common site of fracture is the sacrum with the majority occurring within 2 years after treatment. Bone mineral density scans and appropriate intervention to maintain bone health may help to reduce this risk.

**Uterine Perforation**

Uterine perforations is a complication related to brachytherapy applicator insertion resulting in excessive doses to normal tissues, poor target coverage, bleeding, and infection. Rates of perforation range from 2-18%.