**Clinical Evaluation**

The diagnosis of acute adenoiditis is made clinically based on the findings of:

- Possible concurrent acute otitis media

- Fever

- Purulent rhinorrhea

- Post-nasal drip

- Nasal obstruction

- Throat pain

- Halitosis

Visual inspection of the adenoids may be attempted using a laryngeal mirror or nasal endoscope.

**Laboratory Testing**

- Rapid Strep test

- Cultures

- Allergy testing

If adenoiditis presents in the context of pharyngitis, the clinician may perform a rapid Strep test. The purpose of doing so is two-fold. First, this will give a definitive diagnosis of the patient’s condition and help guide antibiotic therapy. Second, the doctor’s office will have a record of positive and negative strep tests, which will play an important role when deciding whether an adenoidectomy, with or without tonsillectomy, is indicated. It is important to remember that adenoiditis remains a clinical diagnosis, so if the Strep test is negative, the physician can presume that symptoms are due to a different causative organism.

In cases of persistent infection despite antibiotic therapy, the clinician may choose to perform throat cultures to help identify the causative agent and guide treatment, as direct cultures of the adenoids may be difficult in the office setting. Other tests to consider include a complete blood count and HIV testing.

If the adenoiditis is believed to result from seasonal or environmental allergies, allergy skin testing may help direct therapy.****

**Radiology Testing**

- Lateral neck X-ray

- Computed tomography (CT) of the sinuses

Sinus X-rays or sinus CTs may be obtained to look for a source of infection in the sinuses if this is suspected clinically. This is rarely required in routine cases. Lateral neck X-rays are an effective way to evaluate specifically for adenoid hypertrophy. A sleep study can be obtained to rule out obstructive sleep apnea in a patient with adenoid hypertrophy who snores.