Treatment of diabetic gastroparesis aims to alleviate the associated symptoms and replenish electrolytes, nutrition, and hydration. Frequently used medications include erythromycin (macrolide antibiotic-associated with increased gastrointestinal motility) and metoclopramide (antiemetic and prokinetic), and polyethylene glycol 3350 may additionally be used to provide relief from severe constipation. Patients who continue to experience gastroparesis symptoms despite medical therapy may be candidates for gastric electrical stimulation (GES), wherein an electrical device is implanted into the abdomen. Unfortunately, no treatment works reliably or consistently. Once the condition has been diagnosed, it is progressive and imparts a very poor quality of life.

The management of diabetic gastroparesis is extremely challenging. It is best done with an interprofessional team that includes an internist, endocrinologist, diabetes nurse educator, primary care provider, gastroenterologist, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists. Specialty nurses play the crucial role of assisting clinicians with patient education and monitoring at regular intervals to ensure adequate control of symptoms. A diabetes nurse educator can assist the clinical team by educating the patient on adequate glycemic control to prevent the progression of this disease. Clinical pharmacists are essential in monitoring patients for adverse reactions from therapy and to limit potential drug-drug interactions. This interprofessional approach will optimize patient outcomes. [Level 5]