**Dietary Recommendations To Prevent Dental Caries**

When a population consumes less than 15 to 20 kg/person/year of free sugars, the levels of dental caries remain low.

Food that stimulates saliva secretion has a protective effect against caries, e.g., hard cheeses, peanuts, wholegrain foods, and sugar-free chewing gum.

A diet rich in fresh vegetables, fruits, and wholegrain starches and low in added sugars and fat prevents chronic diseases associated with diet, including oral conditions like dental caries, periodontal infections, and oral malignancy.

**The Prenatal Stage**

Mothers and caregivers influence their children's diet and oral hygiene. Pregnant women have a unique opportunity to receive appropriate information about healthy dietary habits and general oral hygiene to prevent early childhood caries in their children. Furthermore, maintaining good oral hygiene must be emphasized, as mothers and caregivers are the sources of cariogenic bacteria in their children.

Poor nutrition in pregnant women may result in developmental anomalies in the infants' teeth.

Dietary recommendations for pregnant women to prevent dental caries in their children include the following:

- Following the healthy eating pyramid.

- Reduce the consumption of cariogenic food, particularly between meals.

- Taking prenatal supplements containing vitamins and minerals as prescribed by their general physician.

**From Birth to the First Year of Age**

The first few years after birth are critical since there is a massive dietary shift from exclusive milk and liquid diet to a modified adult diet. Breastfeeding is strongly recommended in the first year of life because of its nutritional and immunological benefits. Breast milk is insignificant in the development of early childhood caries as compared to night-time bottle feeding, which should be discouraged. Breast milk is low in fluoride.

Parenting plays an important role in the transition from milk to solid foods. Parents influence what the child likes or dislikes, the quality of diet, and overall weight status.

- Ensuring optimal nutrition.

- Decreasing the consumption of drinks other than breast milk, formula, and water.

- Avoiding putting the child to bed with a bottle.

- Prohibiting dipping pacifiers in foods with high concentrations of sugars, like honey or syrup.

- Dissuading constant sipping of drinks from a bottle.

**First and Second Year of Age**

Establishing a healthy eating pattern at a young age benefits oral and general health. Parents should make careful choices regarding types of snacks; low-cariogenic food such as fruits and cheese must be encouraged.

- Continuing to discourage constant drinking from a bottle and putting the child to bed with a bottle.

- Establishing a routine eating pattern.

- Offering non-cariogenic snacks, like cheese.

- Limiting the consumption of cariogenic food to mealtimes.

- Restricting the consumption of sugary drinks to 120 ml (4 oz) per day.

**From Two to Five Years of Age**

Children would prefer foods high in sugar and calories if exposed to repeated consumption of such foods early in infancy.

During this period, children begin to be more independent, make their own food choices, and increase food snacking between meals.

Dietary recommendations to prevent dental caries at this age include:

- Continuing to promote regular eating patterns.

- Promoting eating cariogenic foods only with meals.

- Offering non-cariogenic or low-cariogenic snacks, like cheese and fruits.

- Avoiding sugar-containing foods that are sticky or slowly eaten.