**Healthcare Safety**

As many as 50% of providers report being the victim of violence at one point in their careers.

**General Prevention Measures**

General prophylactic safety measures to best obviate workplace violence include and prevent the use of seclusion and restraint:

- **Security**— A survey of 250 Emergency Departments in the United States showed that nearly 77% of hospitals did not have 24-hour security, and only 1.6% used metal detectors.

- **The efficiency of operation**— Long waiting times have been associated with a predisposition to violence in Emergency Departments. A census of approximately 50,000 patients showed that a waiting time of two hours is significantly associated with an increased incidence of violence.

- **Warning sign recognition**— Training personnel to recognize disruptive patients at the onset of a visit can help raise staff awareness and increase set precautions. A 1997 survey of 517 psychiatric residents indicated that 36% were physically assaulted, and nearly 66% described themselves as undertrained or without training in managing violent patients.

- **Access control**— A study of emergency department security in 250 hospitals concluded that solely 21% of hospitals controlled ED access during high-risk time periods.

- **Alarm systems**— Alarms can be used for enhanced patient and staff safety. Some examples of alarm types include pressure-sensitive bed alarms, patient room alarms, and staff panic alarms.

**Negative Consequences of Restraint and Seclusion**

Healthcare workers should be aware that restraint and seclusion can have significant adverse implications on patients and should be deemed a last resort. It is the duty of healthcare professionals to follow the four basic ethical healthcare principles: autonomy, justice, beneficence, and non-maleficence. In accordance with both beneficence - the act of doing good - and non-maleficence - do no harm, healthcare providers must ensure the administration of restraint is implemented as a last resort. A 2019 meta-analysis on the effects of restraint and seclusion estimated that the precipitation of posttraumatic stress disorder following restraint interventions ranged from 25% to 47%.

Healthcare workers must also be sure to appropriately monitor the patient following restraint and seclusion to avoid deleterious effects such as pressure ulcers, skin breakdown, abrasions, asphyxia, strangulation, incontinence, depression, social isolation, and drug overdose or interaction.