The simple cyst usually has a good prognosis and follow it up with imaging studies. After surgical interventions, it usually doesn't require follow-up unless the patient becomes symptomatic, and there is a high risk of recurrence rates.

Isolated PCLD has a benign prognosis compared with ADPLD and is mainly asymptomatic. The primary aim of PCLD treatment focused on reducing liver volume. However, surgical interventions carry a high risk of significant morbidity. Nevertheless, the benefits should be weighed carefully against their complications. A Progression to the end-stage liver is expected in the context of extremely increased liver mass.

Liver failure is seen incidentally, usually in a late stage of the disease. Liver volume is considered a prognostic tool as it affects both symptom burden and patients' quality of life. In liver diseases, the MELD score used to assess three-month prognosis in patients with liver failure is a leading tool to select patients for liver transplantation. As the function of the liver in patients with PCLD remains intact, this score will not increase.

PCLD patients who are carriers of mutations in PRKCSH or SEC63 showed a more severe disease course than patients without a known mutation. Also, patients with mutations in PKD2 have more favorable renal prognosis than patients with mutations in PKD1.

For BCA and BCAC, there are limited prognostic factors following resection of BCA and BCAC due to the paucity of the disease. However, the overall prognosis is considered better than other malignant tumors of the liver. Some studies have found that favorable outcomes occur in patients who perform total resection resulting in only a 5% to 10% recurrence rate.