Adverse effects of sunscreen include four types of contact dermatitis: irritant, allergic, phototoxic, and photoallergic.

An American study revealed that UV filters are the most common cause of positive photo patch testing.

The adverse effects of physical sunscreen are due to the usage of nanoparticles, which have a more beneficial cosmetic effect. The increased surface area of nanoparticles can result in a greater level of catalytic reactions, increasing the production of free radicals and damage to DNA and proteins. These smaller particles can form complexes with the protein that can behave as haptens, inducing autoimmune conditions.

Three observations led to the review of animal and human studies regarding the adverse effects of UV filters:

- An increase in sunscreen use

- An increase in the incidence of malignant melanoma

- An increase in experimental studies demonstrating UV filters have adverse endocrine effects

In vivo and in vitro animal studies have shown multiple potential adverse effects of UV filters within sunscreen. These adverse effects include endocrine dysfunction of the reproductive and developmental systems. The UV filters of concern include BP-3, 4-MBC, and OMC. An anti-estrogenic effect was strongly associated with BP-3 as well as 3-BC, 4 MBC, and OMC. This finding was based on the uterine weight of immature rats. UV filters demonstrated the anti-estrogenic effect of HMS, OD-PABA, and PABA in yeast expressing human estrogen receptor a. After exposure to UV filters, 3-BC, and 4—MBC, there was a delay in male puberty and reduced prostate weight. The mechanism of action behind the reproductive toxicity may be due to alterations in proteins of the gene expression of estrogen receptor, androgen receptor, progesterone receptor, insulin-like growth factor I, complement proteins, nuclear receptor co-repressor, and steroid receptor coactivator 1 in the uterus and prostate. In a 90-day study with BP-3, fertility was affected in male mice. This finding was demonstrated by decreased sperm density in a dose-related manner following dermal exposure in mice and oral exposure in mice and rats.

Experimental studies in humans have demonstrated an increased permeability of the UV filters BP-3, 4 MBC, and OMC. Levels were detectable in the plasma 1 to 2 hours after exposure. The study also demonstrated a difference in concentration based on gender. Male urine and plasma concentration samples were higher than female samples. A Swiss study of human breast milk revealed that 85% of the sample contained UV filters. Bisphenol and BP-3 share a similar chemical structure. Bisphenol can cross the blood-placenta barrier, so the assumption is that BP-3 can also cross the placenta. An increased concentration of BP-3 in a mother's urine was associated with decreased birth weight in girls and increased birth weight and head circumference in boys.