The infraspinatus is a portion of the rotator cuff muscles composed of the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis. These muscles act to stabilize the glenohumeral joint. The tendons of these muscles are nonlinear, viscoelastic, and heterogeneous. A major component of these tendons is collagen, which creates a matrix providing extensibility. The transition point of a tendon to bone insertion can be broken down into the following four zones: tendon mid-substance, fibrocartilage, calcified fibrocartilage, and bone.

The infraspinatus originates from the medial three-quarters of the infraspinous fossa and the dorsal part of the scapula inferior to the scapular spine. The infraspinous fossa is found on the posterior scapula. The scapular spine divides the posterior aspect of the scapula into the supraspinous and infraspinous fossae. Of note, the teres minor muscle also originates from the infraspinous fossa. The distal tendinous portion runs along the lateral border of the scapular spine then passes across the posterior aspect of the shoulder joint to its insertion on the middle facet of the greater tuberosity of the humerus. This attachment is bounded by the attachments of the supraspinatus and teres minor, superiorly and inferiorly, respectively. The infraspinous fascia covers the muscle and creates a distinction between itself and the teres minor and major.

The infraspinatus muscle's action on the shoulder is primarily through its function as a rotator cuff muscle providing glenohumeral stability. The rotator cuff applies compression upon the head of the humerus that allows for the stabilization of the humeral head during shoulder abduction. The muscles of the rotator cuff provide opposing forces to balance the movement of the shoulder. The infraspinatus is involved in anterior-posterior force balance as the infraspinatus provides the posterior force, and the subscapular provides the anterior force. When the rotator cuff muscles are deficient (for example, a torn infraspinatus tendon), the humeral head will elevate partially out of the glenoid fossa, decreasing the efficiency of the deltoid muscles abduction action.

The infraspinatus has actions on the head of the humerus. The infraspinatus insertion at the middle facet of the glenoid tubercle allows it to exert a lateral or external rotational force. This force is synergistic with the teres minor, as it inserts on the inferior facet of the glenoid tubercle. Compared to the other rotator cuff muscles, the infraspinatus has the second-largest anatomic footprint on the humerus. The subscapularis has the largest.

The infraspinatus also acts on the scapula. When the shoulder is held in anatomic position, the infraspinatus allows the abduction of the inferior angle of the scapula, termed scaption. Scaption makes the scapula more mobile, which assists the other shoulder muscles in allowing for full shoulder abduction.