**Mental Status**

A single GCS score is of limited value; it is insufficient to determine the degree of injury after trauma and does not have prognostic value.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a nonspecific term for an injury to the brain due to various injury mechanisms (i.e., blunt, penetrating, or blast injury). TBI can be classified as mild, moderate, or severe; this classification is based on the GCS score. The term “concussion” (interchangeable with mild/minor TBI) is defined as a reversible impairment of neurologic function following head injury. Clinical features of concussion include loss of consciousness during the traumatic injury, “seeing stars” (visual changes), and other symptoms such as headache, dizziness, nausea, and vomiting.

- Mild/Minor TBI: GCS 13 to 15; Mortality 0.1%

- Moderate TBI: GCS 9 to 12; Mortality 10%

- Severe TBI: GCS less than 9; Mortality 40%

It is important to note that individuals, even with a mild TBI, often can develop post-concussive syndrome (PCS), with headaches, lethargy, mental dullness, sleep disturbance, and other symptoms that can persist for several months after a TBI.

Impaired consciousness can occur in response to damage to the brainstem. Toxic and metabolic factors also are common causes of impaired consciousness because of their effects on these structures and must be explored during early evaluation since trauma can co-occur with intoxication.

The presence of flat affect may result from significant head trauma as a result of damage to the frontal lobes, an area of the brain not well-tested by the standard motor and sensory examination.

**Cranial Nerves**

Visual field defects can suggest damage to some point along the complex visual pathways.

The pupil reactivity, or light reaction, depends on the intact pathway from the retina via the optic nerve (CN #2) to the midbrain and then back to the pupillary sphincter muscle via the oculomotor nerve (CN #3). A loss of reaction can be due to injury anywhere along this pathway and can be easily lateralized during an examination. The presence of asymmetrical or abnormally responsive pupils may also be present due to brainstem damage.

Normal eye position and movements are dependent on the oculomotor (CN #3), trochlear (CN #4), and abducens (CN #6) nerves. The absence of the oculocephalic reflex (doll’s eye movements) suggests brainstem dysfunction in the comatose patient but can be normal in the awake/conscious patient. Abnormal horizontal eye movements indicate damage to the oculomotor nerve (CN #3), abducens nerve (CN #6), or the pons. Abnormal vertical eye movements indicate damage to the oculomotor nerve (CN #3), trochlear nerve (CN #4), or the midbrain. An abducens nerve palsy may result from a clivus fracture or as a false localizing sign due to elevated intracranial pressure.

The lack of a corneal reflex on either side suggests damage to the trigeminal nerve (CN #5) or Facial nerve (CN #7). Loss of hearing can suggest damage to the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN #8) or crucial middle/inner ear structures.

Lack of a gag reflex or an asymmetric response is indicative of damage to either the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN #9) or the vagus nerve (CN #10). Lack of any gag reflex may suggest damage to the afferent portion of the reflex, the glossopharyngeal nerve. An asymmetric elevation of the uvula is more suggestive of damage to one of the two efferent portions of the reflex, the left or right vagus nerve.

Significant weakness or asymmetric appearance during testing of the accessory nerve (CN #11) and hypoglossal nerve (CN #12) would suggest damage to these nerves.

**Sensory, Motor, and Reflexes**

The sensory exam, motor exam, and reflex testing of the extremities, done systematically, are important to help identify the location and extent of an injury. New onset of sensation loss or sensation changes, muscle weakness, or alterations in reflexes noticed during the post-traumatic neurologic examination can be used in conjunction with knowledge of the key dermatomes and myotomes to localize impairment to a potential single peripheral nerve, peripheral plexus, or spinal nerve level.

In acute traumatic injury to the spinal cord, there is initially a phase called “spinal shock.”

**General Findings**

Fundoscopic findings such as papilledema suggest increased intracranial pressure and should be addressed. Subhyaloid hemorrhage is suggestive of a subarachnoid hemorrhage.

In the case of direct head trauma, bony-step off will be present in the case of a displaced skull fracture. CSF rhinorrhea often occurs with a base-of-skull fracture involving the ethmoid bone. CSF otorrhea and hemotympanum can occur with a base-of-skull fracture involving the temporal bone. Battle sign and raccoon eyes are also suggestive of base-of-skull fractures.