ESP block is most often performed in the pre-operative holding area by anesthesiologists, anesthesiology residents, or nurse anesthetists. A peri-operative nurse should also be present during the procedure to help with the pre-procedural timeout, patient positioning, and monitoring of patient vitals. During the timeout, practitioners should verify the procedure to be performed, the side of procedure, allergies, and any potential contraindications to performing the procedure. Also, sterility during the procedure must be maintained, and resuscitation medications and equipment must be readily available in case of emergency. At all times during the procedure, a dedicated nurse must monitor the patient's vital signs and oxygenation.

Pharmacists can have a role in preparing the blocking agent and verifying appropriate dosing as well as performing medication reconciliation, notifying the team of any concerns that may present.

Nursing's are essential members of the team, contributing to the success of the ESP block process.

Post-operatively, nursing should be aware of the specifics of the management of the catheter. The nursing staff requires training that ESP block catheters are not epidural catheters, as the location of the catheter near the midline on the patient’s back may confuse them. The nursing staff should also be made aware of clinical presentations of potential complications of the ESP, including bleeding, local anesthetic toxicity, and pneumothorax. Any untoward complications should be immediately reported.

Only with a collaborative, interprofessional team approach can an ESP block be performed without significant complications. [Level V]