**Pharmacokinetics**

In therapeutic doses, phenytoin is absorbed entirely and reaches peak plasma concertation at 1.5 to 3 hours. However, in settings of acute ingestions, absorption tends to last longer than two weeks; this is potentially attributable to its effects on reducing the gastrointestinal motility and poor water solubility.

Fosphenytoin can be administered intramuscularly (IM) or intravenously (IV) but requires enzymatic conversion by phosphatase in the body to the active phenytoin compound.

**Distribution**

Phenytoin is usually 90% bound to plasma proteins (mostly albumin), and only its unbound form is pharmacologically active. The fraction of protein binding may be lower in neonates, pregnant patients, hypoalbuminemia, and uremia. It is distributed in all tissues and becomes firmly tissue-bound with a large volume of distribution.

Its levels are higher in the central nervous system as compared to the serum.

**Metabolism**

The hepatic P450 enzyme system metabolizes phenytoin, (predominantly CYP2C9 and CYP 2C19) to inactive metabolites, and is an inducer of CYP3A4, which account for many of its drug-drug interactions.

Because the metabolism of phenytoin is predominantly by the cytochrome P450 enzyme system, drugs that alter the function of these enzymes either by inducing or inhibiting phenytoin would require monitoring and possible medication adjustments to phenytoin based on resulting follow up phenytoin levels.

Medications that inhibit these enzymes increase the phenytoin plasma concentrations. Some of These drugs include amiodarone, cimetidine, cotrimoxazole, disulfiram, fluconazole, metronidazole, chloramphenicol, sodium valproate, 5-fluorouracil, and sulphonamides.

Medications that induce the enzyme system to decrease plasma phenytoin concentrations include alcohol, barbiturates, carbamazepine, theophylline, rifampin, and other medications.

**Excretion**

1% to 5% of the drug is excreted in the urine unchanged. At plasma concentrations below 10 mg/L, elimination will follow first-order kinetics; following saturation of the system due to increased drug concentrations, elimination changes to zero-order kinetics. Subsequently, the usual average half-life of 22 hours can become significantly prolonged with marked overdose.

**Monitoring**

Therapeutic drug monitoring of phenytoin is necessary to ensure dosage delivery is at therapeutic levels.

Knowledge of its pharmacokinetic properties is crucial for correct interpretation of total serum concentrations when protein binding becomes altered due to hypoalbuminemia, renal failure, or interaction with other protein-bound drugs such as valproate.

Theoretical equations such as the Sheiner-Tozer equation have been introduced to calculate adjusted serum concentration levels and avoid inappropriate adjustment of dosage of phenytoin. However, they have not seen broad implementation in clinical practice due to poor patient outcomes.

Closer investigation of total serum phenytoin and serum albumin ratio by healthcare providers is critical for proper monitoring of phenytoin therapy.