There is a lack of availability of concrete guidelines on the management of microphthalmia with cyst. The basic approach towards managing this condition is determined by certain critical factors. Prime consideration should be given to

- Age at presentation

- Volume of the orbit

- Pattern of the growth of the cyst.

Visual and cosmetic rehabilitation should be initiated only after ensuring no visual potential in the microphthalmic globe.

Orbital volume in a normal person linearly expands up to 5 to 6 years of age, followed by a marked decrease in the rate in the subsequent years.

The indications of early cyst removal are as follows:

- Ill-fitting prosthesis or orbital wall displacement in the presence of the cyst

- Rapidly progressive cystic enlargement due to spontaneous or post-traumatic hemorrhage into the cavity. A dark red fluid (instead of the usual translucent yellow fluid) is revealed on examination in these cases.

- Cyst prolapse through the palpebral fissures

In a child < 7 years of age, conformer therapy must be initiated as soon as the patient’s first presentation in the clinics for best outcomes. For the first few months, a weekly follow-up is usually recommended. Serial augmentation of the conformer’s size with successive visits is necessary as the child grows. Customized, painted, or centrally hollow (when the vision is preserved) conformers are being worn lately. If the orbital volume is severely reduced (< 85% as compared to the contralateral side), the use of orbital expanders over rigid conformers is the preferred approach.

Socket enlargement is directly proportional to the implanted volume in the socket. As compared to the rigid, static spheric implants made from silicone, orbital expanders (dynamic orbital implants) increase in volume to stimulate bony orbital growth in these hypoplastic juvenile sockets. An autogenous Dermis Fat Graft (DFG), a natural biocompatible, slow-growing dynamic implant, is an effective option for socket reconstruction in a hypoplastic orbit.

Synthetic orbital expanders are of three types:

- Hard spherical implants – Patients with these implants often require subsequent surgeries, thereby undergoing repeated ocular trauma

- Inflatable soft tissue expanders – Saline-filled fluid chambers are fixed to the subperiosteal orbital space, and the filling port is attached subcutaneously in the temporalis fossa. Disadvantages include premature extrusion, uncontrolled directional expansion, and a painful injection.

- Hydrogel implants

Approved by United States Food and Drug Administration (US-FDA) in 2006, integrated tissue expander fulfills all basic criteria for an ideal expander with minimal tissue loss and subsequent surgical procedures. Since it is inserted through a lateral canthal incision, simultaneous placement of prosthesis may be performed over an intact conjunctival surface.

Surgically excising the cyst (in-toto) is the recommended method of removal. Cyst aspiration may be performed prior to surgical removal or as a stand-alone procedure. A high recurrence rate limits its use as the first line of surgical treatment.

In a severely microphthalmic globe (with no visual potential) with an associated cyst, excision may be combined with enucleation/evisceration followed by placement of an orbital implant (DFGs, hydroxyapatite, Medpor – porous polyethylene, or silicone) in the same setting.

Any eyelid procedure or socket reconstruction using mucous membrane grafts should be reserved for the late phase of life. In patients with Blepharophimosis and increased inter-canthal distance (ICD), a combined Z lateral canthoplasty and V-Y medial canthoplasty is an effective method of correction. A secondary surgery in the earlier stage of life leads to cicatrix formation resulting in poorer cosmesis. A customized prosthesis must be considered for better outcomes.

Orbito-cranial advancement surgery that allows for the advancement of bone forwards and outwards by virtue of bone grafts should be kept as a last resort in hypoplastic orbits.