Topical minoxidil (empirical formula C9H15N5O) is a hair growth stimulator. Its mechanism of action is not well-established. Scalp sulfotransferase changes minoxidil into minoxidil sulfate, the active form of the molecule. Variations between individuals in sulfotransferase activity may be the cause of the discrepancy in minoxidil efficiency.

Minoxidil acts by shortening the telogen phase, causing the quiescent hair follicles to enter prematurely into the anagen phase. The shortening of the telogen phase may induce telogen effluvium after the initiation of minoxidil therapy. Also, minoxidil extends the duration of the anagen phase. Lastly, increased hair length and diameter are the clinical effects of minoxidil.

The initial effects of minoxidil occur after approximately eight weeks of treatment, and maximal effects take place after four months. Minoxidil appears to act on the potassium channels of vascular smooth muscles and hair follicles, which may induce the following effects:

- Stimulation of the microcirculation near the hair follicles by inducing arteriolar vasodilation, which may cause hair growth

- Induction of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression increases vascularization around the hair follicles, thus contributing to hair growth.

- Activation of the prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase one which stimulates hair growth.

- Inhibition of androgen effects on the androgen-sensitive hair follicles.

- Direct stimulation of the hair follicles: Minoxidil may act as an ‘epidermal growth factor’ on matrix cells delaying their aging, thus prolonging the duration of the anagen phase via the activation of the beta-catenin pathway.

- Minoxidil has been demonstrated to possess anti-fibrotic properties secondary to its effect on collagen synthesis.