The management of CSF leaks should be tailored according to the underlying etiology. As many traumatic leaks cease spontaneously, it is advisable to wait and watch for a short time. If the leakage persists, the first step involves conservative non-invasive management by interventions that lower the ICP. These include recumbency, cerebral decongestants like acetazolamide, avoiding straining exercises, and not blowing the nose. The presence of significant dural defects, bony spicules, comorbidities, extremes of age reduce the chances of spontaneous healing of CSF leaks.

For persistent leaks, drainage of CSF via repeated lumbar puncture or continuous lumbar drainage via percutaneous catheter can be done. However, for the non-traumatic causes or for iatrogenic trauma during surgery, the likelihood of resolution with conservative management is lower. Nonetheless, an initial trial of conservative management followed by CSF diversion is instituted. Iatrogenic CSF leak during posterior fossa surgeries can be prevented by meticulous watertight dural closure and obliteration of air cells with bone wax or using a muscle patch with fibrin glue.

**CSF Diversion Strategies**

If conservative strategies fail, continuous or intermittent CSF drainage using a lumbar drain is done. Continuous drainage is usually done at the rate of 5 to 10 ml/hr (150 to 200 ml/day), while for intermittent drainage protocol, 20 to 30 ml of CSF is drained every 4 hours. Caution should be maintained to prevent over-drainage. A trial of CSF diversion is generally continued for 5 to 7 days. Failure in control of the CSF leak warrants surgical management. In the scenario where conservative measures fail, surgical management is indicated irrespective of the leak's etiology. The surgical procedure and approach are tailored depending on the site of the leak.

**Timing of Surgery**

The decision to proceed with definitive surgical management depends on the etiology and presentation timing concerning the initial insult. Early surgery without trial of conservative management or CSF diversion is indicated in patients suffering from penetrating injury like gunshot wounds, meningitis, pneumocephalus, large identifiable bony defect, external herniation of brain parenchyma through the wound. An initial trial of conservative management followed by CSF diversion is instituted in the remaining cases, and delayed definitive surgical management is planned if the above measures fail.

**Approach**

**Cranial CSF Leaks**

The traditional approach is a transcranial repair of skull base defects. For defects in the anterior cranial fossa, a bicoronal scalp flap is raised along with harvesting a pedicled pericranial flap. After performing a bifrontal craniotomy, the leak site is identified, and a combined intra and extradural repair are performed.

Endoscopic repair of CSF leak has gained popularity, especially for anterior and middle skull base repairs owing to the panoramic view and better visualization of the defect site. Central leaks are managed using an endonasal trans-ethmoid or transseptal approach, while the transpterygoid approach is used for lateral leaks. After the leak site is identified, the placement of an appropriately sized graft completes the procedure.

**Spinal CSF Leaks**

Wound re-exploration with identification of the leak site is made. It can be repaired primarily or using a free graft reinforced with fibrin glue. A meticulous fascial closure in layers is paramount in achieving closure of the spinal CSF fistula.

**Graft Placement Technique**

A choice exists between the graft placement in the subdural and the extradural space. It is termed as underlay/inlay technique when placed subdurally, which can be achieved only during a transcranial repair. On the other hand, the overlay/onlay technique is defined as the placement of a graft over the dural defect from the extradural side, either done transcranially or endoscopically. Current literature supports the results of either technique. Many surgeons prefer using a combination of both to achieve better results.

**Graft Materials**

These can be classified as autologous and dural substitutes. The autologous grafts can be further classified as free grafts or pedicled grafts. Free grafts include fascia lata, free fat graft, free mucosal graft, free pericranial graft, and free temporalis fascia. Pedicled grafts include pedicled pericranial flap, pedicled muscle flap, and pedicled nasoseptal graft. The last decade has witnessed good success rates using a pedicled nasoseptal graft called Hadad-Bassagasteguy flap based on a nasoseptal branch of the sphenopalatine artery during the endoscopic repair. Schwartz et al. described the "gasket seal closure," which includes the use of autologous fascia lata with a bony buttress further reinforced with fibrin glue.