Early and accurate diagnosis and treatment can have a major impact on patient outcomes. Early treatment emphasizes symptomatic relief. Limiting further bleeding, decreasing pain, and preventing joint contracture are the main goals of early management of the gastrocnemius strain. Rest, ice packing, compressive wrapping, and elevation are common measures to minimize swelling and pain of injured muscle. The application of moist heat and massage are considered contraindicated early in treatment as they are thought to increase the risk of further hemorrhage.

Medications may be necessary to reduce pain and muscle spasms. Early mobilization is also paramount for preventing contracture. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are not recommended within the first 24 to 72 hours of injury due to an increased risk of bleeding from their antiplatelet effects. Celecoxib and possibly other COX-inhibitors are possible options during this period due to their weaker antiplatelet effect. Acetaminophen or narcotic pain medication can also be used.

Once the acute phase of treatment has been successful, that patient should be started on the rehabilitative phase of treatment. It is important to prescribe physical therapy to promote functional recovery. Initially, gentle stretching can help lengthen the intramuscular scar of the injured muscle. Later, strengthening, heel raising, and proprioceptive exercise should be added as well as core muscle strengthening and general reconditioning. The patient is allowed to ambulate as tolerated and to increase the activity level gradually after the pain subsides. In patients suffering from severe injury, weight-bearing of the affected lower extremity should be limited, and a cast or orthosis may be needed for ambulation. Weight-bearing exercise or dorsiflexion stretching should be delayed until the pain subsides.

Most patients recover well under non-operative treatment. Surgical repairing of the muscle tear may be needed in certain cases. However, the procedure is technically challenging due to the difficulty of performing a suture through muscle tissue. Fibrosis and contracture at the incision site appear to be another concern. The absolute surgical indication is still unclear.