With clean hands on a fully relaxed joint, the tendon/target is struck with sufficient force to elicit the reflex while the clinician’s eyes are focused on the proximal muscle group, looking for contraction, rather than the distal appendage, looking for movement. To achieve full relaxation of a joint, the patient may need to be distracted. This can be accomplished by asking them to clench their jaw, conversing with them (those techniques should not be used for jaw jerk), or asking them to hook their fingers together and forcefully pull their arms apart (Jendrassik maneuver for lower extremity and jaw jerk reflexes only).

The technique may vary slightly depending on what type of tool is used or what reflex is being tested, for instance, circular hammers can be "dropped" passively through an arc using gravity to strike the patellar tendon, but when striking the biceps tendon are generally swung like a drumstick. In any case, the tendon’s axis is generally struck perpendicular to the plane of the hammer (if the hammer has a flat edge), meaning if you are striking the vertically oriented patellar tendon in a seated patient the rim of the tool will generally be horizontal and parallel to the floor. A stethoscope should be held 1 inch from the stem, on the tubing, and swung in a short arc.

**Grading**

Reflexes are graded based on amplitude. Various scales have been used to grade reflexes. The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) Muscle Stretch Reflex Scale is frequently used and empirically supported

**NINDS Scale:
**

- 0: Reflex absent

- 1: Reflex small, less than normal; includes a trace response or a response brought out only with reinforcement

- 2: Reflex in the lower half of the normal range

- 3: Reflex in the upper half of the normal range

- 4: Reflex enhanced, more than normal; includes clonus if present, which optionally can be noted in an added verbal description of the reflex

Plus or minus can indicate that the reflex was in between whole grades. Occasionally “5” is used to denote sustained clonus. One-half can alternatively indicate reinforcement was used.