In the appropriate clinical scenario, diagnosis of pheochromocytoma can be established by biochemical confirmation of hypersecretion of metanephrines and catecholamines. Per the latest endocrine society guidelines, initial biochemical evaluation should include plasma-fractionated metanephrines or urinary-fractionated metanephrines.

Plasma fractionated metanephrines: It has been noted in several studies that plasma metanephrine concentrations tend to be higher in the seated position when compared to the supine position; this results in a decrease in specificity and an increase in false positive results.

Guidelines recommend that blood be drawn in the supine position after the patient has been fully recumbent for at least 30 minutes before sampling.

Patient 24-hour urine fractionated metanephrines and catecholamines: This is also a good screening test for biochemical evaluation of pheochromocytoma. Per guidelines, urinary creatinine should be measured to verify the completeness of the collection.

The next step in evaluation after biochemical tests suggest pheochromocytoma is to locate the tumor using imaging studies. Per guidelines, a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis is the recommended initial imaging test to locate the tumor. MRI is an acceptable alternative to CT scans, particularly when avoidance of radiation or contrast is desired, although its spatial resolution is lower. For metastatic disease, 18F-FDG PET scanning is recommended. The 123I-MIBG scan is an alternative when radiotherapy with 123I-MIBG is planned.

Genetic testing: Since as many as 35% of the cases may be related to germline disease-causing mutations, due consideration should be given to genetic testing in all patients diagnosed with pheochromocytoma.

Once the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma is confirmed, careful clinical evaluation and family history may reveal characteristic symptoms and signs of hereditary syndromes associated with pheochromocytomas. Targeted genetic testing for VHL, MEN2, and NF1 syndromes should be performed in these cases. After identifying a pathogenic mutation, genetic screening of first-degree family relatives should be considered.

Typical sporadic cases are unilateral, associated with negative family history and absence of symptoms/signs of VHL, MEN2, and NF1 syndromes. These individuals should be clinically monitored for the development of characteristic signs of these syndromes. Genetic testing should be considered in sporadic cases depending on clinical suspicion. A study from Germany reported the detection of characteristic mutations in 24% of patients with apparently sporadic pheochromocytoma.

Several genes associated with the development of pheochromocytomas have been identified and have been categorized into three clusters based on the mechanism of tumorigenesis:

- The pseudohypoxia pathway (Cluster 1) has been associated with mutations in EGLN1, EGLN2, DLST, FH, IDH3B, MDH2, SDHA, SDHAF2, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD or VHL,  EPAS1, IDH1, and IDH2 genes,

- The kinase-signaling pathway (Cluster 2) has been associated with mutations in NF1, MAX, MERTK, MET, MYCN, RET, or TMEM127 genes, and

- Cluster 3 is a somatic cluster associated with alterations in the Wnt signaling pathway.