**Structure**

The sphenoid broadly divides into the central body, the greater wings, the lesser wings, and the pterygoid process. The body of the sphenoid is the medial part of the bone, in between the two lateral greater wings. It contains a depression called the sella turcica, which has a central depression for the pituitary gland. The body also houses the sphenoidal sinuses. The two lesser wings of the sphenoid are present anterior to the body and are triangular. The two greater wings of the sphenoid are also triangular in shape and are lateral to the body. The pterygoid process is directed downwards and made up of two laminae.

**Ligaments**

The sphenoid bone has several intrinsic ligaments, which may occasionally ossify. These are the pterygospinous, the interclinoid, and the caroticoclinoid ligaments.

**Openings**

This cranial bone has several openings to allow the entry and exit of several nerves and blood vessels to move in and out of the cranial cavity. These include the optic canal, the superior orbital fissure, the foramen rotundum, the foramen lacerum, the foramen spinosum, and the foramen ovale. The foramen lacerum is between the sphenoid, the basilar part of the occipital, and the apex of the temporal bone and often contains connective tissue.

**Function**

Sphenoid bone has many essential functions. It helps form the base and lateral sides of the skull in combination with the orbital floor. Its many articulations with other bones give the skull rigidity. It is an attachment site for many of the muscles of mastication. A portion of the sphenoid forms the facial skeleton. Also, several fissures and foramina exist in the sphenoid, which transports several blood vessels and nerves of the skull to the head and neck.  The body of the sphenoid has a cavity with a sinus that communicates with the nasal cavity. These sphenoidal sinuses work to make the skull lightweight and to increase resonance.