The most common type of osteosarcoma is high-grade, intramedullary, conventional osteosarcoma. This is further divided into histological subtypes are osteoblastic, chondroblastic, and fibroblastic varieties depending on the predominant cellular component.

In contrast to the conventional osteosarcomas (high grade) that are intramedullary, two indolent variants arising from the surface of the cortex include periosteal osteosarcomas (intermediate grade) that arise from the inner cambial layer and parosteal osteosarcomas (low-grade) that arise from the outer fibrous layer of the periosteum, respectively.

Osteosarcoma is a mesenchymal neoplasm that produces osteoid as well as the woven bone matrix.sina qua non" for diagnosis.

Osteoid is characterized histologically as being glassy, densely eosinophilic, and homogenous. Osteoid deposition by malignant cells may be described by the following patterns – filigree or lacelike (delicate and anastomosing), sclerotic (dense confluent sheets of the matrix), and thick trabeculae (which may mimic dense bone).

The most common histologic subtype is the osteoblastic variant of conventional osteosarcoma, which shows a preponderance of a lacelike osteoid matrix without the presence of significant chondroid or fibrous matrix.

Parosteal osteosarcomas have a stuck-on appearance. Histopathological examination demonstrates a well-differentiated fibrous tissue with osseous components, hypocellular spindle cell stroma with well-differentiated trabeculae. These may undergo dedifferentiation into dedifferentiated parosteal osteosarcoma (DPOS), which may demonstrate the presence of high-grade spindle cell sarcoma along with the primary tumor.