The cerebral aqueduct is the narrowest portion of the ventricular system, and aqueductal stenosis or other changes to its structure are a common cause of hydrocephalus. There is a bimodal distribution with the first peak happening before one year of age and the other peaking after 12 years of age. Early-onset aqueductal stenosis usually presents with increased head circumference, tense anterior fontanelle, and sunset eyes. Compare this presentation to late-onset aqueduct stenosis, which presents with headache, visual deterioration, urinary incontinence, abnormal gait, and unusual behavior. Treatments for hydrocephalus associated with aqueductal stenosis treatments include ventriculoperitoneal shunt or endoscopic third ventriculostomy.

Early-onset aqueductal stenosis is hypothesized to be due to intrauterine infection, atresia, or inherited as a hereditary sex-linked recessive condition.

Onset in patients over 1 year of age may have many different etiologies, including, gliosis, forking, and mechanical compression, which all lead to obstructive non-communicating hydrocephalus.

Tumors that may cause aqueductal obstruction include tectal plate gliomas and growths within the pineal region. Tectal plate gliomas are a form of midbrain gliomas that are slow-growing and low-grade tumors of the oligodendrocytic histological subtype. Tectal plate gliomas are often asymptomatic but can slowly invade into the cerebral aqueduct and cause delayed-onset aqueduct stenosis. MR imaging can provide strong evidence to support the diagnosis, but a definitive diagnosis requires histopathological analysis.

Compression of the aqueduct by the vein of Galen or Vein of Galen aneurysmal malformation (VGAM) is a congenital vascular malformation that accounts for 30% of all pediatric vascular abnormalities. The vascular defect causes the shunting of arterial blood from choroidal circulation to the prosencephalic vein of Markowski (MProsV of Markowski). In healthy development, the MProsV of Markowski completely closes off as their role is taken over by the internal cerebral veins. Formation of arteriovenous shunts connecting the choroidal circulation with the MProsV of Markowski cause increase flow through the MProsV of Markowski and prevent its closure. The continued patency of the MProsV of Markowski is known as a VGAM. Hydrocephalus and congestive heart failure are both presenting features of VGAM. Both a decrease absorption of CSF as well as a compression of the cerebral aqueduct can cause the clinical picture of hydrocephalus. In infants, a trans-fontanelle ultrasound can be used to evaluate the brain anatomy and identify a VGAM. MR imaging can help make a definitive diagnosis and assess comorbid conditions such as brain infractions, atrophy, and hydrocephalus.