Most mammalian retinae only contain two types of cones (dichromats), sensitive to short wavelengths (S cones, maximally sensitive near the blue end of the visual spectrum), and medium wavelengths (M cones, maximally sensitive to green wavelength light). Humans, as trichromats, have an additional L cone, which is sensitive to long-wavelength light at the red end of the visual spectrum. Differential stimulation of these cones creates color axes between red-green and blue-yellow, enabling visualization of mixtures of colors that fall in the range of the visual spectrum. The blue-yellow color axis is somewhat of a misnomer, as it more specifically refers to the ability to differentiate blue from green as well as yellow from red.

The first step of visual transduction is the light-mediated conformational change of 11-cis-retinal, which activates an associated opsin that acts as a G-protein coupled receptor. Each type of cone is associated with a different opsin, which has different genetic bases. S cone opsins are autosomally encoded on chromosome 7, while M and L cone opsins are located nearby on the X-chromosome and are nearly identical. M and L cone opsin genes are believed to undergo frequent homologous recombination, which underlies changes in normal spectral sensitivity that explain the variations in the severity of red-green color blindness. These defects are far more likely to affect karyotypic males than females as they are sex-linked. S cone opsin defects are far less common than M and L.