# Continuing Education Activity

Poland syndrome consists of anatomic anomalies that include the absence of the sternocostal head of the pectoralis major muscle with other varied manifestations that include hypoplasia or absence of the pectoralis minor muscle as well as digital anomalies such as syndactyly. Other anomalies include the absence or hypoplasia of the ipsilateral breast, excavatum deformities, and rib aplasia. Defects are overwhelmingly unilateral and more commonly affect the right side. This activity reviews the cause, presentation of Poland syndrome and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the physical features of Poland syndrome.
- Review the work up of a patient with Poland syndrome.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for Poland syndrome.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and outcomes in patients with Poland syndrome.

# Introduction

Poland syndrome consists of anatomic anomalies that include the absence of the sternocostal head of the pectoralis major muscle with other varied manifestations that include hypoplasia or absence of the pectoralis minor muscle as well as digital anomalies such as syndactyly.

# Etiology

The etiology of Poland syndrome is not well understood and is thought to arise from abnormalities relating to the subclavian arteries and branch vessels during embryogenesis, reducing perfusion to the affected ipsilateral side of the chest wall.

# Epidemiology

Poland syndrome affects about 1 in 36,000 to 50,000 newborns, with males more likely to be symptomatic than females.

# History and Physical

Patients with Poland syndrome usually present for cosmetic and aesthetic complaints and are usually asymptomatic.

The physical evaluation for Poland syndrome includes an assessment of the anterior chest wall and associated anatomic limb abnormalities.

Visual inspection and the physical examination of the ipsilateral limb is important because those limb anomalies are present in most cases, specifically syndactyly; hypoplastic metacarpals and phalangeal abnormalities of the index, middle, and ring fingers most commonly affected.

# Evaluation

Prenatal sonographic evaluation can demonstrate unilateral limb defects and unilateral chest wall asymmetry and should prompt evaluation for other associated anatomic defects.

# Treatment / Management

Surgical intervention, although rarely necessary, can be indicated for reasons including paradoxical movement of the chest wall, hypoplasia or aplasia of the female breast, and cosmetic indication for men and women with chest wall asymmetry.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis of Poland syndrome in female patients includes normal breast asymmetry.

An incidentally noted absent pectoralis muscle on CT scan could also be secondary to a surgically absent pectoralis major muscle.

# Complications

The majority of patients with Poland syndrome are asymptomatic and have few functional manifestations.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

In the setting of asymptomatic cases, a primary care physician and a radiologist often are the sole members of the healthcare team involved in diagnosing and educating the patient on this presenting complaint. In the setting of planned surgical intervention, a primary care physician often in coordination with a surgeon, is involved in assessing the patient's health status before surgery.