The GON, LON, and TON are commonly associated with occipital neuralgia, cervicogenic headaches, and migraine headaches.

**Occipital Nerve Block**

GON blocks are frequently used to treat migraine headaches and occipital neuralgia. A small dose of local anesthetic combined with corticosteroids is injected halfway on the nuchal line between the occipital protuberance and the mastoid process and above the occipital ridge.

**Pulsed Radiofrequency (PRF) or Thermal Radiofrequency Ablation (TRFA)**

Regarding the GON, LON, and TON, PRF may decrease pain by generating a low-intensity electrical field around sensory nerves that hinder the operation of the A-delta and C fibers in the long run.

**Occipital Nerve Stimulation/Neuromodulation**

Occipital nerve stimulation has been used to relieve severe pain caused by occipital neuralgia when conservative medical treatments and block procedures are ineffective. It involves placing nerve stimulator leads obliquely or horizontally near the bottom of the skull across from the GON location.

**Ultrasound-guided Cryoneurolysis of the GON**

Cryoneurolysis of the GON has been used to manage the symptoms of patients with ON. Even though there is limited evidence on this technique's efficacy, a previous study by Kastler et al., who performed seven cryoneurolysis procedures of the GON in six patients with occipital neuralgia, demonstrated the technique helped alleviate pain for three months in five of the patients.

**Dorsal Rhizotomy**

Another possible treatment option for occipital neuralgia is dorsal rhizotomy of the C1 to C3 spinal nerves, in which the ventrolateral margin of the C1 to C3 rootlets become separated at the entry points.

**Peripheral Neurectomy**

Peripheral neurectomy has been suggested to be an effective surgical technique for patients with occipital neuralgia that provides effective pain relief in most patients. However, few studies have evaluated the efficacy of this treatment. Thus, more studies are required to fully assess the efficacy and possible complications for performing peripheral neurectomies among patients with ON.

**Surgical Decompression**

Botulinum toxin could potentially offer pain relief to patients with ON. Within presynaptic cholinergic nerve terminals, the toxin attaches to high-affinity recognition sites and blocks acetylcholine delivery.

In addition to the surgical considerations above, physicians should take into account any anatomic details or variations for the GON, LON, and TON that were mentioned previously to reduce the risk of undesirable postoperative outcomes and help maximize the benefits for patients who are receiving treatment with regards to these occipital nerves.