Achondroplasia is characterized by short stature, macrocephaly with frontal bossing (broad forehead), midface hypoplasia (small nasal bridge), FMS (the base of the skull is endochondral in origin), rhizomelia (the proximal portion of the limb is shorter than distal portion), brachydactyly (short digits) with a prominent gap between the ring and middle fingers (known as a "trident hand"), radial head subluxation, posterior bowing of the humerus, thoracolumbar kyphosis (TLK), lumbar hyperlordosis, and genu varum (bowed legs).

Those affected have an average torso size, yet short limbs (sitting height may be within normal limits), but their standing height will often be below the 5th percentile. The upper extremities may not be able to extend at the elbows fully. An achondroplastic cohort's upper extremity range of motion was investigated and revealed a mean loss of elbow extension of approximately 13.1 degrees, primarily due to posterior bowing of the distal humerus and less so due to posterior radial head subluxations.

**Bowed legs**are very common in those with achondroplasia. The technical term for this bowing is genu varum, and more than 90% of untreated adults with achondroplasia have some degree of bowing.

**Thoracolumbar kyphosis (TLK)**is often appreciated in the newborn and can be accentuated due to massive head size, trunk hypotonia (thought to be the etiology of this feature), flat chest, and protuberant abdomen, especially when the infant begins to sit upright. The visible deformity may correct when the child lays prone. T12 and L1 apical wedging are frequently seen on x-rays, and the deformity usually involves vertebrae of T10 to L4. The frequency of TLK deformity was found to be as high as 87% at 1 to 2 years old and decreased to 11% from 5 to 10 years old.

**Foramen magnum stenosis (FMS)**is usually the first spinal manifestation observed in infants with achondroplasia. Increased vigilance is required in both the evaluation and surveillance of this condition. It is associated with a high mortality rate, ranging from 2 to 5%. Common signs and symptoms include periods of apnea while sleeping and excessive snoring. Other subjective or objective findings include difficulty swallowing, lower cranial nerve palsies, hyperreflexia, generalized hypotonia, weakness, and clonus. Intelligence is usually average unless the child develops hydrocephalus or has other central nervous system complications.

**Hearing impairment**can be observed in children with achondroplasia as a result of middle ear dysfunction. If inadequately treated, these problems can result in conductive hearing loss, which may be severe enough to interfere with language development. Approximately 50% of children will require a pressure-equalizing tympanostomy and ear tube placement.

**Pseudoclaudication**, discomfort while standing, and difficulty walking for prolonged periods, leg paresthesias, and subjective weakness may be observed later in development. These are specific signs of spinal stenosis, and patients with achondroplasia are prone to lumbar stenosis due to the development of short pedicles, thickened facets, and thickened ligamentum flavum. Lumbar spinal stenosis occurs in approximately 25% of achondroplastic patients. Neurologic symptoms such as lower extremity numbness are usually related to nerve root or spinal cord compression.