Treatment options differ depending on the etiology of the T-wave changes. Some T-wave changes require no intervention. However, some causes of T-wave changes are associated with high morbidity and mortality without emergent intervention.

**Ischemia and Infarction**

If acute T waves are seen indicative of ischemia in a coronary artery distribution, management should be focused on reperfusion and treatment of the acute coronary syndrome.

**Hyperkalemia**

In severe hyperkalemia in the presence of peaked T-waves, calcium gluconate should be administered promptly to stabilize the cardiac membrane, in hopes to prevent arrhythmia. Mild hyperkalemia without T-wave abnormalities can be managed with polystyrene sulfonate, a potassium binder, insulin which forces potassium intracellularly, or furosemide, which drives potassium out of the body through the urinary tract.

**Pulmonary Embolism**

Pulmonary embolism (PE) is a common cause of T-wave changes. Treatment options for PE vary depending on the size and severity. Acute massive and submassive PEs should be considered for catheter-directed tPA. Smaller pulmonary embolisms in the absence of hemodynamic compromise or right heart strain can be found for systemic anticoagulation.

**Pericarditis**

Pericarditis can be managed with ibuprofen and colchicine for at least three months. If recurrent, pericarditis, a longer course of treatment is recommended.

**Drug-drug interaction or Intoxication**

Serum drug levels may help identify intoxication with a particular medication that may be causing ECG abnormalities. It is recommended to stop the drug if intoxication or drug-drug interaction is suspected while workup is being done. Some drugs have reversal agents. For example, dig immune Fab is the first-line agent for digoxin toxicity. It is an immunoglobulin fragment that binds with digoxin and neutralizes it.