The main cause of hypercalcemia is an excess parathyroid hormone (PTH). PTH-mediated causes include adenoma/hyperplasia of the gland, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, and multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes (type1, 2A). Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia is an autosomal dominant condition due to an inactivating mutation in the calcium-sensing receptor gene.

Although more common in adults than pediatric patients, the next important etiology to consider is a malignancy. Renal carcinomas, leukemias, lymphomas, and rhabdomyosarcoma can be associated with elevated calcium levels mediated by the action of PTH-related peptides.

Hypervitaminosis D can be iatrogenic, secondary to excessive milk intake, or related to granulomatous conditions such as sarcoidosis, tuberculosis or fungal infections.

Endocrine causes such as thyrotoxicosis (due to stimulation of osteoclast function by thyroid hormone), hypoadrenalism and also pheochromocytomas can be associated with hypercalcemia.

Other miscellaneous causes include Williams syndrome, Murk Jansen syndrome, hypophosphatasia, hypervitaminosis A, acute/chronic renal failure, use of thiazide diuretics or lithium, milk-alkali syndrome, subcutaneous fat necrosis, and prolonged immobilization. Williams-Beuren syndrome is characterized by elfin facies, subvalvular aortic stenosis, short stature, and developmental delay. Features of Murk Jansen syndrome include extreme short stature (short-limbed dwarfism), prominent eyes, high-arched palate, wide open fontanelles and micrognathia.