**Central Line-Associated Blood Stream Infection (CLABSI)**

CVC catheter removal should be considered in specific circumstances and depending on the cultured organism. CVC infected with Candida, S. aureus, and Pseudomonas should be removed and replaced at an alternate site after subsequent blood cultures return negative. Antimicrobial therapy and duration are dictated by the specific organism that is cultured and severity of the infection. Further workup to evaluate for metastatic infections should be considered depending on the implicated organism and persistence of bacteremia after catheter removal. The second set of blood cultures should always be obtained to confirm clearance. Prevention of CLABSI is the best way to limit this type of HAI. Experienced operators should practice good hand hygiene, skin disinfection with chlorhexidine, and maintain aseptic techniques throughout the procedure. Interventions to mitigate the risk of CLABSI include daily review of CVC indication, minimizing the number of CVCs, and using only CVC with the required number of lumens.

**Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infection (CAUTI)**

Both catheter management and anti-microbial therapy are needed to treat CAUTI. Minimizing the use and duration of indwelling catheters is the most important preventive step. Daily assessment of indications and the need for continued catheterization should be done. Intermittent catheterization is associated with lower rates of CAUTI and should be considered in patients who definitely need it.

In the setting of CAUTI, removal of the urinary catheter is recommended after two weeks of use due to biofilm formation and inadequate response to antimicrobial therapy. Antimicrobial therapy should be based on cultures and susceptibility testing. Providers should use hospital or community antibiograms to direct initial treatment. There is no clear consensus on the use of antiseptic-coated urinary catheters or collection bags or antimicrobial catheter irrigation; in fact, there is suspicion that this may lead to increased antimicrobial resistance.

**Skin and Soft Tissue Infection (SSI)**

SSI is treated by debridement of devitalized tissue and drainage of infected fluids, including abscesses. Anti-microbial therapy should initially be chosen with broad coverage for the most common pathogens associated with the specific site of infection. Narrowing anti-microbial coverage should be guided by the culture results and the patient’s clinical picture, as the cultures may not always capture all the implicated pathogens in polymicrobial infections. Preventive measures for developing SSI may be broken down into pre-operative, intra-operative, and post-operative. Pre-operative preventative measures include reducing host-modifiable risk factors, administering pre-operative antibiotics if indicated, and de-colonization of specific pathogens. Hair removal is not usually necessary, and shaving the area may cause microtrauma and introduce bacteria more deep-seated in the epithelium.

Intra-operative measures towards prevention include maintaining euthermia (temperature higher than 35.5 degrees Celsius), euvolemia, and avoiding hypoxemia, all of which are strategies to improve tissue oxygenation. Glycemic control should be achieved, keeping glucose concentrations less than 180mg/dL while avoiding hypoglycemia.  Intra-operative antibiotics may be re-dosed as needed depending on the duration of surgery. Post-operative measures involve maintaining hygiene to the area, monitoring dressings, incision sites, post-operative drains. Prophylactic postoperative antibiotics may be indicated in dirty or contaminated wound, where there is already a presumed infection, or in immunocompromised patients.

**Pneumonia**

The respiratory culture results should guide anti-microbial therapy for treating HAP and VAP. If a sample can not be obtained, empiric anti-microbial treatment should be started based on the hospital guidelines and hospital antibiograms for HAP and VAP. Patients should be reassessed daily for the need for continued anti-microbial therapy and depending on the level of suspicion of disease.P. aeroginosa, MRSA, and other gram-negative bacilli. Dual anti-pseudomonal coverage may be necessary based on patient risk factors and the hospital antibiogram to treat VAP.

In the setting of suspected aspiration pneumonia coverage for oral anaerobes should be started. Antibiotics should be de-escalated based on culture results and clinical stability of the patient. If symptoms don't improve within 72 hours or the patient is rapidly deteriorating after appropriate treatment is started, further investigation into complications or alternate sources of infection should be considered. Steps to prevent VAP pneumonia include limiting exposure to mechanical ventilation, decreasing the duration on the ventilator, titrating to low levels of effective sedation, and early mobilization.

**C. difficile Infection (CDI)**

Hospital-acquired CDI is treated similarly to community-acquired CDI. If the infection is associated with antibiotic use, the initial step is to discontinue the inciting antibiotic if feasible. Oral vancomycin, oral fidaxomicin, and metronidazole are active against C. difficile. Providers should follow the most recent guidelines for the treatment and management of CDI. Duration of therapy depends on concomitant antibiotic use, the severity of illness, recurrent disease. Surgical evaluation and fecal microbiota transplantation may be warranted in severe disease.

Prevention HO-CDI requires close surveillance of clustered outbreaks in healthcare facilities. Prevention strategies are targeted toward early detection, prompt isolation, and implementation of contact precautions, proper hand hygiene, environmental cleaning and disinfection, and anti-microbial stewardship.