The prognosis depends on the underlying etiology for thrombocytopenia. While thrombocytopenia does not lead to complications in pregnancy, the etiology behind the thrombocytopenia can pose significant challenges. The mode of delivery is chosen based on the obstetric indication.

- Gestational thrombocytopenia: It is a self-limiting condition that usually resolves within 4 to 8 weeks of delivery of the fetus. Although there is a high risk of recurrence with subsequent pregnancies, it is often a benign condition that seldom causes any complications in the mother.

- Immune thrombocytopenia: ITP can lead to significant bleeding issues in the mother. ITP in the mother can also affect the neonate and lead to neonatal thrombocytopenia. Despite low platelets, the risk of bleeding is quite low in the mother. In the neonates who have thrombocytopenia secondary to maternal ITP, catastrophic bleeding events (like intracranial hemorrhage) occurs in less than 1% of patients.

- TMA: Both pregnancy-related TMA (PEC/HELLP/AFLP) and TMA not specific to pregnancy (TTP/ATypical HUS) are associated with high rates of maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality. Thrombocytopenia related to these conditions seldom poses any issues in the mother or the neonate. The goal of treatment is delivery of the baby.

- Clinicians should manage other causes of thrombocytopenia (bone marrow failure syndrome, PNH, etc.) according to primary etiology, and the prognosis depends on the underlying etiology.

Neonatal outcome in women with thrombocytopenia:

- The neonatal outcome is excellent in neonates born to mothers with gestational thrombocytopenia. They never develop thrombocytopenia or are at risk of bleeding.

- Neonates born to mothers with ITP may develop transient thrombocytopenia. Although the passive transfer of antibodies from the mother causing transient thrombocytopenia in the neonate is the most popular theory behind neonates developing thrombocytopenia, it is not entirely proven. The nadir of platelets appears within 24 to 48 hours. Reports of intracranial hemorrhage appear in less than 1% of neonates who develop thrombocytopenia secondary to maternal ITP.