Wilms tumor is the most common abdominal cancer in childhood and typically presents between ages 3 to 5 years. There are approximately 650 new cases in the United States every year.  Girls are slightly more likely to have Wilms than boys.

Wilms is more common in Africans and African Americans while it is least common in East Asians.  Asian patients also had fewer unfavorable histology tumors, tend to have lower-stage disease, and enjoy better survival outcomes.

European and North American rates are about the same.

Ninety percent of Wilms tumors are diagnosed before six years of age with the median age of diagnosis being 3.5 years.

With marked improvements in chemotherapy, the overwhelming majority of affected children now survive.

Overall 5-year survival in the US is 92% but in poor parts of the world with fewer resources, the survival rate is only 78%.

Wilms tumor is associated with a number of specific syndromes including WAGR syndrome. WAGR syndrome refers to the presence of Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and mental retardation. Children with WAGR syndrome have a 50/50 chance of developing Wilms tumor. Children with this syndrome have a specific chromosomal abnormality in the WT1 gene which is involved in both renal and gonadal development.

Another syndrome associated with Wilms is the Denys-Drash syndrome or just Drash syndrome. This includes male pseudo-hermaphroditism and progressive renal failure starting in infancy.  The renal disease begins with simple proteinuria in newborns and infants which eventually progresses to nephrotic syndrome and eventually full-blown renal failure. Ninety percent of affected individuals will eventually develop Wilms tumor.

Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome is clinically diagnosed by hemihypertrophy, pancreatic enlargement, hypertrophic kidneys, omphalocele, ear creases, macrosomia, and macroglossia. Affected patients have a 5% to 10% chance of developing Wilms.

Other syndromes sometimes associated with Wilms include Sotos syndrome, Perlman syndrome, Trisomy 18 (Edward's syndrome), Frasier syndrome, Bloom syndrome, Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome.

Wilms tumor in boys may also present with cryptorchidism, varicocele, or hypospadias, and about 10% of affected girls will have congenital uterine anomalies. Various other renal congenital abnormalities, such as duplication and renal ectopia, are not uncommon.

A finding of perilobar nephrogenic rests in children younger than one year of age is associated with a marked increase in their risk of developing a contralateral Wilms tumor.