Tumors of the palate, both benign and malignant, most often present asymptomatically or are associated with a low level of discomfort.  The appearance of benign and malignant lesions of the palate is also quite similar, making it of utmost importance that the clinician be able to differentiate between them. Malignant squamous epithelial neoplasms such as verrucous carcinoma, carcinoma of the maxillary sinus, and squamous cell carcinoma may appear in the hard palate. Carcinoma of the maxillary sinus is often asymptomatic for a long time and usually presents at an advanced stage. This tumor is associated with the elderly and is most commonly diagnosed once the tumor expands to fill the sinus and produces a bulge of the alveolar ridge or palatal area on physical examination. Squamous cell carcinomas constitute more than ninety percent of all oral cancers. Non-squamous cell carcinomas of the oral cavity are rare. Risk factors for squamous cell carcinoma of the palate include alcohol, tobacco, and HPV infection. Primary squamous cell carcinoma of the soft palate is painful, causes dysphagia, and portends a much worse prognosis than tumors located more anteriorly. Verrucous carcinoma is a form of squamous cell carcinoma that rarely metastasizes, behaves indolently, and demonstrates a white papillary clinical appearance. The most common locations for verrucous carcinoma are the alveolar ridge and hard palate, and it is associated with elderly patients who wear complete denture prosthesis. Tumors of the palate can follow the palatine nerves through the greater and lesser palatine foramen and extend into surrounding bone, nerves, and soft tissue. Up to seventy percent of squamous cell carcinomas of the hard palate extends beyond the hard palate into neighboring structures. Radiographically, malignant tumors of the palate may show evidence of bone destruction and sometimes reveal a radioopacity produced by the neoplastic mass.

Minor salivary gland carcinomas represent less than five percent of oral cavity cancers, and around sixty percent of them arise on the hard palate. Both malignant and benign salivary gland tumors of the palate appear as well-circumscribed, smooth, dome-shaped, non-moveable swellings that demonstrate a slow growth pattern.

Pleomorphic adenoma is the most common benign salivary gland neoplasm found within the palate. The most frequently discovered malignant salivary gland tumors of the palate in descending order are adenoid cystic carcinoma, polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma, and mucoepidermoid carcinoma.

Melanoma is a malignant tumor of melanocytes most often associated with cancer of the skin. Melanoma may develop anywhere melanocytes exist and have the potential to form from melanocytes located within the palate. Oral melanoma is extremely rare, accounting for less than one percent of all oral malignancies. The most common site for oral melanoma is the hard palate, which accounts for approximately forty percent of cases. Oral melanoma most commonly appears on the maxillary alveolus or hard palate and tends to have a much worse prognosis than cutaneous melanoma. Initially, melanoma lesions appear flat and later become fixed and nodular in appearance. Melanomas often appear as light/dark brown lesions.

The most common locations of extranodal lymphoma in the head and neck are the soft palate and posterior hard palate. On examination, lymphomas typically appear as a non-ulcerated, non-tender diffuse mass.

Sarcomas are malignant tumors of non-epithelial-tissue origin that may arise anywhere in the human body, including the palate. Sarcoma of the palate appears as ulcerated masses in the middle-aged or young patient.

Cleft palate and lip are the most common congenital orofacial deformities in the world. Cleft palate represents the third most frequently occurring congenital deformity after clubfoot and cleft lip. Cleft lip and palate demonstrate a multifactorial inheritance pattern. They are the result of a combination of genetic predispositions and in-utero exposure to teratogens like nicotine, alcohol, antiepileptics, and folate antagonists. Cleft palate results in severe facial deformities, feeding difficulties, nasal regurgitation of milk, coughing/choking during feeds, difficulties with phonation, dentition defects, and predisposes patients to recurrent episodes of otitis media with effusion. Cleft palate occurs in a variety of chromosomal abnormalities like the Pierre-Robin sequence, Patau syndrome (trisomy 13), and Edward syndrome (trisomy 18). Embryologically, a cleft palate occurs due to a partial or total failure of fusion of the palatine prominences by the ninth week of development. Cleft palate may be unilateral or bilateral and complete or incomplete. There are three types of cleft palate: submucosal cleft palate, incomplete cleft palate, and a complete cleft palate. In the submucosal cleft palate, the palatine mucosa remains intact, but an underlying bony palatal or muscular defect is present. Incomplete cleft palate refers to clefting of the secondary palate exclusively, while complete cleft palate refers to clefting of the entire soft palate, hard palate, and uvula. Cleft palate repair, termed palatoplasty, should be performed between six to twelve months of age to optimize feeding and speech development without interrupting normal maxillofacial growth.

Repeated bouts of upper airway obstruction cause obstructive sleep apnea during the deep stages of sleep as a result of the narrowing/collapse of the respiratory passages. Patients with obstructive sleep apnea tend to be overweight with associated peripharyngeal fat infiltration and/or increased size of the tongue and soft palate. These anatomic abnormalities predispose patients to obstructive sleep apnea because they decrease the cross-sectional area of the upper airway. An increased neck circumference corresponds to increased peripharyngeal fat infiltration, specifically lining the airway and at the base of the tongue. Neck circumference should be measured when obstructive sleep apnea is suspected. A neck circumference greater than seventeen inches in men and greater than sixteen inches in women increases the risk for obstructive sleep apnea. One local airway factor thought to be a causative agent of obstructive sleep apnea is an elongated soft palate. A distal palatal segment length greater than fifteen millimeters has shown to increase the risk of sleep apnea dramatically. Initial treatment of sleep apnea is primarily nonsurgical and consists of positive airway pressure therapy, most commonly in the form of CPAP. Historically, many of the surgical techniques used to correct sleep apnea in adults were sub-optimal, and palatopharyngoplasty techniques have evolved from primarily excisional methods to those that reposition and reconstruct the palate. Examples of these more advanced surgical techniques include the expansion sphincter-pharyngoplasty, lateral pharyngoplasty, relocation pharyngoplasty, and uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP).