As pharmaceutical companies continue to advertise directly to consumers and practicing clinicians, practitioners need to be aware of the implications of such marketing strategies on patient care. At the surface level, drug advertisements serve to update clinicians on advancements in treatment options as well as to increase awareness of pharmaceutical options for patients, allowing for greater confidence and patient participation in their health management.

Direct-to-consumer advertising (DTCA) is the direct effort of pharmaceutical companies to promote prescription drugs to the public.

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has jurisdiction over the DTCA of prescription drugs, whereas the Federal Trade Committee oversees over-the-counter (OTC) drug ads. While the FDA oversees all prescription drug advertisements, drug ads do not need to be approved for compliance before being released to the public.

The FDA requires that all products claim prescription drug ads (the typical, specific medication advertisement):

- Give at least one approved use of the drug.

- Provide the generic name of the drug.

- Share all adverse effects listed in the drug's "prescribing information."

The full "prescribing information" is approved by the FDA prior to approval for marketing; this includes full details about the drug, including chemical properties, a complete list of adverse effects, and appropriate use cases.  In addition, the ad must explain the risks and benefits of the medication in a balanced manner.

In 1997, the FDA liberalized its policies on broadcast advertising by allowing for "adequate provision" of information about drug adverse effects and benefits by referring consumers to another source of information, such as a toll-free telephone number or a website.

The FDA also defines two other forms of prescription drug advertising: reminder advertisements and help-seeking advertisements. Reminder advertisements operate under the assumption that the public is already aware of a drug and its uses. The ads may not contain any information related to the drug, including its uses, benefits, or adverse effects. Any medication with a black box warning is not allowed to be advertised in this manner to the public. For example, a reminder ad might state "ask your doctor about" and then the drug's brand name and generic name, without describing the drug or for what conditions it is typically prescribed.

Help-seeking advertisements describe a constellation of symptoms and encourage the public to seek advice or help from their physicians. These ads typically contain a drug company's name and phone number to call to seek further information. For example, a help-seeking ad might list several symptoms for a particular disorder for which the drug company has a medication they are seeking to promote. Then, the ad suggests that if the person suffers from those symptoms, they should ask their health care clinician for more information without stating the name of the medication. Typically, help-seeking advertisements are not regulated by the FDA but rather by the FTC, given that they should not contain or recommend the use of any specific drug. However, in the case that a help-seeking ad suggests a particular drug, the FDA oversees the ad as a product claim advertisement.