Treatment depends on the etiology but core principles of treatment in addition to etiology specific treatment include acid suppression with PPI or H2 blockers, lifestyle modification, liquid to soft or puree diet to allow adequate time for healing and dietary modification. If the etiology appears to be acid reflux based on history then the use of H2 blockers twice a day or proton-pump inhibitors daily is indicated initially. Patient should also be advised of lifestyle and dietary modifications which include weight loss, elevating the head end of bed (patient with nocturnal symptoms of cough, hoarseness, sore throat), elimination of some dietary triggers such as fatty food, chocolate, carbonated drinks, spicy food, smoking, and alcohol. If the etiology is medication-induced esophagitis, the medication should be stopped if possible and if necessary then should be switched to any other alternatives. The patient should be instructed to take pills with 4 oz of water and remain upright for 30 min after taking the pills. For eosinophilic esophagitis treatment include acid suppression, topical or systemic steroids either topical budesonide or fluticasone and dietary modification if a food allergy is suspected. If etiology is infectious, target therapy is indicated. For C.  Albicans, oral fluconazole is the drug of choice. For HSV esophagitis, treatment is oral or intravenous acyclovir and Foscarnet for those who are non-responders. CMV esophagitis is treated with Gancyclovir or Valganciclovir. Treatment of complications like stenosis or stricture may require endoscopic dilation. Addition of topical anesthesia like topical lidocaine (e.g. GI cocktail) and opioids may help in ulcers related pain. NSAIDs must be avoided as it may exacerbate symptoms.