The presentation of aortic valvular atresia can be rapidly seen in the post-natal period. The chief initial findings of the condition are dyspnea, cyanosis, and rapidly progressive heart failure. Dyspnea and/or tachypnea is thought to be the most sensitive sign for aortic valvular atresia, as it develops in about 60% of live births. While the disease may not initially present with cyanosis, as the ductus arteriosus remains open shortly after birth, cyanosis starts to become apparent as the ductus closes. The average age of development of cyanosis is 2 days. Measured oxygen (O2) saturation can be variable. A small number of patients (16%) can show low O2 saturation at rest and with a modest drop in levels with crying. This can be moderately improved with oxygenation.

On physical examination, a precordial bulge can be present, though it is not a reliable indicator. Over 50% of patients, however, have a pulmonary systolic ejection murmur, the intensity of which can vary from grade 1 to grade 3. The murmurs can be heard clearest along the left sternal border. The second heart sound at the cardiac base is mostly single, though sometimes can have a very close split and rarely have an ejection click. Heart failure is quick to develop in about 60% of these patients, with the average age of development being 2.5 days. It is almost always associated with hepatomegaly, with about 3cm of protrusion beyond the right costal margin. An S3 heart sound can sometimes be heard, along with chest rales, edema, and palpable spleen. Blood pressure as well can be lower than average, hovering around 65/45 mmHg, and pulse pressure is generally narrow. No clinically significant pressure difference is noted between upper and lower extremity measurements.