# Introduction

Enteroglucagon is a molecule discovered in the human intestine. The historical belief was that it was an extra-pancreatic isoform of glucagon. Glucagon-like substances in the intestine were first described by Sutherland and De Duve, who identified them in preparations from the intestinal mucosa.

# Issues of Concern

The preproglucagon polypeptides play key roles in intestinal and systemic metabolism:

- Glicentin

- Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1)

- Glucagon-like peptide 2 (GLP-2)

- Oxyntomodulin

# Cellular Level

The preproglucagon gene is the precursor to glucagon and is shared between the A-cells of the pancreatic islets of Langerhans and the L-cells of the intestine. Within the L-cells, the processing of preproglucagon polypeptide forms glicentin, glucagon-like peptides 1 and 2 (GLP-1 and GLP-2), and glicentin is then further cleaved to produce oxyntomodulin, with a leftover fragment called glicentin-related polypeptide (GRPP).

Exenatide, a synthetic GLP-1 receptor agonist, was developed after the discovery of Exendin-4, a molecule of the glucagon superfamily of hormones, in the saliva of the Gila monster, which showed potent pancreatic insulinotropic effects in studies on animals, thus motivating the development of a new class of anti-diabetic medication.

The gene that codes for glicentin is in the alpha-cells of the pancreas and the intestinal or intestinal L-cells—the gene on chromosome 2 (6 exons, 5 introns).

# Development

In a 1991 study, researchers highlighted the presence of enteroglucagon/glicentin in a 10-week-old human fetus in pancreatic cells.

# Organ Systems Involved

- Glicentin (69 amino acids) is present in alpha cells of the pancreas, intestinal L cells (duodenum, rectum, distal ileum, proximal colon, caecum, proximal jejunum). Researchers have also found the glicentin gene in the central nervous system.

- GLP-1 (30 amino acids) is also in the alpha cells of the pancreas, L cells of the intestine (proximal small intestine, colon, and distal ileum), and in the central nervous system (nucleus tractus solitaries of the brain stem).

- GLP-2 (33 amino acids) is in the L cells of the intestine (colon and distal small intestine).

- Oxyntomodulin (37 amino acids) is likewise present in the L cells of the intestine.

# Function

GLP-1 belongs to a class of molecules known as “incretins,” molecules that stimulate a decrease in blood glucose levels. The release of these molecules depends on the oral intake of glucose and other nutrients. This contributes to the “incretin effect,” a phenomenon by which oral ingestion of glucose induces a greater increase in the release of insulin as opposed to an intravenous load of glucose.

GLP-2 is involved in proliferative effects on small intestine mucosa.

Glicentin shows some glucagon-like activity, while the roles of oxyntomodulin and GRPP in humans are unclear at present.

# Mechanism

GLP-1 acts on the GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R), which belongs to the class of G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs).

After release, GLP-1 is degraded by the enzyme dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) to GLP-1 (9–36) amide.

Neutral endopeptidase 24.11 (NEP 24.11) is another enzyme that catabolizes GLP-1. It is a zinc metallopeptidase and is expressed in several locations, particularly in the kidneys. However, its contribution to GLP-1 degradation only becomes clear following inhibition of DPP-4, as otherwise most of the GLP-1 reaching the kidneys is already degraded by DPP-4.

Proteolysis by DPP-4 limits the half-life of endogenous GLP-1 to 1-5 minutes. Analogs of GLP-1 in clinical use are thus chemically modified to be resistant to the effects of this enzyme, and therefore have much longer half-lives than endogenous GLP-1 (e.g., liraglutide, exenatide). Another mechanism of prolonging the actions of GLP-1, apart from degradation-resistant synthetic analogs, is the inhibition of their degradation by the action of the class of drugs called DPP-4 inhibitors (e.g., sitagliptin, saxagliptin, vildagliptin).

# Related Testing

The role of preproglucagon is still under study and with probable different clinical applications, but, currently, there is no routine test performed in the clinical setting.

# Pathophysiology

Enteroglucagon was once implicated in the pathogenesis of diabetes after pancreatectomy. These have also been described in a rare functional pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, which may be located in the pancreas itself or in the small intestine, where they correlate with slight intestinal hypertrophy. A case report exists describing trophic effects of enteroglucagon (now known to be due to GLP-2) in a patient with an endocrine tumor in the kidney.

# Clinical Significance

GLP-1 analogs are now used in the management of diabetes.

DPP-4 inhibitors inhibit the degradation of endogenous GLP-1 by DPP-4 and thus increase the half-life of the endogenous product. Examples include sitagliptin, saxagliptin, and linagliptin, among others. The efficacy of linagliptin may be adversely affected by CYP3A4 or P-glycoprotein inducers such as rifampin or St. John’s wort, thus requiring the use of alternative agents that are not pharmacodynamically affected by changes in CYP-450 drug metabolism.

GLP-2 analogs are currently emerging as a treatment for short-bowel syndrome due to their trophic effects on the small intestine.