Occurrence is estimated at 1:17,000 to 1:20,000 overall. Approximately one in 70 individuals carry an OCA-mutated allele, with the OCA2 mutation being the most common worldwide. OCA2 is common in sub-Saharan Africa since cultural norms permit consanguineous marriages, allowing prevalence reach 1 in 1000 and a phenomenon called pseudo-dominance where the recessive allele burden is so high in a given family, that the recessive trait is disproportionately represented. The prevalence of individual forms of albinism are included below:

- OCA1: Prevalence is 1 in 40,000 worldwide but one of the most common forms in America and China (70% of cases)

- OCA2: The most common worldwide (1:39,000). Prevalence as follows: African Americans (1:10,000), overall Americans (1:36,000), Sub-Saharan Africa (1:3,900)

- OCA3: Prevalence is 1: 8500 of African individuals primarily in southern Africa.  It can also be seen in Pakistani, German, Indian, and Japanese populations.

- OCA4: Prevalence is 1:100,000 but accounts for 24% of Japanese OCA.  It is also described in German, Turkish, Indian, Korean, Chinese, Danish, and Moroccan, populations.

- OCA5: Very rare, only mentioned in a case report of a Pakistani family

- OCA6: Very rare, case reports in a Chinese family and a man from eastern India

- OCA7: Very rare, consanguineous Faroese family

- Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS): Prevalence is 1:500,000 worldwide but 1:1800 in Puerto Rico

- Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS): Very rare (less than 500 cases published in the past 20 years)

- Angelman syndrome (AS) and Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS): Prevalence of AS (1:12,000 to 20,000) and PWS (1:15,000) are higher than the OCAs. However, only approximately 1% of AS and PWS sufferers have contiguous gene deletions that lead to OCA2-like presentation

- Ocular albinism (OA1): Prevalence is 1:50,000