# Introduction

This article will review the embryological development of the testicles. However, to understand the embryology of the testicles, it is essential to have a basic understanding of the normal anatomy of the testicles.

The male gonads, otherwise known as the testicles, are sex glands that have both an exocrine secretory function in the production of sperm and an endocrinological function as part of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis in men through the production of androgens. The normal anatomy of the testicles is that of an oval shape located in the scrotum, further separated by the scrotal septum. The length of the testis is between 3 cm to 5 cm, whereas the width is between 2 cm to 3 cm.

The consistency of normal testicles on palpation is smooth and soft. The testes are suspended superiorly by the spermatic cord and inferior to the scrotum by the scrotal ligament. During embryological development, the scrotal ligament is also known as the gubernaculum.

The tunica vaginalis is a double-layered structure that covers all of the testes apart from the posterior and superior borders, which represent the attachment of the epididymis and spermatic cord.  The posterior lateral testis has a small space between the body of the epididymis and the testis. This small space is known as the sinus of the epididymis. The tunica albuginea is found deep in the tunica vaginalis. It is a thick fibrous sheath that covers the testes.

The descent of the testicles is a complex stepwise process that involves an interaction between many anatomical structures, environmental influences, regulatory hormones, and inherited genetic factors.

# Development

**Development and Sex Determination of Gonads**

The beginning of testicular development is with the formation of the genital ridge. The origin of the genital ridge is from the intermediate mesoderm. The intermediate mesoderm forms paired structures that reside beside the dorsal mesentery, specifically in the coelomic cavity.

The proliferation of coelomic epithelial cells found on the ventromedial surface of the mesonephroi initiates the formation of the genital ridge. The mesonephros contains the mesonephric duct (Wolffian duct). This structure is a primordial urogenital tissue that contributes to the formation of the epididymis, seminal vesicles, and vas deferens after male sex determination.

The paramesonephric duct (Mullerian duct) is also found in the mesonephros and runs in parallel to the mesonephric duct. This structure is essentially the female equivalent of the mesonephric duct (Wolffian duct) and contributes to the formation of the uterus, fallopian tube, and vagina following female sex determination. The mesonephros and genital ridge form a structure known as the urogenital ridge (UGR).

A dense layer of pseudostratified epithelial cells forms following the proliferation of coelomic epithelial cells, which are present on the ventromedial side of the mesonephros. Basement membrane fragmentation facilitates the migration of epithelial cells dorsally towards the mesonephros.

Primordial germ cells (PGC) originate from an area around the yolk sac. PGCs begin to colonize the gonads by approximately five weeks of gestation. By the sixth week of gestation, the PGCs will have invaded the genital ridges. Primordial germ cells divide to reach approximately 3000 cells and undergo further specialization with the activation of gametogenic genes and inactivation of pluripotency genes; this is a process known as licensing.

Following this process of the activation of gametogenic genes and inactivation of pluripotent genes, the primordial germ cells are known as gametogenesis-competent cells, which will either differentiate into male or female specialized cells in response to cues from the cells of the mesonephric tissue.

In genetically male embryos, the primordial germ cells have an XY chromosome complex. In males, there is a sex-specific gene that initiates the determination of gender by activating the production of regulatory sex-determining proteins. This testis-determining factor (TDF) is also known as the sex-determining region of the Y chromosome (SRY). It is the gene resting on the Y chromosome, specifically on its short arm (Yp11).

The SRY gene encodes for a transcription factor that activates the testis-specific enhancer (TESCO) of a related autosomal gene known as SOX9 (SRY-Box Transcription Factor 9). The SOX9 gene is essential for the initiation of Sertoli cell differentiation from supporting cell precursors. These supporting cells would otherwise differentiate into follicle cells (specifically granuloma cells).

SRY upregulates levels of SOX9. Once the cellular/tissue levels of SRY and SOX9 are high enough, the SOX9 protein begins to maintain its transcription at high levels in Sertoli cells. Once there are enough SOX9 positive cells in the gonad, it begins to undergo morphological changes, which will lead to the formation of the testes.

By approximately the fifth to the sixth week, the gender of the embryo is determined.

**Testicular Descent**

There is a biphasic model for the explanation of testicular descent. This process divides into two morphologically and hormonally distinct stages.

**Transabdominal Stage**

The transabdominal phase of testicular descent consists of the movement of the testes from their starting position on the posterior abdominal wall adjacent to the kidney down to the internal inguinal ring. This phase is dependent on a non-androgenic hormone and starts by the eighth gestational week. Between the eighth and fifteenth gestational weeks, the gubernaculum enlarges causally, leading to the formation of the gubernacular bulb, whereas between the 10th to 15th gestational weeks, the cranial suspensory ligament (CSL) regresses. Regression of the CSL is a necessary step for testicular descent; however, regression of the CSL alone is not sufficient to initiate gonadal descent.

The gubernaculum anchors the testes to the future inguinal region by traction. The gubernaculum shortens as it progressively incorporates into the gubernacular bulb.

**Inguinoscrotal Stage**

The second stage of testicular descent (inguinoscrotal) begins by the 26th gestational week. This stage is androgen-dependent and consists of the passage of the testes from the internal inguinal ring down into the scrotum.

The scrotum is effectively a continuation of skin and subcutaneous tissue lining the anterior abdominal wall. As the testes descend through the inguinal canal, it takes layers of the abdominal wall with it. The layers of the abdominal wall involved in testicular descent continue as analogous layers in the scrotum. The processus vaginalis obliterates through a process of programmed smooth muscle cell death in response to a decrease in androgen levels in the third trimester.

In the majority of fetuses, the testes will have descended into the scrotum by the 33rd gestational week.

# Cellular

**Sertoli Cells**

Sertoli cells are epithelial supportive cells found in the seminiferous tubules. They support the germ cells by providing the required nutrients to complete spermatogenesis.

Also known as sustentacular cells, they are the only somatic cells in the entire seminiferous epithelium.

Sertoli cells have an epithelial nature. Sertoli cells are the target of hormones such as FSH and testosterone. This activity leads to the regulation of spermatogenesis through regulatory cross-talk between Sertoli cells and germ cells.

**Functions of The Sertoli Cells**

- Not only provide support to the developing germ cells but also house them, provide with required nutrition, and protect them.

- Secrete lipids, carbohydrates, vitamins, amino acids, and metal ions required for the proper development of the developing germ cells.

- Regulate cholesterol metabolism during spermatogenesis, which plays a vital role in sperm production and male fertility.

- Secrete hormone inhibin B, which helps in suppressing the secretion of FSH, thus bettering the function of Sertoli cells, spermatogenic status, and sperm number.

- Act as macrophages by engulfing the apoptotic bodies, bacteria, all the dead, and worn-out cells.

- Secrete an androgen-binding protein (ABP)

- Convey the mature germ cells to the lumen to be transported further.

**Leydig Cells**

The primary source of steroid hormones in a normal male is the Leydig cell. The normal function of the Leydig cell through the production of steroid hormones ensures normal reproductive function and fertility in males.

They are generally large polyhedral, pale cells with an eccentric nucleus lying in the connective tissue present between the seminiferous tubules. The cytoplasm contains rod-shaped Reinke's crystalloid bodies and vacuoles, which are yellowish in color containing various enzymes.

# Molecular Level

As mentioned earlier, there are specific genetic and molecular messengers that are essential for normal testicular descent.

**SRY**

In 1990 Sinclair et al. identified a gene on the Y chromosome, which they named the sex-determining region of the Y chromosome.

The SRY gene becomes transactivated by the product of the WT1, which binds to the SRY promoter region.

**SOX9**

The SOX9 (SRY-Box Transcription Factor 9) gene encodes a 509 amino acid long transcription factor, which is necessary for sexual development. It is found on the long arm of chromosome 17 and is a member of HMG transcription factors having a molecular mass of 56kD.

SRY begins a feed-forward loop between Glia-activating factor (FGF9) and SOX9; this causes the upregulation of FGF9 and inhibits WNT4. WNT4 promotes female sex development, whereas FGF9 stimulates male sex development. This upregulation of FGF9 and SOX9 and downregulation of WNT4 stimulate testis development.

**SF1**

Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1), also known as NR5A1, is a transcription factor that consists of 461 amino acids.

**AMH**

Anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH), also known as Mullerian inhibiting substance (MIS) is a 560 amino acid long protein.

**INSL3**

Insulin-like peptide 3 (INSL3), otherwise known as Leydig cell-specific relaxin-like factor, is a hormone encoded by the INSL3 gene found on chromosome 19.

# Function

**The Normal Function of the Testes**

There are two main functions of the testes. These are the endocrine production of androgens and exocrine production of spermatozoa.

The endocrine function of the testis is under neuroendocrine control. The production of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) by the anterior hypothalamus stimulates the production of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) in the anterior pituitary.

**Endocrine Function**

GnRH is released in repeated pulses in response to excitatory neurotransmitters such as glutamate and kisspeptin.

Luteinizing hormone stimulates the production of androgens in Leydig cells by binding to a GPCR.

Leydig cell androgen production is dependent on the activity of four enzymes. These are cytochrome P450 17a-hydroxylase (P450 17a),  P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc), 17b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17b HSD) and 3b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3b-HSD).

**Exocrine Function**

Spermatozoa are produced from spermatogonia through a stepwise process. The spermatogonia are at the basement membrane of the seminiferous tubules. The spermatogonia can be either stem cells (type A spermatogonia) or differentiated spermatogonia (Type B spermatogonia). Type A spermatogonia either produce more type A spermatogonia or type B spermatogonia.

After completing the prophase of meiosis 1, the spermatocytes rapidly complete meiosis 1. This process results in the formation of haploid secondary spermatocytes. The secondary spermatocytes complete meiosis 2, leading to the production of four haploid spermatids from one primary spermatocyte.

**Functional Significance of Testicular Descent**

According to the ‘temperature-dependent hypothesis,’ testicular descent is necessary because a low-temperature environment is needed to produce viable sperm. Normal spermatogenesis and storage in the epididymis require temperatures below that of the core body temperature.

A testicular temperature of 2 to 7 degrees C below core body temperature is a requirement for effective spermatogenesis.

# Testing

**Imaging**

In the context of undescended testis, imaging methods can serve to determine the anatomical location of undescended testes; this allows for better pre-surgical planning and reduces the extent of exploration and anesthesia time.

**Karyotyping**

Chromosomal changes are detectable through the use of a technique known as karyotyping, which allows the identification of the chromosomes so that in situations where there may be an extra or missing chromosome, it is detectable through karyotyping.

# Pathophysiology

**Testicular Developmental Disorders**

**Testicular Dysgenesis**

Testicular dysgenesis syndrome (TDS) is a constellation of poor-quality semen, testicular germ cell cancer, cryptorchidism, and hypospadias. It is a consequence of disruption to embryonal programming and gonad development.

Reduced production of androgen receptors, disrupted hormone levels along with exposure to endocrine disrupters are associated with the development of TDS.

As mentioned before, researchers believe that EDCs contribute to the development of TDS through the interference with the production, transport, metabolism, binding, release, action, and elimination of hormones associated with developmental processes.

There are historical examples of maternal exposure to chemicals contributing the testicular developmental disorders; the synthetic estrogenic drug known as diethylstilboestrol (DES) was historically used for the prevention of the complications of pregnancy but was shown to increase the risk of testicular malformations.

**Cryptorchidism**

It is a state wherein there is an absence of the testes in the scrotum may be unilaterally or bilaterally. The etiology of cryptorchidism can divide into anatomical, genetic, or hormonal causes.

As the main functional significance of the descent of the testes according to the ‘temperature-dependent hypothesis’ is the maintenance of a low-temperature environment to produce viable sperm, failure of testicular descent will lead to an increase in the testicular temperature. An increase in testicular temperature causes a reduction in effective spermatogenesis. Furthermore, damage to Sertoli cells may occur due to the production of reactive oxygen species.

Cryptorchidism appears to demonstrate associations with an increased risk of testicular intraepithelial neoplasm (TIN), which may lead to testicular carcinoma in situ (CIS).

**Anorchia**

By definition, anorchia is the absence of testes in a person who has a 46 XY karyotype and an external male phenotype. It is also known as vanishing testis syndrome or embryonic testicular regression.

Because patients with anorchia have a normal male phenotype, scientists suspect that the testes were functionally normal during some point of embryological development.

**Monorchism**

Monorchism is, by definition, the state of only having one testis in the scrotum. Monorchism may result from trauma, testicular torsion, or surgical removal because of testicular malignancy.

**Polyorchidism**

Polyorchidism refers to a congenital anomaly in which more than two testes are present in the scrotum.

Leung described a way of classifying polyorchidism based on embryological differentiation.

- Type I: An extra testis without an epididymis or vas which attaches to the ipsilateral testis.

- Type II: The extra testis drains through the epididymis of the ipsilateral testis, and they share a common vas deferens.

- Type III: The extra testis has its own epididymis separate from the ipsilateral testis, both of those structures draining into a common vas deferens.

- Type IV: The extra testis has a separate epididymis and vas deferens from the ipsilateral testis.

**Testicular Torsion**

Testicular torsion is a state in which the spermatic cord twisted upon itself, leading to a restriction of blood supply and venous drainage of the ipsilateral testis. If emergency treatment is not delivered quickly, it may lead to necrosis of the testis.

Researchers believe that the majority of postnatal testicular torsion is associated with the "bell clapper anomaly."

Testicular torsion is extravaginal or intravaginal.

**Swyer Syndrome**

Swyer syndrome, also known as pure gonadal dysgenesis, occurs when there is abnormal sexual differentiation during embryological development, leading to insufficient intrauterine virilization with undifferentiated gonads with associated female phenotype.

Swyer syndrome occurs due to reduced production of testosterone and AMH leading to a failure of gonadal differentiation.

**Klinefelters Syndrome**

Klinefelters syndrome is a common congenital chromosomal disorder with an incidence of 0.1% to 0.2% of newborns.

**Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome**

A child can have a disorder of sexual development (DSD) without a chromosomal abnormality such as Klinefelters syndrome. The most commonly seen 46 XY DSD is androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS).

AIS occurs due to molecular defects in the gene that codes for the androgen receptor (AR).

As patients with AIS have a Y chromosome, they will produce male gonads. However, as the fetal cells do not respond to androgens, there will be abnormal development of the reproductive system. This situation may manifest as undescended testes. Furthermore, as androgens play a part in the inhibition of female characteristics through SOX9 and SF1, a loss of response to androgens may lead to a female phenotype.

**5-ARD Deficiency**

The enzyme 5-alpha reductase 2 (5alpha-RD2) converts testosterone into DHT.

5-alpha reductase deficiency is a 46 XY DSD. It presents with a female phenotype or improperly virilized external genitalia along with testes. The gene for 5 alpha-RD2, also known as SRD5A2, is found on the second chromosome on position 2p23, it is an autosomal recessive condition.

**Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia**

The most common inborn error of adrenal function is congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) secondary to a deficiency of the steroid 21-hydroxylase enzyme.

In infant females, the most common form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (21-hydroxylase deficiency) may present with a salt-wasting disease or virilization of the external genitalia. In both males and females, it can present with precocious puberty.

Other less common forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia include the 3b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3b-HSD) deficiency which occurs due to mutations in the HSD3B2 gene, the 17a-hydroxylase (P450 17a) deficiency which occurs due to mutations in the CYP17A1 gene, and the P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc) deficiency which occurs due to mutations in the CYP11A1 gene.

A deficiency in the 3b-HSD enzyme causes a failure of the conversion of 17-a hydroxypregnenolone to 17a hydroxyprogesterone, pregnenolone to progesterone, and DHEA to androstenedione, resulting in the accumulation of pregnenolone, DHEA, and 17-a hydroxypregnenolone and a reduction in the production of sex steroids. It may also cause salt-wasting disease.****Reduced production of androgenic steroid hormones may present as pseudohermaphroditism associated with cryptorchidism.

A deficiency in the P450 17a enzyme leads to a failure of the conversion of pregnenolone to 17a-hydroxypregnenolone, progesterone to 17a- hydroxyprogesterone, and reduced conversion of 17-hydroxypregnenolone into DHEA. This process leads to the accumulation of pregnenolone, progesterone, and reduced production of glucocorticoids and sex steroids, leading to incomplete virilization in males associated with ambiguous external genitalia and cryptorchidism.

A deficiency in the P450scc enzyme leads to a failure of the conversion of cholesterol into pregnenolone; this is the first step in the synthesis of all steroid hormones. As a result, there is a severe deficiency in steroid hormones.

**Other Related Conditions**

**Congenital Inguinal Hernia**

The lifetime risk of inguinal hernias is significantly higher in men (27%) than in women (3%).

# Clinical Significance

**Testicular Developmental Disorders**

**Cryptorchidism**

Congenital undescended testes (cryptorchidism) is a very common congenital urogenital malformation with a prevalence among normal birth weight boys varying between 1.8 to 8.4%.

By definition, cryptorchidism is a condition where either one or both of the testes do not descend into the scrotum.

- Cryptorchid – This refers to a testis that is not in the scrotum and cannot be manipulated so that they enter the scrotum.

- Ectopic – This refers to a testis that has not followed the regular developmental route of testicular descent. This condition can be femoral, pubopenile, crossed scrotal, or perineal.

- Gliding – This refers to a testis that can be manipulated to enter into the upper scrotum, but with the removal of manipulation, they retract.

- Retractile – This refers to the testis, which can be manipulated to enter into the scrotum; they do not retract when tension is released.

- Acquired – This refers to the testis, which initially had normal descent that ascends spontaneously.

The diagnosis of cryptorchidism is by manual palpation; this is an essential part of the newborn physical examination and should be diagnosed during infancy.

**Anorchia**

Anorchia occurs in 1/20,000 males and is also associated with 1/177 of those with cryptorchidism.

It is crucial to distinguish anorchia from cryptorchidism by examination of the abdomen and inguinal canal. Furthermore, as congenital adrenal hyperplasia can present similarly, plasma 17a-hydroxylase levels should be determined to rule out CAH. The diagnosis of anorchia can be made through undetectable plasma levels of AMH and inhibin B associated with raised plasma levels of FSH.

**Monorchism**

Clinically, it is not always possible to determine the exact etiology of monorchism as a child presenting with monorchism may have cryptorchidism, testicular agenesis, or VTS. Further investigation, such as laparoscopy or imaging techniques, may be performed. However, the accuracy of imaging techniques and the invasive nature of diagnostic laparoscopy means are not optimal methods for determining the cause of monorchism.

**Polyorchidism**

The majority of patients with polyorchidism are asymptomatic.

**Testicular Torsion**

The prevalence of testicular torsion in males below the age of 25 years is between 2.9 to 3.8 patients per 100,000 people.

Testicular torsion is diagnosable using a color doppler ultrasound; this is the gold standard for the evaluation of the acute scrotum.

**Swyer Syndrome**

Swyer syndrome has an incidence of 1 in 80,0000.

**Klinefelters Syndrome**

In Klinefelter's syndrome, the primordial germ cells fail to develop appropriately such that by puberty, no germ cells remain, resulting in insufficient spermatogenesis.

- Small firm testes

- Above-average height

- Erectile issues

- Sparse male-pattern body hair

- Bilateral gynecomastia

- Infertility

**5-ARD Deficiency**

The phenotypical presentation of 5-ARD deficiency does not tend to match the genotypical presentation such that patients with the same genotype may present with different phenotypes.

**Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia**

A deficiency in 3B-HSD accounts for between 1% and 10% of CAH cases.