# Introduction

Major basic protein (MBP) is an eosinophil granule protein. Eosinophil granules contain a crystalloid core comprised of MBP and a matrix consisting of other toxic and pro-inflammatory mediators. MBP is the predominant constituent in eosinophil granules. MBP derives its name from research in guinea pig eosinophils that showed MBP was the majority protein in secondary granules. Increased concentrations of MBP and other cationic proteins have shown correlations with atopic diseases, parasitic infections, and other eosinophil-associated inflammatory processes.

# Cellular Level

MBP is a 13.8 kDa protein rich in arginine with an isoelectric point (pI) of 11.4.

The MBP proform (proMBP) is absent in mature eosinophils. The exact trigger for cleavage of proMBP to MBP is not known. Interleukin-5 (IL-5) is known to stimulate the maturation of eosinophils within the bone marrow and serve as a chemotaxis agent at sites of inflammation. IL-5 also stimulates the synthesis of proteins in eosinophil granules.

Studies of IL-5 stimulated umbilical cord precursor cells identified a homolog of MBP named MBP2.****Although MBP is present in eosinophils, basophils, and other cells, MBP2 has, so far, only been identified in eosinophils, making it a potentially useful biomarker for eosinophilic disorders.

# Organ Systems Involved

Eosinophil-mediated diseases involving the lungs, heart, skin, and gut are the best studied and characterized.

- Cardiovascular

- Gastrointestinal

- Pulmonary

- Renal

- Neurologic

- Skin

# Function

- Host defense against parasitic infections, such as Trichinella spiralis and Schistosoma mansoni.

- Activation of mast cells, basophils, and neutrophils during inflammation.

- Complement activation through alternative and classical pathways.

- Platelet agonist

- Antibacterial activity

- Natural protein inhibitor of heparanase - heparanase has been implicated in inflammation and inflammation-associated cancer due to its ability to degrade the extracellular matrix scaffold and potentially assist with penetration of eosinophils into other tissues.

Additional functions more closely associated with pathologic activity, such as fibrosis, bronchospasm, and epithelial remodeling, are detailed in subsequent sections.

# Mechanism

MBP is toxic to helminths, bacteria, and mammalian cells. MBP can exert cytotoxic effects through several pathways. It is capable of increasing membrane permeability, disrupting a cell’s lipid bilayer**.**

MBPs participate in host defense and inflammation via another distinct method: extracellular DNA traps.

MBP can influence nerve activity, as well. MBP is an allosteric antagonist of inhibitory M2 receptors.

# Pathophysiology

Organ and tissue-specific damage due to eosinophil dysfunction or hyperactivity occurs through a variety of methods. MBP is heavily involved in these processes. Four general mechanisms can describe the pathology seen in eosinophilic disorders

- **Eosinophilic infiltration:**Excessive accumulation of eosinophils in tissue can lead to tissue damage if there is extensive deposition. This condition may occur in eosinophilic types of pneumonia, for example.

- ****Allergic inflammation:****As previously mentioned, IL-5 is vital for its role in stimulating the differentiation and growth of eosinophils and for stimulating their recruitment to sites of inflammation. Th2 cells are highly associated with allergic conditions and can stimulate eosinophils directly or indirectly. Direct stimulation can occur with the Th2 release of IL-5. Indirect activation can occur with Th2 production of IgE, which can bind mast cells (type I hypersensitivity response). Release of mast cell contents, such as Il-5 and leukotrienes, can lead to further eosinophil activation and inflammation.

- **Fibrosis:**Eosinophils can cause fibrosis by releasing transforming growth factorβ, interleukin 4, and interleukin 13, leading to fibroblast activation and proliferation.

- **Thrombosis:**Eosinophil granular contents can induce a hypercoagulable state in certain diseases by activating platelets. MBP and EPO are potent platelet agonists.

# Clinical Significance

Linking clinical symptoms or diseases to eosinophils can, at times, be especially challenging, because eosinophils may not always be present on histopathological or microscopic examination of specimens. This situation can occur due to the degranulation of eosinophil contents at target sites without direct infiltration of eosinophils. As a result, testing for MBP and granular proteins has increased.

**Skin:**Atopic dermatitis is associated with elevations of serum IgE and eosinophilia in blood. However, biopsies of patients with atopic dermatitis are absent of eosinophils. An analysis of skin tissue via immunofluorescence from affected patients revealed the presence of MBP, suggesting degranulation of MBP from eosinophils in the dermis of patients with atopic dermatitis.

MBP has also been found in skin biopsies of patients with chronic urticaria.

**Gastrointestinal:**Eosinophilia and MBP have correlated with various gastrointestinal conditions, such as eosinophilic esophagitis, celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and eosinophilic gastroenteritis.

**Upper and lower airways:**MBP has implications in bronchial hyperreactivity (reviewed in “mechanisms”). The measurement of this granule in the sputum of patients with asthma has been shown in some studies to be better at identifying asthma than measurement of eosinophilia alone.

**Cardiovascular:**MBP is deposited in the cardiac tissue of patients with the eosinophilic endomyocardial disease.