**Pre-Surgery**

Informed written consent is obtained from the patient, usually before the surgery date, and reconfirmed on the day, so there is adequate time to discuss any questions. The surgeon, theatre team, and patient should confirm the correct surgical site. The surgeon should personally mark the side being operated upon with the patient's consent and agreement before any medication is administered in the preoperative area. A local anesthetic injection is given as a peribulbar injection. Once the patient is under general anesthesia, it is advocated that a three-point check is performed that the correct eye is being removed: the consent form signed by the surgeon and the patient is reviewed by the surgeon, the clinical notes that record the history are reviewed by the surgeon, and the correctly marked eye is identified and agree with by the anesthesiologist, the circulating nurse, and the surgical nurse. Only then one can proceed with the procedure.

**Surgical Technique**

- Once a sterile field is achieved, the eyelids are retracted with the lid speculum or a traction suture.

- A retrobulbar anesthetic injection is administered with a mixture of 2% lidocaine and 0.5% marcaine with epinephrine.

- A 360-degree conjunctival peritomy is performed, and Tenon fascia is carefully removed from the globe with blunt dissection between the rectus muscles.

- Each rectus muscle is isolated with a squint hook, and the Tenon capsule is detached from the muscles.

- The muscle is secured by a locking double-armed 6-0 suture posterior to the insertions. Displacement of the muscle is prevented by clamping the suture to the surgical drape. The muscle is then transected anterior to the suture.

- The superior and inferior oblique muscles are disinserted without using tacking sutures.

- Vertical traction on the globe is created by grasping the rectus muscle insertions. The optic nerve is clamped, and enucleation scissors or snares are introduced to the posterior orbit, and the nerve is transacted. A useful technique to provide anterior traction is to use the stump of the inferior oblique.

- The optic nerve is cut using enucleation scissors.

- Careful dissection of residual fibrous attachments is undertaken with Wescott scissors.

- Minimize any orbital fat manipulation to reduce the risk of atrophy.

- Soak neurosurgical paddies/swabs in local anesthetic with epinephrine and temporarily pack these into the orbit with pressure for a few minutes. Bipolar cautery can be used to assist in hemostasis but should be used judiciously.

- In cases of intraocular tumors, at least 7-10 mm of the optic nerve is removed during the enucleation. It is wise to photograph the globe and the length of the optic nerve after the enucleation.

- Send the globe for pathologic investigation.

- If planning to insert the orbital implant, choose the correct size and with or without wrapping, introduce with the Carter introducer inside the muscle cone, posterior to the Tenon capsule.

- The rectus muscles are secured to the implant, and the Tenon capsule is closed with buried and interrupted 5-0 absorbable sutures.

- The conjunctiva is closed with a running 6-0 or 7-0 absorbable suture, avoiding invagination of the epithelium, which can lead to cyst formation.

- Finally, a conformer is placed to maintain the fornices and prevent symblepharon formation. Topical antibiotic ointment is applied to the fornices and lids.

- Retro-orbital injection with liposomal bupivacaine gives good postoperative pain control.

- A temporary tarsorrhaphy suture is frequently inserted between the lateral, upper, and lower eyelids with a 5-0 vicryl or 6-0 vicryl suture to reduce chemosis and prevent the conformer from falling out. These sutures are removed in one to four weeks after surgery.

- The orbit is covered with a gentle pressure patch for 24 hours to reduce postoperative edema.

**Post-Surgery**

Oral analgesia can be given to the patient to use as required. Oral broad-spectrum antibiotic prophylaxis may be necessary in cases of infection. The pressure patch can remain in place up to a week to reduce postoperative edema, although it is generally removed in 24 hours because of the inevitable oozing and soaking of the dressing that occurs. It will need to be removed to allow the application of topical antibiotic and corticosteroid ointment onto the conformer. Patients should wash their hands prior to manipulating the conformer.

**Orbital Implants**

Enucleation is usually undertaken with implant insertion, either primary or as a secondary procedure. Many types of implant material have been used.

The goal of implant placement is to replace the lost volume, allow prosthesis motility, and improve symmetry with the fellow eye. Implants can be integrated, nonintegrated, buried, or exposed. The orbital contents will tend to contract towards the apex nasally and inferiorly over time, regardless of the type of implant used. This process likely leads to superior sulcus deformity. It is important to correctly size the orbital implant prior to placement. Sizers are used intraoperatively to select an implant of adequate size so that the layers of the Tenon capsule and conjunctiva can be easily apposed over its surface without tension. The addition of any wrapping material will increase the implant diameter by 1 to 2 mm and also reduce the risk of exposure of the implant.