Evaluation of BPD involves assessment of blood gas, chest x-ray and evaluating the nutritional status of the patient. An arterial blood gas may reveal hypoxia, hypercarbia or acidosis. These patients remain on continuous pulse oximetry to help target adequate oxygen saturation. Many centers also utilize transcutaneous carbon dioxide monitoring to evaluate the ventilation of the infant.

Chest radiographs may show decreased lung volumes, hyperinflation, areas of atelectasis, pulmonary edema, and pulmonary interstitial emphysema. High-resolution CT may demonstrate abnormalities not readily seen with routine chest radiography. Infants with moderate or severe BPD must be screened for pulmonary hypertension(PH) at 36 PMA using an echocardiogram. Some centers chose to screen all patients with BPD since the morbidity and mortality associated with the diagnosis of PH in BPD are quite high.

The diagnosis of BPD is made clinically based on the GA, postmenstrual age (PMA), oxygen exposure and oxygen requirement at 36 weeks PMA. In 2001, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) workshop proposed the current definition where infants born at less than or equal to 32 weeks GA with 28 days of oxygen exposure get diagnosed with mild, moderate or severe BPD at 36 weeks PMA based on their respiratory support at that time.

This definition still has many deficiencies and does not adequately predict respiratory outcomes; hence in 2016, the NICHD workshop on BPD proposed a revision of this definition. The suggested refinement suggests utilizing radiographic confirmation and accounts for the newer modes of non-invasive ventilation.