**Types of Intragastric Balloons**

Intragastric balloons vary in terms of the material, duration of therapy, balloon volume, adjustability, and the methodology of insertion and removal. The intragastric balloon placement is typically done within an endoscopy unit as an outpatient procedure. The procedure typically takes roughly 30 minutes, and the patient may be discharged 1 to 2 hours post placement of the balloon. Currently, the three FDA-approved balloons include the Obalon, Orbera, and ReShape balloons. These three balloons are also approved in Europe and the Elipse, End-Ball, Heliosphere BAG, Lexbal, MedSil, and Spatz3.

The Orbera balloon was approved for usage in 1997 in Europe and later by the FDA in the US in 2015. This is the balloon system in which most of the data on both safety and efficacy are available. The Orbera balloon is composed of silicone, filled with 400 to 700 mL of saline, and is placed endoscopically into the stomach for up to 6-months. The total body weight loss is measured at approximately 10.2%, with excess weight-loss measuring at 26.5%.

Since 2015, the ReShape system, a dual balloon system, and the Obalon, the first swallowable balloon that allows up to three balloons to be inserted without endoscopy, have been introduced. The Obalon system consists of three separate balloons. These are inserted by swallowing and then filled with gas nitrogen to approximately 250 mL each by an attached catheter. Typically, one balloon is inserted per month with up to three balloons. At the six-month mark post insertion of the initial balloon, all balloons are retrieved endoscopically. The estimated total body weight loss is measured at 7.1%.

The ReShape balloon is placed in an endoscopic fashion for up to six months and filled with saline of approximately 750 to 900 mL. It is then retrieved at the six-month mark endoscopically. The estimated total bodyweight-loss percentage is 6.8%, with an estimated weight loss of 25.1%.

The Spatz3 balloon is unique in that it is adjustable and can be in place for up to 12 months. This balloon system can reside in the stomach for up to one year. It is placed endoscopically and retrieved in an endoscopic fashion. It is adjustable and filled with saline. The balloon itself is made of a silicone material. The total body weight loss is measured at 20.1%, with an estimated weight loss of 45.8%.

The Elipse is the only intragastric balloon that is removed via natural excretion. This does not require any endoscopic procedure. This balloon is noted to be procedure-less and made from polyurethane. It is filled with approximately 550 mL of saline via a catheter. The balloon is left in situ for up to four months. Given the resorbable material inside the balloon, it degrades, which allows a natural release valve to open and empties the balloon. This is then naturally excreted.