Screening recommendations can be found in a detailed presentation through "Sexually Transmitted Disease Treatment Guidelines 2021," published by the CDC.

Depending on the clinical presentation of the patient and the severity of symptoms, a patient with a primary complaint concerning a possible sexually transmitted infection should involve ruling out localized and systemic STIs. Initial diagnostic testing will be guided by the presenting sexually transmitted infection as described in the CDC Sexually Transmitted Disease Treatment Guidelines that were updated in 2021.

Most common laboratory testing performed includes:

- Nucleic Acid Amplification Test (NAAT)

- Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF)

- Fluorescent Treponemal Antibody Absorption Test (FTA-ABS)

- Rapid Plasma Reagin (RPR)

- Treponema pallidum Particle Agglutination (TP-PA)

- Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL)

**Chancroid**

- Female/Male: Diagnosis is by clinical history and examination, together with the exclusion of alternative ulcerative infections such as herpes and syphilis. One or more deep, relatively large, painful ulcers on the genitalia associated with inguinal adenopathy that is tender and suppurative are highly suggestive of chancroid. (Herpetic ulcers are usually smaller and chancres from syphilis are typically painless.)

- Gram stain may show a typical "school of fish" pattern, but this is only 80% reliable. The definitive diagnosis requires the growing of Haemophilus ducreyi in a culture which is difficult and requires the use of specially enriched media grown under conditions of high humidity and high CO2, not generally available to most clinical laboratories. There is currently no FDA-approved PCR serological test available for H. ducreyi.

- The CDC recommends using the following clinical criteria:

- One or more painful genital ulcers
- Clinical findings, such as the appearance of genital ulcers and regional lymphadenopathy consistent with chancroid
- No evidence of Treponema pallidum infection by darkfield microscopy of the exudate or by serologic testing within one week after the onset of ulcers
- A negative Herpes simplex virus culture or PCR test was performed on the exudate

**Chlamydia**:

- Female: Diagnosis is made by using a NAAT on a vaginal swab, first-catch urine sample, or self-endocervical swab.

- Male: Diagnosis is made using NAAT of a first-catch urine sample or urethral sample.

**Genital Herpes**

- Female/Male: Diagnosis is by clinical examination, NAAT from genital ulceration, or viral culture.

- Fluorescein-labeled monoclonal antibodies are used in a direct, immunofluorescence assay for herpes simplex virus antibodies, but it is not currently recommended due to its relative insensitivity.

- Cellular changes on cytologic examination associated with herpes simplex virus infections are also not recommended for diagnosis. It is considered too non-specific and insensitive.

- HIV testing is recommended in all patients who test positive for genital herpes.

**Gonorrhea**

- Female: Diagnosis is made using a NAAT vulvovaginal or endocervical swab.

- Male: Diagnosis is made using NAAT of a first-catch urine sample or urethral sample.

**Granuloma inguinale**

- Female/Male: Diagnosis is primarily clinical, based on the gross appearance of the lesions and microscopic findings of intracellular Donovan bodies on a scraping, tissue crush, or biopsy specimen.

- Donovan bodies are rod or oval-shaped intracellular inclusions in the cytoplasm of histiocytes and/or mononuclear phagocytes of infected patients.

- Donovan bodies stain dark purple with Wright's stain.

- The infecting organism is very difficult to culture, and no FDA-approved molecular diagnostic laboratory test is currently available.

**HIV**

- Female/Male: Diagnosis involves using a blood sample or saliva for antibodies as a preliminary test, followed up with more specific tests, including PCR or specific immunoassays.

- The CDC recommends at least one HIV test for all adults from 15 to 65 years.

- High-risk individuals (sexually active gays, bisexuals, and men who have sex with other men) should be tested at least annually.

- PCR testing is essentially diagnostic of an HIV infection.

- The CDC recommends HIV1/HIV2 antigen-antibody immunoassay.

- Patients who are unlikely to return for follow-up should be offered a rapid point-of-care HIV test. Results are available in <20 minutes but may be negative in early infections.

- An RT-PCR-based viral load test is also recommended.

- HIV RNA testing is best for acute HIV infections.

- An HIV1/HIV2 antibody differentiation assay would be confirmatory.

- HIV-infected individuals should be screened for chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis when diagnosed and at least annually afterward.

- Individual assays to isolate specific antibodies or particular viral antigens can be used for confirmation. (See our companion reference StatPearls article on "HIV Testing.")

**HPV and Genital Warts**

- Female/Male: Diagnosis is primarily clinical, based on the gross appearance of any cutaneous or other lesions discovered on the physical examination.

- A biopsy can be done for confirmation, but this is usually reserved for the following situations:

- Immunocompromised patients (cancer risk is highest)
- Diagnosis is uncertain
- Atypical lesions
- Lesions that do not respond to standard therapy

- Female: Reflex HPV testing can be done on cervical cells from a Pap smear to identify HPV subtypes.

- Suspicious Pap smear results can be further evaluated by colposcopy using acetic acid to highlight specific white-colored areas that can be biopsied.

**Lymphogranuloma venereum**

- Female/Male: Initial diagnosis is primarily by clinical suspicion in regions where this infection is common and by eliminating other causes of genital ulcerations with inguinal lymphadenopathy.

- Ulcerative infections of the genitalia to exclude, which also cause inguinal lymphadenopathy, would be chancroid, herpes, granuloma inguinale, and syphilis.

- Lymphoma, penile cancer, and HIV are additional causes of lymphadenopathy.

- Serological testing with complement fixation, micro-immunofluorescence, or NAAT can confirm the diagnosis, but PVR-based genotyping is the most definitive.

- NAAT testing is usually preferred due to availability and is recommended for all patients who present with proctocolitis.

- Finding Chlamydia trachomatis in a genital, lymph node, or rectal specimens through culture, direct immunofluorescence, or nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) would be diagnostic and confirmatory.

- Men at high risk (men who have sex with men) and have proctocolitis should be tested for Chlamydia trachomatis.

- HIV testing is also recommended in this patient population.

**Pelvic Inflammatory Disease**

- Female: Diagnosis is primarily clinical based on the presence of lower abdominal pain, pelvic discomfort, purulent vaginal discharge, abnormal vaginal bleeding, or dyspareunia.

- Clinical findings suggestive of pelvic inflammatory disease include:

- Fever >101 F (>38.3 C)
- Cervical friability
- Mucopurulent cervical discharge
- Saline microscopy of vaginal fluid shows abundant WBCs
- Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and/or C-reactive protein
- Laboratory confirmation of N. gonorrhea or C. trachomatis by NAAT or culture
- A diagnosis of pelvic inflammatory disease is unlikely if the cervical discharge is normal and no WBCs are seen on a wet prep of the vaginal fluid.

- NAAT testing for N.gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis is recommended. Testing for M. genitalium is also recommended (if available).

- Serological testing for HIV and Treponema pallidum (syphilis) should also be performed.

- Pregnancy testing should be done, and pelvic ultrasonography should be considered if there is any suspicion of a tubo-ovarian abscess.

**Mycoplasma genitalium**

- Female/Male: Initial diagnosis is primarily clinical based on symptoms and the exclusion of chlamydia and gonorrhea.

- NAAT assays for M. genitalium are now available and FDA-approved, with a sensitivity of 96% or better.

- Mycoplasma genitalium should be suspected in all patients with recurrent or persistent gonorrhea or chlamydia infections and intractable urethritis.

- Presumptive treatment can be initiated in suspected cases even without diagnostic confirmation.

**Syphilis**

- Female/Male: Diagnosis is confirmed by a positive finding on serological tests to include at least one nontreponemal (VDRL, RPR) and one treponemal (FTA-ABS, TP-PA) assay.

- No NAAT tests are currently available. PCR tests for T. pallidum have been developed, but none are FDA-approved.

- **Nontreponemal testing**, including the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) and Rapid Plasma Reagin (RPR) assays, are non-specific serum antibody tests for syphilis.
- A negative test would be non-reactive, while a positive test would demonstrate a titer ≥1:8.
- If the titer is <1:8, the test should be repeated, and a treponemal assay should be performed as well.  
- Nontreponemal tests are simple, inexpensive, and are usually the initial screening tests for syphilis.
- They will identify roughly 80% of patients with primary syphilis and close to 100% with secondary syphilis.
- They typically turn positive only after the appearance of the primary chancre.
- When quantified, they can be used for disease tracking as a fourfold change in activity is generally considered significant.
- However, they are not specific for syphilis and can often give false-positive results, so they are inadequate for a definitive diagnosis alone without confirmation from a treponemal test.

- **Treponemal testing**, including the Fluorescent Treponemal Antibody Absorption (FTA-ABS) and theTreponema Pallidum Particle Agglutination (TP-PA) assays, are needed for confirmation of the diagnosis.

- While specific treponemal antibodies appear early, their level does not correlate well with disease activity or stage.
- They typically remain positive for life even after successful treatment, making them useless for disease tracking.

- 
**A positive result on at least one nontreponemal and one treponemal test is required to definitively confirm a syphilis diagnosis.**

- Only quantifiable nontreponemal tests can be used for disease tracking.

- Darkfield microscopy can identify the infecting spirochete in 80% of cases even before serological testing but is rarely performed.

- Patients who present with possible neurosyphilis will need a cerebral spinal fluid sample to assist with the diagnostic workup.

- VDRL testing of the cerebrospinal fluid is highly specific for neurosyphilis but not very sensitive.
- Treponemal testing of the cerebrospinal fluid is highly sensitive but less specific than the VDRL test for neurosyphilis.

- HIV testing should be performed on all patients testing positive for syphilis.

- For further details on diagnostic testing, see our companion reference StatPearls article on "Syphilis."

**Trichomoniasis**

- Female: Diagnosis using NAAT of the vagina, endocervical swab, urine analysis, or urethral sample.

- Alternatively, a wet mount will show motile flagellated protozoa.

- Patients diagnosed with trichomoniasis should also be tested for chlamydia, gonorrhea, HIV, and syphilis.

**PREGNANCY - STI Screening Recommendations from the CDC 2021 Guidelines:**

Sexually transmitted infections can seriously complicate pregnancy and potentially cause serious health consequences for the mother and her unborn child.

- **First Prenatal Visit:**
- All pregnant women should be tested for HIV, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C, and syphilis at their first prenatal visit. 
- All pregnant women <25 years of age and older, pregnant women who are at increased risk for infection should be tested for chlamydia and gonorrhea.
- Pregnant women who test positive for chlamydia should be retested 3 to 4 weeks after treatment and again within three months.

- **Third Trimester Visit:**(preferably at or before 36 weeks)
- Rescreen women <25 years of age or at continued high risk and all those not previously tested for chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis.
- Pregnant women with high-risk factors or who were not previously tested should be screened for HIV and hepatitis B.
- Those patients who tested positive for syphilis at the prenatal visit should be retested.

**High-risk factors include:**

- New or multiple sex partners

- Inconsistent use of condoms

- A sexual partner with concurrent or multiple partners

- A sexual partner who has a sexually transmitted infection (STI)

- History of illegal drug use or prostitution

- Living in an area with a high rate of STIs

- Incarcerated individuals

The CDC does not recommend routine testing in pregnancy for bacterial vaginosis, Herpes, HPV, or Trichomoniasis.

**Treatment of STIs in Pregnancy**

Curable STIs (chlamydia, gonorrhea, syphilis, and trichomonas) can be successfully treated with appropriate antibiotics deemed safe for administration during pregnancy. While viral STIs cannot be cured, they can generally be controlled with various antivirals and other preventive measures to minimize transmission to the baby and harm to the mother.

For detailed information on specific STI treatments in pregnancy, readers are referred to the 2021 WHO and CDC STI Guidelines.