**Structure**

The DRG participates in sensory transduction and modulation, including pain transmission.

The axons of these neurons are bundled into roots/nerves that contain a mix of fibers with varied excitability, including low-threshold mechanosensory fibers, higher-threshold Aβ nociceptors, and Aδ fibers. Aβ, Aδ, and C fibers carry peripheral sensation information to their respective soma in the DRG. Myelinated Aδ fibers have a relatively high velocity to carry acute nociceptive details (temperature, mechanical, and chemical-induced) to the DRG. Unmyelinated C fibers have a smaller diameter and slower conduction velocity. They also carry nociceptive input to the DRG but contribute to the more diffuse and more profound secondary pain after an injury. In addition, DRGs have a large population of glial cells; each DRG has approximately eightfold more glia than neurons.

DRG neurons are pseudounipolar; a single axon projects from the cell body and bifurcates at the T-junction. The peripheral portion of the axon extends to receptor endings in the periphery and is responsible for afferent signaling. The central part of the axon extends into the central nervous system (CNS). It shows considerable axonal arborizations into the spinal cord, terminating in synapses at ipsilateral or contralateral wide dynamic range neurons, inhibitory interneuron networks, and other targets in the dorsal horn.

The 31 right and left spinal nerve pairs in humans form from afferent sensory dorsal axons (the dorsal root) and motor ventral efferent axons (the ventral root). The DRG is consistently positioned under the vertebral pedicle at the thoracic and lumbar levels. The use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in asymptomatic subjects identifies the DRG in the foramen in 92% of L1, 98% of L2, 100% of L3, and L4, and 95% of L5, with the remainder of DRGs located in intraspinal or extraforaminal (lateral) regions.

**Function**

The role of peripheral sensory neurons is to conduct action potentials from peripheral sensory neurons to central terminals for transmission to the central nervous system. Action potentials are characterized by ionic currents across excitatory membranes. Sodium depolarization is followed by potassium repolarization and an increase in intracellular calcium, a second messenger for development, excitability, neurotransmitter release, gene expression, and cell death.

DRG neurons have specialized membrane properties and are separated from each other within ganglia. Each is encased in a layer of satellite glial cells with supporting functions. Almost all her DRG neurons undergo subthreshold excitation during the activation of other cell bodies. This is sometimes referred to as DRG "cross-depolarization" (or "cross-excitation"). Up to 90% of her DRG neurons depolarize when stimulation is applied to the axons of neighboring DRG neurons that share the same ganglion.