**Lagophthalmos**

Defined by the failure of the upper lid margin to reach the lower lid margin, what is commonly referred to as “lid lag” can either be a complication or an expected outcome of the blepharoplasty procedure. With levator advancement procedures, up to 2 mm of lid lag can be acceptable and will resolve over time. Management of post-operative lagophthalmos includes corneal lubrication to protect against corneal abrasion. Patients should be monitored closely during this time to ensure any degree of lagophthalmos is resolving.

**Ectropion**

Ectropion can evolve during lower lid procedures with excess skin resection, scarring, or loosening of the tarsoligamentous complex. While conservative management such as upward massage or upward taping can be undertaken, ectropion is typically corrected by surgical retightening of the lower lid. Until that time, eye lubrication can be utilized to decrease discomfort.

**Dry Eyes**

Many patients may complain of dry eyes postoperatively. Utilizing Schirmer’s test pre-operatively can select for the patients at the highest risk. Any manipulation of the lacrimal system, such as resuspension of the lacrimal gland, can also place patients at high risk for dry eyes. Corneal lubrication is the mainstay of treatment. Referral to an ophthalmologist may be necessary if these symptoms do not resolve.

**Retrobulbar Hemorrhage**

The most feared complication of blepharoplasty is a retrobulbar hematoma. Typically caused by bleeding following postseptal fat resection, this complication presents with severe ocular pain, proptosis, and visual complaints. Patients may have all symptoms or only one. In any patient presenting with these symptoms following blepharoplasty, the diagnosis of a retrobulbar hematoma should be considered. The treatment is emergent orbital decompression with lateral canthotomy with inferior cantholysis.