# Introduction

Even with the falling rates of cardiovascular deaths, the events of deaths attributable to sudden cardiac death keep rising.

# Function

The heart decreases the increased stress on the ventricular wall by remodeling the structure of the ventricular wall by a process known as hypertrophic growth. This process involves increased production of proteins and changes in the size and configuration of the sarcomeres present in the myocytes. These adaptations help in handling the increased stress on the heart. The left ventricular mass in highly conditioned athletes can increase up to 60 percent in comparison to non-conditioned control subjects. This change in mass sheds light on the remodeling capabilities of the heart.

An increase in the size of cells is the mechanism underlying the process of hypertrophy of any organ. The myocardial remodeling correlated with exercise and pregnancy does not have associations with the failure of the heart since there is no drastic change in the structure and functioning of the heart.

# Issues of Concern

Changes in the sequence of electrical activation have already been described as the underlying process that leads to primary electrical remodeling. However, even the change in the rate of electrical activation can cause electrical remodeling of the heart. Both of these changes occur in the absence of any structural insult to the heart. Right ventricular pacing in the longterm can lead to persistent changes in the direction of T-wave on the electrocardiogram. These changes were still present, even following the restoration of the normal sequence of electrical activation. The t-wave polarity remembered the polarity of the QRS complex during the period of an altered sequence of electrical activation. Therefore, this phenomenon was termed ‘cardiac memory.’

# Clinical Significance

Sudden cardiac death due to post-infarction arrhythmias is one of the most calamitous sequelae of myocardial infarction. These arrhythmias can also occur with heart failure. Electrical remodeling of the heart in response to structural insult is the underlying mechanism by which these arrhythmias develop. This type of remodeling is secondary electrical remodeling. Changes in different ion channels and intercellular gap junctions pave the way for secondary electrical remodeling. Abnormalities in the repolarization, specifically the lengthening of the duration of the action potential is most often present with this type of electrical remodeling. Intricate changes in the ionic channels of outward K+ currents, late part of inward Na+ currents, and inward Ca2+ currents have implications in the underlying pathophysiology of this kind of electrical remodeling. Current densities and the spatial distribution of ionic channels change with the progression of remodeling, especially in heart failure.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The reversal or slowing of structural cardiac remodeling has occurred with the use of beta-blockers, aldosterone antagonists, and ACE inhibitors. They are beneficial in patients with ejection fraction less than 40 percent.

Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) has been effective in alleviating the symptoms in electrical remodeling due to heart failure. It decreases the chances of sudden cardiac death in such patients. There is a certain degree of reversal of electrical remodeling of the heart with CRT.

These interventions can be supplemented by interprofessional coordination and communication. Nurses can play a vital role in management by motivational interviewing. There are vast numbers of regional educational programs which can provide critical information to the patients regarding their diseases and conditions. Nurses can play a role in guiding the patients towards these resources. Patient education has a beneficial effect on adherence to the interventions and regular follow-ups. Moreover, nurses can help by managing regular follow-ups. Referral to nutritionists and psychologists is also an important aspect. Since this condition requires lifestyle and diet changes as part of its management.

Pharmacists can play their role in management by overlooking the dosage, safety providing information about the appropriate time of medication ingestion and side effects, reviewing the medication refill history, and providing adherence interventions.

An interprofessional team of health professionals and clinicians can provide a collection of clinical protocols that lay the framework for the expertise of nurses and pharmacists. These collections of clinical protocols can include various steps like ordering laboratory investigations, prescribing, and managing the dose of medications related to a specific clinical condition. These are known as collective prescriptions. The use of collective prescriptions is a valuable strategy in providing effective healthcare to patients.