An important part of evaluating prostate cancer is determining the stage. The most commonly used staging system is the three-stage TNM (tumor/nodes/metastases) classification. Its components include the size and extent of the tumor, the presence of involved lymph nodes, the PSA level, the Gleason score (from a biopsy or surgical specimen), and the presence of metastases. When cancer cells spread from the prostate to other parts of the body, they most commonly go to the bones and lymph nodes.

**The Key Distinction in Prostate Cancer Staging is Whether or Not the Cancer is Confined to the Prostate and is Therefore Potentially Curable**

- T1 and T2 cancers are limited to just the prostate and are considered "localized."

- T3 cancer has spread outside the prostatic capsule but has not reached the rectum or bladder. Cancer may also have spread to the seminal vesicles (stage T3c), which tends to be an ominous sign.

- T4 cancers have spread outside the prostate to adjacent regional structures such as the bladder. They may also metastasize to the lungs, lymph nodes, or liver which would be identified by their N (nodes) or M (metastasis) scores. Stage T4 prostate cancers with distant metastases have an overall 5-year survival rate of only 29%.

**Clinical Tumor Staging**

- TX Primary tumor cannot be assessed

- T0 No evidence of primary tumor

- T1 Clinically invisible tumor; not palpable or visible by imaging

- T1a Tumor incidental histologic finding in less than or equal to 5% of tissue resected (TURP specimen)

- T1b Tumor is an incidental histologic finding in greater than 5% of tissue resected (TURP specimen)

- T1c Tumor identified by needle biopsy (because of elevated PSA level); tumors found in one or both lobes by needle biopsy but not palpable or visible by imaging

- T2 Tumor confined within the prostate

- T2a Tumor involves up to half of one prostatic lobe

- T2b Tumor involves more than half of one lobe but not both lobes

- T2c Tumor involves both lobes of the prostate

- T3 Tumor extending through the prostatic capsule; but no invasion into the prostatic apex or beyond the capsule

- T3a Extracapsular extension (unilateral or bilateral)

- T3b Tumor invading seminal vesicle(s)

- T4 Tumor is fixed or invading adjacent structures (other than seminal vesicles)

**Pathologic Tumor Staging**

- pT1 There is no pathologic T1 classification

- pT2 Organ confined tumor

- pT2a Unilateral, involving half of one side or less

- pT2b Unilateral, involving more than half of one side but not fully involving the other side

- pT2c Bilateral disease

- pT3 Extraprostatic extension

- pT3a Extraprostatic extension or microscopic invasion of the bladder neck

- pT3b Seminal vesicle invasion

- pT4 Direct invasion of the bladder, rectum, or pelvis

**Testing For Evidence of Tumor Spread**

CT scans, MRIs, bone scans, and PET scans can evaluate for any cancer spread within the abdomen and pelvis, particularly to the regional and para-aortic lymph nodes.

- Bone scans can detect early metastases to the bones, but the PSA usually needs to be at least 20 before this is likely to be positive.

- Magnetic resonance imaging is excellent when used to evaluate the prostatic capsule for an extracapsular extension and the regional lymph nodes and seminal vesicles for possible tumor involvement.

- 68-Gallium prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) PET/CT and PET/MRI scans and similar PET scans are FDA-approved tests for reliably detecting even early metastatic prostate cancer. They appear to offer significantly improved sensitivity and specificity over standard imaging by combining molecular activity testing with conventional morphologically based radiographic studies. While indicated to detect metastatic and recurrent disease, they can also be used in the initial staging of high-risk localized disease, such as from high Gleason score cancers. 68-gallium PSMA PET/CT scanning can also be used for targeted therapy by switching the imaging radiotracer for a therapeutic moiety.