**Nonoperative Management**

Physical therapy is the mainstay of treatment for Hoffa pad impingement syndrome.

The goal of taping is to tilt the inferior portion of the patella anteriorly to decrease impingement and subsequent inflammation of the IFP. This is accomplished by applying tape across the proximal half of the patella with the knee fully extended. Two separate strips are applied in a "V" formation, with the apex at the tibial tubercle. The first part of the V tape starts at the tibial tubercle and is applied over the medial epicondyle while the patella and surrounding soft tissue are pulled inferiorly. The second strip is applied beginning at the tibial tubercle and towards the lateral epicondyle in the same fashion. The tape is to remain in place all day, every day until the patient is https://www.citethisforme.com/vancouverpain-free. Patients are also instructed to avoid hyperextension and rapid extension maneuvers to decrease impingement of the IFP.

Muscle training focuses on closed-chain exercises targeting the quadriceps, namely the vastus medialis obliquus, to improve patellar tracking.

House and Connell reported an improved visual analog score after injecting a mean of four injections of alcohol and bupivacaine under ultrasound guidance.

**Operative Management**

Operative intervention is indicated once the patient has exhausted conservative management. Arthroscopic resection of the posterior aspect of the IFP is the primary surgical treatment of the inflamed, symptomatic fat pad.

Patients with discomfort and swelling around the inferior pole of the patella may find relief with arthroscopic denervation of the nociceptive nerves innervating those areas. The inferior fat pad is often surgically removed from where it inserts on the inferior patellar pole using an electrothermal cautery method.

Kim et al. reported improved clinical results with either partial or subtotal arthroscopic excision of the impinged fat pad between the patella and femoral trochlea. Given that partial resection was just as successful as subtotal resection and kept more of the fat pad, it may thus be a suitable course of therapy.