Patients presenting with the features of Whipple’s triad require further evaluation for the underlying cause of hypoglycemia. Initial laboratory investigations include:

- Urea & electrolytes

- Liver function tests

- Fasting glucose

- Insulin, C-peptide, and proinsulin levels at the time of documented hypoglycemia

- Sulfonylurea and meglitinide screen

- Beta-hydroxybutyrate (BOHB)

- Early morning cortisol (if indeterminate, then a short Synacthen test should be arranged) and IGF-1 levels

- IGF-2 levels if there is a history of weight loss and malignancy

- Insulin/insulin receptor antibodies if elevated insulin levels/partially suppressed C-peptide

**Reactive Hypoglycemia**

It is normally postprandial and mostly due to Islet cell hyperplasia (enlarged and increased number of insulin-producing islet cells), autoimmune syndrome due to anti-insulin antibodies (rise in blood glucose post meals causes fluctuation in insulin production), glycogen storage disease (glucose regulation by the liver is altered) and gastric surgery (altered rate of digestion and secretion of insulin). A mixed meal test is performed for further evaluation in an adult with features suggestive of reactive hypoglycemia.

**Fasting Hypoglycemia**

Insulinoma, neoplasia, alcohol, and drugs are examples of conditions that lead to fasting hypoglycemia. A 72 hour fast is the gold standard test for the biochemical confirmation of insulinoma. Elevated insulin and C-peptide levels, in the setting of hypoglycemia, with a negative sulfonylurea screen support the diagnosis of endogenous overproduction of insulin(insulinoma). Insulin has an anti-ketogenic effect, and plasma beta-hydroxybutyrate levels remain less than 2.7mmol/L in insulinoma in prolonging fast.

Computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and abdominal ultrasonography are primary investigations to localize insulinoma. In patients with endogenous hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia with negative non-invasive localization studies, endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) or selective arterial calcium stimulation test (SACST) with hepatic venous sampling can be performed for localization of smaller insulinomas. Endoscopic ultrasonography and selective arterial calcium stimulation test (SACST) have shown sensitivity for localization of 82 to 85% and 93%, respectively.

Patients diagnosed with insulinoma should be screened for primary hyperparathyroidism and pituitary disease as part of Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1.

**Hypoglycemia Secondary to IEM**

Inborn errors of metabolism are rare causes of hypoglycemia. Diagnostic workup is described as below, and further testing should be conducted if suspected.

- Glycogen storage disease: fasting hypoglycemia with hepatomegaly, which can be investigated with a glucose tolerance test with lactate and ketones measurement.

- Glucokinase activating mutation: postprandial hypoglycemia, which can be investigated with a mixed meal test.

- Monocarboxylate 1 mutation (MCT1): autosomal dominant associated with exercise-induced hypoglycemia

- Fatty acid oxidation defect: fasting hypoglycemia with raised cyclic phosphokinase and free fatty acid levels

- Gluconeogenesis disorder: fasting hypoglycemia with raised alanine, glycerol, lactate, and ketones.