Occlusion of the cerebral arteries can lead to stroke, leading to significant morbidity and mortality. Understanding of cerebral arterial anatomy is also significant in the diagnosis and management of intracranial aneurysms and tumors.

Ischemic occlusion of branches of the ICA results in anterior circulation strokes. Occlusion of cortical (pial) branches of the anterior circulation results in cortical stroke syndromes with clinical findings of aphasia, apraxia, cortical sensory impairment such as neglect or agraphesthesia, and contralateral hemiparesis. Occlusion of deep perforating branches, most commonly the lenticulostriate arteries, results in lacunar infarcts with the most common type of pure motor hemiparesis. Cortical infarction of the posterior cerebral artery will result in homonymous hemianopia. Occlusion of the perforators from the PCA (thalamic perforators) may result in the lacunar syndrome of pure sensory hemianesthesia.

The ophthalmic artery arises from the ICA. A transient ischemic attack presenting with transient monocular blindness indicates a transient ischemic attack (TIA) in the ipsilateral ICA territory. The imaging modality of choice will be a carotid duplex ultrasound or computed tomogram (CT) angiogram.

The anterior circulation supplies 80% of the brain and posterior circulation 20% of the brain. Logically, 80% of strokes occur in the anterior circulation and 20% in the posterior circulation.

Moyamoya disease is an occlusive condition resulting from blockage of the terminal ICA bilaterally and the development of abnormal collateral vessels in the region of the basal ganglia and internal capsule. These tiny collaterals give rise to the radiological appearance of a "puff of smoke," which is the literal meaning of Moyamoya in Japanese. It is a major cause of both ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes in childhood and early adulthood and is often treated with surgical bypass to revascularize the MCA distribution.