# Continuing Education Activity

Asbestosis is an interstitial lung disease caused by the inhalation of asbestos fibers. Asbestos fibers have been historically chosen for construction, shipping, mining, and aerospace engineering commercial use because of their high electrical and thermal resistance and low cost. This activity describes the evaluation and management of patients with asbestosis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of asbestosis.
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of asbestosis.
- Review the management options available for asbestosis.
- Describe the interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance asbestosis and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Asbestosis is an interstitial lung disease caused by the inhalation of asbestos fibers. These fibers are different mineral silicates (mainly hydrated magnesium silicates) and are classified into two main categories based on their shape, i.e., serpentine and amphibole.

# Etiology

There are three main forms of asbestos exposure. Direct work-related environmental exposure is common among workers at shipyard, mining, aerospace, etc. Bystander exposure is the second form of exposure commonly seen in certain professionals like electricians, masons, and painters. The third and most common form of asbestos exposure is the general community exposure, such as the use of asbestos for road surfaces, playground material, landfills, and chemical paints. The disease is dose-dependent; the dose of exposure is higher in the first group and, respectively, lower in the second and third forms of exposure. Also, the risk of the disease is more with amphibole variety compared to the serpentine asbestosis fibers.

# Epidemiology

The prevalence of the disease is more in those disciplines where the intensity of exposure is high. A study conducted in Okayama, Japan, among construction workers revealed that workers working in the installation of the asbestos board have the highest number of cases (39.1%), followed by sprayer of asbestosis (38.5%). And also longer the duration of exposure, the more the chances of asbestosis.

The latent period for benign disease is shorter than other pulmonary complications. The incidence of pleural effusion is associated with the site of exposure and was found to be 9 cases per 1000 in heavily exposed groups. Although mesothelioma is less prevalent than lung cancer, over 2000 cases per yr in the twenty-first century were reported in the united states of America. The incidence of lung cancer is comparatively more than mesothelioma. The use of asbestos in developed countries has been reduced but use in developing countries like Nepal, Pakistan is considerably high.

# Pathophysiology

Interstitial fibrosis is regarded as the principal pathogenic mechanism of asbestosis. It is believed that after deposition and transmigration of asbestos fibers in the lung, there is an accumulation of macrophages followed by fibroblasts that lay the foundation for fibrosis. Reactive oxygen species produced by immune cells and phagocytes in response to asbestos fibers result in oxidative injury. These reactive oxygen species and transepithelial migration of fibers injure the type 1 alveolar cells. Injured epithelial cells also produce fibroblast growth factor-beta, which induces fibrosis. In an attempt to phagocytose the foreign body, macrophages produce inflammatory mediators such as tissue necrosis factors, interleukins, and stimulation of the phospholipase C pathway.

As this is a progressive disease, fibrosis increase over time. Asbestos fibers also activate serum complement C5a, a chemotactic factor for macrophages.

A recent investigation revealed that the length of fibers has a direct relation to pathogenesis. Longer fibers are more potent than shorter fibers in stimulating the NF-kB pathway and gene promoter activity.

# Histopathology

On gross examination, the visceral pleura is markedly thickened, especially on the lateral and diaphragmatic surface of the lung with localized fibrous plaques and pleural effusions. Diffuse fibrosis of the lower lobe of the lung is visible on the cut section.

On microscopic examination, asbestosis is marked by interstitial fibrosis with characteristic asbestos bodies and ferruginous bodies. The presence of both asbestos bodies and ferruginous bodies helps pathologists differentiate between asbestosis and interstitial lung fibrosis. Asbestos bodies are golden yellow, beaded rod-like structures with a translucent center. It is formed when asbestos fibers get coated with iron-containing proteinaceous material. A ferruginous body is an indication that the patient may have had prior exposure to asbestos and appear as golden-brown fusiform rods resembling dumbells. Fibrosis causes distortion of the lung parenchyma architecture, which causes the formation of enlarged air space surrounded by a thick fibrous wall and hyperplastic type 2 pneumocytes called honeycomb appearance.

# History and Physical

The history of occupation is crucial for both diagnosis and management. History of exposure to asbestosis helps to exclude other chronic interstitial lung diseases. Usually, there is a history of 10 to 20 years of exposure to asbestos and progressively worsening dyspnea. Cough with sputum and wheezing are unusual, though, if present, are mainly associated with smoking. The patient may complain of chest discomfort due to heart failure following pulmonary hypertension. The severity of the disease depends on the duration and intensity of exposure and whether the patient has direct occupational contact with asbestos. History of smoking and dyspnea on exertion are important, and nonproductive cough is quite common. History of loss of appetite and weight, hemoptysis indicates the suspicion of lung tumors. Gradual onset of localized pain or breathlessness and then radiating to the shoulder may be evident in pleural involvement.

Physical examination reveals clubbing in 32% to 42%, asbestos warts, reduced chest expansion due to restrictive lung disease (38%). Bibasilar rales are best auscultated at lower lateral and basal areas.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of asbestosis is largely clinical. First, the history of asbestos exposure is central to the diagnosis. The overall clinical picture is characterized by progressive restrictive pulmonary disease with interstitial fibrosis on radiography. The pulmonary function test reveals characteristic restrictive disease.

**Pulmonary Function Tests**

- **Spirometry and Lung Volum:**This includes forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV1), total lung capacity (TLC), functional residual capacity, and residual volume. Like any other restrictive lung disease, all earlier mentioned lung volumes are reduced. FEV1/FVC ratio is either normal or increased.

- **Diffusing Capacity:**Total carbon monoxide diffusion capacity (DLCO) reduction is a common but nonspecific finding. Reduced total carbon monoxide diffusion capacity (DLCO) is manifested earlier.

**Arterial Blood Gas**

Arterial oxygen tension (pao2) may be normal or may reveal hypoxia and respiratory alkalosis.

**Chest Radiograph and HRCT Chest**

Chest radiograph shows diffuse reticulonodular infiltrates at the lung bases causing shaggy heart borders. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) is often diagnostic of asbestosis.

**Lung Biopsy**

It shows interstitial fibrosis with characteristically peribronchial fibrosis. The distribution of fibrosis in asbestosis is from the center to the periphery, i.e., centrifugally. The microscopic view of asbestosis shows distinct asbestos bodies coated with iron-containing proteinaceous material and diffuse pulmonary interstitial fibrosis. Still, in contrast, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) displays patchy interstitial fibrosis. The profuse proliferation of fibroblasts, i.e., fibroblastic foci and subsistence of early and late proliferative lesions (temporal heterogeneity), is well defined in IPF and rare or absent in asbestosis.

**Bronchoscopy/VAT**

A lung biopsy can be achieved by endobronchial, transbronchial, and video-assisted thoracoscopic (VAT) approaches. The endobronchial biopsy is done with ultrasound-guided bronchoscopy to visualize the airway and adjacent structures. This technique has been routinely used in many centers due to its high diagnostic value and low risk. Endoscopically-guided forceps do transbronchial lung biopsy. Conventional transbronchial biopsy has a higher risk of complications and bleeding. The modern technique is the minimally invasive video-assisted thoracoscopic (VAT) guided biopsy. VAT has fewer complications, is more sensitive, specific, and has more diagnostic yield than transbronchial biopsy. So, VAT is preferred over transbronchial lung biopsy, though VAT has some discrepancies like cost and expertise requirement.

Bronchoalveolar lavage has a limited role. Samples can be taken from suspected patients for cellular analysis of asbestos bodies count, inflammatory cells like macrophages, neutrophils, eosinophils, and dust particles. Asbestos body formation is more common in amphibole fibers, while chrysotile fibers have a shorter half-life and have fewer chances of asbestos body formation. So the absence of asbestos bodies in chrysotile asbestosis leads to a false-negative result.

**Biochemistry**

Lab analysis shows elevated C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, rheumatoid factor, and antinuclear antibodies.

# Treatment / Management

Asbestosis has no specific treatment, so supportive care is the only available option. Therefore, prevention is the best management. Monitoring the occupational environment and minimizing asbestos exposure have a significant role in asbestosis control.

**Drug Therapy**

The goal of corticosteroid therapy is to suppress the acute and chronic inflammatory process, thereby reducing lung damage, but the success rate is low. Steroids suppress the release of reactive species and mediators in the ongoing inflammatory process. Because of the lack of placebo-controlled trials, there is no direct evidence of the benefits of steroids in improving the survival of life. The proper dose and length of therapy of steroids are not known.

Patient with asbestosis sometimes has also a history of smoking and they develop chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In such cases, inhalers containing long-acting beta 2 agonists, inhaled corticosteroids, or long-acting muscarinic antagonists are also prescribed. Smoking cessation is also advised.

**Oxygenation**

Patients with hypoxemia (Pao2 less than 55 mmHg) at rest or on exertion should be supplemented with oxygen. Pulmonary rehabilitation and management of cor pulmonale have been shown to improve the quality of life as the disease progresses.

**Surgery**

Decortication of subpleural fibrosis by thoracotomy improves atelectasis. Pleurectomy can be performed in pleural fibrosis.

**Lung Transplantation**

This is the ultimate treatment in severe asbestosis, where all other therapies have failed in the case of chronic and irreversible fibrosis.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differentials of asbestosis include the diseases involving the interstitium of lungs such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, interstitial pneumonitis, rheumatoid arthritis, hypersensitive pneumonitis, pleuropulmonary fibroelastosis, drug-induced pneumonitis, combined pulmonary fibrosis, and emphysema. Diagnosis of asbestosis requires the exclusion of these differentials.

**Non-specific Interstitial Pneumonitis**

This may be idiopathic or associated with other connective tissue disorders. Lower lobe involvement, ground-glass opacities, impairment of pulmonary functions mimic this condition with asbestosis, but female predominance and rare honeycombing help in differentiation. History of exposure and histopathology is important to rule out other similar conditions.

**Chronic Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis**

It is an allergic reaction based upon the antigen-antibody interaction following exposure to allergens. Clinical presentation of hypersensitive pneumonitis such as dyspnea, cough resembles that of asbestosis. So lung biopsy with histopathology evaluation is required. It involves interstitial inflammation with granulomas and giant cells, usually throughout the whole lung, as compared to more pronounced fibrosis in the lower lobes of the lung in asbestosis.

**Rheumatic Disease**

The rheumatic disease involves the interstitium of the lung in about 10% of cases. Unlike asbestosis, other systemic manifestations like arthritis, Raynaud phenomenon, muscle weakness, skin changes are present in rheumatic disease.

**Drug-induced Interstitial Pneumonitis**

Some drugs used for purposes other than pulmonary diseases have pulmonary toxicity involving interstitium as their side effects. Anagrelide, a phospholipase A2 inhibitor, lamotrigine, cyclophosphamide, bleomycin, nitrofurantoin, etc are the drugs that cause pulmonary toxicity.

**Pleuropulmonary Fibroelastosis**

Pleuropulmonary fibroelastosis is a rare benign condition. Though this disease simulates asbestosis, this condition involves pleura and subpleural parenchyma almost simultaneously. Fibrosis is due to elastic fiber proliferation. But in asbestosis, pleural involvement is not parallel to parenchymal fibrosis as pleural involvement is usually the late presentation. And also, pleuropulmonary fibroelastosis may involve the upper lobe of the lungs.

**Silicosis**

Silicosis has more tendency to undergo fibrosis than asbestosis, forming a whorled pattern of collagen fibers that can be appreciated in histology. Occupational history makes an easy way out to exclude silicosis. Fibrosis may also involve hilar lymph nodes and sometimes the calcification called egg-shell calcification.

**Sarcoidosis**

Sarcoidosis is a chronic granulomatous disease of the lung which involves the multisystem. CD4+ to CD8+ cells ratio is increased as in asbestosis, but it has a more pronounced increment than in asbestosis. Histopathology reveals noncaseating granuloma, asteroid bodes, Schaumann bodies are characteristic of sarcoidosis not found in asbestosis.

**Coal Worker Pneumoconiosis (CWP****)**

It is also called black lung disease. It is the coal dust-induced progressive massive fibrosis disease. Cut section and biopsy of the lung of workers working in coal mines show black patches mixed with fibrosis.

**Combined Pulmonary Fibrosis and Emphysema**

Usually, emphysema is highly associated with smoking and occurs without fibrosis. The co-existence of fibrosis and emphysema was first established in 1990.

# Prognosis

The severity of the disease depends upon the duration and intensity of exposure. More intense contact for a long period of time has a poor prognosis. Early intervention after the first symptom has a good outcome and prolongs survival. The condition worsens in acute exacerbations and superimposed infections. Radiologic screening in workers helps in picking the earliest abnormal changes.

# Complications

Complications increases with the duration and intensity of exposure. Following complications occur in patients having exposure to asbestos:

**Respiratory Failure**

Asbestosis is a restrictive lung disease characterized by the restricted filling of the lung. Total lung capacity and forced vital capacity reduce significantly. Patients complain of progressive dyspnea on exertion and cough. Deterioration of diffusing capacity and oxygenation is common. Pleural fibrosis prevents the expansion of the lung. Carbon dioxide retention is another hazard that leads to respiratory acidosis.

**Malignancy**

Patients with asbestosis have a high risk of developing pleural malignancy. Patients who have low exposure to asbestos fibers have sequelae of asbestosis followed by malignancy, but those with intermediate or high-intensity exposure have high chances of lung cancer even in the absence of asbestosis. Lung cancer has more propensity to develop when the smoker is exposed to asbestos due to the additive effect of asbestos and cigarette smoke. Studies show that adenocarcinoma (primary bronchogenic carcinoma) is the major type of cancer that accounts for about 45%, followed by squamous cell carcinoma in about 42% of cases, and 13% is undifferentiated. Unlike fibrosis, the majority of tumors are present in the upper lobes (69%) and only 13% in the lower lobes.

**Heart and Other Organs**

It was found that heart weight is increased due to hypertrophy of right ventricle pumping against high pulmonary vascular resistance. More commonly, left auricle hypertrophy has been appreciated. Pulmonary and tricuspid valves are generally normal, but the mitral valve is fibrosed and fused with thickening chordae tendineae. Advanced asbestosis causes right heart failure leading to cor pulmonale. The liver is congested in the centrilobular pattern due to the right-sided damming of blood.

**Cancers of Other Organs**

Cohort's study has unveiled that asbestosis is related to cancers of the gastrointestinal tract, ovaries, adrenals, larynx, and kidney. Gastrointestinal tract cancer is mainly due to exposure to asbestos through asbestos-lined cement water pipes.

# Consultations

Management of asbestosis requires a multidisciplinary team consisting of:

- Pulmonologist

- Radiologist

- Oncologist

- Thoracic surgeon

- Histopathologist

- Pharmacist

- Nurses

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Asbestosis is an occupational disease, so it is more prevalent in workers. Prevention is the utmost step in the management of asbestosis. Despite the usefulness of asbestos, it is hazardous for long-term use and exposure. In the modern world, concern over the harmful effects is rising continuously. Research has been conducted to evaluate the effects of asbestos on health. Because it takes a long time to develop the disease as it is a progressive process, cessation of exposure stops the disease process. Avoiding potential risks, health education and safety training, monitoring of the work environment, periodic examination, and providing treatment to the workers help to control the disease. Workers should be alarmed and have the right to know about the symptoms, outcomes of treatment, the toxicity of drugs, health problems of asbestosis, and they should consult the health team as soon as possible. Patients suffering from asbestosis should stop smoking, minimize the exposure by changing the workplace or occupation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Competent healthcare systems in collaborations with other organizations and government bodies should work together to control occupational diseases. The healthcare team has more diagnostic, therapeutic, and supportive care. So prevention or minimization of exposure necessitates the government legislation to act accordingly, international labor organizations, World Health Organization, dust management teams. Intersectoral coordination has a huge impact on optimizing the working environment and working hours. The application of engineering techniques to maintain appropriate working sites for optimum workers' health is essential. Healthcare team consisting of general providers, radiologists, pulmonologists, pharmacists, surgeons, oncologists, nurses, and histopathologists assists in making a proper diagnosis and appropriate treatment.