The procedure is performed under local anesthesia with procedural sedation or general anesthesia in the operating room. General anesthesia or excessive sedation may mask potential neurological symptoms (e.g., from needle puncture) during the procedure. Aseptic precautions, including skin preparation, and sterile draping must be guaranteed. The patient is in a prone position, although some authors prefer lateral positioning. Under the guidance of X-ray fluoroscopy, an introducer needle is advanced obliquely (to avoid catheter kinking) at an angle of about 30 degrees at the point of entry of the skin (paramedian access). The choice of catheter entry site depends on the location of cancer and the related pain. Head-neck tumors may require cervical positioning; painful thoracic neoplasms (e.g., breast and lung cancers) catheters in the thoracic segment of the spinal cord, whereas lumbar catheters are generally inserted for abdominal tumors such as colorectal tumors. However, puncture at lower medullary levels is also possible and the catheter positioning can be adjusted according to need. Nevertheless, too far upwards inserted catheters can induce secondary malpositioning. For the administration of baclofen, the lumbar approach is sufficient.

After the needle has gained access to the CSF (free flow of CSF indicates the right intrathecal positioning of the needle), the intrathecal catheter is inserted and its ascent is assessed in the subarachnoid space. After confirmation by fluoroscopy (the tip of the catheter is radiopaque) through oblique projections, the needle is generally withdrawn by about 1 cm so as to protect the catheter during subsequent maneuvers and the insertion site is enlarged by about 2 cm. After a blunt dissection, the needle is removed and the catheter is thus fixed to the paravertebral fascia through an anchoring system with non-absorbable points. The next step is the preparation of the pocket (generally in the lateral abdomen) for the positioning of the reservoir. If the patient is initially in the prone position, the decubitus position must be changed to the lateral position, perfecting the surgical field. The subcutaneous pocket is parallel to the costal arch on the anterior axillary line in the lower abdomen. If necessary, other sites can be provided (e.g., high gluteal region, Figure 1). Tunneling of the catheter in the subcutis, insertion of the reservoir in the pocket, the connection of the catheter to the reservoir (it is advisable to loop the catheter below the pump), the closure of the pocket with resorbable points and the puncture site, complete the procedure.

If the positioning of the subcutaneous pump is not foreseen, a device for the administration of drugs through a needle puncture (port-a-cath) is placed. Due to the device chamber's small size, the procedure is less complex, as well as much less expensive. This approach, however, seems to be in disuse as it exposes the patient to greater risks of infection and complicates clinical management.