All patients will have some degree of bruising and swelling, which may last up to 2 weeks. If upper eyelids are being operated upon because of a ptosis and also with blepharoplasty, some degree of dryness is inevitable. Most patients will need topical lubrication with drops during the day. Some patients need a topical lubricating ointment at night.

**Eyelid Sensation**

As the eyelid margin is supplied by branches of the supraorbital nerve centrally and laterally and the supratrochlear nerve medially, upper eyelid incisions will result in decreased sensation along the eyelid margin for six to eight weeks. Although most patients recover by 8 weeks, some numbness can persist for longer.

**Lagophthalmos and Dry Eyes**

Early in the postoperative period, almost every patient will experience some degree of lagophthalmos. However, within a few days, this settles and there is complete closure of the eyelids. This is where the experience of the surgeon is important as a number of factors affect the height of the upper eyelid and its ability to close. Peroperatively, local anesthetic injections will partially paralyze the orbicularis muscle, giving the levator a mechanical functional advantage. If there is diffusion of any anesthetic into the levator and Müller’s muscle, the lid elevation will be affected. Most surgeons will aim for a slight lagophthalmos on the table, especially when ptosis correction is also undertaken. Topical lubricants with drops and ointment are useful for the first few days to weeks until the lagophthalmos resolves.

Even without lagophthalmos, the patient may experience dryness of the eyes. This is because the lid blink and degree of closure (firmness of closure) are affected in the first few weeks after surgery. Furthermore, any other underlying conditions that contribute to dryness (Meibomian gland disease, blepharitis, acne rosacea, lower lid laxity, etc) will exacerbate the postoperative dryness. It is important to monitor the corneas. On occasion, it may be necessary to place temporary punctal plugs in the lower puncta. These can be removed once the postoperative dryness is resolved.

**Tearing**

Tearing because of relative dryness of the cornea may occur for a few days. Topical ointment like Refresh pm ointment or Soothe ointment at night helps. During the daytime, if there is dryness, use of Celuvisc or Genteal gel are useful.

**Hemorrhage**

Ecchymosis is not uncommon. However, a retrobulbar hemorrhage is an emergency which necessitates opening of the wound and the deeper tissues to release the hematoma.

**Assymetric Eyelid Creases**

When making a skin crease incision, it is important to remember that the final crease often ends up about 2-mm higher. Lowering a high skin crease is difficult and the results are unpredictable.

**Asymmetric Height and Eyelid Adjustment**

Upper eyelid blepharoplasty is an art form, and small differences are often seen in all patients. It is wise to allow all the swelling to settle to determine if additional adjustments are needed. We rarely adjust before 2 months after surgery. Adjustable upper eyelid ptosis repair was described some years ago but is very rarely used.

**Blepharoplasty Refinements**

**Wrinkles of Upper Eyelid Skin and Sub-Brow Skin
**

Fine wrinkles are often seen on the tarsal platform and also between the upper lid crease and the brow. These latter lines are radial lines, which become more common with aging. “Pulling” on the upper lid skin or brow skin does not resolve these particular wrinkles. The use of the CO2 laser with one pass at 90 mj gives very nice results to these wrinkles.

**Addressing Temporal Hooding**

Some surgeons have recommended extending the lateral arc of the upper lid skin excision laterally and up close to the brow and have shown nice results with minimal scarring when the patient does not want to have a brow lift performed.

**Skin Crease Reformation**

When a well-defined skin crease needs to be designed, we pick up the levator aponeurosis in the skin closure sutures. One can use buried vicryl sutures from the subcutaneous tissue to the aponeurosis or pick up the aponeurosis with the skin closure suture. Removal of a strip of the orbicularis oculi muscle and some preaponeurotic fat also allows a more defined upper eyelid skin crease.

**Filling the "A" Frame Central Eyelid**

As one ages, prominence of the medial fat pad and posterior dislocation of the central fat pad with stretching or disinsertion of the levator aponeurosis (and also age-related fat atrophy more posteriorly) gives a deep superior sulcus. Free fat grafts may be used to fill this space. Another options is to mobilize the upper eyelid fat pad behind the orbital septum, bring the fat forwards and suture it to the orbicularis under the incision. This gives nice results without the need for free fat grafts. The medial fat pad can also be mobilized and transposed centrally, but the whole central concavity cannot be adequately addressed using this technique.

**Lateral Brow
**

Botulinum toxin is injected in the lateral sub-brow orbital orbicularis to give a nice lift to the brow tail. A similar resection of a small amount of orbital orbicularis oculi muscle may be performed to provide a subtle brow lift.

**Internal Brow Lifts**

"Internal brow lifts” should be considered as brow stabilizing procedures. We do not believe that you can get a long-lasting and substantial brow position and curve change by pushing the brow from below. We do not use the “internal brow lift” procedure.