Coronary artery disease (CAD) is one of the leading causes of death in the United States, accounting for 1 out of every 4 deaths annually. Coronary revascularization has long been a definitive treatment for reducing symptoms, myocardial infarction and death in acute coronary syndromes (ACS). However, coronary revascularization is not as clear in stable CAD.

One of the major setbacks with coronary revascularization has been the dependence on angiographic (or visual estimation) analysis of lesions. During angiography, a number of factors are considered which will ultimately dictate the best treatment course. These include the patient’s symptoms, clinical characteristics, an angiographic appearance of the coronary anatomy, and alternative options, which may include CABG. This leaves a large area of operator variability with regards to interpretation and treatment. This lack of clarity has led to inappropriate stenting cases, which have been well publicized. This focus has drawn attention from media, providers, clinicians, and payors to develop criteria and guidelines, standardizing the process of coronary revascularization.

Some trials have been published, helping to establish the Appropriate Use Criteria (AUC) for coronary revascularization. The AUC is the good intent to ensure that the right procedure is performed on the right patient at the right time for the right reasons, to achieve the best possible outcome. Reliance on clinical trials, guidelines, and AUC serve as the framework upon which coronary revascularization is performed.

The development of FFR arose in the early 1990s as a means of selecting physiologically significant lesions. The DEFER (2001) trial was the first major landmark trial, showcasing FFR and demonstrating coronary revascularization could be safely deferred when lesions had an FFR greater than 0.75. However, FFR was not widely used in subsequent years for a variety of reasons.

The Clinical Outcomes Utilizing Revascularization and Aggressive Drug Evaluation (COURAGE, 2007) studied PCI in patients with stable CAD and high-grade coronary stenosis, randomizing patients to PCI versus optimal medical therapy. The COURAGE trial failed to demonstrate the benefit with routine revascularization of coronary lesions when compared to optimal medical therapy alone. This landmark trial along with inappropriate stenting and further establishment of AUC and guidelines brought FFR back to the forefront.