The HMP shunt is parallel to the glycolysis pathway and takes place in the cytoplasm. A 6-carbon sugar, glucose, may enter the glycolytic pathway or enter the alternative HMP shunt depending on the cell’s individual needs at the time. Once the glucose enters the HMP shunt, it undergoes a series of reactions, broken down into the oxidative(irreversible) and non-oxidative phases (reversible). The oxidative phase is responsible for converting the intermediate glucose-6-phosphate to 6-phosphogluconate, using the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) enzyme. The by-product of this reaction is the important molecule NADPH. 6-phosphogluconate then converts into ribulose-5-phosphate, and NADPH gets produced again as a by-product.

The non-oxidative phase of the HMP shunt involves the conversion of ribulose-5-phosphate to ribose-5-phosphate (R-5-P) through a series of independent reactions. It is important to note that no NADPH molecules get created in this part of the HMP shunt. R-5-P in this reaction can be returned to the glycolytic pathway as fructose-6-phosphate. This step requires the transketolase enzyme with the presence of the thiamine co-factor. Thiamine also participates in a plethora of other metabolic reactions throughout the body. It is used by enzyme alpha-ketoglutarate in the Krebs cycle, for the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase as well as branch-chained ketoacid dehydrogenase.

The HMP shunt pathway is under the regulation of the demands of NADPH in the respective tissue. The rate-limiting enzyme is G6PD and has allosteric inhibition directed by the presence of NADPH and allosteric activation via the presence of NADP+. Consequently, the activity of G6PD activity also increases in a fed state with a high carbohydrate diet, and conversely, decreases in a starving or a diabetic state.