Surgical approaches involving lower limb structures require meticulous care and emphasize understanding anatomical landmarks to prevent iatrogenic damage to the nerves that supply the foot. One of the most commonly reported complications of an anterior approach of a total ankle arthroplasty is an injury to the superficial fibular nerve and its aberrant branches, especially the intermediate dorsal cutaneous nerve. It is therefore recommended to visualize the nerve and mark its course preoperatively to avoid iatrogenic damage.

Another study presented a case of deep fibular nerve injury secondary to ankle external fixator replacement surgery. If divided into four zones, the tibia may be used to assess the extent this nerve injury. The deep fibular nerve is at highest risk of injury in the zones where the nerve lies on the interosseous membrane while present at the posterior edge of the lateral tibia (zone 2) or where the nerve moves away from the membrane but lies directly in contact with the tibia (zone 3) when placing an external fixator.

The lateral plantar nerve may be at more risk for injury than the medial plantar nerve when performing a calcaneal osteotomy through a lateral approach in the treatment of valgus deformity of the hindfoot. This risk exists because the lateral plantar nerve and its branches more commonly cross over the osteotomy site compared to the medial plantar nerve, which does not present at the osteotomy site. Thus, recommendations are that performing osteotomies through the medial calcaneal cortex be undertaken in a carefully controlled manner.

Sural nerve injury may be present during laser surgery, lesser saphenous vein harvest, or posterolateral ankle surgery involving the Achilles tendon, the peroneal tendon, or even the lateral malleolus.

Last, saphenous nerve injuries commonly occur with use of an anteromedial portal for ankle arthroscopy, variceal surgeries, or during saphenous vein harvests.