The biggest risk of nerve repair or transfer is no return of function is achieved. Risk factors for procedural failure include prolonged paralysis of greater than 6 to 12 months before the intervention, advanced age or poor health status, and performing multiple neurorrhaphies, as are required for interposition grafting. Each neurorrhaphy introduces additional opportunities for axonal loss. Postoperative radiotherapy does not appear to affect functional outcomes, although chemotherapy is known to cause facial paralysis.

When the facial nerve is repaired proximal to the pes anserinus or a nerve transfer to the main trunk is performed, the expected outcome is synkinetic movement. Synkinetic movement is not a complication per se but represents a suboptimal outcome. Synkinesis may impair voluntary movements, particularly smiling, resulting in marked facial asymmetry and lower quality of life despite restoration of tone and movement. While numerous theories regarding the etiology of synkinesis have been proposed, it is currently thought that a major contributing factor to synkinesis is the misdirection of axons to different neuromuscular junctions from the ones they innervated before the injury.

Additionally, axons that terminate in multiple rather than single neuromuscular junctions will cause discoordinated movement and increase the basal firing rate of the innervated muscle and its resting tone. Botulinum toxin injections and facial physical therapy are the mainstay treatment options for this problem, but selective neurectomy and myomectomy have also been successfully employed.

One risk of performing nerve transfers, particularly in the case of the masseteric nerve to buccal branch transfer undertaken more than 72 hours after injury, is the possibility of reinnervating the wrong nerve branch. Without the ability to stimulate the recipient nerve, it is possible to select a suboptimal branch that may not produce the desired precise effect. While suboptimal branch selection is unlikely to result in movements completely different from those intended as long as the recipient branch is in roughly the correct location, it may be that the resulting smile vector, for example, is not entirely symmetric with the uninjured side. Most facial reanimation surgeons prefer to reinnervate native facial muscles whenever possible, but in cases of suboptimal outcomes of nerve transfer, intractable synkinesis, or longstanding paralysis of greater than 12-18 months, free muscle transfer may be employed instead of nerve repair or transfer.

When an uninjured nerve is sacrificed in grafting or transfer, there is always a risk of donor site morbidity. Greater auricular and sural nerve harvest site hypesthesia is common, predictable, and usually results in nothing more than auricular lobule numbness and lateral ankle and foot numbness, respectively. While uncommon, the potential for developing painful neuromas at these sites does exist. These neuromas can be treated with excision and burying the cut nerve end into muscle.

Motor nerve sacrifice, on the other hand, may carry a greater risk of morbidity. Masseteric nerve sacrifice is generally well tolerated, with little more than the loss of some facial volume due to muscle atrophy; most patients do not complain of decreased bite force. Cross-face nerve grafting also tends to be well tolerated, despite requiring sural nerve harvest, and there tends to be minimal morbidity other than a scar from the contralateral dissection required to access the uninjured facial nerve. While sacrificing an uninjured facial nerve branch to supply axons to the cross-face graft may risk weakening the normal side smile, this is rarely seen in practice.

The highest risk for donor site morbidity among these procedures occurs with the hypoglossal-facial nerve transfer because of the potential for dysphagia and dysarthria accompanying tongue weakness. When the entire hypoglossal nerve is transferred, facial outcomes are good because of the high axon count in the hypoglossal nerve, but the morbidity is severe.