Osteopathic medicine is a branch of medical training that focuses on the mind, body, and spirit when treating patients.  It is formulated on the basis that the mind, body, and spirit are interconnected, and interruptions in the function of these components can lead to pain or other ailments. Osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT) is a collection of manual manipulative techniques used to treat dysfunction in the body unit. Its goal is to improve the range of motion of muscles or joints, enhance neuromuscular function, decrease overall pain, and improve biochemical balance.

Somatic dysfunction is an impaired function of the fundamental elements of the body. It can include the musculoskeletal, nervous, vascular, and lymphatic systems and combinations of these systems in affected areas of dysfunction.

Fibular head somatic dysfunction is a potential cause of knee and ankle pain, as well as gait abnormalities. The fibula is a small bone that is part of the distal lower extremity, located laterally to the tibia, that plays a role in both the knee and ankle joint motion. When it is not moving properly, some patients can experience knee pain, ankle pain, or difficulties with their normal gait.

Two OMT techniques are commonly used to treat fibular head somatic dysfunction. These techniques are the muscle energy technique and the high-velocity low-amplitude technique. Muscle energy techniques are used to mobilize joints in which movement is restricted, strengthen weak muscles, stretch tight muscles and fascia, and improve local circulation.

Muscle energy is a direct and active technique that utilizes cooperation between the patient and the physician.  In this technique, the patient will be instructed to contract the target muscle while the physician provides a counterforce to that muscle. High-Velocity low-amplitude techniques are used to engage a restrictive barrier in one or more planes by applying a rapid, short force by the physician. This thrust is applied within the anatomic range of motion that is restricted.