The overall goal in the evaluation and treatment of these patients presenting with Barton fractures is to obtain sufficient pain-free motion which will allow the patient to return to their usual activities while at the same time minimizing their risk for developing early-onset osteoarthritis that will lead to disability. Traditionally, the treatment of distal radius fractures is by closed reduction and immobilization in a splint or cast, this has been and remains the treatment of choice in nondisplaced and stable distal radial fractures.

The following key radiographic signs should alert the surgeon that the fracture is unstable and indicate closed reduction will be insufficient:

- Dorsal comminution greater than 50% of the lateral width of the distal radius,

- Palmar metaphyseal comminution,

- Initial dorsal tilt greater than 20 degrees, initial fragment displacement greater than 1 cm,

- Radial shortening of more than 5 mm,

- Intra-articular disruption or Barton's fracture

- An associated ulna fracture, and

- Severe osteoporosis.

Most Barton fractures are unstable and operative fixation is required. The undisplaced fractures can be managed with immobilization in a cast. While applying the cast, the wrist is slightly volar flexed in volar barton fracture and dorsiflexed in dorsal barton fracture.

**Volar Approach for Volar Barton's Fracture**

A Volar T-buttress plate is used for the fixation of volar rim fracture. In contrast to the principle of fixation, the plate is applied on the volar surface rather than the tensile/dorsal surface due to less soft tissue irritation.

**Dorsal Approach for Dorsal Barton's Fracture**

A preoperative CT scan is required for the evaluation of fracture patterns and the level of comminution. The dorsal approach is used for dorsal barton and fragment-specific fixation of distal radius fracture through the 3rd dorsal compartment. A 5-6 cm longitudinal incision is made along the lister tubercle. The extensor pollicis longus tendon is retracted radially after incising the roof of the 3rd dorsal compartment. Subperiosteal dissection is done in the 2nd and 4th dorsal compartments to expose the distal radius.

K-wires have been used along with a spanning external fixator for barton fracture with a success rate of 80-90%.