Here are some important points:

- Trinucleotide repeat disorders are caused due to an abnormal number of triplet repeat sequences either in the coding or the non-coding regions and are a result of either maternal or paternal transmission.

- Trinucleotide repeat disorders were initially classified as type 1, which are polyglutamate (polyQ) disorders with abnormal CAG repeats in the coding region, and type 2 or non-polyglutamate (non-polyQ) disorders.

- Response to cold, heat, hypoxic, and oxidative stresses have been postulated to trigger complex cellular responses that trigger cellular mechanisms to increase the chances of cell survival. One effect is to relax the fidelity of DNA repair that has been postulated to cause extensive repeat expansions in the even otherwise susceptible microsatellite regions.

- The inheritance pattern of the repeat expansion diseases is evidence of the dynamic nature of these mutations and is termed as 'anticipation,' which leads to an earlier and more severe presentation of disease in the progeny.

- This also implies that the threshold mutation can occur through anticipation, which could manifest disease in a patient with normal parents, who would harbor a subthreshold mutation.

- The diagnosis of these disorders requires both a strong clinical suspicion, even in the absence of family history, as well as a small-pool PCR.

- Current treatment depends on supportive care and managing complications, to improve the quality of life and genetic counseling to educate the patient about the risk of the disease in the progeny. Friedreich's ataxia is treated with high dose antioxidants that have been proven to have some effect but are not curative.

- Most patients have psychiatric manifestations, and hence psychiatric evaluation and psychological support should be offered to all patients with repeat disorders.

- The upcoming research for treatment of CGA RELATED trinucleotide repeat disorders therapy aims to lower the expression of this mutated gene by inhibiting the messenger RNA (mRNA) using either antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) or RNA interference (RNAi).

- Molecular chaperones, ubiquitin-proteasome degradation, and autophagy, all three pathways have been implicated in the polyQ disorders and hence in its treatment.

- Innate trophic support from MSC or from augmented growth factor support, such as delivering brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) or glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), is in the clinical trial phase II/III for treating trinucleotide repeat disorder.

- An interprofessional team that provides a holistic and integrated approach to patients with trinucleotide repeat disorders can help achieve the best possible outcomes since complications of these disorders are not uncommon.