Historically, head lice have been removed by hand, by shaving affected areas, or by physical removal with a lice comb. Wet combing involves moistening the hair and combing the hair root-to-tip with a lice comb. Cure rates vary widely with this method.

Pharmacologic treatment of lice focuses on two mechanisms: neurotoxicity resulting in paralysis of the louse and suffocation of the louse from topical application. It is important to recognize that available treatments kill lice but do not reliably destroy eggs. Repeat treatment is often required for complete eradication. A second treatment 7 to 10 days after the initial treatment is typically sufficient to eradicate most nonresistant lice.

Multiple topical pediculicides are considered first-line treatments for lice infestation. These include pyrethroids, malathion, lindane, benzyl alcohol, topical and oral ivermectin, and spinosad.

Pyrethroids are one of the most frequently used treatments for lice among topical agents. Permethrin 1% is a synthetic pyrethroid and is widely used as a treatment and is available over-the-counter in the United States. Permethrin affects sodium transport across neuronal membranes causing respiratory paralysis of arthropods.

Malathion 0.5% is an organophosphate cholinesterase inhibitor that causes respiratory paralysis in arthropods. It has a good margin of safety but has an unappealing odor and requires an 8 to 12-hour treatment period.

Lindane 1% is an organochloride that kills lice by respiratory paralysis. It is absorbed into the blood and slowly metabolized and should not be used repeatedly. This agent has the potential for neurotoxicity and has been taken off of the market in California. It may be used as a second-line agent in adults but should be avoided in children, the elderly, or adults weighing less than 50 kg.

Benzyl alcohol 5% lotion was approved in 2009 as a topical suffocation treatment that prevents lice from closing their respiratory spiracles. It appears to have an efficacy comparable to pyrethrins.

Spinosad 0.9% is a topical pediculicidal agent that was approved in 2011. It works by provoking hyperexcitation, causing death by paralysis. It was found to have twice the eradication rate of permethrin at 14 days and is effective after a single dose. It may be beneficial for patients not adherent to other therapies.

Topical ivermectin 0.5% lotion increases chloride in muscle cells, causing hyperpolarization and paralysis. It works with a single application. There is only a small amount of systemic absorption after topical application. However, it should be used as a third-line agent due to its limited clinical experience and its cost.

The only currently used oral treatment for pediculosis is ivermectin. Ivermectin also has a risk of neurotoxicity. It has demonstrated effectiveness in clinical trials but is not FDA-approved for the treatment of pediculosis. It may be an appropriate second-line therapy when the lice are resistant to topical treatments.

Body lice are eradicated through proper hygiene and laundering or application of insecticide to affected clothing. Pubic lice are commonly susceptible to agents used to treat head lice, although they vary in sensitivity. Permethrin and lindane can be used but due to its risk of neurotoxicity, lindane should only be used in resistant cases. Malathion has been used but is not approved by the FDA.

Because lice can be present on inanimate fomites, heating infested clothing and bedding with hot water is necessary to destroy all stages of lice. The heat necessary for the destruction of lice and nits is 52 degrees Celcius for 30 minutes. Lice have been found to become heat resistant through hormonal mechanisms, sometimes tolerating temperatures over 100 degrees Celcius.