**Biochemistry**

A diagnosis of nPHPT in most cases is made when patients presenting with osteoporosis or renal stones are investigated proactively. In such presentations, reasonable initial investigations would include serum ionized calcium (if available otherwise, total corrected calcium), P, PTH, eGFR, 25 OH vitamin D, and urinary calcium excretion. The results from these and a thorough review of the patient's medications would suffice to exclude nSHPT and diagnose nPHPT. The clinical situation dictates other investigations like liver function tests and serum Mg. Some have proposed that an increased serum calcium/phosphate ratio might help identify independent parathyroid activity, but this has yet to be validated by prospective studies.

Another potentially useful ratio is the PF index. It is designed to differentiate primary hyperparathyroidism from secondary hyperparathyroidism from vitamin D deficiency. The formula is serum calcium (mmol/L) x PTH (pg/mL)/phosphorus (mmol/L). The cutoff is 34. The PF index has a reported sensitivity of 96.9% and specificity of 97.6%, making it potentially very useful.

In difficult cases, dynamic testing with a thiazide challenge test to exclude idiopathic hypercalciuria and even possibly a calcium loading test to clarify the diagnosis of nPHPT may be necessary. See the differential diagnosis section for details.

In the rarer situation, where calcium and PTH are measured for other reasons, and normocalcemic hyperparathyroidism is suggested, then the other tests in the initial battery (DEXA scan, renal ultrasound, Sestamibi scan, 24-hour urine calcium, along with a review of medications) will rule out nSHPT and help diagnose nPHPT.

In both instances, the calcium and PTH must be repeated on different occasions, and the diagnosis of nPHPT is confirmed. The results of these tests can also guide the clinician in selecting patients for PTX following the expert panel recommendations.

A yearly follow-up with DEXA, renal ultrasound, calcium, PTH, and urinary calcium excretion is recommended in patients who are managed medically. In selected patients, measurement of bone turnover markers (urine NTX, serum CTX, BSAP, osteocalcin) to follow patients on antiresorptive therapy for osteoporosis in medically managed nPHPT may be utilized. Changes in these parameters are observed earlier than in bone densitometry.

The biochemical tests used are listed below, with notes on the rationale for choosing them and their limitations.

- Serum total calcium: Correction for albumin required according to the formula: Corrected calcium = measured calcium + 0.8 (4.0-measured albumin). Note that serum calcium can be highly variable due primarily to dietary factors.

- Serum ionized calcium: Influenced by pH, acidosis increases, and alkalosis decreases

- Serum phosphorus (P)

- Serum alkaline phosphatase (BSAP): In selected patients, measurement of bone-specific alkaline phosphatase, a marker of bone formation, may be helpful

- Serum 25(OH) vitamin D: Large stores, a long half-life, and PTH independence make this the ideal test for vitamin D status. PTH levels normally begin to rise when levels decrease below 30 ng/ml, so a higher 25 (OH) vitamin D level would be needed to diagnose nPHPT.

- Serum intact PTH: Both second and third-generation assays may be used, but the latter has an edge in renal failure.

- Serum albumin

- Serum BUN and creatinine (Cr), estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), and PTH begin to rise when eGFR decreases below 60 ml/min/1.73 m2.

- Urine calcium and creatinine: both spot and 24-hour samples

- Liver function tests: to rule out liver diseases causing nSPHP

- Serum magnesium (Mg): hypomagnesemia may underestimate PTH elevation as it decreases the secretion and action of PTH.

- Serum 1,25 (OH)2 vitamin D: not routinely measured as levels are normal or even raised in both vitamin D deficiency and primary hyperparathyroidism.

**Biochemistry Summary**

Normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism is defined as:

- At least two separate corrected or ionized calcium levels at least six months apart in the presence of persistently elevated PTH in the absence of any causes of secondary hyperparathyroidism.

- Ionized calcium is preferred.

- 25(OH) vitamin D should be 30 ng/ml or higher.

- GFR should be >60 ml/min.

- An increased serum calcium/phosphate ratio has been suggested as an additional criterion but has yet to be validated.

**Imaging Studies**

The diagnosis of nPHPT is biochemical. Imaging modalities are useful for preoperative localization, especially if minimally invasive surgery (MIS) is planned, multi-gland disease is suspected, or reoperation is required. They have no role in diagnosis per se. A reasonable initial test is a cervical ultrasound followed by a Tc99m nuclear scan to localize the abnormal parathyroids before surgery. The typical findings in ultrasound, Tc99m scans, and other tests and their limitations are listed below. As far as the newer testing modalities reviewed below are concerned, there is not enough evidence to recommend them routinely. Success rates with these tests vary and are guided by institutional practices, individual acquaintance, and availability of experts, and the practitioner should consult the multi-disciplinary team before embarking on these expensive investigations.

**Cervical Ultrasonography**

- Normal parathyroid glands are rarely visible in ultrasound scans.

- Enlarged glands are seen as oval hypoechoic masses with a peripheral vascular ring.

- The parathyroids have polar arteries, whereas lymph nodes have hilar ones.

- They are seen in inferior or posterior locations to the thyroid gland and are sometimes confused with peripherally situated thyroid nodules.

- Ultrasound is less efficient in detecting smaller lesions, multi-gland disease, and ectopic adenomas in retro esophageal, retro-tracheal, and mediastinal locations and is highly operator-dependent.

- Ultrasound alone is insufficient to aid preoperative localization before minimally invasive surgery.

- The thyroid gland is also scanned at the same time as abnormalities found may be treated in the same surgical setting.

- Parathyroid incidentalomas are adenomas discovered during surgery or thyroid ultrasound examinations. They are generally smaller in size, weigh less, and produce less PTH than adenomas that produce hyperparathyroidism. Reports of FNA biopsy are rampant in the radiology literature, but the surgical guidelines on parathyroid surgery caution about several risks and sequelae and confine FNA exclusively for difficult and unusual cases.

Renal ultrasound will document renal size, identify hydronephrosis and demonstrate nephrolithiasis of stones typically at least 4 mm in size. Precise identification of nephrocalcinosis and all renal calculi will require a non-contrast CT scan of the abdomen, which is considered the gold standard study.

**Radionuclide Imaging**

- Tc 99m is a radiopharmaceutical coupled to six (sesta means six) units of methoxyisobutylisonitrile (MIBI) ligands that transport it to target organs.

- It is a lipophilic cation that, when injected intravenously, distributes proportionally to blood flow.

- It is taken up by abnormal parathyroids and retained. The principle behind this modality is that the Tc99m sestamibi elutes earlier from the thyroid gland than parathyroid adenomas.

- A delayed scan after 2 to 4 hours will show the adenomatous parathyroid with increased uptake of the Tc99m sestamibi and help in its localization.

- The gamma rays emitted as the isotope decays are measured with a gamma counter on the surface.

- The cell composition will determine the amount of absorption and is directly proportional to its mitochondrial content. Oxyphil cells are rich in mitochondria and show well in oxyphil tumors.

- Sestamibi scintigraphy with SPECT (single-photon emission computed tomography) adds a three-dimensional component to the gamma camera images, which increases accuracy.

- Tc99m sestamibi SPECT/CT adds a second imaging modality CT (computed tomography), using X-rays in the same sitting as the nuclear scan. This method combines images from two different scans together to obtain greater detail, yet the above combination detects multi-gland disease poorly.

- An earlier washout of the nuclear material from the smaller adenomas or hyperplastic parathyroids can lead to a negative scan, as found in nPHPT.

- In multiple adenomas, a preferential uptake and retention by one adenoma over the others is the reason for not detecting the other glands.

- The presence of p-glycoprotein in the parathyroid cells and patients on calcium channel blockers are more likely to have negative scan results.

- Other confounders are coexisting thyroid lesions that display delayed washout.

**Tc99m Sestamibi scanning**complements ultrasound, and the two together successfully localize many lesions than either alone, but even this combination sometimes has poor concordance in nPHPT.

99mTc-Sestamibi/123I subtraction protocol involves two radioisotopes used simultaneously rather than sequentially, and there are reports of localizing multi-gland disease better than the above methods. In this technique, since iodine is involved, patients on thyroxine replacement should stop treatment for two weeks before the test.

Some studies report greater success in nPHPT with 4D-CT and novel PET tracers like 11C-methionine and 18F-FDG, but these have to be tested in larger patient populations to be routinely recommended.

**4D-CT scanning**appears to be particularly useful in patients considering reoperation for persistent or recurrent disease. It has an initially reported sensitivity of 77%, but more recent studies put this higher (sensitivity 81.3%, specificity 95.5%, positive predictive value 87.1%).

**Parathyroid Imaging: Which to Do First?**Since the Sestamibi scan has the longest track record, high imaging sensitivity, and superior positive predictive value for parathyroid pathology, it is still probably the initial recommended scan for hyperparathyroidism. Ultrasound adds relatively little new information to a positive Sestamibi scan. If the Sestamibi scan is inconclusive, 4D-CT is now the recommended imaging modality.

A study utilized near-infrared light autofluorescence to locate the parathyroids with success in parathyroid surgery. More studies are needed to test the sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values of this localizing modality.

Finally, patients with negative or equivocal scans but a biochemically confirmed nPHPT who have indications for surgery will still need surgery.

DEXA (dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry) scans of the lumbar spine, the hip, and the distal third of the radius determine the T score, which is the standard deviation (SD) compared to a young healthy adult's bone density. Although a good measure of bone density, it does not indicate bone strength or quality. Fracture sites, arthritis, and degenerative bony changes all influence values and have to be taken into account before decisions are made based on DEXA. Moreover, changes in bone density can only be appreciated at yearly intervals, and ethnicity may influence the interpretation.

A trabecular bone score is the most cost-effective way of determining bone quality. It utilizes software along with data from the DEXA scan and bone mineral density (BMD) determinations and can independently predict fracture risk.

**Other Imaging**

MRI is not generally used for parathyroid imaging, but it has been reported to have a 79.9% sensitivity in detecting parathyroid adenomas. This increases to 91.5% when combined with ultrasound and Sestamibi scans.

High-resolution peripheral quantitative computed tomography (HR-pQCT) has been used to study defects in bone microarchitecture even when bone density is not grossly abnormal. This test is still in research settings and is not performed routinely. In nPHPT, HR-pQCT may be abnormal when the lumbar spine BMD is not reduced.