Uric acid stones account for about 10% of all renal calculi in the United States. However, the incidence and prevalence of these stones around the world varies depending upon ethnicity and geography. More than 50% of the stones among Hmong immigrants in the United States are uric acid stones. Uric acid calculi account for about 57% of stones in Sudan and 75% in Israel. The prevalence ranges depending upon the sex of the patient, with a higher occurrence rate among women. People with type 2 diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome, and obesity are at a substantially higher risk of developing uric acid stones than the general population.

The environment also plays a role in nephrolithiasis risk. A study done in Saudi Arabia found increased episodes of renal colic with a raised temperature. The nephrolithiasis formation rate is also higher among workers in factories with hot surroundings.  Both of these findings suggest that dehydration significantly contributes to uric acid stone disease.

A recent study comparing the existence of nephrolithiasis among developed and developing nations showed an overall increase in the incidence as well as the prevalence of renal lithiasis. This increase in stone disease is especially notable in developing countries because of the shift in the socio-economic condition of the population.  As the population becomes more affluent, they tend to adopt a more Western diet with more animal protein in their food which increases their tendency to produce uric acid.  Global warming is also considered a contributing factor. The review also identified an increased production of uric acid stones among developing countries as opposed to industrialized nations. However, data from the developing countries is insufficient, with another study showing a contrasting difference between the prevalence of renal calculi in the modern Indian population compared to the same population in previous studies. Study data was restricted in terms of specimen size but it does tend to confirm the general trend in uric acid stone production in the developing world.