Local anesthetics block voltage-gated sodium channels, which prevents sodium influx into the cell and blocks impulse transmission. Local anesthetics are also class I antiarrhythmic drugs due to the blockade of cardiac sodium channels, with lidocaine being the class IB prototype. They selectively block channels that are frequently depolarizing (as occurs in tachyarrhythmias) and, therefore, slow transmission.

Two subclasses of local anesthetics categorize according to the location where metabolism occurs. The amino amides such as bupivacaine, ropivacaine, and lidocaine, are hydrolyzed in the liver, whereas plasma cholinesterases metabolize the amino-esters such as procaine, chloroprocaine, and tetracaine.

Amino amides are stable in solution, whereas the amino esters are unstable. Allergic or hypersensitivity reactions are more likely to occur with amino esters than amino amides.

Local anesthetics work in the nonionic form. In the presence of a low pH, the ionized form is dominant; this can delay the onset of action; this also explains why local anesthetics are not effective in sites of inflammation, where an acidic environment is common. Thus, many clinicians add sodium bicarbonate to overcome the tissue acidity and increase the local anesthetic efficacy.

Epinephrine is often added to a local anesthetic solution, which allows the clinician to use a lower dose of the anesthetic and improve safety. Further, epinephrine acts as a vasoconstrictor and delays absorption of the anesthetic into the peripheral arteriole, thus increasing the duration of action. The addition of epinephrine can also improve hemostasis by inducing vasoconstriction in the surgical field.

However, the dose of epinephrine used should not be more than a 1 to 100,000 concentration. In certain patients, the drug can cause arrhythmias, especially for patients receiving halothane. Epinephrine can also compromise flap viability, so the surgeon must account for this when determining whether to use it and at what dose. Finally, the patient should not use epinephrine on the nose, ear, or penis.