Erythromycin is a bacteriostatic antibiotic, which means it prevents the further growth of bacteria rather than directly destroying them. This action occurs by inhibiting protein synthesis. Erythromycin binds to the 23S ribosomal RNA molecule in the 50S subunit of the bacterial ribosome; this causes a blockage in peptide chain synthesis, ultimately inhibiting the protein synthesis. Humans have the 40S and 60S subunits and do not have 50S subunits, so erythromycin does not affect protein synthesis in human tissues.

Macrolide antibiotics have anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory actions. In preclinical studies, erythromycin inhibited neutrophil infiltration in the lungs and the periodontium. As a result, erythromycin protected against fatal pulmonary inflammation and inflammatory periodontal bone loss. Furthermore, because developmental endothelial locus-1 (DEL-1) levels are severely reduced in inflammatory conditions and aging, erythromycin's ability to upregulate DEL-1 may reveal a novel molecular mechanism responsible for erythromycin's anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory actions.

Erythromycin is active against gram-positive bacteria, gram-negative bacteria, and several other organisms. The gram-positive bacteria include Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus pyogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, Listeria monocytogenes, Corynebacterium minutissimum, Corynebacterium diphtheria. The gram-negative bacteria include Legionella pneumophila, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Bordetella pertussis. Other microorganisms covered by erythromycin include Chlamydia trachomatis, Entamoeba histolytica, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Treponema pallidum, and Ureaplasma urealyticum.

Resistance can develop against erythromycin; this occurs via modification of the 23S rRNA found in the 50S rRNA. The erythromycin cannot bind to the ribosome, and the bacteria can continue protein synthesis.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**As erythromycin gets deactivated by gastric acid, oral tablets must either contain an ester or stable salt as part of the molecular structure or be enteric-coated. Once erythromycin is orally administered, it is easily absorbed through the gastrointestinal system. It diffuses into various tissues and phagocytes following absorption via the gastrointestinal system. As phagocytes circulate in the blood and induce phagocytosis of harmful bacteria, erythromycin gets released during this process. Optimal blood levels are reached when the patient takes it in a fasting state. Peak plasma concentration (Cmax) is achieved in four hours when administered with food.

**Distribution:**Erythromycin is largely bound to plasma proteins, but erythromycin readily diffuses into most bodily fluids. Erythromycin is concentrated in the liver and is later excreted in bile.

**Metabolism:**The liver metabolizes most of the administered erythromycin. It undergoes demethylation through the cytochrome P450 system, specifically the enzyme CYP3A4.

**Excretion:**Erythromycin is mostly excreted through bile. A tiny percentage of the drug undergoes renal excretion. Erythromycin has a half-life of 1.5 hours to 2 hours. Optimal blood levels are reached when the patient takes it in a fasting state. Peak plasma concentration(Cmax) is achieved in four hours when administered with food.