The management of recurrent pyogenic cholangitis requires a multidisciplinary approach, involving the emergency physicians, interventional radiologists, gastroenterologists, and surgeons (general and/or hepatobiliary), as well as allied health professionals at each stage of treatment. In patients presenting acutely, they should be managed using a resuscitative A to E approach. This will likely involve oxygen therapy, fluid resuscitation, correction of potential coagulopathy, and initiation of broad-spectrum antibiotics. Critical care support in fulminant sepsis should be utilized.

Definitive treatment of recurrent pyogenic cholangitis for those who do not respond to medical management comes in the form of biliary decompression. Initially, ERCP is used both to characterize the extent of disease (biliary tree ‘mapping’ for future procedures) and to provide therapy e.g. stone removal, sphincterotomy, or stent insertion for visible and accessible strictures for more distal obstructions. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC) is better for more peripherally obstructed ducts.

Decompressive procedures may be required multiple times and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) guided drainage may be warranted, especially in those with concomitant hepatic abscesses if surgical resection is not able to be performed.

Eighty-three percent of those who underwent primary surgery were deemed to be stone-free as a result, with 81% remaining stone-free at a 3-year follow-up. Eleven percent of patients had disease recurrence. Another retrospective North American study of 42 patients with recurrent pyogenic cholangitis over a twenty-year period showed a reduced disease recurrence in patients who had undergone surgery (hepatectomies or bile duct explorations with or without access loop formation) when compared with nonoperative patients (15% compared to 36% respectively).

Major abdominal surgery is high-risk and decisions about whether to operate should be taken using an interprofessional approach. Additionally, in very rare cases a liver transplant could be considered in a case of diffuse bilateral disease.