**Blood Tests**

Workup for biliary obstruction includes routine****labs and some dedicated labs, including:

- Complete blood count (CBC)

- Comprehensive metabolic profile (CMP)

- Fractionated bilirubin

- Alkaline phosphatase and fractionation

- Gamma-glutamyltransferase

- Viral hepatitis serology

- Antimitochondrial antibody levels

- Antinuclear antibody

- Coagulation studies

- Tumor markers (CA19-9, CEA, AFP)

**Urine Test**

- Urine bilirubin

**Stool Test**

- Occult blood to rule out GI malignancy

**Radiological and Endoscopic tests -**Non-invasive and invasive radiologic tests can help diagnose the underlying etiology of biliary obstruction.

- Abdominal ultrasound with Doppler can be a starting radiological test due to its low cost, non-invasive test, and easy availability. Ultrasound is a good test to evaluate gallstones, dilations of extrahepatic bile ducts, and assess for patency of blood vessels using doppler.

- Based on the ultrasound results, an abdominal CT scan can be the next step. This can help assess for pancreatic head lesions and liver lesions and rule out other intra-abdominal processes.

- Nuclear medicine scans like the HIDA scan can assess for cystic duct obstruction.

- MRCP (magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography) is a very sensitive test to assess further intra- and extrahepatic bile duct abnormalities like cholangiocarcinoma, strictures, or bile duct stones.

- Endoscopic tests like EUS (endoscopic ultrasound) with needle aspiration and ERCP with cytology and biopsies can be further considered based on noninvasive testing results. ERCP can be both diagnostic and therapeutic in cases of biliary obstruction caused by gallstones.

- Sometimes interventional radiology-based PTCA (percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram) can be done to obtain biopsies and evaluate for strictures.