Initial efforts should focus on resuscitation from cardiac arrest due to ventricular fibrillation. This includes closed chest compressions and early defibrillation. If the arrest is prolonged, it may be prudent to provide rescue ventilation and/or medications to improve coronary perfusion pressure (e.g., epinephrine). For an isolated blunt cardiac injury resulting in dysrhythmia, stabilization of the electrical activity may be the only necessary intervention. After resuscitation, appropriate post-arrest care should be implemented.

It may be appropriate to consider other forms of traumatic arrest, depending on the clinical scenario. These may include tension pneumothorax, cardiac or coronary laceration or tamponade, traumatic valvular injury, pulmonary laceration or great vessel injury, hemorrhagic shock, etc., or extrathoracic injuries, depending on the mechanism of injury.

Prevention remains an important consideration. Unfortunately, the use of chest wall protectors has failed to demonstrate a decrease in the incidence of commotio cordis.

- "Measures should be taken to ensure successful resuscitation of commotio cordis victims, including training of coaches, staff, and others to ensure prompt recognition, notification of emergency medical services, and institution of cardiopulmonary resuscitation and defibrillation." (strong recommendation, based on moderate-quality evidence).

- "It is reasonable to use age-appropriate safety baseballs to reduce the risk of injury and commotio cordis" (moderate recommendation, based on moderate-quality evidence).

- "Rules governing athletics and coaching techniques to reduce chest blows can be useful to decrease the probability of commotio cordis" (moderate recommendation, based on limited evidence).