The diagnosis is clinical. Fever, sore throat, malaise, cervical lymphadenopathy, and particularly the presence of grayish/whitish/blackish colored pseudomembrane on the tonsillar and the posterior pharyngeal wall should prompt the provider for early initiation of treatment with immediate administration of antitoxin. Diagnosis is confirmed by isolation of Corynebacterium species on culture and by toxigenicity testing. In equivocal cases, where the cultures are initially negative such as due to recent antibiotic therapy, but with antibody titers being less than 0.1 IU in serum sample and a known case of C. diphtheria in close contact, along with a positive PCR test of the patient can support the diagnosis of Corynebacterium diphtheria.

**Toxigenicity Tests**

Elek Test: The Elek test is based on the principle of antigen-antibody precipitation. It was first described in 1949, and ever since its introduction, it has mostly replaced the traditional in vivo virulence test in a guinea pig, which was most prevalent in those eras. In this process, positive control or a toxigenic strain and a non-toxigenic strain or negative control along with a DAT coated paper strip are placed in the agar medium. After 24 to 48 hours at 37 degrees C, a presence of a clear line of precipitin at a junction where the toxins and the antibodies meet supports the diagnosis. Other enzyme-based tests such as catalase cystinase, pyrazinamidase nitrate, and urease nitrate urease can be used to diagnose potentially toxigenic species within 4 hours.

Newer technologies such as matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF) helps indirect identification of specific species from a colony grown in blood agar plates in approximately 30 minutes with high accuracy of 97% to 100%.

**Imaging**

Echocardiography can be done to assess the ejection fraction and other associated structural anomalies if present, such as aortic regurgitation, mitral valve regurgitation, and ventricular systolic dysfunction. Electrocardiography is an essential tool to monitor dynamic changes in ST and T waves, which could detect conduction anomalies such as sinus tachycardia, ectopic beats, heart block, and myocardial infarction as well. CT scans can detect complications such as interventricular abscess as well and changes in pericardial thickness. X-ray examination on a patient with diphtheria may present with nonspecific findings such as pulmonary infiltrates or cardiomegaly.

**Role Of Biomarkers**

A rise in biomarkers, such as total leukocyte count and serum glutamic oxalo-acetic transaminase levels (SGOT), can be associated with a worse prognosis and can correlate with disease severity.