Resistant hypercalcemia is associated with persistent, severely elevated calcium levels, leading to morbid complications, including death, if not promptly and properly managed. The pattern of multiple ER visits due to symptomatic hypercalcemia should prompt care providers to further evaluate possible causes of persistent hypercalcemia. Management should focus on the rapid reduction of serum calcium levels through calciuresis, decreased intestinal absorption of calcium, and reduced bone resorption. The mainstays of therapy include volume resuscitation, bisphosphonates, and calcitonin. However, despite preliminary treatment, denosumab has been proven to be an excellent choice of therapy in resistant hypercalcemia cases. Patients who do not respond to this therapy would require hemodialysis and, ultimately, surgical intervention in select patients.

The importance of the interprofessional approach cannot be under-emphasized. Early identification of symptomatic hypercalcemia by the emergency medicine physician is essential to initiate immediate hydration. The nephrology and hemodialysis team played a vital role in resistant hypercalcemia, requiring hemodialysis to normalize calcium levels. The endocrinologists will primarily coordinate the patient's care and determine treatment strategies. They will also decide which patients would benefit from denosumab versus other modes of therapy or when surgery becomes appropriate. Surgeons become significant members of the treatment team, mainly in parathyroid cancers and some other malignancy-related hypercalcemia, in which surgery becomes the last resort to normalize calcium levels. Nurses play significant roles in critical care and closely monitoring patient vitals and hemodynamics. Pharmacists can verify dosing, check for interactions, and consult with clinicians regarding adverse effects. All interprofessional team members should utilize open communication with the rest of the care team, particularly to communicate areas of concern and also maintain accurate and updated patient records so all caregivers have the data from which to base decisions. These examples of interprofessional interplay show how this approach will drive better patient results in hypercalcemia cases. [Level 5]