In general, Salmonella infection can be involved in bacteremia and focal infections such as osteomyelitis, meningitis, gastroenteritis, and urinary tract infections. Salmonella osteomyelitis is common in sickle cell disease patients. The history and presentation of Salmonella are split into NTS infection and enteric fever. NTS infection most commonly presents as gastroenteritis with diarrhea, fever, and abdominal cramps. Commonly in history, NTS infection is the contact with reptiles, especially in zoos, aquariums, or as pets. For Salmonella enteritidis, eating undercooked chickens may cause inflammatory diarrhea. Other raw or undercooked products such as eggs, meat, and dairy products can also cause Salmonella infection and may be found in the history of the patient. An immunocompromised state is also common for Salmonella infection. Infection is common in children less than one year of age due to underdeveloped immune systems. In adults, Salmonella infection is present in chronic steroid use, malignancy, immunodeficiency from organ transplantation, and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. S. enterica
subspecies. arizonae is a common cause of infection in patients with immunodeficiency states.

For enteric fever, the onset is gradual and can present with fever and constitutional symptoms such as headache, malaise, and lethargy. Other physical manifestations include abdominal pain, dactylitis, hepatosplenomegaly, and blanching erythematous macular or maculopapular rash famously known as rose spots. Early symptoms include either pea soup diarrhea or constipation. Severe presentations may also further develop into sepsis, shock, and altered mental status from potential meningitis. Bloody diarrhea can occur in a small portion of enteric fever patients.