When performing a stapedectomy or other middle ear surgery, the primary goal is to preserve auditory nerve function when possible. This holds even in those cases where complications may require the abandonment of the procedure. Having the option to fall-back to the use of a hearing aid is always more preferable than complete loss of a patient's cochlear reserve. According to Myer's Operative Otolaryngology, complications that might arise include tympanic membrane perforations, chorda tympani nerve damage, ossicular dislocation, floating stapedial footplate, perilymph gushers, round window otosclerosis, persistent stapedial artery, facial nerve abnormalities, intraoperative vertigo, reparative granuloma, and perilymphatic fistulas. Many of these can play a role in the risk of developing profound sensorineural hearing loss, or a "dead ear."

Tympanic membrane perforation may occur when raising the flap before the separation of the fibrous annulus from its sulcus. Small tears can be repaired with equally small planets of Gelfoam, while larger perforations may require the surgeon to reinforce the area with any additional harvested tissue that might not have been used for the oval window as an underlay graft. Preoperative evaluation of the tympanic membrane is essential, as highly atrophic and thinned tympanic membranes may require a myringoplasty at the time of surgery. These complications, however, rarely have an impact on the outcome of stapedectomy.

When bringing down the scutum to obtain good exposure for the stapedectomy, it is essential to do this carefully so as not to damage the chorda tympani nerve, which is often preserved (~90% of cases). Stretching of the nerve or partial sectioning can be remedied with reapproximation of the nerve fibers, as mentioned previously, but complete sectioning may be unavoidable in a small percentage of cases. It is interesting to note that those patients in whom chorda tympani nerve transection is required have experienced fewer symptoms of dysgeusia when compared to their stretch injury counterparts.

Ossicular dislocation is an unusual complication and often involves the incudomalleal joint resulting from the lateral displacement of the long process of the incus. While this may result in some challenges when placing the prosthesis, moving the incus back to its original position will usually offer good hearing results.

When the stapes superstructure is down-fractured, there is a rare chance (<1%) that the entire footplate becomes avulsed from its surrounding annular attachment to the oval window. This complication may occur should the surgeon skip creating a small fenestration in the center of the footplate with a needle before bringing down the stapes superstructure. It is crucial to keep in mind that this may also occur while trying to create fenestrations in thickened footplates, so avoidance of excess pressure is vital. It will be necessary to gain a hold of the footplate, and when this is not possible, it may be achieved by drilling or curetting into the promontory side of the footplate until a small right-angled pick can grab beneath it, turning into a complete footplate extraction.

Large floating fragments may be extracted by placing a few drops of blood over the oval window, waiting for a clot to form, and removing them all en bloc. Do not, however, attempt to retrieve those pieces that have become subluxated into the vestibule, as this may cause inner ear damage. Displacements of large fragments may result in persistent postural vertigo, while small fragments should be left alone as they rarely result in a loss of hearing.

Perilymph gushers are a rare occurrence where a sudden flow of perilymph fluid occurs immediately upon accessing the vestibule. It is most common in children suffering from congenital stapes fixation but has been encountered in adults with otosclerotic disease processes on occasion. Sensorineural hearing loss occurs more often in those patients who experienced a perilymph gusher. The pathophysiology is usually due to a widening or enlargement of the cochlear aqueduct or communication between the medial internal auditory canal and the inner ear.

When considering a stapedectomy on a child, one might want to obtain a preoperative CT to identify abnormalities of the otic capsule. After encountering a gusher, control is best achieved by elevating the head while suctioning perilymphatic fluid, obtaining fat from the ear lobule to place into the oval window, and using a prosthesis to hold it in place. The head is to remain elevated, postoperatively, and insertion of a spinal drain may be a useful supplemental treatment.

While otosclerosis that results in complete obliteration of the round window is rare, if encountered, the procedure should be abandoned as drilling out the round window has been associated with increased risk of sensorineural hearing loss. Should there be a partial obliteration observed, the surgery may proceed as usual.

The occurrence of a persistent stapedial artery, a remnant of the second branchial arch vasculature, is an abnormality that can often be worked around - even larger arteries can be kept intact while using fenestrations of the footplate and placement of the prosthesis on whichever end of the footplate has the most space. If the artery obliterates the obturator foramen, the procedure should be terminated, and hearing amplification should be achieved with a hearing aid.

It is not uncommon to encounter a partial or total dehiscent facial nerve during middle ear surgery. The most important reason to be able to identify this anomaly is to avoid instrumentation that could damage the nerve. In sporadic cases, the facial nerve may overhang the oval window or travel directly across its surface. Gentle retraction of the nerve using the side of a suction tip often provides the surgeon with enough exposure to complete a fenestration and prosthesis placement. When overhang is more prominent, some metal crimp-on prostheses could be useful in curving around the nerve. Extreme displacement of the facial nerve that results in coverage of the footplate dictates abandonment of the surgery.

Intraoperative vertigo occurs due to excessive manipulation of the stapes or an emptying of the fluid in the vestibule, which results in the stimulation of labyrinthine receptors. Under local anesthesia, the surgeon can use this symptom as a warning of impending inner ear damage, which, of course, is not the case regarding general anesthesia. In an awake patient, persistent vertigo can cause an obstacle to completing the surgery, which is partly the cause of many surgeons choosing general anesthesia, and rapid measures must be initiated to relieve these symptoms. Droperidol is the fastest acting drug in this emergency and is pushed intravenously, slowly. Patients should be monitored after the admission of droperidol, as there is potential for cardiac complication and hypotension.

A terrible complication of stapes surgery is the formation of reactive granulation tissue in and around the oval window. There are many ideas on what causes such a reaction, but it is believed that the use of powderless gloves, the avoidance of Gelfoam, or washing the prosthesis before introducing it into the middle ear space has reduced granulomatous formations, postoperatively. These growths typically occur one week after surgery, as patients begin to complain of decreased hearing and dizziness. On otoscopic examination, a violaceous fullness in the posterosuperior quadrant of the tympanic membrane may be observed, and an audiometric evaluation will show sensorineural impairment with a reduction in speech-recognition thresholds.

Treatment for reparative granulomas involves an immediate surgical intervention to replace the original prosthesis and graft, along with the removal of the growth. Adjunctive therapy with high-dose steroids has been used, but if the disease process is not surgically corrected early enough, permanent sensorineural deficits persist.

Perilymphatic fistulas are a result of persistent or redevelopment of the temporary fistula made after footplate fenestration. This could be a result of imperfect tissue graft placement, a dislodging of the prosthesis, or a sudden leak of perilymphatic fluid from a cough or sneeze. Patients will usually complain of a fluctuant hearing loss and dizziness while an audiogram will exhibit deterioration of the cochlear function. Immediate surgical exploration is indicated to preserve hearing, and if a fistula is confirmed, replacement of the tissue graft and prosthesis is indicated.