# Continuing Education Activity

Obesity surgery is growing in popularity throughout the world. While patient selection is a key factor in determining the success of the surgery, post-operative care is equally as important in order to identify and treat complications and optimize long-term health and nutrition status. This activity reviews types of bariatrics surgeries and describes commons post-operative complications and their management. The role of the health care team is imperative throughout all stages of care in bariatric surgery patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the following types of bariatric surgery and the associated mechanism of weight loss: Adjustable gastric band, laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy, roux-en-y gastric bypass, duodenal switch, and/or biliopancreatic diversion. 
- Identify postoperative surgical, medical, and nutrition complications of the various bariatric surgeries
- Outline the benefits of bariatric surgery and discuss which surgeries are associated with the best outcomes in terms of weight loss and comorbidity resolution. 
- Review the importance of collaboration and communication among surgeons, internists, dieticians, and psychologists to improve outcomes for patients receiving bariatric surgery.

# Introduction

With a growing number of obese patients throughout the world, weight loss surgery has surged in popularity. Not only have bariatric surgeries been shown to improve obesity-related comorbidities, but they have also had a great impact on both the quality of life and life expectancy of patients.

Care for the bariatric patient does not cease in the OR. These patients need close follow up and care from experts in the fields of nutrition, psychiatry, and internal medicine in addition to their surgeon. This paper will provide a review of the types of bariatric surgery and anticipated benefits in regard to weight loss and co-morbidity improvement, expected alterations in nutrition and eating habits, potential complications, and the psychological impact surgery and subsequent weight loss has on bariatric patients.

# Technique or Treatment

When it comes to weight loss, therapy can be divided into either surgical or conservative treatment. The latter refers to behavioral modification in the form of increased physical activity and alterations in diet. While this usually leads to an average of 10% short-term weight loss, it is difficult for patients to maintain. Surgical weight loss has been defined as the most effective and long-lasting form of weight reduction.

**Adjustable Gastric Band (AGB)**

The adjustable gastric band is typically performed laparoscopically and is a restrictive procedure, meaning that weight loss is induced by reducing the amount of food that can be taken in at one time.

**Sleeve Gastrectomy (SG)**

Another bariatric surgery that falls into the restrictive category is sleeve gastrectomy.

**Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass (RYGB)**

Combining both restrictive and malabsorptive aspects of weight loss surgery, RYGB is another common bariatric surgery. It involves the (laparoscopic) creation of a 20-30mL gastric pouch using the cardia of the stomach, separating it from the remaining stomach, pylorus, and proximal small bowel.

**Biliopancreatic Diversion (BPD)/ Duodenal Switch (DS)**

BPD and DS are less commonly performed bariatric surgeries that are a combination of restrictive and malabsorptive. These result in the greatest weight loss but also have the greatest postop mortality rate of 1.1%.

**Post-Operative Care following Bariatric Surgery**

The trend for bariatric surgeries has been to perform them laparoscopically as it is associated with decreased hospital length of stay, wound complications, and post-op pain in addition to improved surgical cosmesis. Furthermore, laparoscopic surgery reduces the risk of post-op venous thromboembolism (VTE) which has been identified as a frequent cause of postoperative morbidity and mortality. With that being said, all patients are placed on an aggressive VTE prevention regimen following surgical intervention. Early ambulation (within 4-6hours post-surgery), sequential compression devices (SCD’s), and pre- and post-op low molecular weight or unfractionated heparin are essential.

As far as oral intake is concerned, patients are typically started on a bariatric clear liquid diet within the first 24 hours post-op as long as they are tolerating water and there are no clinical signs of staple line or anastomotic leak.

**Nutritional Consequences of Bariatric Surgery**

As patients continue to thrive at home following surgery, their diet is advanced to solids with a goal of approximately 1200 calories and 60-120 grams of protein per day. While protein malnutrition is rare following bariatric surgery (with the exception of BPD/DS), many patients do experience intolerance to protein-dense foods and should be monitored for such. Vitamin supplementation is also recommended upon discharge and patients are often provided multivitamin regimens including additional iron, calcium, vitamin D, and vitamin B with routine monitoring and further customization of supplements based on patient’s labs and clinical status.

As mentioned previously, the vitamin deficiencies seen after weight loss surgery include iron (33% to 55% of patients) calcium and vitamin D (24% to 60%), vitamin B12 (24% to 70%), and thiamine (less than 5%). Following RYGB, the most frequent nutritional deficiency is iron and B12 depletion which is seen in up to 60% and 70% of patients respectively. Iron deficiency is due to the duodenum and proximal jejunum being bypassed as they both serve as iron absorption sites. As for B12, it is typically absorbed within the terminal ileum after binding with intrinsic factor (IF), a substance secreted by the parietal cells of the gastric antrum. resecting the gastric antrum during RYGB, there is delayed mixing of IF and B12 resulting in poor absorption at the terminal ileum and deficiency.

Anatomically, restrictive procedures, such as SG, can put patients at higher risk for dehydration due to early satiety. As such, patients are instructed to take sips of liquids throughout the day. In regards to malabsorptive procedures, patients may have the unpleasant side effect of increased flatulence, bloating, and loose, foul-smelling stools due to fat and starch malabsorption.

**Anticipated Weight Loss**

Following bariatric surgery, patients can expect to see the largest drop in weight within the first year with the most rapid weight loss occurring within the first three months. It is not uncommon for patients to regain approximately 1/3 of their initial weight loss over the subsequent 2 to 6 years; however, weight typically stabilizes between years 6-15 following surgery.

In general, interventions that involve less GI tract rearrangement (ie restrictive procedures) tend to have less weight reduction; however, these patients also suffer less long-term and perioperative problems. Most weight is shed after BPD/DS which boasts 83% of excess weight lost (EWL) at 3 years.

# Complications

Despite the optimization of surgical technique and post-operative care, it is still imperative for physicians and surgeons to monitor bariatric patients for both medical and surgical complications and treat them accordingly. Overall 30-day mortality among all bariatric surgery patients is less than one percent with restrictive procedures being 0.1%, RYGB 0.5%, and 1% for BPD/DS.

As VTE is a common cause of morbidity and mortality following bariatric surgery (0.3% at 7 days and 2% at 180 days), it is important to note modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors.

From a surgical perspective, anastomotic or staple line leaks and bleeding have been identified as having the greatest association with sepsis, reoperation, and intensive care unit (ICU) admission.

Internal hernias are identified in 1% to 3% of RYGB or BPD/DS patients and are more commonly seen after patients begin to lose weight.

Stenosis and marginal ulcers usually manifest at the gastroenteric anastomosis. Stenosis is seen greater than 30 days post-op, and patients will present with epigastric pain and regurgitation. Diagnosis and treatment include endoscopy with balloon dilation of the anastomotic site.

**Complications Based on Type of Bariatric Surgery**

Adjustable Gastric Band. Examining the adjustable gastric band, it has the lowest rate of post-op morbidity and mortality of all bariatric surgeries. Its thirty-day mortality is between 0% to 0.1%.

Band slippage and subsequent gastric outlet obstruction are diagnosed in patients who have developed food intolerance or new/worsening reflux.

Sleeve Gastrectomy. As discussed, the complications of sleeve gastrectomy are rare, with a global rate of 7.7%.

Roux-En-Y Gastric Bypass. Thirty-day post-op mortality for RYGB is 0.2% to 0.5%. Other early complications of RYGB include anastomotic leak (1%) and cardiac event in 0.2% to 1% of patients.

Biliopancreatic Diversion/Duodenal Switch. BPD and DS are accompanied by the most weight loss but also by the highest metabolic morbidity and mortality rates.

# Clinical Significance

After discussing the complications associated with bariatric surgery, the decision to proceed with surgical intervention may seem intimidating to patients. It is important to note that obesity is an independent risk factor for health conditions including stroke (CVA), coronary artery disease (CAD), OSA, hyperlipidemia (HLD), diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension (HTN), degenerative joint disease, asthma, cancer, and depression.

Improvement in comorbidities is noticed as early as six months following weight loss surgery/ Patients have improved longevity with an 80% drop in annual mortality and a 50% reduction in overall mortality.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Considering all the behavioral, bodily, and lifestyle changes associated with weight loss procedures, it is no surprise that the psychological care of a bariatric patient plays a major role in both the pre- and postoperative setting. Preop psychological evaluation is advised to ensure patients are prepared for such a dramatic undertaking. Patients suffering from a major depressive disorder, substance abuse, or binge eating disorder may require further psychiatric care or even be disqualified from surgery.

Even considering the physical and emotional stress associated with bariatric surgery, most patients experience an improved quality of life with enrichment of their psychosocial functioning, mood, self-image, and perceived health. In addition, patients have superior mobility and reduction in anxiety that translates into expanded confidence and interaction with others, ultimately resulting in amplified productivity and economic opportunities.

While bariatric surgery has known medical, surgical, and nutrition-related complications, it has been proven to have a positive effect on patients' longevity, comorbidities, and quality of life. A team comprised of surgeons, internists, dieticians, and psychologists, in addition to a strong emotional support group, are essential for optimal outcomes following weight loss surgery. With close monitoring, surgical, medical, and nutritional complications can be identified and remedied with minimal sequelae. With continued psychologic support, patients are prepared for lifestyle changes that will aid in successful weight loss and, ultimately, improved confidence and productivity. If properly selected preoperatively and properly monitored postoperatively, bariatric patients will surely reap the benefits of weight loss surgery.