The walls of the GI tract are composed of four layers of tissue, from innermost to outermost: mucosa (epithelium, lamina propria, and muscular mucosae), submucosa, muscularis propria (inner circular muscle, outer longitudinal muscle), and the serosa.

The smooth muscles responsible for movements of the GI tract are arranged in two layers; an inner circular and an outer longitudinal layer. Between these two layers of smooth muscle lies the myenteric plexus, a network of nerves containing the interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC).

The ICC are considered the pacemaker cells of the GI tract, responsible for generating and actively propagating slow waves. Slow waves are partial depolarization in smooth muscle that, due to the syncytial nature of the cells, sweep down long distances of the digestive tract. Depolarization of smooth muscle cells occurs via the activation of an inward current carried by L-type voltage-dependent calcium channels. Activation of L-type calcium channels is a primary mechanism through which GI smooth muscle cells achieve excitation-contraction coupling. Calcium entry into smooth muscle cells through L-type calcium channels during action potentials (AP) is substantial. When an AP occurs in phasic GI muscles, they are superimposed upon slow-wave depolarization. This mechanism shows the syncytial nature between smooth muscle cells and ICC: ICC generates slow waves which conduct into smooth muscle cells, depolarizing them. The depolarization of the smooth muscle cells then elicits action potentials.

It is important to note that slow waves are not action potentials and do not elicit contractions by themselves. Slow waves synchronize muscle contractions in the gut by controlling the appearance of a second depolarization event, spike potentials, which occur at the crest of slow waves. Spike potentials are true GI APs that elicit muscle contraction. Slow-wave frequency differs throughout the GI tract, occurring approximately 16 times per minute in the small intestine and roughly three times per minute in the stomach and large intestine.

Peristalsis occurs in both the smooth muscle esophagus and the skeletal muscle esophagus. Peristalsis in the skeletal muscle esophagus results from the activation of neurons at the level of the vagal nucleus (nucleus ambiguus). In contrast, peristalsis in the smooth muscle esophagus is mediated by the vagus nerve at the level of the dorsomotor nucleus and myenteric plexus.

Chemically, intestinal serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) is critical in the modulation of ENS development, motility, secretion, sensation, epithelial growth, and inflammation. Upon its release, 5-HT binds to specific receptors, 5-HT3 and 5-HT4, present on neurons within the myenteric plexus of the ENS. Stimulation of 5-HT3 receptors results in the activation of afferent nerves. In contrast, stimulation of 5-HT4 receptors augments peristaltic reflex pathways by acting presynaptically on nerve terminals to enhance the release of acetylcholine, thus, stimulating peristalsis.