The upper arm is the segment between the elbow and the glenohumeral joint, incorporating the axilla. The contour of the upper arm is afforded by the muscles, specifically the deltoid, biceps, and triceps. In youthful arms, the skin is taut, and there is little adiposity. The subcutaneous fat has a deep lamellar and superficial alveolar layer separated by the superficial fascial system, and it is lamellar that is prone to excess fat deposition.

The medial brachial and antebrachial nerves that provide sensory innervation to the inner arm and forearm, respectively, lie deep in this fascia within the deeper subcutaneous fat. The medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve branches (2-3) accompany the basilic vein from the medial epicondyle until they traverse the deep fascia of the arm approximately 8 cm proximal to the medial epicondyle. The medial brachial cutaneous nerve runs posterior and parallel to the basilic vein, and its branches terminate approximately 2 cm proximal to the medial epicondyle.

The deep fascia of the arm incorporates the major motor-sensory nerves (median, ulnar, radial), major vessels, including the brachial artery and its tributaries, and the muscles of the anterior and posterior compartments. The lymphatics of the upper limb accompany the venous tributaries and drain to the axillary lymph nodes.

Appelt's classification stratifies the upper arm fat, skin excess, and lateral chest wall skin excess with corresponding recommendations.

**Appelt,et al., Classification**