Acute ankle sprains mostly receive treatment with conservative measures, i.e., ankle brace, and rarely require surgical intervention. However, recurrent ankle sprains may require surgical intervention if all conservative measures have been exhausted. PRICE therapy, formerly known as RICE therapy, involves protection, rest, ice, compression, and elevation. There is no evidence regarding the effectiveness of this therapy; however, this intervention commonly assists with short term pain control to facilitate the early restoration of strength and range of motion.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID), used topically or taken orally, can be utilized in addition to PRICE therapy for short term symptomatic pain control. Additionally, if fracture were to be present, recent evidence has suggested normal dosage NSAID use of fewer than 14 days does not increase the risk of nonunion, as previously documented.

Neuromuscular training therapy is imperative in reducing the recurrence rate and should be implemented to improve overall functional instability. These exercises, which typically include proprioception tasks and balance, have been found to improve overall ankle functional outcomes significantly.

Although most experts recommend two weeks of immobilization and protected weight-bearing, a short period of immobilization, up to 10 days, has been suggested by some investigators to be beneficial for the management of pain control and edema.

External support in the form of taping or bracing over rigid immobilization has proven to be more effective, as these therapies have found a greater reduction in edema and shorter time to return to sport. The application of a brace can also be beneficial for up to 1-year post-injury. Bracing has shown effectiveness in prevention from recurrent injury but has not shown to be effective as a preventative therapy for the initial injury. There is a strong belief that brace application works by supporting impaired proprioception, as opposed to the range of motion restriction. Trending research supports bracing as superior to neuromuscular training regarding the prevention of self-reported recurrent ankle sprains, with a 47% reduction in recurrence versus neuromuscular therapy.

Taping has also demonstrated effectiveness with the prevention of recurrent ankle sprain, with two to four-fold reduction, compared with no taping. However, the effects of taping vs. bracing are mostly inconclusive and more preferential.

Differentiation between mechanical instability versus functional instability is imperative for surgical selection when warranted. Often chronic, recurrent ankle sprains can lead to chronic ankle instability and pain that is unresolved by conservative measures.

The most common surgical procedure for recurrent ankle sprains with chronic lateral ankle instability is the Brostrom Gould procedure. During this procedure, non-absorbable or equivalent suture material can be utilized with one or two suture anchors to facilitate the repair of the anterior talofibular ligament. The calcaneofibular ligament can also be augmented in the repair if injured.

Other surgical options include anatomical reconstructions with tendon grafting, such as the Watson-Jones, Evans, and Chrisman-Snook. However, the previously mentioned procedures are not as commonly performed. Furthermore, these procedures are more disruptive to the anatomy, more technically difficult, and are more likely to result in ankle joint over-tightening.

Also, ankle arthroscopy is generally recommended with any procedure involving lateral ankle stabilization, as it is common for a patient to sustain other pathologies due to the mechanism of injury. Other coexisting pathologies include; synovitis, anterior tibiotalar impingement, and osteochondral lesions. A study by Komenda and Ferkel found 93% of the study’s patients with chronic ankle instability presented with intraarticular pathology, synovitis being the most common, followed by the presence of loose bodies.