The continuous administration of drugs by the intrathecal route is a viable and relatively safe option for the treatment of chronic painful conditions associated or not with oncological pathology, and for the treatment of severe spasticity, also in children. Further research and expert opinions are needed to improve our current knowledge about the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic model of intrathecal drug administration and to evaluate the use and safety of other drugs not currently indicated for this purpose. Results from these investigations will undoubtedly lead to a widening of indications. Furthermore, in patients with cancer, the life expectancy of fewer than three months sets a limit to the execution of the procedure. This indication, probably dictated by the last costs of the procedure, should be revised since the major target of palliative therapy is the improvement of the HR-QOL regardless of the life expectancy.

Finally, the formation of a dedicated interprofessional healthcare team is mandatory for the success of this therapy. The possibility of having qualified personnel is fundamental to the success of the procedure. This team includes specialty-trained pain management nursing staff or a palliative nurse, for administration and monitoring and continuously evaluate the progress of the therapy, performing the necessary dosage changes, and evaluating potential side effects. This approach requires knowledge of advanced devices and appropriate algorithms. The pharmacist will prepare the doses and should verify dosing ordered and check for potential interactions, reporting their findings to the treating clinicians. All this should happen under the aegis of a clinician specializing in pain management, so that the entire interprofessional team is well-versed in the parameters and monitoring of this therapy, and can direct patient outcomes optimally. [Level V]