Since SV phenomena are a direct result of work demands, healthcare organizations have a duty to offer effective resources and implement programs to identify high-risk events and attenuate the consequences of second victim experiences. Given the heterogeneous nature of each medical specialty and institution, these programs should be tailored to the unique needs of the providers they serve. The discussion below provides a general overview of current processes that demonstrate preliminary efficacy in addressing and attenuating second victim distress.

The literature from early adopter institutions suggests the following 3-tiered support system:

**Stage 1.**Emotional first aid provided by a trusted colleague or mentor:

This stage covers the majority of adverse events and involves a post-incident immediate discussion to allow those involved (if desired) to debrief in time following the incident before returning to work tasks. The most important thing for colleagues at risk for SVS is to listen and not jump in to provide solutions. Trusted colleagues should strive to normalize the provider's feelings by acknowledging that all providers are human, feel bad about mistakes and/or adverse patient outcomes, and suffer when these events occur. It is also important to help the individual understand that each provider will respond to a particular event with different symptoms and severity, even for an event that appears similar. If relevant, trusted colleagues can also share their own prior mistakes.

Below are some specific suggestions to engage affected providers in emotional first aid:

- Take the provider to a private place away from the scene of the clinical event as soon as safely possible.

- Use open-ended questions, such as “How are you feeling?”  “Do you want to talk about it?”

- Listen and allow them to control the conversation. For example, providers may wish to keep the conversation brief or may want to discuss it many times.

- Ask if you can call the provider later that day or tomorrow to ensure they are doing ok and/or if you can arrange contact with a peer supporter or professional.

- Give the provider time alone to collect their thoughts before returning to clinical duties.

- Some providers may need to leave the worksite, and the person providing emotional first aid may need to help facilitate this coverage if possible.

Before ending the contact, make sure the provider has referrals for the emotional, psychological, and/or professional help they may need.

It is NOT helpful to say: “Tell me what happened.” “Everything will be OK.” And or “Don’t worry about it.”

**Stage 2.**Support by trained peers:

This is administered by specific coworkers trained in mentoring and supporting peers after an adverse or traumatic encounter. These trained peers follow up in the days and weeks following the incident to ensure the provider’s wellbeing and referral for further support as needed.

**Stage 3.**Support by mental health professionals.

This should be available to all clinical employees and is encouraged if the provider’s second victim symptoms interfere with their professional or personal lives or if symptoms fail to improve or worsen over time.

**Emotionally Processing Patient Death**

As patient deaths are particularly high risk for leading to severe or longer-lasting SVS, these events deserve special discussion. Immediately after a patient's death, team leaders and attendant providers find value and meaning in honoring that patient's life and sharing a moment of common humanity.