A rapid, focused history and physical examination are essential for evaluating a patient presenting with acute-onset focal neurologic dysfunction. They are the initial steps in differentiating acute stroke from stroke mimics and ischemic etiology from hemorrhagic, including the subtype. Statistics vary, but common ischemic stroke mimics include hypoglycemia, seizure, and migraine.

**Ischemic stroke**

Ideally, the history will determine when the patient was last seen well, onset acuity, risk factors, medications, and pertinent details related to a possible relevant illness. In addition to vital signs, a focused neurologic examination using the NIH Stroke Scale is recommended.

**Intracerebral hemorrhage**

ICH most commonly occurs during routine activity but can occur during sex or other physical activity. Neurologic symptoms usually worsen over minutes to a few hours, and neurological deterioration is often seen before and during hospitalization secondary to an enlarging hematoma and its sequelae. Clinical presentation varies by the size and location of the hemorrhage, with the most common symptoms being nausea, vomiting, and headache.

If a seizure occurs, it is usually at the onset of bleeding or within the first 24 hours. The incidence of acute seizures within the first 24 to 72 hours is between 4 and 42%.

Without neuroimaging, no clinical decision scale can differentiate ICH from other conditions with high sensitivity or specificity.

**Subarachnoid hemorrhage**

As with ICH, aneurysmal SAH usually occurs during routine activity, including rest or sleep, but can occur during physical activity.

Potential focal exam findings include unilateral vision loss, visuospatial neglect, and ophthalmoplegia; retinal, subhyaloid, and vitreous hemorrhage; third and sixth nerve palsy; hemiparesis, aphasia, and abulia.

The neurological examination can be categorized using the Hunt Hess scale or the World Federation of Neurological Surgeons scale.