Measurement of serum albumin using routine assays on automated chemistry analyzers is a quick and simple method of determining the presence of hypoalbuminemia. Assays are based on the color change that occurs when albumin binds to a particular dye that is measured spectrophotometrically. Other methods used to measure albumin include immunonephelometric and immunoturbidometric techniques.

Decreased albumin levels may be an incidental finding on protein electrophoresis; however, protein electrophoresis provides a semi-quantitative albumin value. The main value of protein electrophoresis in a patient with low serum albumin is with the differential diagnosis of hypoalbuminemia. In the presence of acute inflammation, hypoalbuminemia will be present with an increase in alpha-1 and 2 globulins and normal gamma globulins. In chronic inflammation, the protein electrophoresis pattern will show hypoalbuminemia with a polyclonal increase in gamma globulins.

In the presence of nephrotic syndrome, hypoalbuminemia with an increase in alpha-2 globulins, due to increased macroglobulin, and low gamma globulins are the typical pattern on serum protein electrophoresis.

With chronic liver disease, hypoalbuminemia with increase gamma globulins and beta-gamma bridging is typical.

Further evaluations are targeted at determining the cause of hypoalbuminemia and monitoring disease. These include liver function tests to determine a presence of liver disease, urine albumin, protein measurement to evaluate urine protein loss, and brain natriuretic peptide for evaluation of heart failure as well as radiological imaging.

Specific tests include alpha-1 antitrypsin clearance for the determination of protein loss via gut distal to the pylorus. This involves a timed collection of stool together with a serum sample. Alpha-1-antitrypsin is resistant to degradation by digestive enzymes. It is used as an endogenous marker for the presence of blood proteins in the intestinal tract. Elevated alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1A) clearance suggests excessive GI protein loss.