Most patients with HbSS phenotype do not present with classical 'sickle cell crises' soon after birth. HbF is still present in the blood, helping maintain adequate tissue oxygenation, and it takes around 6-9 months to wean off completely. Not all SCA have the same phenotype, and multiple phenotypes exist that can either co-exist or present as a spectrum of the disease.

- Vaso-occlusive subphenotype - Distinguished by higher hematocrit (Hct) compared to other SCA. A higher Hct leads to higher viscosity that promotes frequent vaso-occlusive crises and acute chest syndrome.

- Hemolysis and vascular subphenotype: Lower Hct compared to other SCA, higher lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), serum bilirubin- implies a higher degree of hemolysis and severe anemia

- Higher risk of gallstones, pulmonary hypertension, ischemic stroke, priapism, and nephropathy
- Severe anemia increases cardiac workload and blood flow through organs, making them susceptible to damage
- Higher free heme and Hb in blood vessels cause oxidative damage

- High Hb F subtype- A 10 to 15% level of HbF alleviates the symptoms of SCA. However, the distribution of HbF is not consistent throughout the body.

- Pain-sensitive subphenotype- Altered neurophysiology amongst various individuals make them susceptible to pain. Some individuals are more susceptible to pain compared to others with SCA.

The patients with SCA present wither with acute or chronic complications associated with the disease. The most common acute complication of SCA is Vaso-occlusive crisis (VOC). The treatment section below discusses the management of acute and chronic issues.

Important points to be noted in the history of patients with SCA

- All patients with SCA will experience VOC during their lives. The earliest presentation is dactylitis in kids as young as six months of age.

- Any body organ can develop VOC (head, eyes, etc.), although extremities and the chest are most commonly involved. If a VOC pain sounds atypical, obtain a history to rule out other causes.

- A thorough history of pain management must determine the best analgesics for the patient.

- When was the last pain crisis, and how many times in the previous year have they been admitted to the hospital with pain crises?
- If they take analgesics daily, it is prudent to know the type and quantity of the analgesic (opioid or non-opioid), the last use of analgesics, and whether they take the analgesics before coming to the ER/office
- History of taking disease-modifying drugs (hydroxyurea, voxelotor, crinzalizumab, etc.)

- A history of substance abuse, psychiatric disorders, and use of psychotropic medications must be obtained.

- History of receiving blood transfusions and exchange transfusions- helps assess the risk of iron overload, presence of alloantibodies (multiple transfusions in the past can lead to the development of alloantibodies, which will help assess the risk of transfusion reactions), and previous transfusion reactions.

- History of any other diseases that may or may not be associated with SCA - previous history of stroke, thrombosis, priapism, etc.

- It is also advised to get in touch with the primary hematologist taking care of the patient- it is valuable to have their input in understanding the patient's normal physiology.

- History of previous surgeries.

- History of life-threatening crises in the past- if present, should alert the clinician to ensure that a similar event is not occurring again. For example, fat embolism may occur more frequently in patients with SCA.

The physical exam should focus on the general system exam to determine the need for oxygen requirements, pain management, and blood/exchange transfusion. However, a focused exam is also necessary to rule out any organ-specific problem. For example, a rapidly enlarging liver or spleen should alert the physician about sequestration crises.