A comprehensive protocol of investigations should be employed if there is a clinical suspicion of oropharyngeal cancer. These include:

**Radiography**

Plain radiography is done for the dental assessment and bony invasion, but it is of limited value.

**Ultrasonography**

It is recommended to perform ultrasound with or without needle biopsy in all the patients reporting with a neck lump because of its excellent accuracy of staging the nodal disease if employed by an experienced operator

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**

MRI provides excellent visualization of the tumor infiltrating the soft tissue and is not distorted by the metallic dental restorations and is considered optimal for the staging of the primary tumor

**Computed Tomography (CT)**

A CT scan can not only be utilized to estimate the size of the tumor but also assist in deciding on surgical removal of the tumor and its spread to the lymph nodes in the neck or lower mandible.

**Positron Emission Tomography (PET)**

PET combined with CT-scan should be employed in cases where conventional cross-sectional imaging fails to identify primary tumors

**Endoscopy and Laryngoscopy**

Endoscopy and laryngoscopy are performed after using an anesthetic spray or general anesthesia to visualize and examine the suspicious sites in detail and take the biopsy sample.

**Biopsy**

A biopsy of the suspicious area is performed to make a definitive diagnosis. The type of biopsy i.e., a fine-needle aspiration biopsy using a fine needle to collect a sample or oral brush biopsy, which is a newer, simpler, and convenient method employing a small brush to collect the sample during routine dental examinations, depends upon the location of cancer.

**Human Papillomavirus Testing (HPV testing)**

The American Society of Clinical Oncology recommends that HPV testing should be done on all the newly diagnosed oropharyngeal cancers. This is done by polymerase chain reaction, which detects the HPV DNA.