Obeticholic acid (OCA) is a synthetic derivative of the endogenous primary bile acid, chenodeoxycholic acid. Obeticholic acid was developed primarily to treat liver and bile duct pathologies. It has established potency as an anti-cholestatic and antihepatotoxic agent. Currently, OCA has FDA approval for the treatment of primary biliary cholangitis (PBC). The use of OCA for primary sclerosing cholangitis and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is still being researched.

**Primary Biliary Cholangitis**

As of this writing, obeticholic acid has only received FDA approval to treat PBC, a disease characterized by progressive destruction of small intrahepatic bile ducts by inflammatory cells.

**Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis**

Primary sclerosing cholangitis is a disease of progressive inflammation, fibrosis, and sclerosis of medium to large-sized bile ducts leading to biliary strictures. There is no effective medical therapy. A phase 2 trial studying OCA in PSC in 77 patients over 24 weeks has shown reductions in serum ALP with the OCA treatment at 5 and 10 mg doses.

**Non-alcoholic Steatohepatitis**

Obeticholic acid is also not approved by the FDA to treat non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) or NASH; however, its effects on these pathogenic states have been studied previously. In a multicenter, randomized controlled phase 3 trial, placebo, OCA 10 mg, and OCA 25 mg were given daily for 18 months to patients in three groups – adults with NASH, NAFLD, or signs of fibrosis stages F2-F3, or F1 with accompanying comorbidity. This clinical study's interim analysis showed that OCA 25 mg significantly improved fibrosis and histological components of NASH disease among patients with NASH.

Obeticholic acid has also shown promising results in treating other conditions such as NAFLD with Diabetes Mellitus type 2 and bile acid diarrhea.