Per the package insert, the exact mechanism of action of carisoprodol in relieving discomfort associated with acute painful musculoskeletal conditions has not been clearly identified. It is believed to be a centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxant that does not directly relax skeletal muscles. The muscle relaxation effects induced by carisoprodol in animal studies are associated with altered interneuronal activity in the spinal cord and the descending reticular formation of the brain. Its primary metabolite, meprobamate, is believed to work at the GABA receptors similar to benzodiazepines and is believed to be responsible for carisoprodol’s therapeutic effects as well as its abuse potential.

Carisoprodol is metabolized in the liver primarily by the cytochrome P450 oxidase isozyme CYP2C19, and is excreted by the kidneys. The absolute bioavailability of carisoprodol remains undetermined. Carisoprodol’s primary metabolite is meprobamate, a known drug of abuse and dependence.

Given the significantly prolonged half-life of meprobamate compared to the carisoprodol, there is a risk of meprobamate bio-accumulation following extended periods of carisoprodol administration.  Also, patients with reduced CYP2C19 activity are poor metabolizers of the carisoprodol resulting in up to a 4-fold increase in exposure to carisoprodol and a 50% reduced exposure to meprobamate.

Carisoprodol is a racemic mixture, only slightly soluble in water but freely soluble in alcohol. The solubility of carisoprodol is practically independent of pH.  Furthermore, as per the package insert, taking this medication with fatty food did not appear to affect its pharmacokinetics.