Coronary artery disease (CAD), also termed ischemic heart disease, is the most prevalent cardiovascular disease and the leading cause of global mortality, with significant implications and consequences for heart muscle functionality. CAD is characterized by the formation of atherosclerotic plaques within the coronary arteries resulting in a decrease in blood flow and oxygen and nutrient delivery to the myocardium. Manifestations of CAD are termed acute coronary syndromes (ACS) and include stable angina, unstable angina, and others from the supply-demand mismatch of insufficient oxygen perfusion from at least 70% occlusion of the myocardial vascular supply. The most severe manifestations of CAD are myocardial infarctions, colloquially termed “heart attacks.” Myocardial infarctions (MIs) divide into ST-segment elevation myocardial infarctions (STEMI) and non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), depending on total or near-total coronary vascular occlusions, respectively, and subsequent findings on electrocardiogram (EKG).

The location of myocardial infarctions within the heart can be generally localized via which specific leads are affected with abnormal ST-segment and/or T-wave morphologies on an EKG. MIs demonstrate cardiomyocyte necrosis, and diagnostic findings include positive cardiac troponin (cTn) tests and creatinine kinase myocardial band (CK-MB) tests.

Cardiomyopathies are inherited or acquired diseases of the heart muscle that affect structure and functionality in the absence of other cardiovascular disease processes, such as CAD. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common genetically inherited heart disease and follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. The pathophysiology of HCM comes from mutations in myocardial sarcomere genes leading to myofibrillar disarray, severe thickening, hypertrophy of the heart muscle wall, and diastolic dysfunction. Manifestations of HCM include dyspnea, syncope, palpitations, and sudden death, and most commonly presents in adolescence. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is characterized by eccentric hypertrophy, dilation of the cardiac muscle wall, and systolic dysfunction.

Myocarditis is the term for inflammation of the heart muscle and has several etiologies. The most common etiology in the Western world is viral infections (infectious myocarditis), but other causes include toxic reactions or allergies to drugs, autoimmune diseases, or other infections (bacterial, fungal, parasitic). Myocarditis involves damage and loss of both cardiomyocytes and cardiac vascular endothelial cells, both of which are common targets of infection from inflammatory processes and white blood cell (often lymphocytic) infiltration into the heart muscle wall.

Heart failure (HF) is the common end-stage pathway and clinical manifestation of cardiac pump dysfunction from a variety of etiologies, including many diseases affecting the heart muscle. HF can be categorized into different groups, such as acute vs. chronic, right heart vs. left heart, and systolic (reduced ejection fraction) vs. diastolic (preserved ejection fraction), each presenting with distinct clinical characteristics. HF is essentially defined as the inability of the heart to pump adequately, leading to congestion, reduced organ perfusion, and functional impairment.