Injury to the axillary nerve usually presents as the result of an overstretched angle between the neck and the shoulder secondary to trauma or excessive force. Typical scenarios include a patient being thrown from a vehicle or falling from a height and landing rostrally in a position which stretches the angle between the neck and ipsilateral shoulder. For example, in the event where a fall results in the distance from the left ear to left shoulder is significantly decreased, the opposite side, where the right ear is pulled away from the right shoulder, is where the injury would occur. Nerve roots C5 and C6, which also make up the superior trunk of the brachial plexus, can become overstretched during birth as well. In the case of newborn delivery, failure of the Moro reflex can manifest as a sign of axillary nerve injury. The Moro reflex is an abduction then adduction, startle reflex which is expected from a baby roughly by 2 months of age. Both adduction and abduction components will not function correctly in this case. Stretching of the axillary nerve at spinal roots C5 and C6 interrupt the innervation to the deltoid and teres minor. The prolonged injury will lead to atrophy of the deltoid muscle, resulting in flattening of the shoulder curvature. Also, the arm will tract medially, given that teres minor no longer counters with lateral rotation. The limb also hangs to the side in an adducted position due to the failure of the deltoid muscle to counter the actions of the adductor muscles in the arm and chest. Avulsion or rupture of the superior trunk affects not only the axillary nerve but also the biceps brachial and brachialis, which accentuates the clinical manifestations of axillary nerve injury, as well as leads to a persistent extension at the elbow. This condition is known as Erb-Duchenne Palsy, also called Waiter's Tip syndrome. In addition to the previously stated, axillary nerve injury can result from an inferior dislocation of the humerus, as well as a fracture at the surgical neck of the humerus, where the anterior branch of the axillary nerve wraps around, exposing the nerve to potential harm. Dislocation of the humerus usually occurs in the inferior direction due to decreased ligament stability to hold the joint together inferiorly. Any irritation of the axillary nerve can also result in paresthesia, numbness, tingling, or overall loss in sensation at the regimental badge area because the cutaneous branch coming from the posterior axillary nerve is the only source of cutaneous innervation at this area. An abrupt onset of pain, following by an extended period of progressive muscle weakness, atrophy, and sensory deficit, is another condition that can affect the axillary nerve. This particularly rare condition, named Parsonage-Turner syndrome (PTS), has an insidious onset but can be precipitated by viral illness, trauma, history of autoimmune disease, or even surgery. It manifests in at least one nerve of the brachial plexus. Given that the axillary nerve is a terminal branch of the brachial plexus, it has the potential to be affected, leading to weakening of the muscles innervated by this nerve. PTS can also be called brachial neuritis or neuralgic amyotrophy.