At the time of the patient's evaluation, a thorough history should reveal the initial diagnosis for which radiation therapy was used, as well as the site of the radiation exposure, and finally the total amount of radiation that the patient has received. It is important to note the radiation dose as well as the timing of the onset of the observed skin changes.  Any associated chemotherapy will also need to be documented, in particular, the types of chemotherapeutic agents used.  Again, certain therapeutic agents were present as risk factors for radiation recall, as discussed above; some of the chemotherapeutic agents that will predispose to radiation recall are doxorubicin, docetaxel, paclitaxel, tamoxifen, methotrexate, to name a few. Chemotherapeutic agents such as doxorubicin, bleomycin, disulfiram, cisplatin, and mafenide acetate are also relative contraindications to hyperbaric oxygen treatment, a treatment modality that is often used as an adjuvant treatment for late effects of radiation skin changes such as ulcerations.

Overall, a thorough history will be important in providing documentation that will aid in choosing a specific treatment algorithm, especially if it involves hyperbaric oxygen treatment.

In addition to the physical exam that is customary for every patient evaluated for any disease process, there should be a particular focus on the presentation of the skin injury itself, as this will decide the treatment modality to be used, depending on the classification of radiation injury. Clinical manifestation of chronic radiation skin injury includes xerosis, hyperkeratosis, decreased or absent sweating, skin atrophy and dyspigmentation, as well as necrosis with full-thickness wounds, and others.

There should be a particular focus in identifying any contraindication to possible hyperbaric oxygen treatment, a treatment modality that is often used with late effects of radiation on the skin. A neck and head and exam is important, with a special focus on the eye for cataracts. The tympanic membranes should be evaluated for any scarring or other abnormalities that may make it hard for the pressure to equalize within the inner year. A chest radiograph to confirm the absence of any acute disease processes and for bullous diseases should be obtained given the high incidence of pneumothorax under more than one atmospheric pressure that is typical of a hyperbaric treatment protocol.