Using the rule of four for the brainstem, the medial longitudinal fasciculus is medial; this is where the tectospinal tract projects and, if lesioned, has the potential to cause ipsilateral internuclear ophthalmoplegia.

In the rare case of atypical Claude syndrome, patients present solely with pupil-sparing oculomotor nerve palsy. In these cases, the superior cerebellar peduncle gets spared, so contralateral ataxia does not occur. There have been cases of atypical Claude syndrome involving the tectospinal tract. On exam, patients can have subtle truncal ataxia due to a lesion between the red nucleus and the superior cerebellar peduncle; this location is thought to involve the tectospinal tract. Researchers postulate that this lesion may lead to the truncal ataxia as it is part of the auditory and visual response that can turn the head and neck towards the sound, causing the trunk to move subtly as well. These rare cases typically occur in those with diabetic or hypertensive oculomotor nerve ischemia.

Additionally, cervical dystonia may also involve the superior colliculus as well as the tectospinal tract. Cervical dystonia, also known as spasmodic torticollis, presents as a neurological condition where abnormal muscle contractions cause the head and neck to move involuntarily. The attribution for the causes of this focal dystonia is the dysfunction of the basal ganglia, but research is examining additional origins. The superior colliculus and the tectospinal tract have been found in animals to play a role in orientation towards looming or approaching objects. Via fMRI, the same process has been studied in humans as well. Researchers found that those who had dampened superior colliculus excitement under approaching or looming conditions were those subjects in the study who currently had cervical dystonia or were family members of those displaying cervical dystonia. The family members were found to be asymptomatic carriers of the gene. The thinking is that those with poor superior colliculus discrimination may be more at risk for displaying cervical dystonia. As the superior colliculus is one of the most GABAergic regions of the brain, there is also a hypothesis that in addition to the tectospinal tract, that any loss of GABA inhibition may lead to the involuntary neck contractions observed in cervical dystonia. Further research needs to be performed to examine this hypothesis.