**Galantamine Side Effects**

Cardiovascular system: Because of their pharmacological action, galantamine, a selective cholinesterase inhibitor, has inhibitory vagotonic effects on the cardiac conduction system. Suppression of sinoatrial activity leads to sinus bradycardia,****and initial management of symptomatic bradycardia involves discontinuation of the offending agent and intravenous injection of atropine which antagonizes the cholinergic effects of the galantamine.

The block of conduction at an atrioventricular node can cause an atrioventricular block. Mobitz type-2 second-degree AV-block may degenerate in more serious rhythm, complete heart block,  and requires pacemaker treatment. Galantamine, a cholinomimetic agent, exerts vagotonic effects on the cardiac conduction system. It has the potential to cause sinus bradycardia and all types of AV block in all patients, with and without known underlying abnormalities of cardiac conduction.

Sinus bradycardia and all kinds of heart blocks have been reported in all patients, both with and without known underlying cardiac conduction abnormalities. Therefore, all patients should be considered at high risk for adverse reactions to cardiac conduction. Galantamine administration requires vigilance and careful assessment of risk factors that can precipitate QT prolongation, syncope, and delirium.

Gastrointestinal system: Galantamine is well tolerated antidementia medication, and undesired effects are rare except for gastrointestinal (GI) side effects, which are a predictable consequence of its cholinergic pharmacological properties. Loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and weight loss are the most common GI adverse effects.

Therefore, the patient's weight must be monitored during therapy with galantamine. GI side effects are usually mild, transient, and reduced in severity with a decrease in dosage. Clinical trials have shown that the median duration of nausea and vomiting is 5 to 6 days after initiating the therapy and following each increment in the dosage. Significant cholinergic side effects can develop in patients receiving higher dosages, and usually, they are related to the rapid rate of initial dosage titration. To reduce the unpleasant effects, dosage should be escalated gradually. In addition, galantamine should be taken with meals. Moreover, the patient and caregiver should be counseled to ensure plenty of fluid intakes.

Through its primary action, galantamine, a cholinergic drug, may be expected to increase gastric acid secretion due to increased parasympathetic activity. Therefore, patients should be closely monitored for symptoms of active or occult bleeding from the gastrointestinal tract, particularly those with an additional risk factor for developing ulcers, such as those with a history of peptic ulcer disease or patients concurrently taking nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Clinical trials of galantamine have not shown any increase in the incidence of, compared to placebo, either peptic ulcer disease or gastrointestinal hemorrhage.

Skin: Serious cutaneous adverse reactions such as acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis, erythema multiforme, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome have been reported in patients receiving both IR and ER formulations. Patients and caregivers should be advised to discontinue the galantamine at the first appearance of the skin lesion, e.g., rash, unless the rash is clearly not related to medicine. If the patient's clinical presentation suggests a severe dermatological reaction, therapy with the galantamine should not be resumed in the future, and alternative treatment should be considered.

Anesthesia: As an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, galantamine is likely to prolong the neuromuscular blocking effects of the succinylcholine-type and other similar neuromuscular blocking agents by delaying the cholinesterase mediated hydrolytic metabolism of these drugs during anesthesia.

Genitourinary system: Galantamine, a cholinomimetic agent, may cause or worsen bladder outflow obstruction, and its use requires caution in patients suffering from prostatic hyperplasia.

Nervous system: Headache and dizziness are the most common side effects. Galantamine, as a cholinergic agent, is believed to have some potential to induce generalized seizures. The convulsive activity could be a manifestation of Alzheimer disease. Therefore, patients diagnosed with dementia of Alzheimer disease and on galantamine prescription should be monitored closely for seizures.

Respiratory system: Because of its cholinomimetic action, galantamine can cause bronchospasm, and therefore, it should be prescribed with care to patients with a known history of severe asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. While on galantamine therapy, the patient's respiratory functions should be monitored closely for any occurrence of respiratory adverse effects.

Galantamine and MCI: As per the data from the two separate clinical trials for patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), galantamine can cause marginal clinical benefit but a still unexplained excess in death rate. Therefore, Galantamine use in patients with a history of mild cognitive impairment is not recommended.

Other side effects reported during clinical trials are depression, anxiety, nightmares, tremor, somnolence, syncope, lethargy, abdominal discomfort, abdominal pain, dyspepsia, muscle spasms, fatigue, asthenia, malaise, fall, laceration, dehydration, dysgeusia, hypersomnia, paresthesia, blurred vision, retching, hyperhidrosis, rhinorrhea, muscle weakness, palpitations, supraventricular extrasystole, flushing, and hypotension.

**Storage and Handling**: Galantamine, both immediate-release tablets and extended-release capsules, should be stored at 77 degrees F. Temperature excursions are permitted between 59 degrees F to 86 degrees F. They should be kept out of the reach of children.

**Drug interactions**: Use with Anticholinergics: Anticholinergic medications can interfere with the pharmacological actions of a cholinergic agent, galantamine.

Use with cholinomimetics and other Cholinesterase Inhibitors: A synergistic effect is expected when galantamine, a cholinesterase inhibitor, is given concurrently with other cholinesterase inhibitors cholinergic agonists such as bethanechol, succinylcholine, and similar neuromuscular blocking agents.

Galantamine elimination involves multiple metabolic pathways and renal excretion. No single pathway is predominant. According to in vitro studies, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 are the major enzymes associated with galantamine metabolism. Galantamine is also glucuronidated in the liver and excreted unchanged in the urine.

**Effect of Other Drugs on Galantamine**

Ketoconazole and erythromycin are known CYP3A4 Inhibitors, and when administered along with galantamine, the clearance of the galantamine reduces.

Ketoconazole, paroxetine, amitriptyline, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, and quinidine, all of which inhibit CYP2D6, and when galantamine is concurrently administered, the oral bioavailability of galantamine increases.

When H2-receptor antagonist cimetidine and galantamine are co-administered, galantamine bioavailability increases.

Drugs commonly known to induce hepatic cytochrome P450 CYP 3A4 or CYP 2D6 enzymes, such as carbamazepine phenytoin, phenobarbital, rifampin, and dexamethasone, will accelerate the metabolism of galantamine.

Multiple doses of galantamine at 24 mg/day has no effect on the steady-state pharmacokinetics of digoxin (at a dose of 0.375 mg once daily), but hospitalization of the patient for second and complete heart block have been reported, R- and     S-warfarin (administered in a single dose of 25 mg) or on the increased prothrombin time induced by warfarin. The protein binding of warfarin was unaffected by galantamine.

Memantine, an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist, when co-administered at a dose of 10 mg twice a day, does not affect the pharmacokinetics of oral galantamine at 16 mg per day at a steady state. The combination of galantamine-Memantine is superior to donepezil-memantine combined formulation in the treatment of Alzheimer disease.

In vitro studies show that galantamine did not inhibit the metabolic pathways catalyzed by CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP3A4, CYP4A, CYP2C, CYP2D6, or CYP2E1. This indicates that the inhibitory potential of galantamine towards the major forms of cytochrome P450 is very low.

Galantamine is vagotonic and causes cardio inhibition. Antihypertensive agents such as beta-blockers (acebutolol), alpha and beta-blockers (carvedilol), and calcium channel blockers (diltiazem) also have the potential to cause an atrioventricular block and bradycardia. When galantamine is used along with these drugs, they have the potential to cause an additive bradycardic effect. ACE inhibitors such as ramipril neither affect the pharmacokinetics nor interact with galantamine in any way, and they can be safely administered with galantamine.