MDD can be treated in a number of ways, including counseling, medications, support programs, psychoeducation about the illness, lifestyle changes including diet, exercise, meditation, or a combination of these approaches. The best treatment for an individual depends on how severe the depression is and other considerations, such as the teen’s life situation, other health conditions, and preferences for treatment. Determining the best approach to care should be a shared decision between the clinician, the teen, and their parents. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are commonly prescribed antidepressants that have been studied in children. While initiating antidepressants, appropriate monitoring and observation are needed.

Suicide is among the most common sentinel events reported to the Joint Commission. Provision for a safe environment, careful screening and assessment, optimal patient visibility, appropriate patient supervision, proper clinical treatment are some of the strategies to reduce suicide risk in the inpatient unit. Mental Health Environment of Care checklist has been used in VA hospitals to reduce suicide hazards. Different levels of observational supervision of suicidal patients have been used for monitoring. Various clinical pathways and guidelines have been developed for risk assessment and appropriate interventions.

The National Suicide Prevention Lifeline provides resources for suicide prevention. Suicidal ideation should be taken seriously. Healthcare professionals who are not comfortable with suicide assessment and management should seek consultation with a mental health professional. School-based screening programs can identify children and adolescents with mood disorders. More research on outcomes will be helpful to assess the efficacy of screening and interventions.