Throughout the formation and birth of a human being, numerous problems may potentially arise. Below is a summary of some of the most common and clinically relevant issues that may exist at birth.

- Cephalohematoma

- Caput succedaneum

- Transient head molding

- Bulging fontanelles (increased intracranial pressure)

- Brachial plexus injuries/facial nerve palsy

- Subgaleal hemorrhage

- Clavicle fracture

- Conjunctivitis

- Torticollis

- Club foot

- Hip dysplasia

- Neural tube defects

- Cleft lip/palate

- Choanal atresia

- Hirschsprung disease

**Vitamin K Deficiency Bleeding**

All newborns are vitamin K deficient, as vitamin K does not cross the placenta, is not in breast milk, and is not produced by the newborn's gut. Due to this lack of vitamin K, newborns are deficient in vitamin-K-dependent clotting factors, placing them at risk of bleeding and fatal hemorrhage. A vitamin K injection should be given at birth to prevent this from occurring. Those newborns that do not receive this injection are at risk of intracranial, subgaleal, or gastrointestinal bleeding.

**Metabolism and Thermoregulation**

As their brown adipose tissue has not developed enough to provide an adequate heat response, preterm infants are at a specific disadvantage regarding thermoregulation. To aid in the thermoregulation of infants, specifically those preterm, important steps should be taken. First, immediately after delivery, the newborn should be dried several times using warm cloths. The newborn should be placed in a bed warmer that utilizes convection to warm the bed and the air surrounding the infant. In addition, some preterm infants would specifically benefit from an incubator, a crib-like unit enclosed by a plastic dome, to aid in increasing the humidity and reducing cold external airflow.

**Newborn Nutrition**

Before birth, the fetus derives most of its energy from the glucose obtained from the mother's blood. Following birth, the amount of glucose stored in the newborn's body as liver and muscle glycogen is sufficient to supply the newborn needs for only a few hours. The liver at birth is still not functionally adequate to undergo gluconeogenesis, so the glucose concentration falls as low as 30 to 40 mg/dl of plasma, which is less than half the normal value. The infant uses its stored fats and proteins for metabolism until the mother's milk can be provided 2 or 3 days later. The infant's weight decreases 5 to 10%, as much as 20%, within the first 2 or 3 days of life. Most of this weight loss is from fluid rather than body solids. There are specific vitamins and minerals that an infant needs to ensure proper growth and development.

- Calcium and vitamin D

- Rapid ossification of bones at birth means a supply of calcium in infancy is necessary. However, calcium absorption in the GI tract is poor in the absence of vitamin D. Therefore, within only a few weeks, severe rickets can develop in infants with vitamin D deficiency. This is of particular concern in premature babies, as their GI tracts absorb calcium even less effectively than term infants.

- Iron

- If the mother obtains adequate iron in her diet, the infant's liver has typically stored enough iron to keep forming blood cells for 4-6 months after birth. Insufficient iron in the mother's diet can lead to severe anemia in the infant after about three months of life.

- Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)

- Required for the proper formation of bone and cartilage but is not stored in significant quantities in the fetal tissues. Unless she has severe vitamin C deficiency, adequate amounts are typically present in the mother's breast milk. It is important to note that cow's milk has 1/4 the amount of vitamin C as human milk and is not recommended in the newborn period.

**Immunity**

Before birth, the antibodies from the mother diffuse through the placenta into the fetus. After birth, a newborn is not able to form antibodies of its own to any significant extent, and by the end of the first month of life, the newborn's antibodies have decreased to less than half of their level at birth, which correlates to a decrease in the immunity of the newborn. However, the antibodies obtained from the mother before birth can protect the infant from most infectious diseases for around six months. This includes protection from measles, polio, and diphtheria. This is why newborns do not need vaccination against these diseases immediately after birth. However, at birth, newborns should receive a vaccination against hepatitis B. It is essential to understand that maternally inherited antibodies do not protect the infant against pertussis (whooping cough), so immunization against this disease is recommended at two months of life. At around 12 to 20 months of life, the infant's immune system forms its own antibodies. It is recommended that children should receive a combination vaccination against diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis (DTaP) at ages 2, 4, 6, and 15 months; and then again at 4 to 6 years of age.