OFD is rare, and because most of the published literature is limited to case reports and small case series, definitive management recommendations are difficult to establish, and the management continues to be controversial. Because it is a benign lesion that seldom progresses during childhood and never progresses after skeletal maturity, some surgeons recommend observation without surgical intervention other than obtaining a biopsy. Bracing may be indicated to minimize deformity and prevent fracture. Surgical intervention in OFD (e.g., curettage or excision) before puberty may result in a high recurrence incidence. Surgical intervention is reserved for massive or deforming lesions or pathological fractures.

Many lesions behave in a benign manner and may remain asymptomatic. As noted, pathological fractures may occur, or the deformity may be significant enough to interfere with walking. Some progressive cases may lead to bone defects, requiring surgical intervention. Among surgical options, both curettage and localized subperiosteal excision carry the risk of recurrence, while radical excision and reconstruction may create additional morbidity such as pseudarthrosis. Furthermore, pathologic fractures may need surgical intervention.

Any correction of deformity will, of course, require surgical intervention and is usually performed after skeletal maturity. The surgical options for OFD mainly include focused curettage and bone grafting with or without external fixation. Curettage is considered the most standard treatment method for benign lesions, as well as aggressive lesions. However, the bone cavity created after curettage often needs to be filled with graft, such as acrylic cement or bone grafts, to restore its mechanical stability.

A more aggressive surgical approach for OFD is extraperiosteal resection. In one review of 16 patients diagnosed with OFD on initial biopsy, three ultimately were diagnosed with OFD-like AD or classic AD based on evaluation of the resection specimen. Thus, the authors' concluded that because of the risk of sampling error and the theory that OFD could progress to AD, all OFD lesions should be treated aggressively. An extraperiosteal approach was recommended because intralesional treatment usually is inadequate, resulting in local recurrence. However, others feel that a larger biopsy would have shown AD allowing differentiation of OFD from AD. Most authors think that the benign nature of OFD is well established and that as long as the diagnosis is correct, observation and symptomatic treatment are adequate.

The treatment for OFD-like adamantinoma is not well established due to the scarcity of cases. Careful observation and symptomatic treatment have been suggested. Surgery does not increase the risk of recurrence or the development of metastases. The aggressive nature of OFD-like adamantinoma compared to OFD is noticed not only histologically and radiologically but also clinically, especially the degree of pain.