Diagnosing and managing nonketotic hyperglycinemia require an interprofessional team approach that includes clinicians (including mid-level practitioners), nursing staff, and pharmacists to avoid complications like underrecognition of clinical seizures and ensure that early and proper diagnostic testing is performed. Referral to critical care services (neonatal or pediatric) should be performed early to place the patient under the care of neurocritical care experts and to ensure that the patient is stabilized from a neurocritical care standpoint.

- The pediatric neurologist should be consulted to evaluate the patient and confirm the diagnosis of seizures.

- A metabolic specialist should be consulted to ensure that the patient receives an appropriate evaluation and initiation of therapy.

- Genetic counseling specialists that the patient’s parents should be referred to determine the genetic risk for medical and personal reasons.

- Pediatric palliative care specialists should be consulted in cases of patients with severe nonketotic hyperglycinemia, as these children have a poor neurologic prognosis, and families might need to get help for a difficult decision to be made about withdrawing critical care support.

Nurses will be crucial in coordinating care between the various clinicians. In cases where anti-epileptic medications are necessary, the pharmacist will consult with clinicians to determine optimal dosing and agent selection and perform medication reconciliation. With this integrated and interprofessional coordination, timely and directed care coordination can improve patient outcomes. [Level 5]