Histological findings in the setting of acute MI are as follows;

- Characteristic histological features within the first 24 hours of insult include; coagulation necrosis of cardiomyocyte, neutrophilic infiltration, accumulation of RBCs in the interstitial spaces and interstitial edema. Eosinophilic appearing ischemic cardiomyocytes with loss of the cross-striations and loss of the nuclei. Within the next 24 to 48 hours, coagulative necrosis establishes completely. After 3 to 5 days, there is a loss of myocyte nuclei and striations in the central portion of the infarct. By 5 to 7 days, macrophages and fibroblasts appear. At 1 week, the number of neutrophils starts to decline, and granulation tissue establishes with lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration.

- Healing continues and, may be complete as early as 4 weeks or may require 8 weeks or longer to complete depending on the extent of necrosis. Sometimes, borders of larger infarct heal leaving the central area unhealed with mummified myocyte for extended periods.

- If reperfusion occurs early within 4 to 6 hours, there is a possibility that infarct would be sub-endocardial without transmural extension. Macrophages appear by day 2 to 3, and by day 3 to 5 fibroblast appears, with early signs of healing.  As compared with that of non-reperfused infarcts, subendocardial infarcts heal early. They may undergo full healing as few as in 2 to 3 weeks. While some larger infarcts and those who take longer to be reperfused, beyond 6 hours show extensive areas of hemorrhage.