First responders perform prehospital stroke assessments to identify potential stroke patients quickly. There are many assessments; however, the most common one is the Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Assessment, which assesses facial droop, arm drift, and speech. A last known well time should be obtained, which documents the last time a patient was observed at their baseline health to better triage eligible patients to transfer patients to primary or comprehensive stroke centers. At these centers, a neurologist performs a rapid initial assessment using the National Institute of Health’s Stroke Scale to localize strokes and document an initial standardized exam to monitor progression. This scale ranges from 0 to 42 and includes categories that assess the level of consciousness, best gaze, visual field, facial palsy, motor function in each limb, limb ataxia, sensation, language, dysarthria, extinction, and neglect.

A non-contrast CT of the head or brain MRI should be performed within 20 minutes of initial presentation to evaluate for intracranial hemorrhage. Vessel angiography using either a CT or MR scanner is obtained of the head and neck to evaluate for potential large vessel occlusion, which could be manually removed through a procedure known as thrombectomy to revascularize tissue at risk of ischemia. Hospitals without this imaging modality are recommended to call a teleradiology service to contact a stroke neurologist for advice on administering thrombolytics and further workup.

Blood glucose should be tested to rule out hypoglycemia as a cause of neurological deficits. Other workups will include a complete blood count and metabolic panel, troponin, and coagulation factors. An echocardiogram should be performed to rule out simultaneous cardiac disease.