**Rathke’s Pouch**

Any remnants of Rathke’s pouch can produce mass effect signs and symptoms. Rathke’s cleft cysts can accumulate fluid and start to expand allowing compression of nearby structures. Vestigial remnants of the pouch can also form craniopharyngiomas. These are benign tumors that are slow-growing and are seen in very young or in the very old. These benign tumors are superseller. They are mostly cystic but can be solid and encapsulated. Two forms of craniopharyngiomas are seen. The first is an adamantinomatous form which contains calcifications and projections into the adjacent brain tissue. These projections can cause an intense inflammatory reaction. The second form, the papillary form, lacks the calcification and cysts and much more approachable surgically.

**Tumors**

Tumors of the pituitary gland are common. Majorities arise from the adenohypophysis and are usually nonsecretory adenomas that are benign.

Pituitary adenomas can be classified as microadenomas (less than 1 cm) or macroadenomas (greater than 1 cm). It is the macroadenomas that have a mass effect on the adjacent structures. If the pituitary gland itself is compressed, it can cause hypopituitarism. A macroadenoma can also cause the compression of the optic chiasm which would result in bitemporal hemianopsia. Headaches, cranial nerve palsies, and hydrocephalus due to blockage of the outflow of the third ventricle.

The majority of secretory adenomas would secrete a single hormone. It is only a very few (1% to 2%) of these adenomas would secrete two or more hormones. An example of a common dual hormone secretion would be growth hormone and prolactin.

The most common secretory adenoma would be prolactinomas. The bigger the secretory prolactin adenoma, the more hormone production there is. Prolactinomas can present with galactorrhea but may not always be present. The second most common secretory adenoma is growth hormone-secreting adenomas. This would be followed by ACTH secreting adenomas, gonadotrophic adenomas (LH and FSH), and thyrotroph tumors.

**Hyperprolactinemia**

Hyperprolactinemia can be related to hypersecretion due to a prolactinoma, or it can be due to a “stalk effect.” The hypothalamus usually secretes dopamine, and it is transported via the pituitary stalk to the adenohypophysis. In the adenohypophysis, the dopamine inhibits the lactotrophs from secreting prolactin. The transport of dopamine can be disrupted in two ways. A large macroadenoma with suprasellar extension would cause this "stalk effect." There would be a disruption in the transport of dopamine. Head trauma would also cause a stalk effect. Lactotroph hyperplasia would develop without dopamine inhibition.

**Lymphocytic Hypophysitis**

Lymphocytic hypophysitis is an inflammatory disorder that would typically present during or right after pregnancy. It is believed to be caused by an autoimmune process. Sarcoidosis (systemic inflammatory disease) can affect the pituitary as well but has to be differentiated from tuberculosis and syphilis.

**Empty Sella Syndrome**

It is during radiological imaging that the sella turcica may appear empty due to a flattened or shrunken pituitary gland.

Primary Empty Sella syndrome: There is chronic intracranial hypertension along with a defect in the diaphragm sella. This would allow intradural contents to herniate into the Sella allowing there to be compression of the gland. Endocrine abnormalities would result in causing hypopituitarism and even visual symptoms of mass effect. This condition is most commonly seen in obese women with multiple pregnancies.

Secondary Empty Sella syndrome: A variety of problems can cause this condition. These can range from injury and trauma, treated pituitary tumors, infections, surgery in the pituitary region, or even Sheehan syndrome. This too can cause endocrine abnormalities.

**Sheehan Syndrome**

This occurs due to the infarction of the pituitary gland due to hypovolemia caused by obstetric hemorrhage. Usually, clinical manifestation occurs in the form of the absence of milk production. The pituitary function can further decline over time.

**Pituitary Apoplexy**

This is a life-threatening syndrome that calls for immediate neurosurgical treatment. There would be a sudden onset of visual dysfunction, severe headache, and pituitary insufficiency. This would call for immediate neurosurgical involvement.

**Genetic Disorders**

One of the common genetic disorders that are encountered in clinical practice is multiple endocrine neoplasia-1 (MEN-1).PIT1 gene would cause deficiencies in GH, PRL, and TSH.

**Developmental Abnormalities**

Pituitary function failure can result from developmental abnormalities that would lead to a decrease or total failure of pituitary hormone failure.

Holoprosencephaly: During embryonic development, there is an abnormality in the development of the fetal forebrain.  The result of this would lead to abnormal hypothalamus with associated facial dysmorphism. Facial abnormalities could include cleft palate, absent nasal septum, and widely spaced eyes.

Septo-optic dysplasia: There is either absence of or hypoplasia of the optic chiasm, optic nerves, and the agenesis or hypoplasia of the septum pellucidum; corpus callosum.

Transcription factor mutations: Any mutations in the transcription factors (for example, PIT1) would lead to developmental abnormalities in the formation and differentiation of the pituitary gland.

**Idiopathic Hypopituitarism**

Other causes: Other causes can cause the pituitary gland to fail in the secretion of its hormones. Many conditions that can affect the pituitary can be trauma, inflammation (bacterial, viral, or fungal), and radiation to the brain and hypothalamus. The effect of radiation depends on the age at which radiation and the dose of radiation.