Chancroid predominantly affects younger sexually active individuals in the 21 to 30-year-old age group. This group reflects a large proportion of career sex workers and the typical younger male population in developing countries that partake of their services. An asymptomatic carrier state has been noted among women, potentially allowing for the unsuspected transmission of the disease.

The incubation period is typically 4 to 10 days after experiencing a minor trauma or microabrasion during sex. Common sites of infection in men are the corona, prepuce, or glans of the penis. In women, common sites frequently noted are the labia, introitus, and perianal areas.

Typically, an erythematous papule develops at the site of inoculation, which quickly becomes a pustule and subsequently develops into an extremely painful ulcer with soft irregular margins, often referred to as a "soft chancre." Multiple ulcers may be noted either as a result of multiple areas of microtrauma or as a result of direct contact between two adjacent areas resulting in "kissing ulcers." The ulcer typically has a friable base with yellow-gray exudate, which easily bleeds when abraded and varies in size, typically from 1 to 2 cm. Left untreated, the lesion spontaneously resolves within 1 to 3 months.

Tender, often unilateral, regional lymphadenopathy develops in approximately 50% of infected individuals. Approximately 25% of these individuals within 1 to 2 weeks of the presenting papule will progress to manifest suppurative buboes, which may spontaneously rupture. Left untreated, these suppurative regional lymph nodes may become superinfected, leading to deep tissue destruction and disfigurement of external genitalia.