Tolosa Hunt syndrome is diagnosed through the clinical presentation, neuroimaging studies, and response to steroids. Laboratory tests and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies are supportive tests but help in ruling out other causes of ophthalmoplegia. Tissue biopsy is diagnostic but is considered the procedure of the last choice and rarely performed, given high risk and technical difficulties.

**International Headache Society (IHS) Diagnostic Criteria**

Tolosa Hunt Syndrome also finds a place in the IHS Classification ICHD-3 Beta, in part three, under Painful cranial neuropathies and other facial pains. The IHS lays down diagnostic criteria for THS which have high sensitivity (approximately 95% to 100%) but low specificity (approximately 50%).

- Unilateral headache

- Includes both of the following:

- Presence of granulomatous inflammation of the cavernous sinus, superior orbital fissure or orbit, as seen on MRI or biopsy

- Palsies of one or more of the oculomotor nerves (cranial nerves III, IV, and/or VI) on the same side

- Corroboration of the cause as evidenced by both of the following:

- Palsies of cranial nerves III, IV, and/or VI have followed headache in two weeks or less, or have developed simultaneously with a headache

- Localization of a headache around the eye on the same side

- Not better explained by any other headache etiology

**Neuroimaging**

MRI brain with contrast, especially the coronal view, is a crucial diagnostic study. It helps exclude other disease processes that produce painful ophthalmoplegia as it is rarely normal in cases of Tolosa Hunt syndrome. MRI can show thickening of the cavernous sinus because of the presence of abnormal soft tissue which is isointense on T1, iso or hypointense on T2, and enhances with contrast. Other MRI findings include convexity of the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus, extension into the orbital apex. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) can also show changes in the soft tissue, but lacks sensitivity. Thus, MRI should be performed for better visualization of the region of the cavernous sinus and/or superior orbital fissure. MRI findings have low specificity, and above-mentioned findings can also be found in lymphoma, meningioma, and sarcoidosis.

**Other Tests**

When there is suspicion of Tolosa Hunt syndrome on clinical presentation and MRI, blood and CSF studies should be performed to rule out other causes of painful ophthalmoplegia (see Other Issues at the end of discussion); as Tolosa Hunt syndrome remains a clinical diagnosis of exclusion.

**Glucocorticoid Response**

Glucocorticoid response finds mention here as it helps with diagnosis as well as treatment. Treating with high doses of systemic steroids leads to a dramatic improvement in pain within two to three days. Cranial nerve dysfunction improves, and there is a reduction in abnormal tissue volume as well as signal intensity on MRI over the next few weeks of steroid treatment.