Epidemiology can be broken down into two types: descriptive and analytic. Typically, descriptive epidemiology precedes analytic epidemiology. Descriptive epidemiology aims to develop foundational knowledge regarding the health event in focus. This data can include rates of occurrences, populations affected, timing, and geographic-specific presentations of a health event. By studying population-specific characteristics, epidemiologists can start learning about the natural history, modes of transmission, risk factors, and even disparities of a health event that is present within a community. Descriptive epidemiology also utilizes information from continuous public health surveillance and ultimately initiates the process of developing hypotheses and directing field investigations to develop effective and informed analytic studies. For example, in a breast cancer study, incidence and prevalence rates may be observed in different countries and in different age groups to learn about its etiologies, risk factors, and potential preventative measures.

Analytic epidemiology, on the other hand, builds from descriptive epidemiology. As hypotheses arise in descriptive epidemiology, analytic epidemiology aims to test its validity. It seeks to uncover potential associations and any other contributors between factors and outcomes using a control group. This hypothesis testing is possible via experimentation or observation. Experimental studies usually involve clinical trials within a controlled process; this includes using randomization procedures, implementations of placebos, and counterbalancing measures to counteract any potential confounding variables or bias. The overarching goal of experimental studies is to establish a causal relationship between an exposure and an outcome. For example, in a parasitic infection study, the exposure would be the parasites, and the outcome would be host survival or host extinction.

On the other hand, observational studies detect the onset of an outcome between those exposed and those not exposed, as well as any potentially related variables, with the hopes of determining associations. There are three types of observational studies: cohort, case-control, and cross-sectional. Cohort studies observe both exposed and non-exposed individuals and record the number of outcomes between the two groups over a designated amount of time. In these observations, if the outcomes are higher in those exposed than non-exposed (control), then an association can be inferred. For example, in a study of obesity risk factors, over 8000 children were followed until 7 years of age. The primary outcome observed was the development of obesity (BMI over the 95th percentile). In this study, risk factors associated with an increased likelihood of developing obesity were found to include: parental obesity, early body mass index rebound, more than eight hours watching television per week at age three, catch-up growth, short sleep duration, and weight gain in the first year.

Case-control studies involve a more retrospective approach, wherein the rates of exposures in individuals who present with the outcome get compared with those that do not (control). If there are more individuals exposed who also have the outcome of interest in these observations, then an association can be inferred. For example, in a study of running-related injuries, it was found that people who have been active for less than 8.5 years and women with a BMI of less than 21 kg/m^2  were at a higher likelihood of developing tibial injuries.

Lastly, cross-sectional studies focus more on a specific time-point than a more extended period, leading to data showing the prevalence or incidence of an outcome after an exposure. However, this format does not offer as much information as the first two types of observational studies and is usually better suited when focusing on the descriptive epidemiology of a larger population. For example, in a study of medical student mental health, students in their first, third, and sixth years of education were surveyed. The study showed that first-year students identified workload and lack of feedback as stressors. Third-year students identified "competence worries" as a stressor, and sixth-year students rated lack of support as a stressor.

Interventions are also monitored during implementation and evaluated for efficacy, efficiency, impact, cost-effectiveness, and potential for improvement. Two important outcome measures are morbidity and mortality. Changes within these two measures can indicate not only the severity of a health event but also serve as one of the litmus tests for the responses that epidemiologists may take. Morbidity and mortality measures can be gathered using either descriptive or analytic epidemiology and can undergo stratification into various subcategories, such as perinatal, neonatal, infant, and maternal morbidity mortalities, to name a few. Morbidity and mortality can also be stratified by age, race,  ethnicity, sex, gender, nationality, and socioeconomic status, which provide an opportunity to uncover group-specific susceptibilities or exposures within a population.

These subcategories provide great insight into the health of the population and highlight any group that may be disproportionately affected. For example, a review of infant mortality in the United States from 1950 to 2010 showed that while infant mortality has substantially decreased in the past four decades, the disparity between African Americans and Whites has progressively increased, further worsened by education and income inequities.