The main drugs used for hookworm infections are mebendazole and albendazole. Data support 400 mg single-dose albendazole therapy over a 500 mg single dose of mebendazole. Three consecutive daily doses of either drug demonstrate superior cure and egg reduction rates, but it is less convenient for mass treatment campaigns. Alternatively, a 3-day regimen of 100 mg twice daily, mebendazole, is suitable for stable uncomplicated cases. Also, pyrantel pamoate 11 mg/kg (up to a maximum of 1 g) orally daily for three days could be an option.

A systematic meta-analysis showed that the efficacy of single-dose oral albendazole, mebendazole, and pyrantel pamoate against hookworm infections was 72% (95% CI, 59%-81%; 742 patients), 15% (95% CI, 1%-27%; 853 patients), and 31% (95% CI, 19%-42%; 152 patients).

Treatment efficacy varies according to the severity of infection, geographical distribution, and age groups. Both mebendazole and albendazole are usually safe with few transient side effects such as dizziness, headache, and abdominal upset.

Pregnant and lactating women have an increased risk of anemia from hookworm infections. Albendazole and mebendazole were both pregnancy category C under the prior FDA system; data on their use in pregnant women are limited. It is not known whether albendazole or mebendazole gets excreted in human milk. While albendazole requires caution in breastfeeding, the WHO allows the use of mebendazole in lactating women.

Treatment failure can occur. Although the etiology is unclear, repeated use of the same medication raises the question of drug resistance. Pyrantel pamoate and levamisole are alternative treatments, but neither has equal efficacy with albendazole.

Cutaneous larvae migrans is usually self-limited and confined to the skin. However, treatment is sometimes needed, and it responds well to oral albendazole or ivermectin.

Coadministration of deworming and iron supplementation has a greater impact on anemia, especially in nutritionally deficient populations. In a study of 746 school children, multi-nutrient supplements along with anthelminthic medications increased Hb, irrespective of initial Hb and nutritional status.

Blood transfusion might be necessary for patients with severe anemia. Nutritional support and frequent monitoring of response are indicated in severely affected individuals. ****

There is no sufficient available data to guide long term monitoring of treatment. As the failure of treatment and reinfection are real threats, we suggest that follow up of clinical symptoms and anemia and stool testing would be advised. A follow up at 1, 4, and 12 months seems to be appropriate in this context.****