**Serum Markers of Bone Formation**

Evidence of bone formation is indicated by the presence of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bone alkaline phosphatase (B-ALP), osteocalcin (OC), and C- and N-terminal propeptide of type 1 procollagen (PICP and PINP). ALP is specific for bone formation, but only if the patient has no bile duct or liver disease. B-ALP is a specific product from osteoblast cells. OC is another specific osteoblast product, and there can be several active types. PICP and PINP are products of proliferating fibroblasts and osteoblasts.

**Analytical Method**

- ALP = colorimetry

- B-ALP = colorimetry, electrophoresis, immunoradiometric assay (IRMA), enzyme immunoassay (EIA)

- OC = radioimmunoassay (RIA), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), IRMA, electrochemiluminescence immunoassay (ECLIA)

- PICP and PINP = RIA, ELISA

**Serum Markers of Bone Resorption**

Bone resorption markers include, but are not limited to, hydroxyproline (OHP), pyridinoline (PYD), deoxypyridinoline (DPD), bone sialoprotein (BSP), and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TR-ACP). OHP is a significant part of protein collagen and plays a role in collagen stability. PYD has high concentrations of bone collagen and cartilage but is not present in the skin. Unlike PYD, DPD is highly concentrated in bone collagen but is absent in cartilage and skin. BSP is made by osteoblasts and is present in the extracellular bone matrix. Osteoclasts, thrombocytes, and erythrocytes make TR-ACP.

**Analytical Method**

- OHP = colorimetry, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)

- PYD = HPLC, ELISA

- DPD = HPLC, ELISA

- BSP = RIA, ELISA

- TR-ACP = colorimetry, RIA, ELISA

**Imaging Techniques**

Bone Scintigraphy: nuclear medicine is used to diagnose various conditions such as primary bone cancer or metastasis, fractures, infection, and inflammatory processes. This imaging technique utilizes a gamma camera and requires an injection of technetium-99m-MDP to identify metabolically active regions of bone. This imaging technique highlights portions of bones with changes in bone turnover and perfusion rates.

Dual-energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DEXA): two X-ray beams of different energy levels are used to determine the amount of energy absorbed by bones (once soft tissue absorption is subtracted). This technique is used to follow osteoporosis progression, where bone resorption activity has out-paced bone mineralization.