Lifestyle medicine is used in primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention models to prevent both mental and physical illness. Primary prevention may include informational handouts and self-assessment questionnaires to get patients thinking about how their lifestyle choices impact their health and encourage them to ask their provider about how to make improvements.

Secondary intervention could include discussing questionnaire results with the patients and following up to develop concrete patient goals. At this level, risk factors and stressors in the patient's life are identified and addressed, along with potential subclinical depression and anxiety. The patient may be recommended for lifestyle modifications and given referrals to support organizations and contact persons.

Tertiary prevention consists of a formal lifestyle management plan and any medication or psychotherapy a patient may already be utilizing. The patient's self-assessment results would then also be part of ongoing monitoring for the efficacy of the prescribed treatment.

Lifestyle changes take time and personal commitment, but a community of like-minded individuals can increase adherence through accountability. A health coach can also be a touchpoint for ongoing motivation. 'Health coaching' refers to a diverse set of behavior change interventions, ranging from motivational interviewing and brief interventions, all to help the patient set goals and make changes.

It can be facilitated by any number of different people, including but not limited to clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), peers, volunteers, nurses, case workers, and social workers, all operating as a cohesive, interprofessional healthcare team. For patients who struggle with adherence to lifestyle medicine recommendations, a referral to behavioral health (e.g., a health psychologist or psychiatrist) may address the barriers interfering with meeting health goals. Telehealth can also be an effective tool for those with mobility barriers or who need to travel a long distance to meet in person.