Antibiotic therapy for the treatment of vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus depends on the type of infection and drug susceptibility of the organism or organisms involved. In monomicrobial infections, the antibiotic choice should be tailored to tissue for penetration, culture, and local resistance patterns. Moreover, treatment can be controversial as vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus often can be found as a colonizer in polymicrobial infections. Initiation of vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus coverage should be initiated based on clinical suspicion or failure of prior antibiotic regimens.

The vast majority of enterococcal infections are due to E. faecalis. E. faecalis tends to be susceptible to beta-lactams and aminoglycosides. Vancomycin resistance is more frequent in undifferentiated E. faecalis than resistance to aminopenicillins, stressing that beta-lactams should remain the first choice in most infections before culture data. Conversely, most strains of E. faecium are highly resistant to beta-lactams and aminoglycosides. In general, if vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus is highly resistant to other antimicrobial therapies; the two major treatments are linezolid and daptomycin. A meta-analysis of these two therapies has shown that the overall mortality, clinical cure, microbiological cure, and relapse rate were not significantly different. Importantly, the most common genotypic causes of vancomycin resistance are VanA and VanB which are inducible resistance genes. As a result, patients with initially vancomycin sensitive isolates that do not respond to treatment should be re-cultured.

If vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus is isolated and highly susceptible, therapy should be narrowed. For UTIs, monotherapy with high dose ampicillin, 18 to 30 g/day intravenous (IV), should be started. If the UTI is uncomplicated but resistant to ampicillin, then nitrofurantoin 100 mg per os (PO) twice a day or fosfomycin 3g PO single dose are the preferred agents. However, it is important to note that UTIs could be secondary to colonization and removal of the catheter could be therapeutic. For bacteremia, monotherapy with ampicillin often can be used as well. However, this does not provide bactericidal activity, so an aminoglycoside such as gentamycin can usually be added. Ampicillin with ceftriaxone is an alternative regimen as it has similar efficacy to ampicillin and gentamycin but is less nephrotoxic.

If sensitivities are not available, or for high levels of resistance to beta-lactams or aminoglycosides, linezolid, 600 mg PO or IV twice a day, can be used. A synthetic oxazolidinone antibiotic, this is a bacteriostatic drug that binds to the ribosome, preventing peptide bond formation. For endocarditis, linezolid has been shown to be an effective first-line medication, although it is a bacteriostatic drug. Adverse effects, especially after prolonged use, include thrombocytopenia, anemia, peripheral neuropathy, and risk of inducing serotonin syndrome. Alternatives should be considered with patients who regularly take serotonergic medications.

Another alternative is an off-label use of high dose daptomycin 8 to 12 mg/kg IV (with renal adjustment) once a day. A lipopeptide antibiotic, it is bactericidal and causes cell membrane depolarization. Importantly, if patients are persistently bacteremic or the minimum inhibitory concentration is high for daptomycin, then combination therapy with ampicillin or ceftaroline can be used. Patients should be evaluated for myopathy, and weekly creatine kinase levels should be obtained. Furthermore, daptomycin is not effective on pulmonary infections as surfactant inactivates it, but this is rarely a concern with vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus because enterococcal pneumonia is exceedingly rare.

Tigecycline, a glycylcycline antibiotic, can be used for patients who are intolerant to other agents. It also can be used if other infections are present with the vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus as it has good coverage against gram positives, some gram negatives, and anaerobes. Although it is off-label, it is specifically considered a preferred agent for polymicrobial intraabdominal infections. It should not be used for vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus bacteremia as it distributes primarily to tissues and achieves low serum concentrations. Typical dosing is 100 mg IV once followed by 50 mg IV twice a day. Patients should be monitored for major adverse effects such as nausea and vomiting.

Chloramphenicol, at 50 to 100 mg/kg/day divided into doses every 6 hours (4 g/day max dose), has been used successfully to treat vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus bacteremia for many years and has excellent tissue penetration, including the CNS. Due to its high incidence of toxicity and adverse effects, such as aplastic anemia or bone marrow suppression, it should not be used as a first-line agent when other options are available and should generally be initiated in consultation with an infectious-disease specialist. It remains an option in resource-poor environments where modern drugs may not be available.