There are six clinically relevant disorders. Since all six of these disorders result in increased ammonia and decreased urea in the blood, they each have the same clinical presentation.

Hyperammonemia is toxic to the brain and leads to encephalopathy, which can manifest as cerebral edema, vomiting, blurred vision, asterixis, and seizures. Excess ammonia will also result in the increased formation of glutamine. Recall that glutamine synthetase uses the reactants NH and glutamate to yield glutamine. Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter, and therefore decreased levels of glutamate will cause depressed neural activity, which manifests as lethargy or a comatose state. In addition, excess ammonia hinders the TCA cycle by causing alpha-ketoglutarate to form glutamate.

Here we will discuss the most common urea cycle disorders:

**Ornithine Transcarbamylase (OTC) Deficiency**

Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency is the only X-linked recessive enzyme deficiency in the urea cycle. It is also the most common enzyme deficiency in the urea cycle. This enzyme deficiency leads to increased levels of carbamoyl phosphate, which becomes shunted into the pyrimidine synthesis pathway once carbamoyl phosphate enters the cytoplasm. Carbamoyl phosphate is converted into orotic acid. Recall that orotic acid is the precursor of all pyrimidines. As a result, this deficiency will result in increased levels of orotic acid in the blood and urine. Orotic aciduria can manifest as orange crystals in diapers.

**Argininosuccinate Synthetase Deficiency**

This disorder is the second most common enzyme deficiency in the urea cycle and is autosomal recessive. Due to this enzyme deficiency, patients will have elevated levels of citrulline.

**Carbamoyl Phosphate Synthetase I (CPS I) Deficiency**

This disorder is also autosomal recessive but does not result in elevated orotic acid. CPS I deficiency is often fatal in infancy.

When a urea cycle enzyme deficiency is suspected, the key to identifying the source of the problem is based on the accumulation of metabolites. For example, OTC deficiency and CPS I deficiency both result in decrease urea and elevated ammonia; however, OTC deficiency will have elevated orotic acid levels, whereas CPS I deficiency will not. Another example, OTC deficiency, and hereditary orotic aciduria, both have elevated serum and urine orotic acid. One difference between these two conditions outside of their respective enzyme deficiencies is that OTC deficiency will have elevated ammonia levels, whereas hereditary orotic aciduria will not.