Radiographs are usually one of the first investigations performed in suspected pulmonary diseases. They have minimal radiation exposure making repeat imaging relatively safe.

There are various approaches to interpreting a chest radiograph, such as ABCDE (airway, breathing, circulation, disability, everything else) strategy, starting from the outside in strategy, or inside out strategy. After assessing whether a radiograph was taken in the posteroanterior (PA) or anteroposterior (AP) projection, it is important to be aware of the quality of the radiographs. One must check if the patient is rotated by comparing the distance of the medial ends of the clavicles from the midline and if there is adequate inspiratory effort. Ideally, one should be able to see 8-10 posterior ribs. With the use of digital imaging, penetration is not as pertinent anymore. These aspects are not as applicable in portable radiographs where the patients are usually acutely ill and difficult to position. Irrespective of the reading pattern, frequently missed regions on a radiograph need extra attention. These include the apices, retrosternal area, subdiaphragmatic region, hilum, soft tissue, and bones.

Airspace opacities are most commonly thought to reflect pneumonia, especially in the presence of air bronchograms, but can also be caused by atelectasis, hemorrhage, edema, aspiration, or even malignancies such as bronchoalveolar carcinoma. In such cases, the distribution of the pathology, comparison with prior imaging, and clinical presentation play an important role. Prominent interstitial markings on radiographs are seen in patients with interstitial lung diseases, or in patients with congestive heart failure (CHF) causing pulmonary edema. Some of the classic findings of CHF include cardiomegaly, Kerley B lines, cephalization of blood flow, prominent interstitial markings, and pleural effusions. Airfield assessment can also reveal masses, nodules, or suspicious pleural thickening, which warrant further investigation. Air trapping in patients with chronic obstructive diseases manifests as flattening of the diaphragm and retrosternal lucency. Pleural effusions can be seen as homogenous opacities on lateral radiographs with as little as 50mL fluid. On posteroanterior views, at least 200mL is required for diagnosing pleural effusions seen as blunting of the costophrenic angles with a concave meniscus. Effusions can also be loculated, and sometimes hard to distinguish from consolidations, in which case oblique views are helpful. Loculated pleural effusion along the fissures, also known as phantom tumors, can be transient and are commonly seen with congestive heart failure.

A pneumothorax is seen as a translucent area without lung markings beyond the pleural line. A large pleural effusion leads to tension pneumothorax. It is essential to check for signs of tension pneumothorax such as deviation of the trachea and mediastinum to the contralateral side. Pneumothorax can be quantified in different ways by measuring the distance from the chest wall to the pleural margin at the apex or at the level of the hilum. Pneumothoraces less than 2-3 cm are considered small and usually do not need treatment as long as the patient is stable.

Soft tissue assessment includes checking for subcutaneous emphysema. An important component of evaluating a chest radiograph is the evaluation of bony structures. Degenerative changes and vertebral wedge compression can be easily seen on radiographs. While incidental rib fractures can be identified on routine chest films, up to 50% rib fractures can be missed. Thus additional oblique projections should be obtained if rib fracture assessment is the primary goal of a study.