# Continuing Education Activity

Patent urachus refers to a spectrum of umbilical disorders that result from the failure of involution of normal embryologic tissues that connect the developing bladder to the umbilical cord. Similarly, presentation is variable and can be readily evident at birth with umbilical cord abnormalities or diagnosed later in adolescence with the complaint of persistent umbilical wetness or recurrent umbilical infection. Surgical management in the form of local exploration with excision versus a laparoscopic approach is generally undertaken, but conservative management is gaining traction. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of patent urachus and highlights the healthcare team's role in accurately evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the embryologic origin of a patent urachus.
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of a patent urachus.
- Review the management options available for patent urachus.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the diagnosis of patent urachus to improve time to potential intervention.

# Introduction

Patent urachus refers to one condition in a rare spectrum of disorders referred to as urachal anomalies. These conditions result from the failure of the involution of normal embryologic tissues that serve to empty the fetal bladder. The location and amount of persistent tissue dictate the presenting symptoms. Some of these urachal anomalies are obvious at birth, while others are more subtle and not diagnosed until adulthood or only incidentally discovered after imaging is obtained for other reasons. Historically, surgical resection of urachal anomalies was routinely undertaken, given the potential for malignancy in retained ectopic tissue.

# Etiology

During the fourth week of embryogenesis, the three-layered embryonic disk folds into a cylindrical shape.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of urachal anomaly is considered difficult to determine, as some have urachal anomalies that are asymptomatic or undiagnosed.

# Pathophysiology

The manifestations of a urachal anomaly depend on the location of the remnant tissue.patent urachus' results in a communication from the urinary bladder to the umbilicus, resulting in drainage of urine at the umbilicus, resultant dermatitis, and the potential for recurrent urinary tract infections. The presence of persistent tissue at the umbilicus without connection to the bladder can result in persistent umbilical drainage, dermatitis, and possible umbilical infection. A bladder diverticulum results when persistent tissue is connected to the bladder. A bladder diverticulum is typically of no consequence except in the instance when the diverticulum causes ureteral obstruction. A urachal cyst results when there is patency along the midportion of the urachus with the closure of the tract to both the umbilicus and bladder. Infection of the cyst can occur and result in abdominal or suprapubic pain with a palpable mass.

# Histopathology

A noted but rare complication of urachal anomalies is malignant degeneration.

# History and Physical

The average umbilical cord is 1.5 cm in diameter and 3.6 cm in circumference.

# Evaluation

In a newborn with visible umbilical cord abnormality, an ultrasound helps to delineate the diagnosis further.

# Treatment / Management

Patent urachus should be surgically resected, either by an open or laparoscopic approach, to avoid recurrent urinary tract infections and umbilical skin breakdown.

# Differential Diagnosis

When a large umbilical cord is observed at delivery, one should consider the potential for the containment of bowel, omphalomesenteric duct, patent urachus, or vascular anomaly.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of children with isolated urachal anomalies is excellent; however, the potential presence of posterior urethral valves should not be overlooked in infants with total patent urachus. It should also be noted that 25% to 30% of children with prune belly syndrome have patent urachus.

# Complications

With regards to patent urachus, recurrent urinary and umbilical infections can represent a significant cause of morbidity. While postoperative complications are rare, wound infection and dreaded intraperitoneal urinary leak can occur.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Some pediatric general surgeons place Foley catheters before every patient's urachus repair, while others forgo this step.

# Consultations

Consultation with a pediatric surgeon is required in patients with a suspected or confirmed urachal anomaly. In children with associated urinary tract abnormalities (i.e., posterior urethral valves), urology is routinely involved.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Families should be educated on the etiology of urachal anomalies. If diagnosed in infancy, the potential for other urinary defects (like posterior urethral valves) and the need for further workup should be discussed. The families of infants brought in for evaluation of umbilical wetness should be reassured that this likely represents self-limiting umbilical granulation tissue. In children with a clear diagnosis of a patent urachus, previously infected urachal cyst, or symptomatic urachal polyp or diverticulum, surgical resection and the expected recovery should be thoroughly reviewed. In children with incidentally discovered urachal anomalies for whom conservative management is being considered, the rare potential for the future development of cancer should be made clear.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Diagnosis of urachal anomalies can be elusive, but persistent umbilical drainage should raise the concern for a urachal anomaly. While this condition is typically found in isolation, the potential for posterior urethral valves in an infant with patent urachus should not be overlooked.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

While sometimes apparent at birth, patent urachus and other urachal anomalies may have a periodic, more insidious presentation. Frontline healthcare providers, like primary care providers and emergency department physicians, must the diagnosis of patent urachus or urachal remnant and their different presentations as part of the differential diagnosis of a child who is brought in for persistent umbilical drainage, recurrent urinary tract infections, recurrent umbilical infection, and/or a palpable mass near the umbilicus. When utilizing imaging modalities like ultrasound, a skilled sonographer and radiologist familiar with these diagnoses are critical. A pediatric general surgeon should be involved with any suspect urachal anomaly or when umbilical drainage initially thought to be an umbilical granuloma does not improve with silver nitrate application. Pediatric urology involvement may be necessary when other urologic abnormalities are diagnosed. Untreated urachal anomalies were historically thought to all inevitably degenerate into malignancy; however, this is now recognized as an extremely rare occurrence.