There are hundreds of laboratory tests ordered by physicians that help diagnose, follow-up, and prognosis of various diseases. Herein, we will focus on the most commonly reported groups of tests.

**Complete Blood Count (CBC)**

Common terms in CBC and their normal values are as follows

**Red Blood Cell (RBC) Count:**The number of RBCs per volume of blood (normal value: 4.2 to 6.9 x 109/mm3

**Hemoglobin (Hb):**Amount of oxygen-carrying capacity of blood (normal value: 130 to 180 g/L in males, 120 to 160 g/L in females)

**Hematocrit (Hct):**Percentage of whole blood occupied by packed RBCs (normal value: 45% to 62% in males, 37% to 48% in females)

**Mean Corpuscular Volume (MCV):**The measure of RBC size (normal value: 80 to 100 micromillimeter)

**Mean Corpuscular Hemoglobin (MCH):**Amount of oxygen-carrying hemoglobin inside RBCs (normal value: 27 to 32 pg/cell)

**Mean Corpuscular Hemoglobin Concentration (MCHC):**Average concentration of Hb inside RBCs (normal value: 32% to 36%)

**White Blood Cell (WBC) Count:**The number of WBCs per volume of blood (normal value: 4.3 to 11 x 109/mm3)

WBC differential:

- Neutrophils (normal value: 1.8 to 7.8 x 103/mm^3)

- Lymphocytes (normal value: 0.7 to 4.5 x 103/mm^3)

- Monocytes (normal value: 0.1 to 1.0 x 103/mm^3)

- Eosinophils (normal value: 0 to 0.4 x103/mm^3)

- Basophils (normal value: 0 to 0.2 x 103/mm^3)

**Platelet Count:**The number of platelets per volume of blood (normal value: 150 to 400 x 109/mm^3)

Reticulocytes: The number of immature RBCs in circulating blood (normal value: 1% of total RBC count)

**Peripheral Smear**

Peripheral smear gives information regarding abnormality in size, shape, color, counts, and composition (inclusions) of cells compared to normal.

**Coagulation Profile**

Commonly used tests for hemostasis are as follows.

**Platelet Count:**it gives an account of the number of platelets in the volume of blood (normal value: 150 to 400 x109/L). Low platelet count occurs in thrombocytopenia. It could be primary (isolated thrombocytopenia) without any other underlying cause, or it could be secondary with associated conditions such as HIV, HCV, SLE, CLL. Certain drugs cause drug-induced thrombocytopenia, e.g., aspirin, ethanol, and NSAIDs.

**Prothrombin Time (PT):**It is also reported along with laboratory control (normal range: 11 to 24s). It measures the extrinsic pathway (factor VII) and common pathway. It is prolonged in vitamin K deficiency, vitamin K antagonist therapy (warfarin), and factor VII deficiency.

**International Normalized Ratio (INR):**Normal range is 0.9 to 1.2. It is used to monitor warfarin therapy and for the assessment of hepatic function.

**Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (aPTT):**It is reported against a normal control (normal range: 22 to 35s). It measures the activity of the common pathway and intrinsic pathway (factors VIII, IX, XI, XII). It is also used to monitor heparin therapy. It is prolonged in hemophilia A (Factor VIII deficiency) and B (Factor IX deficiency).

**Other Tests**

- Fibrinogen

- D-Dimers

- Specific factor assays (Factor VIII)

- Lupus anticoagulant

- Tests for thrombophilias (activated protein C resistance)

- Von Willebrand tests (vWF antigen, Ristocetin cofactor activity, factor VIII)

**Diagnostic Tests in Diabetes Mellitus**

- Fasting Blood Glucose (FBG): normal range is <126 mg/dL

- Random Blood Glucose (RBG): normal range is <200 mg/dL

- Glycosylated Hemoglobin (HbA1c): normal value is <6.5 %

- 2 hour 75 gm Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT): normal value is < 200 mg/dL

**Diagnostic Tests in Hepatobiliary Disease**

The most commonly ordered tests to evaluate liver function and detect hepatocytes injury are as follows:

- PT/INR: normal range 0.9 to 1.2

- Serum Albumin: normal range 3.5 to 5.0 g/dL

- Serum Bilirubin (total): normal range 0.1 to 1.0 mg/dL

- Serum Bilirubin (direct): normal range 0 to 0.3 mg/dL

- Alanine aminotransferase (ALT): 8 to 20 U/L

- Aspartate aminotransferase (AST): 8 to 20 U/L

- Alkaline phosphatase (ALP): 35 to 100 U/L

- Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT): 0 to 30 U/L