Before performing any diagnostic study, a comprehensive review of the patient’s history and clinical course, as well as a complete physical examination, are necessary. The diagnostician will inform the patient of the indications and overview of the studies which they will be performing. The diagnostician must thoroughly explain the risks and benefits of the exam to the patient and also obtain informed consent.

Routine motor and sensory nerve conduction study should first take place to make sure no other nerve pathology exists, and the clinician can interpret the repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) results.

Repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) involves supramaximal stimulation of a motor nerve 5-10 times at a frequency of 3 Hz to determine compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude decrement. The 4th CMAP amplitude is compared with the first. A decrement of >10% is significant. RNS study should ideally be performed on the proximal and most affected muscle to increase sensitivity. However, this may not be possible or easily accomplished because of limitations in the immobilizing of the recording electrodes and the tested muscle. Limb and muscle movement during the test can alter the recording electrode leading to inaccurate results. Limb temperature should be kept warm at 32 degrees celsius. Colder temperature leads to increased amplitudes, prolonged latencies, slowed conduction velocities on NCS, and decrease CMAP decrement on RNS, leading to inaccuracy.

Exercise testing is part of the RNS study routine to determine post-exercise facilitation and exhaustion. If no significant decrement is observed (>10%) with baseline test, a 1-minute exercise follows, and RNS is repeated at 1-minute intervals for 3 to 4 minutes to look for decrement due to post-exercise exhaustion. The patient is finally instructed to perform maximal isometric contraction of the tested muscle for 10 seconds, and RNS is then performed at a 1-minute interval for five minutes to look for amplitude increment due to post-exercise facilitation and exhaustion.

Single-fiber EMG is the most sensitive test for a patient suspected with neuromuscular junction disorder. The exam is proven to be safe, however, technically challenging for both the patient and the physician performing it. It requires experience and technical knowledge.

To perform a single fiber EMG (SFEMG), you need a contracted single fiber electromyography needle or a facial concentric needle with a small recording surface.