The use of IVIg represents the main pharmacological treatment option for MMNCB. Of note, indeed, more than three-quarters of the patients respond to IVIG. The response in muscle strength improvement is, however, short-term, and only 20% of patients achieve prolonged remission. Most of the patients need periodic IVIg infusions. In spite of regular IVIg infusions, motor deficits may slowly progress due to secondary axonal damage. In a Cochrane review, IVIG was considered superior to placebo in the treatment of MMNCB (NNT 1.4, 95% CI 1.1-1.8).

IVIG is initially administered at a dose of 0.4 g/kg/day for five consecutive days for a total dose of 2 g/kg. Some clinicians administer IVIG in 2 days by administering at 1 g/kg per day. The follow-up maintenance IVIg infusion dose ranges from 0.4 g/kg once weekly to 2 g/kg every 8 weeks depending upon the patient’s condition. Because Ig is generally administered for long periods, often for years, the subcutaneous route has been investigated. Clinical investigations showed that the subcutaneous immunoglobulin (SCIG) is safe, equally effective, feasible, and the patients can self-administer themselves at home. The dose of SCIG is the same as that of IVIG.

In non-responders, the treatment options are limited. Different immunomodulatory agents such as cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil, azathioprine, and rituximab, have been reported in the literature with variable results.

Corticosteroids and plasmapheresis are ineffective in patients with MMN.