Laboratory tests have limited use in ACS, but may show arrhythmia, coagulopathy, azotemia, or occult drug use. Abnormalities such as elevated serum creatine phosphokinase (CPK>2000) and myoglobinuria are typically seen as muscle breakdown ensues. Diagnosis is established by clinical findings and measurement of compartment pressures. Saline manometry (Whiteside procedure) using pressure transducers is the test of choice. Any intercompartmental pressure above 30mmHg in a symptomatic patient is confirmatory of ACS. Also, any patient with a Delta Pressure (DP) less than 30 is similarly confirmatory. DP = Diastolic Pressure – Compartment Pressure. Any such findings in a symptomatic patient must have a stat surgical consult for possible fasciotomy. Needle placement for saline manometry is specific to the compartment under suspicion. The anterior compartment of the leg is entered approximately one third the distance down the tibia from the tibial tuberosity(level), and 1 cm lateral to the tibial edge, with the needle going in approximately 1-3cm. The lateral compartment is entered at the same level as above and enters right at the fibula's edge and 1cm in. The superficial posterior compartment is entered at the same level as above, and at a point, 3-5cm medial to the mid posterior line, going in 2-4 cm. Finally, at the same level, the deep posterior compartment is entered just medial to the medial tibial edge and aimed in the fibula's direction, going in 2-4 cm. Other modalities have been used to non-invasively measure intercompartmental pressures, such as ultrasound, laser Doppler flow, and infrared spectroscopy. Other invasive studies such as muscle pH, muscle glucose level, and muscle pO2 have been studied; however, saline manometry remains the gold standard. Interobserver variation has been a problem, and continuous monitoring seems more sensitive and specific than a one-time measurement.