Displaced talar neck fractures almost exclusively receive treatment by open reduction and internal fixation with nonoperative treatment reserved for the rare nondisplaced injury pattern or fractures in patients who are not surgical candidates. Nonoperative treatment consists of immobilization with a splint in the acute setting, transitioning into a short leg cast when swelling has subsided. Surgical options for talar neck fractures include external fixation or open reduction internal fixation. A spanning external fixator is often selected as a temporizing measure to stabilize the bony injury and allow observation of the soft tissue envelope. The goal of surgery is anatomic reduction, which can be challenging in scenarios of high displacement, comminution, or angulation. A biomechanical study demonstrated that as little as 2 millimeters of malreduction of the articular surface alter contact stresses.

Directly visualizing fracture reduction is paramount, with a dual incision technique (anteromedial and anterolateral) often necessary. Exposures can be augmented with malleolar osteotomies to aid in the visualization of the talar neck and body. Soft tissue considerations, fracture type, and other associated injuries often dictate the exact surgical approach. There are various reports of screw, plate, and hybrid fixation strategies. An estimated 96% of reported fractures of the talar neck were addressed with some combination of plate and/or screw constructs.

Historically, talar neck fractures were treated with the urgency reserved for open fractures or irreducible dislocations. The theory was that prompt reduction and fixation maintained the tenuous blood supply to the talus.