# Continuing Education Activity

Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) is one of the most severe arboviral encephalitis affecting America. Currently considered an emerging disease showing consistently increase incidence across a wider population. In the United States, between six to eight cases are annually reported, predominantly between May through October, mostly in Florida, Georgia, Maryland, Wisconsin, and New Jersey. This virus has also been considered a potential bioterrorism weapon given its airborne transmission. The case-fatality rate described is 30%, with neurologic sequelae seen in 50% of survivors. This activity describes the epidemiology pathophysiology, diagnosis, treatment, and outcome of Eastern equine encephalitis. It highlights the importance of an interprofessional team in detecting outbreaks and also in managing this complex and uncommon condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of Eastern equine encephalitis medical conditions and emergencies.
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of Eastern equine encephalitis.
- Review the management options available for Eastern equine encephalitis
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance Eastern equine encephalitis care and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) is one of the most severe arboviral encephalitis affecting America. Currently considered an emerging disease showing consistently increase incidence across a wider population. In the United States, between six to eight cases are annually reported, predominantly between May through October, mostly in Florida, Georgia, Maryland, Wisconsin, and New Jersey.

# Etiology

Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV) is an arbovirus from the Togaviridae family, genus alphavirus. Maintained by a cycle between birds and predominantly Culiseta melanura mosquitoes associated with freshwater hardwood swamps.Coquillettidia perturbans, Aedes cinereus, and Aedes canadensis.

# Epidemiology

The first identification of Eastern equine encephalitis virus in humans dates from 1938 during an important outbreak affecting Massachusetts, U.S. As previously described, humans do not usually participate in the natural cycle but rather get affected sporadically in the geographic region along the Atlantic, and Gulf coasts of the U.S. The largest EEEV outbreak recorded is from 1959 in New Jersey, U.S., and involved 32 cases during 8 weeks. E.E.E. is now a nationally notifiable condition and is monitor through ArboNET, a national arboviral disease surveillance disease system since 2003.

As per ArboNET reports, non-human active areas are much greater than what human data suggests. Some researchers hypothesize this is likely due to the lack of necessary conditions for the EEBV to escape the enzootic cycle (non-human animal endemic) and then enter the epizootic cycle (non-human animal epidemic). It could also be related to surveillance and/or testing biases.

# Pathophysiology

After a bite from an infected mosquito, Eastern equine encephalitis virus is inoculated carried by mosquito saliva into dermal tissue, it starts affecting dendritic and Langerhans cells, which migrate to lymphoid tissue, where viral replication occurs translating into viremia or systemic virus seeding. The incubation period ranges from 3 to 10 days.

# Histopathology

Research has shown the mesenchymal cell tropism of Eastern equine encephalitis virus with early replication in bones, tendons, and myocardium. Lungs, stomach, kidneys, and spleen have also been described in EEEV infection.

# History and Physical

Human arboviral disease, when symptomatic, can be divided into three different syndromes: Febrile systemic illness (seen in uncomplicated Dengue fever), Hemorrhagic fever (seen in dengue hemorrhagic fever and yellow fever) and encephalitis. This last category includes EEE but also Venezuelan equine encephalitis, Japanese encephalitis, and La Crosse encephalitis.

# Evaluation

Basic laboratory findings include peripheral leukocytosis. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) usually reports neutrophilic pleocytosis and absent hypoglycorrhachia.

Radiologic findings usually involve basal ganglia, thalami, and cerebral cortex. Neuroimage, specifically brain MRI T2/FLAIR can report a pattern of focal lesions (also described in children) without significant edema as opposed to common autopsy findings, which include severe edema, peaking around day 12 in 60% of the patients with encephalitis. In children, the predominantly affected area seems to be the cortex.

# Treatment / Management

Thus far, no antiviral drug has proven to be beneficial in treating Eastern equine encephalitis. Supportive care continues to be the general approach, and this often includes intensive care unit admission requiring ventilatory support. There is no need to isolate patients.

Since a vaccine is currently not available, prevention represents the main strategy to control this emergent disease. Prevention then depends on efforts to reduce vectors, such as reducing potential breeding sites and the use of insecticides along with personal protective measures (e.g., protective clothing and use of repellents).

# Differential Diagnosis

In areas with greater risk of Eastern equine encephalitis virus transmission, EEE should be considered by health-care professionals in any case with aseptic meningitis or encephalitis. Suspected infections should also be reported to the local health department. Differential diagnosis includes other viral encephalitides, such as measles, mumps, echovirus, and less likely prion disease such as Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

Currently, only veterinary Eastern equine encephalitis virus vaccines are available, especially for use in horses. There are no licensed vaccines available or EEE at the time. There is an inactivated Vero cell vaccine for Japanese encephalitis approved since 2009. Some studies have identified cross-protection with Yellow fever, but no association has been documented with EEE.

Some researchers are currently working on a possible live-virus vaccine potentially effective against multiple mosquito-borne diseases, but more research is granted.

# Prognosis

The fatality rate is described as high as 41%. Around 50% of the affected patients will develop some neurological disability. Poor predictive factors identified include severe hyponatremia, electroencephalogram abnormalities, and high initial CSF pleocytosis.

# Complications

Several complications have been described, more frequently involving the central nervous system resulting in cognitive, motor, or sensory deficits. Associated neurological sequelae include most commonly seizures (63%), but also paralysis, intellectual disability, and behavioral changes. Late diagnosis and intervention can result in multiorgan failure and autonomic dysfunction, and ultimately death.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Eastern equine encephalitis is caused by a virus transmitted by a particular mosquito usually found in freshwater swamps. Symptoms include fever, chills, headache, myalgias, arthralgias. Diagnosis is made by serology and viral identification by PCR on a cerebrospinal fluid obtained after a lumbar puncture. Currently, treatment is supportive care and close monitoring. The fatality rate can be as high as 41%, and early diagnosis is key. Neurologic sequelae are seen in up to 50% of the patients, including seizures, paralysis, behavioral changes as psychosis, intellectual disability. There is no vaccine available. Prevention is critical to avoid EEE by limiting exposure to mosquitos. The center for disease control and prevention (CDC) recommends the use of insect repellent containing one of the following: DEET, picaridin, IR3535, oil of lemon eucalyptus, para-menthane-diol, or 2-undecanone. It also recommends wearing long-sleeve shirts and long pants and mosquito-control both indoors and outdoors.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional approach is very important in the management of Eastern equine encephalitis. This is a nationally notifiable condition, communication between epidemiologists and the health department is vital to understand changing trends and raise awareness if a new outbreak is taking place, especially among physicians, to diagnose EEE promptly. Neurology evaluation could also be considered, depending on the level of confidence of the primary team and the complexity of the case.