# Introduction

Simulation-based education is a broad term that encompasses interactions with mannequins and standardized patients, along with practicing procedural skills.  Simulation represents an important facet of undergraduate and graduate medical education and provides an opportunity to practice skills before performing them on patients. The simulation environment represents a perfect opportunity for the deliberate practice of complex skills until a level of mastery is achieved for both routine and low frequency/high stakes procedures alike.

# Curriculum Development

When designing a curriculum that encompasses mastery learning concepts, the Angoff method has been widely accepted as a tool for identifying when mastery is achieved.

Complex procedures and high stakes clinical scenarios can introduce cognitive overload and psychological stress to learners, especially novices.  These can be broken down into micro-skills, introducing each component of a procedure one at a time, and building upon it with the next step until learners have reached a level of competency that represents mastery.

# Procedural Skills Assessment

Mastery learning has been extensively studied for the acquisition of procedural skills.  As learners perform these procedures better, patients experience fewer complications and shorter lengths of stay.

Interestingly, in one study, deliberate practice was shown as an effective method to overcome gender differences in procedural skills. Historically, males have achieved higher scores on the Fundamentals of Endoscopic Surgery.  Ritter et al. demonstrated that a curriculum focused on mastery learning supported by deliberate practice can virtually eliminate these disparate results.

# Medical Decision Making and Leadership Development

Mastery learning has also been studied for clinical skills. A recent study examined its utility for the achievement of Entrustable Professional Activities (EPAs), core skills that are part of competency measures in undergraduate medical education. The EPAs are various skills that medical students should achieve before entering into residency and should be able to complete without supervision.

Robinson et al. studied the effect of an online training program for the detection of melanomas. Their analysis revealed that a mastery training program decreased unnecessary referrals to dermatologists for benign skin lesions and led to an increase in referrals for melanomas.

Another study examined the use of mastery learning for communication skills, specifically difficult conversations like breaking bad news. This represents an important method for assessing learners on skills that affect patient-provider relationships.

# Clinical Significance

Mastery learning supports competency-based education (CBE). The shift towards CBE derived from the need for supplemental education with the advent of the mandate in reduced working hours in graduate medical education. Residents have subsequently had less exposure in the clinical environment; therefore, a more systematic approach for the acquisition of skills is necessary.

Skills retention has been shown to wane over time.  Mastery learning has been studied as a means of overcoming skill degradation and increasing patient safety.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The ability for teams to participate in iterative sessions, especially for resuscitation, positively contributes to patient outcomes.  Secondly, deliberate practice can also lend itself to improved confidence for those serving in the role of team leader in code situations.