The initial evaluation should include basic blood and urine samples. A complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), and a urinalysis (UA) can all give an initial broad overview of potential pathologies leading to the cause of the anasarca. The CMP can help assess renal function, albumin level, and liver function (AST and ALT). Dipstick testing principally detects albumin and would need an additional protein sulfosalicylic acid precipitation test (SAS) to detect globulins and Bence-Jones proteins. A urine protein/creatinine ratio or 24-hr urine for protein can obviate the need for SAS testing. The finding of a markedly positive dipstick for protein in combination with hypoalbuminemia and clinical edema is virtually diagnostic of a nephrotic syndrome. Additional testing through measuring a brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) can give clues like underlying CHF. Chest radiography is helpful in cardiac enlargement, pulmonary edema, and pleural effusions.

If warranted, a cardiac echo can evaluate the ventricular function, assess for the presence of a pericardial effusion, and aid in the diagnosis of cardiac disease. Echocardiography can also be used to evaluate pulmonary arterial pressures for patients with known or suspected obstructive sleep apnea and lower extremity edema. Venous ultrasonography is the imaging of choice in the evaluation of suspected DVT. Duplex ultrasonography also can be used to confirm a chronic venous insufficiency. The most commonly used radiographic technique in patients with renal dysfunction or proteinuria is the use of renal ultrasonography. Ultrasonography allows the clinician to characterize kidney size and assess for cystic renal disease and hydronephrosis.

Magnetic resonance angiography with venography of the lower extremity and pelvis can be used to evaluate for intrinsic or extrinsic pelvic or thigh DVT. Left iliac vein compression by the right iliac artery (May-Thurner syndrome) should be suspected in women who are 18 and 30 years of age and present with edema of the left lower extremity. Lymphoscintigraphy is the method of choice for evaluating lymphedema when the diagnosis cannot be made clinically.  MRI may aid in the diagnosis of musculoskeletal etiologies like a gastrocnemius tear or popliteal cyst. T1-weighted magnetic resonance lymphangiography can visualize the lymphatic channels when lymphedema is suspected.