**History**

In recent years, those at greatest risk of developing ocular tuberculosis are immunocompromised individuals. Extrapulmonary involvement is seen in more than 50% of patients who have both acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and TB.

Therefore, it is crucial to complete a full past-medical and social history, and specifically inquire about the patient’s HIV status, when suspecting ocular TB. This information is especially useful when in conjunction with a history of nonspecific symptoms of pulmonary TB (chest pain, chronic cough, hemoptysis, fever, anorexia, night sweats, unexplained weight loss), travel to TB endemic country, interaction with active TB patient, prior positive radiographic findings, tuberculin skin test (TST) or interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA).

**Presenting Ocular Symptoms**

Ocular TB can present with any type of ocular inflammation. Patients may report acute or chronic inflammation that is unilateral or bilateral. Patients may also report headaches, flashes, floaters, or red-eye. Choroid tubercles near the macula present with diminished visual acuity and photosensitivity. Of note, the lack of visual symptoms does not rule out ocular TB as small tubercles in the peripheral fundus may be asymptomatic.

**Signs**

Ocular TB is a great imitator of various ocular pathologies. A provider should consider many possible findings. The following are clinical signs of ocular TB described according to the anatomical location:

**Extraocular TB**

- **Orbit**: The involvement of the orbit is most common in children.

- **Eyelids**: The involvement of the eyelids is also most common in children. Eyelid TB can present as lupus vulgaris with reddish-brown “apple-jelly” nodules.

- **Lacrimal Gland**: TB involvement presents as symptomatic dacryoadenitis, indistinguishable from other bacterial infections.

- **Conjunctiva**: Primary tuberculous conjunctivitis is a chronic disease that eventually leads to scarring. Patients present with ocular redness, discomfort, and mucopurulent discharge with regional lymphadenopathy.

- **Cornea**: It may present as phlyctenular keratoconjunctivitis (an inflammatory nodule at the limbus) or interstitial keratitis. The phlyctenule is believed to be a hypersensitivity reaction to TB antigen, and it may erode the epithelia and create photophobia, redness, and tearing. Tuberculous interstitial keratitis presents as a unilateral sectoral, peripheral stromal infiltrate with vascularization.

- **Sclera**: Tuberculous scleritis is challenging to diagnose outside the context of active systemic TB. Scleritis is usually chronic, does not respond to anti-inflammatory treatment, can be necrotizing, and usually presents anteriorly; posterior sclera involvement is rare.

**Intraocular TB**

- **Anterior Uveitis**: It is usually granulomatous, may present as iris granulomas with broad-based posterior synechiae, and Koeppe and Busacca nodules, mutton-fat keratic precipitates on the posterior aspect of the cornea, and/or complicated cataract.

- **Intermediate Uveitis**: Usually presents with unilateral or bilateral asymmetry and appears similar to par planitis. Features include mild-to-moderate vitritis with snowball, snow banking, peripheral vascular sheathing, and/or peripheral retinochoroidal granulomas.

- **Posterior Uveitis**: It is the most common presentation of ocular TB. Common patterns include a solitary tubercle, multiple tubercles, miliary choroidal tubercles, and multifocal choroiditis (Image 1). Tubercles are white-yellow nodules that typically reside in the posterior pole. Usually, fewer than five are present but maybe as many as 50 or 60. Non-contiguous, multifocal choroiditis may progress to a diffuse, contiguous pattern called a serpiginous-like lesion. This lesion resembles serpiginous choroiditis (multifocal serpiginous choroiditis); however, in contrast to classic serpiginous choroiditis, it does not extend to the disc, tends to spare the fovea even when the macula is involved, and it is more multifocal and pigmented (Image 2). The vitreous in tuberculous serpiginous-like choroiditis is usually inflamed, whereas, in serpiginous choroiditis, there is no vitreous inflammation.

- **Retina**: TB of the retina is almost always a result of the choroidal extension. Rarely does hematogenous spread effect the retina before the choroid. Retinal lesions may take the form of either focal tubercles, subretinal abscesses, or diffuse retinitis. Occlusive retinal vasculitis may occur and induce neovascularization. Exudative retinal hemorrhagic periphlebitis with uveitis is highly suggestive of intraocular TB.

- **Optic Nerve**: Optic neuropathy develops either from direct infection induced by TB or a hypersensitivity reaction to the infectious agent. It may present as an optic nerve tubercle, papillitis, or papilledema. Optic nerve swelling and disk edema have been reported with posterior tuberculous scleritis.

- **Endophthalmitis**: Tubercular subretinal abscesses may burst into the vitreous cavity and present as endophthalmitis or panophthalmitis.