It is important to treat the patient with soft tissue radionecrosis from an interprofessional approach with the hyperbaric oxygen therapy not done as isolated treatments, but in conjunction with adequate, timely surgical debridement, antimicrobial therapy for infection, adequate nutrition, oncology considerations, and consideration of plastic surgery options for resolution of the wound. It is essential to have good wound care with the appropriate use of dressings to control the moisture in the wound environment and the bacterial bioburden.  Cases can become very complex, and not all the therapy options are reasonable until the infection has first been treated with appropriate antibiotics directed by culture and adequate surgical debridement of necrotic tissue.

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is often added as an adjunct especially if the tissue is fibrotic or ongoing progressive necrosis. At this point in therapy, one may be treating a necrotizing infection in the setting of soft tissue radionecrosis. It is often beneficial to do repeat selective debridement of the wound while getting hyperbaric oxygen therapy. It is especially to be helpful to do selective debridement about once a week after doing the hyperbaric oxygen treatment because the more viable tissue has a healthy pink blush and the necrotic tissue will well demarcate making it easier to do the selective debridement. Negative pressure therapy (wound vac) may be started once the tissue no longer has active tissue necrosis, and this will help to promote granulation tissue formation and faster wound healing. Negative pressure therapy can be effectively used in conjunction with hyperbaric oxygen therapy.

Once a healthy bed of granulation tissue has formed, then the options of treatment are to either to allow the wound to heal by secondary intention or to consider skin grafting or flap closure. During this stage of the process, a plastic surgeon can be helpful with the direction of the treatment and consideration of further hyperbaric oxygen treatment to treat for surgical flap compromise. Fluorescent angiography can not only be helpful with the determination of the flap perfusion but with evaluation of the adequacy of the hyperbaric oxygen therapy at promoting neovascularization and when this has plateaued with no further treatments needed. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is not restricted to just an arbitrary number of treatments, but sometimes more than 40 treatments are needed to reach the goal of adequate wound healing.