Radiographically, the involvement of the thumb, radius, and carpal bones increases as the severity of the disease increases. Radial club hand is classified by radiographs and was classified into four types by Bayne and Klug in 1987.

The condition is also commonly associated with a number of congenital syndromes. Indeed, only one-third of patients with radial dysplasia present with an isolated upper extremity malformation, thus underscoring the need for a complete physical examination to reveal commonly associated congenital syndromes.

VACTERL association (vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiac defects, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal abnormalities, and limb abnormalities) is usually a sporadic event, thought to be due to an error in mesodermal development.

Holt-Oram syndrome is an association of cardiopulmonary and limb defects (also known as heart-hand syndrome).

In individuals with TAR (thrombocytopenia-absent radius) syndrome, the radius is completely absent in addition to thrombocytopenia. The thumb is usually present but hypoplastic.

Fanconi anemia is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by severe hypoplasia or aplasia of the bone marrow with anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. In addition to genetic counseling to discover possible associations with the previously mentioned conditions above, it is also recommended to screen for Fanconi anemia in all patients with radial dysplasia who do not have a known identifiable syndrome. It is possible to diagnose Fanconi anemia before bone marrow failure occurs, and early diagnosis would provide sufficient time to search for a bone marrow match that would prevent the child from dying from aplastic anemia. Chromosomal breakage studies are recommended for all children with deficiencies of the thumb and radial border of the forearm.