With significant trauma, resuscitation and stabilization efforts are paramount. After the patient is stabilized, open fractures should be addressed emergently. If there is vascular compromise thought to be secondary to fracture fragments compressing a vessel, reduction of the fracture should be attempted immediately.  The wound should be thoroughly irrigated with at least one liter of saline or a combination of saline and betadine, and then a sterile or betadine soaked dressing should be placed over the wound, and the limb should be immobilized in a well-padded splint. Repetitive uncovering of the wound increases infection rates. Antibiotics should be administered as soon as possible in the prehospital setting or emergency department. One study suggested that antibiotic administration within three hours of injury decreases infection rates six-fold. A more recent retrospective study by Lack, et al. indicated that if antibiotics were given within 66 minutes of injury, the infection rate was 0%, but increased to 17% if antibiotics were delayed beyond this time frame. For grade 1 and grade 2 open fractures antibiotics should be given to cover gram-positive organisms.  Cephalosporins such as cefazolin or cefuroxime can be used.  Additional coverage for gram-negative organisms should be administered in grade 3 fractures. Aminoglycosides such as gentamicin are commonly used in this instance. In the presence of fecal or possible clostridial contamination or if the injury occurred in a farmyard, high dose penicillin should also be given. If a patient is truly penicillin allergic, clindamycin is an acceptable substitute. The tetanus status of all patients with open fractures should be assessed. If a patient has not completed the tetanus series or has not had a booster in the last five years, tetanus toxoid should be given. If the wound is high risk for Clostridium contamination or the patient has not had a tetanus booster in more than ten years, both tetanus toxoid and tetanus immune globulin should be administered.

An orthopedic surgeon should be consulted immediately to start planning for definitive management.