A comprehensive review of the patient’s history and clinical course and a complete physical exam must be performed before performing any diagnostic study. The diagnostician will inform the patient at the bedside of the indications and overview of the studies, which will be performed to properly diagnose ulnar neuropathy with electrodiagnostic testing. The diagnostician must thoroughly explain the risks and benefits of the exam to the patient. Consent should also be obtained before initiating testing. One should ideally examine at least 2 extremities, performing both sensory and motor nerve conduction studies, as well as EMG needle testing in both proximal and distal muscles for comparison.

As with all nerve conduction studies, the temperature of the patient’s limbs should be kept warm at 32 degrees Celsius. Colder temperatures can cause mistakenly increased amplitudes, prolonged latencies, and slowed conduction velocities on NCS. To minimize the electrical interference, which can occur while doing the study bedside, a notch filter should be used, and if possible, all unnecessary machines turned off, including unplugging the clinic/hospital bed.

To evaluate for ulnar neuropathy,  electrodes are placed over the muscles innervated by the ulnar nerve (e.g., the abductor digiti minimi, quinti, or the first dorsal interosseous muscle) and the tendon of the first or fifth digit. The ulnar nerve is stimulated at the level above or below the elbow and the wrist to help localize the involved sites of entrapment or neuropathies. Short-segment stimulation can increase the sensitivity of the study.