Patients who are physically dependent on sedative effects often require medication during the detoxification process to minimize the risks associated with complicated withdrawal. Acute intoxication can present with slurred speech, cognitive impairment, poor coordination, and unsteady gait. For alcohol and benzodiazepine withdrawal, the Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment (CIWA) scale helps determine the frequency of medication dosing to prevent withdrawal complications. In an emergency setting, treatment for alcohol and benzodiazepine intoxication is primarily supportive, with close monitoring of vitals. Benzodiazepines are considered a first-line treatment to prevent worsening withdrawal symptoms.

For opioid intoxication, naloxone is used to reverse respiratory depression caused by opioid overdose. Naloxone is a competitive mu-opioid receptor antagonist, which reverses the effects of opioids. It can be administered intramuscularly, intravenously, or nasally; the fastest route of administration is intravenous.

For PCP intoxication, the focus is stabilizing the patient with supportive care. The patient may exhibit ataxia, nystagmus, increase cardiac workload, muscle rigidity, and seizures. Hyperacusis is another side-effect of PCP use, which is why it may be necessary to place the patient in a low stimulus environment. A high stimulus environment may trigger agitation and increase the likelihood that restraints are required. In some cases, gastric suction or the use of activated charcoal may be indicated. Benzodiazepines may help to control agitation and reduce the risk of seizures.