Signaling pathways triggered by growth factor-RTK binding play a pivotal role in embryonic and fetal development. This knowledge comes from studies in which RTK genes are intentionally knocked out or altered and from the study of clinical disorders of organogenesis. Almost all RTKs and their growth factors function in some capacity in organ formation; notable examples appear below.

c-KIT (stem cell factor/SCF) – c-KIT (i.e., stem cell growth factor receptor) is a member of the PDGFR subfamily, but it has roles in development that other members of the family do not. c-KIT/SCF drives the proliferation, survival, and migration of hematopoietic stem cells, melanocytes, and primordial germ cells. Receptors are expressed not only on the cells themselves but on their migratory pathways and final destinations (bone marrow, fetal liver, skin, gonads). c-KIT is also present on mast cells and stimulates their proliferation. Mice with mutated c-KIT have macrocytic anemia, decreased pigmentation, and impaired fertility. In humans, loss-of-function mutations in c-KIT cause piebaldism, a condition characterized by hypopigmented patches of skin and hair.

ErbB (epidermal growth factor/EGF and neuregulins) – EGFR (i.e., ErbB1) receptors are present diffusely on embryonic and fetal tissue; mice lacking EGFR die in utero or the early postnatal period, and have defects in numerous tissues including skin, CNS, intestines, liver, and lung. ErbB2 and ErbB4 knock-out mice fail to form cardiac ventricle trabeculae, leading to intrauterine death. ErbB4 knock-outs also have defects in cranial sensory ganglia and peripheral nervous system myelination due to defects in Schwann cell migration. ErbB3 knock-out mice have impaired atrioventricular valve formation with early embryonic demise.

Eph (ephrin) – Eph/ephrin signaling is unique in that both the receptor and ligand are membrane-bound. Cell to cell interactions result in alteration of the actin cytoskeleton; thus, Eph receptors are important in cell migration. In particular, Eph receptors play a crucial role in neural crest cell migration and axon guidance in the developing nervous system. Bidirectional repulsive and attractive forces mediated by these receptors help create the topographic maps of various sensory systems, guide spinal motor neurons to their appropriate destinations, and aid in the formation of the cerebral cortex and midline structures like the corpus callosum. Mutations in the gene encoding for ephrin-B1 result in craniofrontal nasal dysplasia, characterized by hypertelorism, cleft palate, a central nasal groove, skeletal abnormalities, and corpus callosum agenesis.

FGF (fibroblast growth factor/FGF) – FGFR/FGF signaling modulates chondrocyte and osteoblast differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis. Consequently, it is necessary for normal osteogenesis, skeletogenesis, and limb bud development. In achondroplasia, activating mutations of FGFR3 promote excessive chondrocyte apoptosis, leading to impaired endochondral ossification and bone growth. In craniosynostosis, activating mutations in FGFR2 leading to accelerated osteoblast maturation and premature cranial suture fusion.

RET (glial cell-line derived neurotrophic factor/GDNF) – RET/GDNF signaling is necessary for the development of the enteric nervous system, Peyer’s patches, kidney, and ureters. Inactivating RET mutations are a significant risk factor for Hirschsprung’s disease. Knock-out studies in mice have revealed that the absence of RET leads to renal and ureter agenesis and malformation; however, studies in fetuses with these conditions have demonstrated RET mutations in only a small percentage, suggesting that they are not the driving mutation.

Tie (angiopoietin-1/ANG1) – Tie2/ANG1 signaling plays a unique role in venous morphogenesis. It induces endothelial cells (EC) to adopt a venous EC morphology and is important for venous remodeling and maintenance. It has a smaller role in angiogenesis as well. Tie2 deficient mice die as a result of defective vascular organization/venogenesis, and Tie2 mutations are frequently present in patients with venous malformations.

Trk (neurotrophins) – The Trk subfamily of RTKs consists of three receptors, each with a plethora of roles in neuronal differentiation, development, and survival. For example, TrkA/neural growth factor signaling plays a pivotal role in the formation and survival of sympathetic ganglia and nociceptive neurons, while TrkC/neurotrophin-3 signaling is crucial for cochlear ganglia and proprioceptive neuron development. TrkB/brain-derived neurotrophic factor signaling is required for synaptic plasticity, long-term potentiation, maintaining the survival of CNS neurons, and forming ocular dominance columns. All three receptors promote motor neuron survival and axon growth.

VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor/VEGF) – VEGFR-1/2 are located primarily on ECs, and binding of VEGF-A regulates vasculogenesis, angiogenesis, and vascular permeability. VEGFR-3, when bound to either VEGF-C or D, regulates lymphangiogenesis. Disruption of these signaling pathways in mice embryos results in death from aberrant vasculature formation and impaired cardiac function.