There are a variety of histopathological diagnostic techniques available for Pythium insidiosum keratitis. On 10% KOH wet mount and Gram stain, it is seen as slender long septate or aseptate hyaline hyphae with perpendicular lateral branches which mimic the hyphae of fungi. Hence they are difficult to diagnose on wet mount alone. But in contrast, numerous vesicles are often present in the hyphae of the Pythium.

On blood agar and sabouraud dextrose agar flat, feathery colonies are observed along with zoospore formation. The zoospore presence is confirmed on culture by the leaf incarnation method. Another method of identifying hyphae is staining by iodine potassium iodide (IKI) and sulfuric acid stain (IKI-H2SO4). The Pythium hyphae change color to blue/ bluish-black, which is labeled as positive, and yellow/ yellowish brown is reported as negative. Additionally, trypan blue has also been a useful indicator in the early identification of aseptate and septate hyphae of Pythium, especially in a rural setup where other diagnostic modalities are scarce.

The next method of identification is the use of periodic acid-Schiff (PAS). The slides of Pythium can be treated with 0.5% and 1% periodic acid for 0.5, 2, 3, and 5 minutes and Schiff’s reagent can be used without modification for 10 minutes. When the filaments turn pink, it is considered positive staining, and when it doesn’t stain, it is labeled as negative. The filaments of Pythium also appear pale pinkish to ghost-like structures on hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) stains. On Gomori methamine silver (GMS) stain, Pythium filament appears brown, and the stroma turns greenish. These filaments on GMS appear as septate or aseptate, broad or narrow, long or short, and may or may not have obtuse to perpendicular branching. The intervening filaments may also have swollen hyphae and can also exist in varied morphologies like twisted, folded collapsed, or hollow tubes.

**Difference of Staining BetweenPythium and Fungus**

The filaments of fungi stain with PAS as bright magenta color, but Pythium filaments stain variably from pink to pale magenta or sometimes may not stain. This difference in staining is due to the presence of cellulose in the Pythium cell wall, which gives a weaker acid reaction with pectin and chitin. The duration, as well as concentration of PA, shows a difference in staining.