The coordination and management of all physicians, nurses, technicians, and office staff needed for a single patient to undergo pancreatic islet cell transplantation requires clear communication between various teams and strict protocol adherence. Endocrinologists initiate the first step with the identification of potential patients. They must clearly communicate the patient's medical history, failed attempts at medical management, and recurrent episodes of unrecognized hypoglycemia to the transplant surgeon. The endocrinologist must also disclose the patient's history to a psychologist. Details of the patient's course become essential for a psychologist for them to understand and assess the patient's motivation to undergo the procedure.

Communication, coordination, and standardization of how the islets are transplanted are of paramount importance. An Australian trial demonstrated that standardization of islet isolation allowed for results of trials performed at different sites to be comparable. Diminishing these procedural variations, which could be affecting outcomes, will enable further discovery as to what promotes graft survival. Improving graft survival will decrease patient morbidity as well as the need for repeat transplantation and additional medications. [Level 2]

Posttransplantation, patients require lifelong immunosuppression. A team of pharmacists, physicians, and psychologists are needed to ensure the medications chosen are tailored to the patient. Patients will continue to need blood glucose checks and regular appointments with different teams. Interprofessional communication amongst the various groups is essential to ensure regimen adherence, identify barriers to adherence, monitoring for side effects (mental and physical), and checking for graft functionality over time.