Osler nodes and Janeway lesions are cutaneous manifestations of endocarditis, a disease most commonly arising from a bacterial or fungal infection of the cardiac endocardium.

Dr. William Osler first described Osler nodes in 1893 and Janeway lesions by Dr. Edward Janeway in 1899. The hypothesis is that Osler nodes and Janeway lesions share similar pathogenesis and arise from micro-emboli embedding in different anatomical sites.

As per the modified Duke criteria, Osler nodes are considered immunologic phenomena of infective endocarditis, and Janeway lesions, vascular phenomena. Osler nodes more commonly correlate with subacute endocarditis, whereas Janeway lesions typically occur in acute infective endocarditis.

Osler nodes and Janeway lesions are typically differentiated based on their morphology, location, distribution, histology, and, importantly, clinical context. The differential diagnosis includes palpable purpura as found in various types of small and medium vessel vasculitis, including microscopic polyarteritis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, immunoglobulin A vasculitis, cutaneous small-vessel vasculitis, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, and polyarteritis nodosa. Palpable purpura may also be a finding in paraneoplastic or malignancy-associated-vasculitis, disseminated gonococcal disease, disseminated intravascular coagulation, meningococcemia, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and Buerger disease. Other causes of purple macules and patches include drug eruptions (glucocorticoid-induced purpura), arthropod bites, sun exposure (actinic/senile purpura), and rarely calciphylaxis.