Early recognition and ability to use corticosteroids and immunosuppressants have significantly changed the natural history of EGPA, improving prognosis, and overall survival.

Corticosteroids help reduce eosinophil burden in blood and tissues and inhibit the prolongation of eosinophil survival in extravascular tissues.

While the initial dose of therapy for a non-severe disease has been 1 mg/kg of oral prednisone, induction of remission in severe disease is often better achieved with pulse dose methylprednisolone with or without cyclophosphamide.

Two randomized controlled trials by the French vasculitis study group established a standardized treatment regimen based on a 5-factor score.

Multiple studies show that maintaining remission with a high incidence of relapses is challenging. Although agents of choice have been well established, the ideal treatment duration and which drugs to stop first are still not well standardized.

**Refractory Disease**

Treatment strategy for frequent relapse or severe refractory disease somewhat depends on end-organ involvement.

Plasmapheresis is effective and preferred in rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis or alveolar hemorrhage.

Intravenous immunoglobulin, on the other hand, is considered in neuropathy or cardiomyopathy refractory to conventional therapy.

Based on smaller case series and well-evidenced success with other ANCA-associated vasculitides, rituximab (anti CD 20) and tumor necrosis factor inhibitors (TNF) are considered an alternative option.

There has also been some success with interferon-alfa (3 million IU 3 times weekly subcutaneously) to induce remission in seven CSS patients refractory to cyclophosphamide. It down-regulates the expression of IL-5 (known to have an increased titer in CSS) and IL-13, apart from modulating eosinophil activating cytokines in CSS. However, it was unable to reduce the rate of relapses after one year of follow-up.

There have also been recent reports of successful use of mepolizumab–an anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody and omalizumab (recombinant humanized monoclonal anti-IVIG E antibody) in refractory EGPA. Both drugs have already been in use for moderate to severe persistent asthma with allergic phenotypes.

As evident in multiple studies, the challenge is to maintain remission with a high incidence of relapses. Although agents of choice have been well established, the ideal treatment duration and which drugs to stop first are still not well standardized.

**Treatment Strategies for Eosinophilic Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis**

**Induction of Remission**

**Without Poor Prognosis (FFS greater than 1)
**

- Oral prednisone: 1 mg/kg daily for 3 weeks, then tapering 5 mg every 10 days to 0.5 mg/kg. Then taper 2.5 mg every 10 days to the minimal effective dosage, or until definite withdrawal.

Or

- Intravenous methylprednisolone pulse (15 mg/kg) followed by oral prednisone as above.

**Relapse
**

- Oral azathioprine 2/mg/kg daily for at least 6 months

Or

- Cyclophosphamide pulses (600 mg/m2) every 2 weeks for 1 month, then every 4 weeks afterward

**With Poor Prognosis**

- Three consecutive methylprednisolone pulses (15 mg/kg) on day 1 to 3 plus oral prednisone (see above)

Plus

- Either 12 cyclophosphamide pulses (600 mg/m2) every 2 weeks for 1 month then every 4 weeks after that

Or

- Short-course of cyclophosphamide (oral 2 mg/kg) for 3 months  or 6 cyclophosphamide  pulses (600 mg/m2) every 2 weeks for 1 month, then every 4 weeks after that, followed by azathioprine 2 mg/kg for 1 year or more

**Maintenance of Remission**

- Methotrexate (10 to 25 mg per week)

- Cyclosporin A (1.5 to 2.5 mg/kg per day)

- Azathioprine (2 mg/kg per day)

**Refractory Disease**

- Plasma exchange

- IVIG (0.4 g/kg per day for 5 days)

- Interferon-alfa (3 million IU 3 times per week subcutaneously)

- TNF inhibitors: infliximab, etanercept, adalimumab

- Rituximab (325 mg/m^2 for 4 consecutive weeks)