Treatment protocols vary depending on the treated tissue.

Robert Marx, DDS did most of the work elucidating the benefit of hyperbaric oxygen for treatment of osteoradionecrosis of the mandible in patients who received head and neck radiation. Osteoradionecrosis of the jaw is the result of an aseptic, avascular necrosis of the bone. Marx showed that for hyperbaric oxygen to be consistently successful, it must be combined with surgery and antibiotic therapy. The major principals elucidated by Marx in the treatment and prevention of ORN include an emphasis on pre-surgical hyperbaric oxygen to improve tolerance to surgical wounding. These patients typically receive 20 pre-extraction treatments followed by ten post-extraction hyperbaric oxygen treatments.

Laryngeal necrosis and other soft tissue necrosis of the head and neck due to late effects of radiation therapy have been successfully treated with hyperbaric oxygen to improve tissue quality both preoperatively and postoperatively and to improve survival of surgical flaps in previously irradiated head and neck tissues.

A growing body of literature supports the use of hyperbaric oxygen therapy in the prevention of radiation injury. This is usually in the setting of proposed surgery within a previously irradiated field where the likelihood of complications and difficult wound healing is high.

At present, a reasonable approach is to provide adjunctive hyperbaric oxygen treatments when surgery in heavily irradiated tissue bed is planned.