**Post-ablation Syndrome**

Post ablation syndrome is a common, self-limiting phenomenon observed in nearly one-third of patients following RFA. The symptoms are flu-like, last approximately seven to ten days following the procedure, and include the following:

- Low-grade fever

- Delayed pain

- Malaise

- Myalgia

- Nausea

- Vomiting

**Hemorrhage**

Hemorrhage, both intra-abdominal and intra-hepatic, is the most frequent post-RFA complication seen,, according to numerous studies. Bleeding typically occurs due to direct trauma from improper positioning of the electrode with resultant injury to small vessels as opposed to direct heat-related injury. It may be venous or arterial in nature and commonly presents as increasing abdominal pain after RFA. Imaging such as CT or ultrasound is confirmatory. Hemorrhagic complications occur more often in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma due to coagulation issues related to underlying cirrhosis. This complication can be preempted by avoiding hepatic vessels during the positioning of the electrode whenever possible, highlighting the essential role of effective imaging guidance. Venous hemorrhage usually ceases spontaneously without additional intervention and/or blood transfusions only; arterial bleeding may be more severe, requiring endovascular or, more rarely, surgical intervention. Cauterization of the needle tract on the removal of the electrode probe should always be performed to help reduce this complication.

Hemothorax may also occur but less frequently than abdominal hemorrhage. Thoracic hemorrhage usually results from arterial injury while performing RFA for lesions in the right hepatic lobe utilizing an intercostal approach. The most common symptoms are shortness of breath and chest pain. Ultrasound, CT of the chest, and/or chest X-ray are confirmatory. Invention to aid in the cessation of hemorrhage, as well as drainage, are typically necessary.

Hemobilia, bleeding within the bile ducts, is another type of RFA-related hemorrhage. It occurs when both a bile duct and a hepatic artery/vein are simultaneously punctured. Abdominal pain is the most common symptom, albeit nonspecific. The biggest issue with hemobilia is the resultant obstruction of the biliary tree with thrombus, which can result in biliary dysfunction and, thus, jaundice and hepatic failure. Tumors in the caudate lobe (Couinaud segment I) pose the highest risk for this complication. Avoidance of dilated biliary radicles during the placement of the electrode probe should aid in prevention.

Bleeding within the liver capsule, known as a subcapsular hematoma, as well as bleeding within the abdominal wall have also been described. A subcapsular hematoma usually occurs when performing RFA on tumors located immediately below the liver's surface. This location is prone to this complication because the electrode tract cannot be cauterized on withdrawal due to its shallow depth.

**Infection**

Infection is another relatively common entity encountered following an RFA procedure. The category of RFA-associated infection is broad and includes abscess and wound infection. Post-RFA abscess is an insidious complication as it can appear long after the procedure. Risk factors for the development of post-RFA abscess include anomalous biliary anatomy (Whipple or other forms of bilio-enteric anastomosis, prior papillotomy, etc.), which render a patient susceptible to ascending infection. The most common symptoms of liver abscess are fever and abdominal pain. The signs and symptoms of hepatic abscess typically occur in less than four weeks following RFA but can occur as far out as 60+ days. While a fever immediately following RFA is common and may be related to post-ablation syndrome, a fever that persists beyond two weeks should raise suspicion for an infectious etiology. CT scan is confirmatory. Enterococcus, Escherichia, Bacteroides, Clostridium, and Klebsiella are the most common culprits. Treatment requires a combination of both antibiotic therapy and percutaneous drainage.

**Biliary Tract Damage**

Damage to the biliary tract encompasses direct ductal injury, stricture, biloma, and, far more rarely, bilioperitoneum and bilio-pleural fistula/bilious effusion. Biliary tract damage is the result of direct thermal injury from RFA as well as electrode-mediated mechanical injury. These types of complications are most common in tumors located in the hepatic hila or in lesions within 1 cm of major bile ducts. Such close proximity to these ducts impedes the safe procurement of the necessary margin of normal hepatic parenchyma surrounding the tumor. Of the aforementioned complications, biliary strictures are the most common. A stricture of the biliary tract can develop anywhere from one week to several months following RFA. The diagnosis is typically made via CT or MRCP. ERCP represents both a diagnostic and therapeutic modality as it may be used for stent placement if the stricture is located in the hilum or common bile duct. Strictures at the level of the ampulla of Vater are treated via endoscopic sphincterotomy.

Biloma, an organized collection of bile located outside of the biliary tree, results from damage to the biliary tract and subsequent leakage of bile. Bile duct injury resulting in biloma may be mediated by direct mechanical injury from the electrode probe as well as thermal damage. When seen with CT, it appears as a well-circumscribed fluid collection generally in close proximity to the ablation zone. The majority of bilomas occur within the first four months following RFA but have been reported as far out as 17 months in the literature. Most patients experience no symptoms, and in about 50% of cases, the biloma regresses without intervention. Percutaneous drainage is required for resolution in the other half of patients. Focused imaging evaluation of the sphincter of Oddi is important to exclude increased biliary pressure related to RFA-induced biliary stenosis as an occult etiology for biloma formation.

**Liver Failure**

Liver failure is one of the most severe RFA-related complications as it can be fatal in patients with hepatic cirrhosis whose liver function is typically already impaired. Prior partial hepatectomy is another risk factor as these patients lack the parenchymal volume to mount an effective compensatory functional response. The acute (or acute on chronic) failure is thought to occur due to vascular injury, which results in hepatic infarction. Preprocedural imaging with careful electrode entry point planning is essential to avoid this complication. Another suggested cause of post-RFA liver failure is overly extensive ablation in the setting of cirrhosis. The destruction of impaired but functioning parenchyma may push the patient into overt liver failure.

**Pulmonary Complications**

Pneumothoraces, pleural effusions, and cases of pneumonia are examples of RFA-related pulmonary complications. As one might expect, pneumothorax is commonly associated with the treatment of hepatic lesions in close proximity to the diaphragm, for which an intercostal approach is necessary. Satisfactory electrode probe positioning in a safe window predetermined by preprocedural imaging reduces the risk. CT evaluation is required with dyspnea or chest pain are experienced by the patient following RFA. If present, admission to the hospital and vital sign monitoring may be warranted. For large, quickly enlarging, or symptomatic pneumothoraces, chest tube placement with serial chest x-rays is usually necessary.

**Cutaneous Thermal Injury**

Skin burns are a known complication related to RFA. They typically occur at two sites: the point of electrode probe entry and along the grounding pads. Life-threatening scorch injuries are rare but have been reported in the literature. Manufacturer increases in the number and size of the grounding pads have, in recent years, greatly reduced the occurrence of this complication because larger and more numerous pads more effectively disperse the high volume of energy generated by the electrical current. Additionally, satisfactory pad placement with adequate skin contact and equidistant positioning from the electrode probe is also essential in the prevention of skin burns. Asymmetric distribution of electrical current may occur when the pads are not appropriately positioned, which prevents temperature uniformity and, thus, higher temperatures in the pads closer to the probe, resulting in cutaneous damage.

**Tract Seeding**

The seeding of the electrode probe tract is a well-described phenomenon associated with percutaneous RFA. Transfer of tumor cells from the lesion to the probe tract occurs when viable cancer cells adhere to the probe on withdrawal following the procedure. Choosing the entry point with the least amount of hepatic parenchyma between the skin and the lesion, as well as decreasing the number of probe punctures, helps to decrease the frequency of this complication. Optimum, first-attempt probe positioning should be the goal. Furthermore, cauterization of the probe tract has also effectively lowered the rate of occurrence. Additional factors that place a patient at risk for developing tract seeding include cancer, which is poorly differentiated, subcapsular tumor location (a contraindication to tract cauterization), and multiple electrode probe insertions.

**Hepatic Vascular Damage**

With hemorrhage having been described above, remaining RFA-related vascular complications include thrombosis of the portal vein and/or hepatic vein as well as pseudoaneurysm formation. Coagulation with resultant thrombosis of vasculature in excess of 3 mm is rare when normal anatomical blood flow is present. Because of extensive collateralization of both arterial and venous blood supply to the liver, most thromboses are asymptomatic such that no intervention is necessary. Blood clots are the result of thermal endothelial damage, which leads to the aggregation of platelets and subsequent activation of the coagulation cascade. Care should be taken to avoid this complication, particularly in patients with cirrhosis, because it could push a patient with preexisting liver dysfunction in fulminant liver failure. In this setting, portal vein thrombosis represents a potentially life-threatening complication.

RFA-induced thermal damage to the hepatic artery may result in small-scale arterioportal shunting. The majority of these small defects will heal spontaneously. In the absence of self resolution, these shunts can be corrected with endovascular intervention.

**Visceral Damage**

While extremely rare, RFA-related damage to the abdominal organs has been reported in the literature. Peripherally located and subcapsular tumors (less than 1 cm from nearby organs) impart the highest risk. Additional factors that increase the risk of abdominal organ injury include prior abdominal surgery as well as chronic cholecystitis (which is known to cause adhesions between the liver and bowel). In these cases, an open or laparoscopic RFA approach is preferred to confirm these organs are physically separated. Hydrodissection (also known as artificial ascites) may help mitigate the risk. This technique involves the introduction of 5% dextrose or normal saline to the peritoneal cavity in order to increase the distance between the liver and abdominal viscera.