Psittacosis is noted for a normal white cell count with toxic granulation or a left shift on laboratory testing. Leukocytosis is uncommon but can be seen. Other markers of acute inflammation, such as the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), are often elevated.

Chest imaging is abnormal in the majority of the cases, most often revealing lobar infiltrates.

**Psittacosis Specific Testing**

Traditionally, serologic testing has been used to confirm suspected cases of psittacosis. Available serologic tests for psittacosis include complement fixation (CF) testing and micro-immunofluorescent (MIF) antibody testing with paired sera. MIF testing is more sensitive and specific for C. psittaci when compared to CF.

Monoclonal antibody techniques are being developed for diagnosing psittacosis, but studies demonstrating the sensitivity and specificity of these techniques are still lacking. DNA-based polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques have also been developed. They show promise as rapid diagnostic tools for diagnosing psittacosis but are not widely available. A 2016 study from the Netherlands that performed real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing in all patients hospitalized with CAP reported PCR testing to be highly reliable with a rapid turnaround time compared to traditional serologic testing.

An emerging diagnostic tool is metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS), which was shown to increase the rate of pathogen identification in severe community-acquired pneumonia cases from 40.8% (when using PCR) to 74.2% (when using mNGS).Legionella pneumophila, Chlamydia pneumoniae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae was noted. Blood and sputum cultures remained negative, but mNGS of blood and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid identified C. psittaci within 48 hours in all three patients. The subsequent history of pet parrots who had recently been sick was identified.

A 2022 study reported higher sensitivity of mNGS than PCR in blood for diagnosing psittacosis because mNGS can detect pathogens with an extremely low DNA load in the sample.

Culture is the most specific and accurate method to diagnose psittacosis; however, it should be noted that isolation of C. psittaci requires a biosafety level three facility due to the risk of transmission to laboratory personnel.

**Diagnostic Criteria for Psittacosis**

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has published guidelines for diagnosing psittacosis. In the appropriate clinical scenario, a diagnosis is made by meeting any one of the criteria listed below:

- Isolation of the causative organism from respiratory secretions

- A noted four-fold or greater increase in antibody titer between serum samples collected two weeks apart via the complement-fixation test (CFT) or micro-immunofluorescence (MIF)

- A single IgM antibody titer detected by MIF of 1:16 or higher