There are no set diagnostic criteria for Kikuchi disease, given its rarity and variable presentation

The initial lab work may reveal mildly elevated inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, ferritin), elevated aminotransferases and elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase. Leukopenia occurs in 20-58% of cases; leukocytosis is rare and occurs in 2-5% of cases. There may be atypical peripheral lymphocytes present in 25% of cases

Infectious workup should be initiated, guided by the history of any recent infectious illnesses, travel, animal exposures, tuberculosis exposures, or recent antibiotic use. Serology for various viral causes of lymphadenitis including testing for acute EBV, CMV, Hepatitis B, Herpes simplex, HIV, parvovirus B19, and viral respiratory causes such as parainfluenza should be obtained. Testing for other infectious causes of lymphadenitis such as Bartonella henselae, Toxoplasma gondii, Entamoeba histolytica, and Yersinia enterocolitica should be performed depending on exposure history and clinical presentation. Testing for tuberculous causes of lymphadenitis can be initiated with tuberculin skin test (TST) or interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA). Typically, patients present for evaluation for Kikuchi disease after having already failed trial of empiric antibiotics for common bacterial lymphadenitis etiologies such as Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus pyogenes, however, these common bacteria may remain in the differential.

Autoimmune workup should be performed, particularly evaluation for SLE with antinuclear antibodies, antibodies to double-stranded DNA, anti-Smith, anti-Ro, and anti-La antibodies. If the patient has positive lupus serologic markers, the histology must subsequently differentiate Kikuchi disease from lupus lymphadenitis. Serum ACE level can be checked, although is nondiagnostic for sarcoidosis. A personal or family history of autoimmune disease should be elucidated. Peripheral flow cytometry can be performed if there his suspicion for malignancy, and histology and immunohistochemistry will be crucial to rule out this diagnosis.

In terms of imaging, ultrasound of the affected lymph node(s) should be performed and may show hypervascularity and node enlargement typically 1-2cm, up to 7cm in the literature

Ultimately, excisional lymph node biopsy is required. The histological characteristics of Kikuchi disease are unique, as explained in the histopathology section of this paper, and will ultimately cinch the diagnosis. Occasionally, a repeat biopsy may be required if the initial biopsy is inconclusive due to the predominance of necrosis