**DNA Viruses**

**Herpesviridae**

**Primary Herpetic Gingivostomatitis (PHGS)**

As previously stated, PHGS is the primary infection with the herpes simplex virus (HSV-1 and HSV-2). Symptoms usually develop after five to ten days of incubation.

The characteristic oral lesions are small vesicles that break and transform into shallow, painful, gray-yellow ulcers.

Oral lesions often accompany systemic symptoms, including fever, sore throat, chills, and lymphadenopathy.

**Herpes Labialis**

Herpes labialis is the secondary infection with the herpes simplex virus due to the reactivation of the dormant virus.

A burning sensation may precede the eruption.

**Chickenpox**

Chickenpox is the primary infection with the varicella-zoster virus. The classic skin lesions are pruritic maculopapular and vesicular eruptions with an erythematous base on the trunk that then spread to extremities.

**Shingles**

Early signs of shingles are pain or paresthesia affecting a specific dermatome due to the involvement of sensory nerves.

Oral involvement is seen when the infection affects the maxillary or mandibular branches of the trigeminal nerve.

Moreover, a unilateral vesicular eruption on the oral mucosa and external ear may occur and is referred to as Ramsay Hunt Syndrome. It may be accompanied by unilateral facial nerve palsy due to geniculate ganglion involvement.

**Infectious Mononucleosis**

Even though the infection is asymptomatic in most cases, some patients may experience a triad of fever, reactive adenopathy, and pharyngitis.

**Oral Hairy Leukoplakia**

Oral hairy leukoplakia is an asymptomatic, white patch with a "hairy" appearance that cannot be scraped off. It usually develops on the lateral borders of the tongue.

**Cytomegalovirus**

Most cases of cytomegalovirus infection are asymptomatic, particularly in immunocompetent hosts.

Some patients may develop non-specific oral mucosal ulcerations, particularly in cases of coinfection with HSV or immunocompromised status. The ulcerations may become chronic and involve the lips, buccal mucosa, and oropharynx.

**Kaposi Sarcoma**

The clinical presentation of HHV-8 is characterized by red, blue, or purple macules, nodules, or plaques on the gingiva, hard palate, or tongue's dorsum. The lesions can be single or multiple.

**Papillomaviridae**

**Human Papillomavirus**

**Verruca Vulgaris**

Verruca vulgaris or common warts are benign oral lesions. They are sessile and papillomatous lesions that classically affect the lips, palate, and gingiva.

**Oral Squamous Papilloma**

Papillomas are the most common growth in the oral cavity.

**Condyloma Acuminatum**

Condyloma acutimatum lesions are transmitted sexually and have been reported in the oral cavity.

**Heck's Disease**

Heck's disease is a benign condition that often presents as multiple, painless, white, well-circumscribed papules or plaques in the tongue, labial, and buccal mucosa.

**Poxviridae**

**Molluscum Contagiosum**

Molluscum contagiosum infection often occurs in immunocompromised individuals.

**RNA Viruses**

**Enteroviruses**

**Herpangina**

Herpangina presents as oral vesicular lesions or pseudomembranous ulcers, classically in the posterior oropharynx involving the soft palate and tonsillar pillar. Patients usually report a sore throat.

**Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease**

Hand, foot, and mouth disease is characterized by mucocutaneous lesions and flu-like symptoms, including low-grade fever and generalized malaise.

The skin lesions begin as macular erythema and progress to vesicles. The vesicles may burst, ulcerate and become painful or coalesce to form larger lesions. Cutaneous lesions classically appear on the palms and soles in a linear distribution.

**Acute Lymphonodular Pharyngitis**

Acute lymphonodular pharyngitis is usually associated with other symptoms such as fever and sore throat. The oral lesions are often described as yellow or pink nodules in the posterior oropharynx.

**Paramyxoviruses**

**Measles or Rubeola**

Measles is characterized by three stages. The symptoms of the first stage usually include cough and conjunctivitis. Additionally, patients may develop red macules with a blue or white center located on the buccal mucosa, commonly referred to as Koplik spots. These may precede the second stage by 48 hours.