Nitric oxide (NO) is produced by converting L-arginine into NO via NO synthases (NOS) in various parts of the body. Endothelial NOS produces NO that acts explicitly as an endogenous vasodilator that diffuses into vascular cells and mediates smooth muscle relaxation by binding to guanylyl cyclase. Guanylyl cyclase converts GTP into cGMP, which activates cGMP-dependent protein kinases. These protein kinases then phosphorylate various ionic channels in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which causes calcium sequestration and prevents calcium mobilization within the cell. As a result, smooth muscle cells relax.

**Endogenous Pulmonary Vasodilation**

I delivery is direct to pulmonary vascular endothelial cells where vasodilation occurs and further reduces intrapulmonary shunting. The belief is that while NO causes myriad effects within the body, iNO is primarily limited to the lungs. This belief is partly because NO exposed to the bloodstream binds readily to hemoglobin, thus inactivating it and explaining why iNO causes pulmonary vasodilation with little chance of hypotension or systemic vasodilation.

**Inhibition of Platelet Aggregation**

NO additionally affects platelet activity. In vitro studies have revealed that NO can activate guanylate cyclase within platelets to accumulate intracellular cGMP. This cGMP subsequently activates protein kinases that reduce the binding of fibrinogen to GPIIb/IIIa and a subsequent partial reduction of platelet aggregation. Research has shown that patients with ARDS have elevated platelets and increased platelet activation within alveolar tissues. Samaha et al. conducted a study to investigate whether iNO and its anti-platelet aggregation effects would influence the platelets of ARDS patients. Their results found significant improvements in oxygenation, reduced pulmonary arterial pressure, and a decrease in ex-vivo platelet aggregation without a change in these patients' Ivy bleeding times. They concluded that the improvement in oxygenation and pulmonary circulation were attributable to the reduced platelet aggregation.

**Immunomodulation**

Research has observed that NO changes the balance of T helper 1 (TH1) and T helper 2 (TH2) cells. Specifically, NO decreases the proliferation rate of TH1 cells and cytokine IL-2 synthesis but increases the production of IL-4 cytokines from TH2 cells. In this manner, NO may inhibit inflammatory responses to viral and bacterial pathogens. Additionally, the belief is that NO affects leukocyte adhesion and recruitment.

**Pharmacodynamics/Pharmacokinetics****:******

- Route of Administration: Inhalation

- The onset of Action: Rapid, dose-dependent onset within minutes

- Absorption: Nitric oxide is absorbed systemically after inhalation. Nitric oxide crosses the pulmonary capillary bed, where it combines with oxyhemoglobin.

- Metabolism: Nitric oxide combines oxygen and water, produces nitrogen dioxide and nitrite, and interacts with oxyhemoglobin to produce methemoglobin and nitrate. Consequently, the end products of nitric oxide metabolism are mainly methemoglobin and nitrate.

- Half-Life: 2 to 6 seconds

- Route of Elimination: 70% of inhaled NO metabolites undergo renal elimination. The kidney clears nitrate from the plasma at rates corresponding to the glomerular filtration rate.