The management of ALF consists of supportive care, prevention, and management of complications, specific treatment when the exact etiology is known, and determination of prognosis and the need for liver support including possible liver transplantation.

**Supportive and Preventive Care**

- Access hemodynamic stability and the need for intravenous fluids and maintenance of acid-base levels and normal electrolytes. Vasopressors are indicated to maintain a mean arterial pressure of 75 mm Hg or higher to ensure adequate renal and cerebral perfusion.

- Monitor hematocrit for any bleeding, as the patients have coagulopathy and poor platelet functions. Blood products of platelets and fresh frozen plasma for coagulopathy is only indicated in patients with active bleeding or before an invasive procedure. Patients should be empirically started on proton pump inhibitors for prophylaxis of gastrointestinal bleed.

- Consider a fever workup including blood and urine cultures and start empirical antibiotics when required.

- Monitor hepatic encephalopathy and protect airway (aspiration risk) should the patient show signs of worsening encephalopathy. These patients should be intubated and should be on a protocol to avoid cerebral edema.

- Adequate nutrition with 1.0 to 1.5 gm of protein per kilogram per day should be administered.

- Monitor for hypoglycemia and maintain blood glucose between 160 to 200.

- Discontinue all home medications except the ones we identify essential to continue.

**Specific Treatment When the Exact Etiology is Known**

For patients with known or suspected acetaminophen-induced ALF, activated charcoal (if presented within 4 hours of ingestion) and prompt administration of N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) is indicated. Rising serum aminotransferases or falling serum aminotransferases along with progressively worsening coagulopathy indicates hepatic necrosis and progression of ALF with likely need for liver transplantation. NAC is also indicated for patients with ALF due to other causes except perhaps ischemic hepatitis and is particularly useful in those with early grades of encephalopathy.

Patients with hepatitis A and E associated ALF should receive supportive care as no specific anti-virals are known to be effective. Patients with acute or reactivation of hepatitis B should receive nucleus(t)ide analogs. Patients with suspected autoimmune hepatitis may benefit from intravenous methylprednisolone at a dose of 60 mg/day. In patients with suspected Amanita phalloides poisoning, gastric lavage, activated charcoal, and intravenous penicillin G at a dose of 1 g/kg/day may be administered.

Patients with identifiable Wilson disease or known hepatic vein thrombosis as the etiology for ALF should be considered for a liver transplant. Those with Budd-Chiari syndrome should be considered for TIPS placement as well as anticoagulation therapy.

Patients with herpes hepatitis or varicella zoster-related ALF should receive acyclovir (5 to 10 mg/kg IV every 8 hours). Patients with hepatitis due to Cytomegalovirus should be given intravenous ganciclovir at a dose of 5 mg/kg every 12 hours.

In pregnant patients with ALF likely secondary to the acute fatty liver of pregnancy or HELLP syndrome, prompt delivery of the fetus is recommended. Also, should the ALF does not resolve, we should again consider possible liver transplantation.

**Management of Complications**

Every attempt should be made to avoid the development of multi-organ dysfunction.

- Renal failure: It may occur due to hypovolemia, acute tubular necrosis or hepatorenal syndrome. Vasopressor therapy with norepinephrine or dopamine is indicated in severe hypotension. Renal-replacement may be considered as a bridge for a possible liver transplant. Continuous renal replacement therapy is preferred to hemodialysis in critically ill patients.

- Sepsis, including aspiration pneumonia and fever, should be covered with broad-spectrum antibiotics. Surveillance cultures of blood, sputum, and urine should be obtained in all patients with ALF.

- Metabolic disorders: Hypoglycemia occurs due to impaired glycogen production and gluconeogenesis, and will need continuous infusions of 10% to 20% glucose. Hypophosphatemia occurring due to ATP consumption in the setting of hepatocyte necrosis requires aggressive repletion. Alkalosis in ALF is due to hyperventilation, and acidosis with a pH less than 7.3 portends 95% mortality in acetaminophen overdose if the patient does not undergo a liver transplant. Hypoxemia may occur due to aspiration, acute respiratory distress syndrome, or pulmonary hemorrhage. Patients with encephalopathy greater than grade 2 should undergo endotracheal intubation for airway protection. Seizure-like activity may be treated with phenytoin or benzodiazepines.

- Cerebral edema: The most common cause of death in ALF is cerebral edema which leads to intracranial hypertension, ischemic brain injury and herniation. Patients with arterial ammonia levels higher than 200 micromoles per liter are at an increased risk for intracranial hypertension. Triggers for cerebral edema include hypoxia, systemic hypotension, decreased cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) and astrocyte swelling which occurs due to increased ammonia levels and glutamine production in the brain. Abnormal pupillary reflexes, muscular rigidity and decerebrate posturing when present indicate the onset of intracranial hypertension. Measures to keep the intracranial pressure (ICP) below 25 mm Hg and CPP above 50 mm Hg, if an ICP monitoring device is placed, should be undertaken. Such measures include elevation of the head of the bed to 30 degrees, avoiding unnecessary stimulation such as suctioning of the oropharynx and background noise, endotracheal intubation, and sedation in a patient with grade 3 encephalopathy and above,  prompt initiation of vasopressor therapy and renal replacement therapy, hyperventilation, and intravenous mannitol therapy.

- Encephalopathy: Encephalopathy is a key feature of ALF. CT of the head should be done in patients with grade 3 encephalopathy and above to assess for intracranial bleeding and cerebral edema.

- Coagulopathy: Like encephalopathy, coagulopathy is also a defining feature of ALF.  Bleeding events are rare despite the presence of severe coagulopathy. Hence routine correction of coagulopathy is not recommended unless in the setting of overt bleeding or before invasive procedures. Transfusions of platelets, plasma, and cryoprecipitate, may be given if indicated. Recombinant factor VII an administration can cause thrombus;  parenteral vitamin K therapy (slow intravenous infusion) may be considered if a nutritional deficiency is suspected or in cases of prolonged cholestasis.

**Liver Support and Liver Transplantation**

The etiology of ALF and the hospital prognosis could help physicians ascertain whether a particular patient is likely to improve or not, and hence need a liver transplant. Those several selection criteria for patients with ALF, to determine the need for liver transplantation exists, it is neither universally accepted, nor fully endorsed by the AASLD as the sole criteria to decide on liver transplantation.

Extracorporeal liver-assist devices have been used in clinical trials in patients with ALF with the aim of detoxification and restore synthetic functions. Recent multicenter trials involving the molecular adsorbent recirculating system and the porcine hepatocyte-based HepaAssist device have both shown to be of no survival benefit.

Liver transplantation, though not readily available is an option for selected patients. Because these patients are critically ill, they are at increased risk of graft complications, most commonly from infections and sepsis, which seems to be the most common etiology of liver graft failure in patients transplanted following ALF.