**Mechanisms of Formation of SEA**

- Hematogenous dissemination- in almost half of the cases with primary nidus from the skin, soft tissue, and urinary or respiratory tract infections.

- Contiguous spread- in 10 to 30% of cases, e.g., vertebral osteomyelitis or psoas muscle abscess.

- Direct inoculation-Neurosurgical interventions, lumbar puncture, epidural analgesia, and other invasive procedures in 15% of SEA.

- Idiopathic in around 20% of cases.

**Pathogenesis of Effects of SEA**

- Direct mechanical compression

- Ischaemic

- Septic thrombophlebitis, and

- Inflammatory process mediated through bacterial toxins.

Most commonly occurs within the thoracic and lumbar regions owing to the following factor:

- Larger epidural space

- An abundance of infection-liable fat, and

- The presence of low pressure vertebral venous system (Batson) communicates freely with the abdominal and pelvic venous systems.

**Abscess Locations**

- Anterior - secondly to pyogenic spondylitis or discitis

- Posterior - following hematogenous dissemination.

- Circumferential.

**Etiology Behind SEA**

- Staphylococcus aureus is seen in almost two-thirds of cases. S. aureus is also responsible for many other clinical mimickers, such as osteomyelitis, diskitis, sepsis, and endocarditis. MRSA infection is commonly observed among patients with implantable spinal or vascular devices.

- Coagulase-negative staphylococci, such as epidermidis, follow spinal procedures.

- Gram-negative bacteria, particularly Escherichia coli (urinary tract infection) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (intravenous drug users).

- Rarely anaerobic actinomycosis or nocardiosis, mycobacteria, candida, aspergillus, echinococcus).