**Oral Dosage**

Naltrexone is available as an oral tablet (50 mg), and the usual dose for alcohol treatment is 50 to 100 mg. Dosing should start at 25 mg orally for a single dose and be repeated in an hour if there are no withdrawal signs. Naltrexone can be given orally with or without food. Administration with or after meals may minimize adverse gastrointestinal (GI) effects.

**Injection Dosage**

Naltrexone is also available in a depot injection (380 mg). The IM form requires injection using provided needles for administration into the upper outer quadrant of the gluteal area; clinicians should avoid injection into the blood vessel.

**Note**

- The patient first needs detoxification from opioids before starting naltrexone; the patient must be opioid-free (including tramadol) for at least 7 to 10 days. Advise patients not to self-administer opioids while receiving naltrexone therapy.

- Since there is a possibility of opioid withdrawal, the recommended approach is to try a naloxone challenge to confirm the appropriateness of the treatment plan.

**Naloxone Challenge**

- Clinicians understand that there is no completely reliable method to determine if a patient has an adequate opioid-free period to start naltrexone treatment. The naloxone test should not be performed when a patient shows clinical signs or symptoms of opioid withdrawal or when the patient's urine contains opioids.

- The naloxone test is used by injecting 0.2 mg naloxone IV and observing for 30 seconds for signs or symptoms of opioid withdrawal. If there is no evidence of opioid withdrawal, inject 0.6 mg of naloxone to observe for an additional 20 minutes. A low dose of 0.1 mg IV has produced a diagnostic response to the naloxone test in some patients.
- Alternatively, naloxone can be injected subcutaneously with 0.8 mg naloxone to observe the patient for 20 minutes for signs or symptoms of opioid withdrawal.

- Test interpretation: Monitor vital signs and observe the patient for signs and symptoms of opioid withdrawal, such as nausea, vomiting, sweating, changes in blood pressure, dysphoria, pupillary dilation, yawning, tearing, craving for opioids, rhinorrhea, stuffy nose, uneasiness, abdominal cramps, poor appetite, sense of fear, disrupted sleep patterns, skin erythema, fidgeting,  poor ability to focus, mental lapses, muscle aches, cramps, piloerection, fever, irritability, anxiety, depression, changes in blood pressure, bone or joint pains, backache, tremors, sensations of skin-crawling, and fasciculations. If signs and symptoms of withdrawal appear, no additional naloxone should be administered.

- If the test is positive, don't initiate naltrexone hydrochloride therapy. Instead, repeat the challenge test in 24 hours.
- If the test is negative, naltrexone hydrochloride therapy could be started if no contraindications are present.
- In case of any doubt about the test result, hold; don't start naltrexone hydrochloride. Repeat the test in 24 hours.

**Opioid Use Disorder**

- For opioid use disorder, naltrexone can be started at a lower dose of 25 mg once daily for a few days and then increased to 50 mg once daily, 100 mg every other day, 150 mg every 3rd day, or 380 mg injection depot form for monthly administration.

- According to ASAM guidelines, extended-release injectable naltrexone 380 mg should be administered by deep IM injection in the gluteal muscle every four weeks.

- Naltrexone is typically combined with an alpha-2 agonist, which minimizes patient discomfort during withdrawal and shortens the duration of opioid withdrawal. Another benefit of rapid opiate detoxification is the reduced time between opioid use and the initiation of sustained naltrexone treatment to prevent relapse. Rapid opiate detoxification completion rates using naltrexone and clonidine range from 75% to 81% compared to 40% for methadone and clonidine alone.

**Alcohol Use Disorder**

- American Psychiatric Association practice guidelines for alcohol use disorder recommend naltrexone in patients with moderate-to-severe alcohol use disorder.

- For alcohol use disorder, naltrexone can be given orally 50 mg once daily, 100 mg every other day, 150 mg every third day, or a 380-mg injection depot form for monthly administration.

- Studies suggest that carriers of the G-allele may experience a higher level of craving and a stronger euphoria following alcohol use. Naltrexone, 50 to 150 mg per day orally, appears to shorten subsequent relapses, whether used in the oral form or once per monthly 380 mg injection, especially in individuals with the G-allele of the AII8G polymorphism of the mu-opioid receptor.

**Heroin Use Disorder**

- Naltrexone maintenance and psychosocial therapy effectively reduce heroin use, but medication adherence is low. Depot injection formulation lasting up to 4 weeks markedly improves medication adherence, retention, and drug use.

- Subcutaneous naltrexone implants in Russia, China, and Australia have doubled treatment retention and reduced relapse to half that of oral naltrexone.

**Specific Patient Populations**

**Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**The AUC of naltrexone increases in liver cirrhosis patients, so the patient's liver function must be considered when dosing the drug in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

**Patient with Renal Impairment:**Naltrexone and its primary metabolite are excreted mainly in the urine; caution is advised administering naltrexone to patients with renal impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Naltrexone is classified as category C for use during pregnancy, which means that the risk to the fetus of adverse effects cannot be ruled out. There is limited research available related to the use of naltrexone during pregnancy. Animal reproduction studies have shown adverse effects. If a female treated with naltrexone to treat opioid use disorder becomes pregnant, naltrexone therapy should be stopped if the mother and the physician agree that the risk of relapse is low. According to ACOG, the decision regarding naltrexone treatment during pregnancy requires a risk-benefit analysis considering the possible risk of relapse with naltrexone discontinuation. Methadone or buprenorphine is usually preferred during pregnancy for opioid use disorder.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Naltrexone is also present in breast milk. Considering the importance of treatment for the mother, a decision on whether to discontinue breastfeeding or discontinue the drug needs to be made.

**Geriatric Patients:**Naltrexone is widely used to treat alcohol use disorder in elderly patients.

**Pediatric Patients:**The safety of naltrexone in pediatric patients(<18 years) has not been demonstrated.