When a syncopal event is identified as cardiac in origin, further workup should involve a 12 lead EKG, rhythm monitoring, and potential further studies such as an echocardiogram, implantable cardiac monitor, or Holter and/or stress test.

The EKG is a helpful tool for identifying arrhythmias. Sometimes it will diagnose active arrhythmias such as conduction block-induced bradycardias to less than 50 beats per minute. Sinus pauses for more than 3 seconds or nonsustained ventricular tachycardias. At other times it will demonstrate suggestive findings such as bifascicular blocks (either a full left bundle branch block or a right bundle branch block couples with a left anterior or left posterior fascicular block), QRS segments prolonged to greater than 120 milliseconds, Mobitz I second degree AV blocks, complete AV blocks, premature ventricular contraction QRS complexes, early repolarization, or Q waves which represent evidence of a preceding ischemic cardiac event resulting myocardial infarction. Electrocardiogram can also identify intrinsic conditions that predispose a patient to intermittent arrhythmias, such as Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (delta waves), Brugada syndrome (semi-right-bundle branch block and coved ST-segment elevation greater than 2 mm with inverted T waves in leads V1-V3), Long-QT syndrome (prolonged QT interval), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (left atrial enlargement, left ventricular hypertrophy criteria possibly with dagger-shaped Q waves in inferolateral leads), and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (epsilon waves).

Basic lab tests, such as a complete blood count and basic metabolic panel, are frequently performed on patients presenting to an emergency department with syncope. However, these tests do not assist in predicting cardiac etiology.

Once cardiac syncope is suspected, if no arrhythmia is identified, echocardiography is perhaps the most useful follow-up diagnostic test as it will directly identify structural abnormalities, as described above. In a retrospective study of 128 patients suspected of having a cardiac syncope, the echocardiogram confirmed diagnosis in 48% of patients and 77% of patients with a specific cardiac diagnosis.

If cardiac syncope is not secondary to a mechanical problem and no arrhythmia is detected on initial EKG, stress testing and longer-term rhythm monitoring can be effective in catching the diagnosis. In cases of exertional syncope, exercise stress testing will often reveal the diagnosis.

The electrophysiologic study is another method that has been utilized to identify cases of cardiac syncope. This study involves the placement of catheter tips at multiple locations within the heart. Testing begins at the SA node and progresses throughout the remainder of the heart. During the study, the heart is paced. An electric current is injected into various nonconducting endocardium regions and along the conduction pathway to attempt to reproduce an arrhythmia. Slow and/or fast pacing and proarrhythmic drugs may also be utilized for this purpose. When an arrhythmia occurs, this study allows the electrophysiologist to find the exact source of the irregular electrical activity and allows for any misfiring cells' ablation. This procedure can thus be both diagnostic and therapeutic. Theoretically, this sounds like an excellent test. However, in practice, this test has poor sensitivity and specificity. It is only recommended in patients with concurrent ischemic heart disease who would not otherwise receive an implanted cardiac defibrillator or other high-risk patients in whom no other tests could reveal a diagnosis. Electrophysiologic studies are only considered diagnostic if they induce sinus bradycardia with a prolonged sinus node recovery time of more than 525 milliseconds, a bundle branch block with tachycardia or a His-Purkinje block (second or third degree), sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia in a patient with preexisting cardiac infarction, or recurrent symptoms in the setting of rapid supraventricular tachycardia.