Classically, aortoenteric fistulas initially present with minor "herald" gastrointestinal (GI) bleed followed later by catastrophic rapid exsanguination that can be life-threatening. However, this is certainly not always the case, and many patient’s initial presentations include dramatic hemorrhage. One described symptomological triad of AEF includes GI bleeding, abdominal pain, and a palpable abdominal mass; nevertheless, in clinical practice, this triad has only been demonstrated in an abysmal 6% to 12% of patients at initial presentation.

Aortoenteric erosion (AEE) must be distinguished from AEF and is typically done so clinically as erosion tends to present as chronic intermittent episodes of bleeding. In contrast, AEFs tend to present with massive overt hemorrhage. As in a review of patient presentation with AEF, melena, and hemorrhagic shock was the most common presenting symptoms, followed by abdominal pain and hematemesis.

The time from prior aortic surgery to an episode of bleeding in secondary AEFs further complicates the diagnostician’s work. Cases of secondary AEF have been reported two weeks after an aortic operation to more than ten years later. In any patient with a known history of an aneurysmal disease or prior history of aortic surgery who presents with enteric bleeding, a high clinical index of suspicion for AEF must be maintained. A more chronic clinical course is consistent with a diagnosis of AEE, which may present with recurrent septicemia with those pathogens typically found in the enteric tract. If the diagnosis of AEE is made, infection of any existing aortic grafts ought to be assumed.