Zinc supplementation has been observed to decrease the risk of infection in various studies.

Treatment begins with oral replacement. In adults, 2 to 3 mg/kg per day or 20-40 mg daily dose often cures all clinical manifestations within 1 to 2 weeks. Even in patients with acrodermatitis enteropathica, a disease of malabsorption, oral replacement with 1 to 2 mg/kg per day is still the standard of therapy with life-long supplementation.

Recommended daily elemental intake is:

- 3 mg/day for children less than 4 years

- 5 mg/day for children between 4 and 8 years

- 8 mg/day for children between 9 and 13 years

- 9 mg/day for women (non-pregnant and non-lactating)

- 11 mg/day for men

- 11 to 12 mg/day in pregnant and lactating women

In patients with severe deficiency because of malnutrition or malabsorption in disorders such as Crohn disease or short bowel syndrome, higher doses of zinc (more than 50 mg/day) may be acutely needed.

For preterm infants with zinc deficiency, normal breastfeeding is usually sufficient for correction, and the deficit usually resolves within weeks with no clinical symptoms. However, maternal breast milk can be zinc deficient if the mother's stores are depleted. Also, low maternal breast milk secretion of zinc from the SLC30A2 mutation can occur. If breast secretion is low, the infant will need supplemental replacement.

At doses more than 50 mg/day, gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea, abdominal discomfort, and diarrhea commonly occur. Furthermore, doses more than 150 mg/day may adversely affect the immune status and lipid profile. These higher doses can also impair the absorption of iron and copper and can potentially lead to genito-urinary problems.

When zinc is given for extended periods of time, particularly at high doses, it is important to monitor the levels of copper in the blood.

Formulations of zinc supplements include:

- Zinc sulfate

- Zinc acetate

- Zinc aspartate

- Zinc orotate

- Zinc gluconate

Patients should be monitored for response to therapy and serum zinc levels should be checked after three to six months of supplementation. If there is an inadequate response, the zinc dose may be increased; however, close monitoring for toxicity should be done on higher doses.

In acrodermatitis enteropathica, supplementation is taken for life. The dose should be individualized in cases where long-term zinc supplementation may be needed and it should be guided by serial serum zinc levels. Additionally, regular assessment of copper and concurrent copper supplementation may become necessary as zinc competes with copper absorption.

Parenteral zinc becomes necessary rarely, except for cases where there is an intestinal failure and/or the patient is on prolonged total parenteral nutrition.