# Introduction

The heart is a four-chambered organ hemodynamically functioning as a reservoir and a pump; it receives deoxygenated blood from the systemic circulation through the superior and inferior vena cava in the right atrium and oxygenated blood from the lung via the four pulmonary veins. The heart pumps deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle to the lungs and at the same time pumps oxygenated blood from the left ventricle into the aorta. These processes are orchestrated by the electric conduction system which coordinates the rhythmic contractions of the atria and ventricles, and the opening and closure of the heart valves. The heart valves are especially important to effectively maintain the systolic and diastolic phase of the cardiac cycle. There are two types of heart valves; the atrioventricular valves (mitral, tricuspid) and the semilunar valves (aortic and pulmonic). The pulmonic valve physically separates the right ventricle from the pulmonary trunk. While there is more literature on the other heart valves, little is known about the intricate function of the pulmonary valve and its role in various disorders.

# Structure and Function

The pulmonary valve is the semilunar valve that separates the right ventricle from the pulmonary trunk. Anatomically, the annulus (ring-like connective tissue) of this valve delimits the right ventricle chamber at the junction of the pulmonary arterial trunk.

The pulmonary valve is separated from the tricuspid valve by a muscular fold, known as the ventriculoinfundibular fold. At its septal margin, the fold forms the supraventricular crest and this fold inserts between the anterior and posterior limbs of the septomarginal trabeculation. This same fold also forms the subpulmonary infundibulum of the right ventricular outlet.

Histologically, the pulmonary valve consists of stratified extracellular matrix compartments of four layers which are the arterialis, fibrosa, spongiosa, and the ventricularis layer. The arterialis faces the artery, and the ventricularis layer faces the ventricle.

The pulmonary valve opens at the systolic phase of the cardiac cycle enabling the deoxygenated blood to be pumped from the right ventricle to the pulmonary circulation. It closes at the diastolic phase of the cardiac cycle, allowing sufficient filling of the right ventricle. The pulmonary valve has a diameter of about 20 mm.

# Embryology

The semilunar valves develop as the endocardial cushion forms in the outflow tract (OFT) of the primordial looped heart tube; this is the first sign of valvulogenesis. Later this endocardial cushion fold becomes a primordial heart valve with highly proliferative valve progenitor cells. During remodeling and maturation, the valves are rudimentary. The primordial valve will grow and elongate into a thin fibrous cusp of the semilunar valve. These leaflets will become stratified into compartments consisting of highly organized collagen, proteoglycan, and elastin rich extracellular matrix during late gestation and soon after birth. This valves continues to mature and undergoes remodeling well into the juvenile stages.

The embryonic leaflet from which the valve derives is the splanchnic mesoderm.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The pulmonary valve has no distinct blood supply, nor does it possess any lymphatic drainage.

# Nerves

The pulmonary valve receives its innervation from the nerve branch of cardiac ventricular plexus. The entire leaflets contain these nerve terminals except for the coapting edge (the ventricular layer or the lower region of each leaflet). Compared to the aortic valve leaflets, the pulmonary valve leaflets contained more numerous nerve terminals. The activity of acetylcholinesterase or tyrosine hydroxylase and neuropeptide Y are observable in these nerve terminals. With age, the density and distribution of innervation in the aortic valve leaflets decrease, but this does not occur in the pulmonary valve leaflets.

# Muscles

The pulmonary valve attaches to infundibulum basally, and the muscle of the subpulmonary infundibulum raises this valve above the ventricular septum; so it is positioned superiorly and becomes the most superior of the cardiac valves. This anatomical configuration enables the surgeon to resect the pulmonary valve and its basal attachment within the infundibulum from the rest of the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) safely.

# Physiologic Variants

There are several physiologic variants of the pulmonary valve. The valve may be unicuspid, bicuspid, or even atretic. Any abnormality of these components can cause congenital semilunar valve disease (CSVD).

# Surgical Considerations

**Surgical valvotomy:**

There are two types of pulmonary valve valvotomies: closed and open valvotomy. The surgeon performs a closed valvotomy by making an incision at the right ventricular outflow tract, and introducing a cutting valvulotome is introduced. This process allows one to cut the valvar diaphragm transversely, and the stenosed pulmonary valve gets converted into a bicuspid valve. The open valvotomy is done through the pulmonary artery and aided by hypothermia or by cardiopulmonary bypass. The main indication for this surgery is a relief of right ventricular obstruction.

**Ross procedure:**

The pulmonary valve is usable as a replacement for the diseased mitral or aortic valve.

# Clinical Significance

**Bicuspid pulmonary valve**

This valve anomaly has been reported in several case reports and may present as an isolated finding or associated with other anomalies such as pulmonary artery aneurysm, transposition of great arteries, or an atrial septal defect.

**Quadricuspid pulmonary valve**

This valve anomaly is even rarer, and on autopsy, the incidence of this anomaly varies from 1 to 5 cases per 20000 necropsies.

**Pentacuspid pulmonary valve**

To date, there are only two case reports of the pentacuspid pulmonary valve.

**Pulmonary stenosis**

This is a common congenital defect which affects 7% of children with congenital heart disorders.

**Pulmonary atresia**

This is the most severe end of the spectrum for pulmonary stenosis, and it can occur with or without VSD. Other abnormalities such as tricuspid atresia or right ventricular free wall dysplasia usually accompany this disease.

**Pulmonary regurgitation**, when it occurs as a congenital disorder, may be accompanied by a VSD. Other etiologies such as congenital anomalies (quadricuspid or bicuspid valve), hypoplasia, post-repair of tetralogy of Fallot or prolapse of the pulmonary valve may also be present. Carcinoid syndrome can also produce abnormalities due to thickening and shortening of the valve.

**Pulmonary valve endocarditis**

Pulmonic valve involvement in endocarditis accounts for 1.5 to 2% of total cases.

**Pulmonary balloon valvuloplasty:**

Pulmonary balloon valvuloplasty is a procedure to repair the stenotic pulmonary valve of the heart percutaneously. The patient groin is sterilized and draped, and the patient is anticoagulated during the procedure. A catheter is inserted to the left femoral vein and advanced to the right ventricle to monitor its pressure. An 18 gauge cannula is inserted to the left femoral artery to monitor systemic pressure. Then a wedge catheter is inserted to the right femoral vein and advanced into the pulmonary artery. A "J" guidewire is then inserted through this catheter, and once in place, the wedge catheter gets removed. The dilation catheter advanced through the guidewire and positioned across the stenotic pulmonary valve. While being stabilized by the guidewire, the balloon is dilated by hand with dilute contrast material at the pressure of 45 PSI.

**Electrocardiography**:

Based on an electrocardiography study of 100 subjects with isolated pulmonary stenosis, i.e., with an intact atrioventricular septum grouped into 4 (based on right ventricle systolic pressure), no diagnostic pattern was apparent that could aid diagnosis, irrespective of the severity of the lesion. The most common ECG finding is right ventricular hypertrophy.

**Echocardiography:**

For pulmonary stenosis, this diagnostic tool is useful in detecting the site of the stenosis, determine the cause, quantify the severity, and determine treatment strategies. The transesophageal echocardiography can visualize the pulmonary valve and right ventricular outflow tract more clearly.

On X-ray, the abnormalities that may present are right ventricular enlargement, right atrial enlargement, prominent pulmonary trunk, and signs of congestive heart failure.

**CT &****MRI**

Nowadays, these modalities are increasingly being used to evaluate the anatomy and functional assessment of the pulmonary valve and right ventricle. CT scan depicts with great detail the pulmonary valve, perivalvular structures, and pulmonary artery branches. Meanwhile, MRI is used postoperatively to evaluate the pulmonary valve function and grading of pulmonary regurgitation.

# Other Issues

There are rare cases in which the pulmonary valve is absent; in particular in the absent pulmonary valve syndrome (APVS).