Obtaining an appropriate history is a crucial factor in conversion disorder. It is crucial to make the patient feel comfortable and to encourage them to share their symptoms, but also their story. One method to consider is creating a list of the patient’s symptoms at the initial visit; allow the patient to list all symptoms that they have been experiencing recently. This initial step is essential, both so that one can document any subtle changes in symptoms throughout the illness and see if the patient lists multiple somatic symptoms. It is essential to ask the patient for a list of symptoms for which they have received treatment previously or suspected neurologic diagnoses. The clinician should focus on gathering details, such as the time frame of symptoms and context. Without revealing the suspected diagnosis, it is important to ask about recent events or stressors in the patient’s life and complete a psychiatric history. Family history should also include psychiatric components. The clinician may wait until the end of the interview to ask for psychiatric history. If the patient has experienced similar symptoms in the past, what was their diagnosis, and how were they treated? Patients with a history of conversion disorder are more likely to have repeat episodes, even without a past diagnosis. These questions can also help shed light on the patient’s view of other providers and to show which specialists they have seen and what work-up they have had. Involving the patient is crucial to building rapport; ask them what they feel is going on. Instead of focusing on what the patient cannot do at the time of the interview, ask them to describe the last time they remember being symptom-free and ask them to describe what a typical day looks like for them.

Conversion disorder cannot truly be considered a diagnosis of exclusion, but diagnosis relies on the clinician to exclude major neurologic diseases and to look for inconsistencies on an exam, as well as clinical signs and symptoms that are not characteristic of organic disorders. Inconsistent symptoms, negative labs/imaging, and/or a significant psychiatric disorder are reliable indicators of conversion disorder. However, the clinician should still exclude all other organic disorders with a thorough exam. Also, patients with conversion disorder may have comorbid neurologic disorders, potentially making the diagnosis more difficult.

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5 edition (DSM-5) categorizes conversion disorder as part of the “somatic symptom and related disorders.” In previous editions of the DSM, clear psychologic comorbidities were a required part of the diagnosis and the ability to show that the symptoms were not intentionally produced.la belle indifférence” (a patient’s apparent indifference to their condition) as a diagnostic criterion. These are now considered features that support the diagnosis of conversion disorder. Other supporting features include associated dissociative symptoms and recent psychological or physical trauma.

The diagnostic criteria for conversion disorder, according to the DSM-5, are as follows:

- One or more symptoms of altered voluntary motor or sensory function.

- Clinical findings can provide evidence of incompatibility between the symptom and recognized neurological or medical conditions.

- Another medical or mental disorder does not better explain the symptom or deficit.

- The symptom or deficit results in clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other vital areas of functioning or warrants medical evaluation.

The presence of symptoms defines an acute episode of conversion disorder for less than six months, and persistent conversion disorder includes the presence of symptoms for greater than six months. Conversion disorder can also have the specifier of with or without the psychological stressor. The DSM-5 recognizes several subtypes of conversion disorder, as listed below. There are many ways to differentiate between organic disorders and these subtypes of conversion disorder.

- Psychogenic nonepileptic seizures – This is the most common subtype of conversion disorder. Psychogenic nonepileptic seizures characteristically demonstrate features such as generalized limb shaking, hip thrusting, and lack of postictal confusion. They may be longer in duration than an actual seizure, with a waxing and waning course, and these patients typically do not lose control of bowel or bladder function or endure injury (such as tongue-biting). They will have no paroxysmal activity on an electroencephalogram. They often do not respond to antiepileptic medications or exhibit worsening of seizure-like activity with attempted treatment. One feature that may present on physical exam is forced eye closure; an examiner will encounter resistance when trying to open the patient’s eyes, which is not characteristic of an epileptic seizure.

- Paralysis or weakness – Weakness is a common presenting symptom with conversion disorder. When paralysis occurs, it is usually confined to one-half of the patient’s body or a single limb. It does not follow any specific anatomical pattern. When paraplegia occurs, normal deep tendon reflexes will still be present, and the Babinski sign will be absent. The most apparent sign of psychogenic weakness is inconsistency. It is essential that the examiner observes the patient carefully during both examinations and when they engage in other actions, such as entering or leaving the room. Common tests/signs used to identify psychogenic weakness are as follows:

- Hoover’s sign – This simple test has its basis on the fact that patients extend their hip when our contralateral hip flexes against resistance. This test is useful for patients with functional weakness in the lower extremities; the examiner has the patient lay supine, places one hand under the affected heel, and asks the patient to lift their unaffected leg against resistance. Patients with functional weakness will have downward pressure on the affected heel.

- Co-contraction sign – Co-contraction is the contraction of an antagonist muscle (such as the triceps) when the agonist muscle contracts (such as the biceps). This test is possible in any agonist/antagonist muscle group to detect the absence of true weakness.

- Arm-drop test – In this test, the examiner holds the patient’s outstretched arm in front of them and then releases it. Jerky or slow descent of the arm onto the patient’s lap is typical of functional weakness.

- Sternocleidomastoid test – Patients with conversion disorder will often exhibit weakness when asked to rotate their head towards the affected side, whereas patients with the organic disease will not.

- Collapsing weakness – This phenomenon can be elicited by asking a patient to hold one of their limbs in a specific position; the examiner then applies light force to the limb, and it appears to “collapse” suddenly.

- Abnormal movement – Several psychogenic movement disorders are common in conversion disorder, as listed below. Features typical of all psychogenic movement disorders include rapid onset, improvement with distracting tasks (such as counting or performing physical tasks simultaneously), and variability (in frequency, amplitude, or affected region of the body). As with paralysis and weakness, it is essential to carefully observe the patient in several settings to pick up these indicators.

- Tremor – Functional tremors are often present at rest and with action. They usually fluctuate in frequency. Organic tremors are present either with rest or action and have a rhythmic consistency. Functional tremors tend to be abrupt in onset (whereas organic tremors are more gradual), often triggered by an emotional or traumatic experience. Upon onset, functional tremors are typical of maximum severity and may start unilaterally. If weights are applied to the affected limb, patients with a functional tremor will generally exhibit an increase in tremor amplitude; patients with organic tremors will show a decrease in tremor amplitude. An examiner can also ask a patient to make a rhythmic movement with their unaffected limb. The unaffected limb tends to take on the frequency/rhythm of the affected limb, or the patient is unable to keep a steady rhythm; this is called entrainment.

- Gait disorder – Functional gait disorder is characterized by a gait that does not adhere to typical patterns seen in neurologic/organic disorders. Patients with unilateral weakness of one leg tend to drag their leg behind them and maintain their hip in internal or external rotation, which causes the affected foot to point outwards or inwards. Several other features are commonly seen in functional gait disorder. The first is sudden knee-buckling, with prevention from an actual fall. Another feature is a “walking on ice” pattern, where the patient acts as if they are walking on a slippery surface, with stiff knees and ankles, broad and slow gait, and arms sometimes abducted. Patients with functional gait disorder may also exhibit excessively slow gait initiation and the appearance of their feet sticking to the ground. They may also engage in pseudoataxia, with a very unsteady gait, crossed legs, and/or sudden side-stepping. Examination of these patients will likely reveal uneconomic postures that displace the natural center of gravity.

- Dystonia – Features seen in functional dystonia include severe pain of the affected limb, adult-onset, fixed posture (present even during sleep), a clenched fist, or an inverted foot. There are often inconsistent movements and multiple somatic complaints associated. Patients with functional dystonia will often have complete remission of symptoms after the placebo, suggestion, or administration of general anesthesia.

- Myoclonus – Organic myoclonus is characterized by jerking or spastic movements caused by sudden muscle contractions or decreased muscle tone. Functional myoclonus will be inconsistent in frequency or amplitude. It may also resolve with placebo treatment or suggestion. Patients with functional myoclonus can be very stimuli sensitive, though unlike a typical response to an abrupt stimulus, they will exhibit a long and variable latency.

- Anesthesia or sensory loss – Functional sensory loss is a less specific manifestation of conversion disorder. Often, the sensory loss does not follow typical dermatomal patterns or patterns indicative of neurologic disorders. Patients may report a sharp demarcation of their sensory loss, which is often a joint or at the end of their extremity, shoulder, or groin. Other patients may exhibit a “hemisensory syndrome,” with sensory loss of an entire side of their body; this can be accompanied by a sensation of feeling “cut in half” or ipsilateral hearing/vision issues. One test that is possible with midline splitting involves placing a tuning fork over the left and right side of the sternum or the frontal bone. Patients should feel the vibrations equally despite their supposed sensory loss, as these bones should vibrate as a single unit. However, patients with functional sensory loss often do not feel the vibration on the affected side.

- Special sensory symptom – This category includes visual (blindness, tunnel vision, double vision), hearing, and olfactory disturbances.

Visual disturbances – In general, visual disturbances are very common in conversion disorder. If a patient exhibits complete blindness, they are more likely to have factitious symptoms. In conversion disorder, the patient’s pupillary reflex is present. We would expect a recent diagnosis of true blindness to result in the patient having some difficulty maneuvering and perhaps increased incidence of injury, with superficial bruising/wounds; this is not present in conversion disorder. The following tests can aid in proper diagnosis:

- Mirror test – This test involves holding a mirror in front of the patient with their eyes open. The examiner moves the mirror from side to side, and the test is positive if the patient tracks themselves in the mirror, indicating that they are not truly blind.

- Fingertip test – In this test, the patient is asked to bring the tips of their index fingers together. Patients with conversion disorder usually exhibit difficulty with this task, whereas truly blind patients use proprioception to complete the test appropriately.

- Signature test – This simple test involves asking the patient to write their signature on a piece of paper. Patients with conversion disorder will often be unable to complete this test, but truly blind patients can write their signatures without difficulty.

- Optokinetic test - This test involves placing a large rotating drum, which has black and white vertical stripes on it, in front of the patient’s eyes. If one observes optokinetic nystagmus, this indicates that the patient’s brain can detect the stripes.

- Menace reflex – The menace reflex is tested by presenting a threat to the patient’s vision. An example would be quickly bringing the examiner’s hand close to the patient’s face as if they were to strike the patient. Patients with conversion disorder will typically blink or flinch, whereas blind patients will not.

- Tearing reflex – The tearing reflex is tested by placing a strong light in front of the patient’s eyes. If their vision is intact, as is the case with conversion disorder, the patient will start to tear up.

Olfactory or hearing disturbances are less common than visual disturbances. Patients with conversion disorder typically report anosmia or deafness. Patients with anosmia can take a taste test, in which they will usually indicate a normal sense of taste. In true cases of anosmia, patients have a decreased sense of taste or exhibit some signs of nutritional deficiency/malnourishment. In patients with symptoms of deafness, the examiner can attempt to confront the patient with a loud sound, which will usually elicit a blink or some form of the startle response.

- Swallowing symptoms – Patients with swallowing symptoms typically describe the sensation of a lump or tightness in their throats, which is referred to as globus sensation or globus pharyngeus. This functional esophageal disorder has no apparent physiologic cause, including no underlying structural abnormality, gastroesophageal reflux disease, or motility disorder. It is also seen in patients without conversion disorder, though they often have a comorbid psychiatric condition. Other features of globus pharyngeus include occurrence in between meals and the absence of odynophagia or dysphagia.

- Speech symptom – Several symptoms of impaired speech can occur with conversion disorder. The most common symptom is functional dysphonia (hoarseness or whispering), but other symptoms include slurred speech, articulatory issues, stuttering, foreign accent syndrome, and mutism. The examiner can ask patients with symptoms of functional dysphonia to cough or sing during lung exam; often, they will be able to perform these functions, whereas patients with true dysphonia have difficulty doing so. The inspection of the vocal cords will be normal.