# Continuing Education Activity

Periodontitis is a disease of the tissue surrounding the tooth structure. The disease is affected by both local as well as systemic etiological factors. Periodontitis is one of the most common diseases associated with the oral cavity. It is important to treat the disease promptly as it not only results in tooth loss but also affects the general health of the patient. The activity reviews the pathogenesis of periodontitis and reviews its diagnosis and treatment. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients affected by periodontitis.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the role of dental biofilm in development of periodontitis. 
- Summarize the differences between chronic periodontitis and aggressive periodontitis. 
- Review treatment considerations for periodontitis.
- Explain a well-integrated, interprofessional team approach to caring for patients with periodontitis to improve patient outcomes.

# Introduction

Approximately 700 species of microorganisms colonize the human oral cavity.

# Etiology

The primary causative agent resulting in periodontal disease is the mixed bacterial colonization in the oral tissue.

Loe et al. 1965, by their pioneering study of "Experimental Gingivitis in Man" confirmed the role of dental plaque in the genesis of gingival and periodontal disease.

# Epidemiology

All the cases of gingivitis do not progress into cases of periodontitis as it depends on the host response.

# Pathophysiology

To understand the pathophysiology of periodontal disease, it is essential to know about the complex dental biofilm as well as the Immune response associated with the disease.

Dental plaque is a complex biofilm, which is the colonization of bacteria enclosed by a protective matrix. This matrix is composed of extracellular polysaccharide and glycoproteins providing a protective environment for microbes in the dental biofilm.

The initial layer deposited on the surface of teeth in the formation of dental plaque is "acquired pellicle."Streptococcus and Actinomyces species are the primary colonizers which are gram-positive, facultative bacteria.Fusobacterium species.

Gradually the host as a response to the bacterial infection by classic innate immune response.

# Histopathology

Gingivitis is the initial stage of the response of the body towards local factors present in the oral cavity; this is a reversible process without the loss of any bone or periodontal support.

# History and Physical

Periodontal disease has been described as an inflammatory condition by the Chinese and Egyptians as early as 4000 years ago.Le chirurgien
dentiste.

Chronic periodontitis is more prevalent in the adult population but can occur in younger patients too.

As compared to chronic periodontitis, aggressive periodontitis has a marked group of characteristics that defines the disease very well making it simple to diagnose it. Baer et al. 1971, defined aggressive periodontitis as "a disease of the periodontium occurring in otherwise healthy adolescent, which is characterized by a rapid loss of alveolar bone around more than one tooth of the permanent dentition."

# Evaluation

For cases of chronic periodontitis and aggressive periodontitis, both clinical, as well as radiographic examination, is mandatory. Clinical examination involves estimation of local factors, developmental discrepancies of teeth leading to increased plaque accumulation, bleeding on probing (a sign of inflammation of periodontal tissue), periodontal probing pocket depth estimation is done manually or using pressure sensitive probes, determination of furcation involvement, recession, determination of clinical attachment level.

In cases of aggressive periodontitis, the classical clinical features along with radiographic evaluation help in diagnosis.Aggregatibacter, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Tanerella forsythia, and Campylobacter rectus are associated with periodontitis in various microbiological, epidemiological studies.

# Treatment / Management

The main aim of periodontal therapy is to improve the gingival health of the patient and preserve the remaining periodontal tissues.

After the clinical and radiographic assessment of the patient, Periodontal charting is done along with the recording of periodontal indices to gauge the severity and extent of disease. Following the clinical assessment, the patient should receive counsel to initiate behavioral changes like cessation of smoking and motivation to improve oral hygiene measures.

# Differential Diagnosis

Periodontal disease may depict as gingival or periodontal abscess, acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis, endodontic-periodontal lesions.

# Prognosis

Several factors affect the prognosis of periodontally involved teeth.

Factors like the position of teeth in the arch also affect the prognosis of teeth having periodontitis, like the risk of mandibular canine is least while the maxillary second molar is the highest.

# Complications

An inflammatory host response characterizes periodontal disease. The surface of periodontal tissue affected by inflammatory changes is about 15 cm^2 to 72 cm^2.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The most critical factor which determines the shift of periodontal disease to health is the establishment of effective oral hygiene measures.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Periodontitis is the most common disease associated with the oral cavity. Approximately 50 % of the patients visiting a dental clinic are suffering from gingival or periodontal disease. It is imperative for the clinician to identify the periodontal disease and address the problem with appropriate treatment modalities. The final complication in cases of periodontitis is not limited to tooth loss, but it also affects the general systemic health of the patient. Hence it is crucial for just not the dentist but also for the general physicians to be aware of the ill effects of periodontitis on systemic health.

The treatment requires a holistic approach. The treatment involves the patient's motivation as well as a local intervention using non-surgical and surgical periodontal treatment along with the adjunctive role of chemotherapeutic agents.