Anthracyclines are known to potentiate cytotoxic effects via different mechanisms, which include intercalating into nuclear DNA, the creation of reactive oxygen species, and inducing apoptosis or cell death.

Dexrazoxane appears to ameliorate the cardiotoxicity seen with anthracyclines by fusing with free and bound iron, thereby decreasing the formation of anthracycline-iron complexes, and eventually, the production of reactive oxygen species which are harmful to the surrounding cardiac tissue.

Dexrazoxane is known to be from the family of compounds known as bisdioxopiperazine. Unlike its iron-chelating analog ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), dexrazoxane is ring enclosed and hydrophilic. However, unlike EDTA, it diffuses into cells readily. Upon its chemical breakdown, dexrazoxane transforms into a form similar to EDTA, a potent iron chelator; this, consequently, displaces excess iron from the anthracycline thought to be liable, in part, for the cardiomyopathy seen with anthracyclines.

Dexrazoxane also acts as a DNA topoisomerase II inhibitor, which happens to be the same target of the DNA topoisomerase II anti-cancer agent (e.g., the anthracyclines), antagonizing the formation of the topoisomerase II cleavage complex and also rapidly degrading topoisomerase II beta.

Dexrazoxane, however, does not induce harmful breaks in the double-strands of DNA as the anthracyclines.

Dexrazoxane was also found to enhance the viability of cells and impose cardiac function protection by attenuating the apoptosis of cardiomyocytes and necroptosis simultaneously after treatment with doxorubicin via interference of the p38MAPK/NF-κB pathways.