After the convergence of the lateral and medial cords within the axilla, the median nerve travels distally along the median bicipital groove in a neurovascular bundle with the brachial artery. As it descends on the arm, it travels over the brachial artery and then under the bicipital aponeurosis (a sheath of connective tissue that inserts the biceps brachii to the proximal forearm), creating the cubital fossa. Above this point, the median nerve provides no muscular or cutaneous innervation. It does, however, provide sympathetic innervation to the brachial artery and its more distal branches (radial and ulnar arteries).

At the level of the elbow, as the median nerve courses under the bicipital aponeurosis, it provides innervation to several proximal muscle bellies of the forearm, including the pronator teres, flexor carpi radialis, flexor digitorum superficialis (sublimis), and palmaris longus muscles. As the nerve emerges from the bicipital aponeurosis, it passes through the convergence point of the superficial and deep heads of the pronator teres. Compression at this point can lead to pronator syndrome, described below. The median nerve makes its final pass underneath the sublime ridge, a sheath of connective tissue formed by the convergence of the medial and lateral heads of the flexor digitorum superficialis (sublimis) (FDS), before emerging to give off two branches, the anterior interosseous nerve and the median nerve proper.

As the median nerve proper descends the forearm, it travels deep to the flexor digitorum superficialis but superficial to the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP). The anterior interosseous nerve (AIN) passes deeper than the median nerve proper, just anterior to the interosseous membrane. In the forearm, the median nerve proper supplies innervation to the pronator teres, flexor carpi ulnaris, palmaris longus, and the flexor digitorum superficialis, However, the AIN provides innervation to the FDP, flexor pollicis longus; and pronator quadratus. By the end of its course in the forearm, the median nerve and all of its branches innervate all of the flexor muscles of the forearm except for the ulnar half of the flexor digitorum profundus and the flexor carpi ulnaris.

Approximately 5 cm above the flexor retinaculum,

the muscle belly of the FDS ends and becomes a tendinous sheath, and the median nerve anatomically lies between this tendon and that of the flexor carpi radialis just before diving into the carpal tunnel. At a variable point before the wrist, the median nerve gives off the palmar cutaneous branch, which passes over the flexor retinaculum and strictly provides sensory innervation to the palm and the base of the thenar eminence.

At its narrowest, the carpal tunnel’s cross-sectional area is less than 2 square centimeters. The median nerve passes directly beneath the flexor retinaculum sheath alongside nine other muscular tendons. This high-traffic area is a prime spot for compression, and in fact, of all the entrapment neuropathies, carpal tunnel syndrome (described below) has been reported to be the most common.

After emerging from the carpal tunnel, the median nerve transverses below the palmar aponeurosis and immediately gives off the thenar recurrent motor branch, which supplies the thenar muscles of the hand: flexor pollicis brevis, abductor pollicis brevis, and opponens pollicis. The last contribution of the median nerve to the thumb is from the anterior interosseous nerve, which travels outside of the carpal tunnel and supplies the flexor pollicis longus.

At the palmar aponeurosis, the median nerve splits into radial and ulnar divisions, which further separate into the common palmar digital branches. These digital branches innervate the first two lumbrical muscles and provide sensation to the palmar side of the thumb, index finger, middle finger, and the radial half of the ring finger. The median nerve also exclusively supplies sensory innervation to the dorsal surface of the index and middle fingers and the lateral half of the ring finger past the proximal interphalangeal joint (i.e., over the nailbeds).