**Measles-Mumps-Rubella Vaccine**

Adverse events tend to occur with the first dose. 1 to 3 weeks following vaccination, 5% of immunized children experience malaise and fever, which can present with or without a rash that lasts up to 3 days.

**Measles-Mumps-Rubella-Varicella Vaccine**

Ten percent or more of vaccine recipients experience redness and pain at the injection site or a fever of 39 degrees C or less. Less than 1% to 10% of patients experience a measles-like, rubella-like, or varicella-like rash in addition to swelling and a fever greater than 39 degrees C.

**Rubella-containing Vaccines**

Patients receiving rubella-containing vaccines may experience acute transient arthritis or arthralgia 1 to 3 weeks post-immunization. These symptoms last 1 to 3 weeks and rarely recur. These symptoms are more common in post-pubertal females, who develop arthralgia in 25% of cases and arthritis in 10% of cases after immunization. There is not any evidence of an increased risk of new-onset chronic arthropathies.

**Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura**

A very rare adverse reaction to the MMR or MMRV vaccine is immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), which may occur within six weeks of immunization. In most children, ITP resolves within three months without complication. In these cases, serologic status can undergo an evaluation to determine the need for an additional dose. Clinicians should consider the risks of another adverse event of ITP before a second dose of the vaccine is required.

**Encephalitis**

Encephalitis occurs in approximately 1 per million doses, compared to 1 in 1000 with infection with the measles virus.

**Febrile Seizures**

Children between 12 and 23 months should receive the MMR vaccine and a univalent varicella vaccine at the same visit instead of an MMRV vaccine to reduce the risk of fever and febrile seizures. The risk is estimated to be around one additional febrile seizure per 2300 to 2800 doses of MMRV vaccine in this patient cohort.

**Allergies**

The trace amount of egg or chicken protein in the MMR and MMRV vaccine is insufficient to cause an allergic reaction in those egg-allergic.