Behcet disease is a clinical diagnosis. However, the other diseases can mimic clinical features seen in Behcet disease, all of which should be ruled out before confirming a diagnosis of Behcet disease.

- Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD): In addition to gastrointestinal involvement, IBD and Behcet disease share several similar clinical features, which include oral ulcers, uveitis, inflammatory arthritis, erythema nodosum, and pyoderma gangrenosum. Colon biopsies may not be adequate in differentiating these diseases. However, sacroiliitis and axial inflammatory arthritis can be seen in IBD but not in Behcet disease. Posterior uveitis and panuveitis are rare in IBD. Vascular inflammation leading to aneurysms, venous thrombosis, CNS involvement, and pathergy test are also features of IBD. Without these other extra-gastrointestinal clinical features, it is challenging to differentiate these two conditions.

- Seronegative arthritis: Reactive arthritis is another major differential diagnosis, as it can also cause peripheral inflammatory arthritis, ocular inflammation, and skin disease. As in IBD, posterior uveitis and panuveitis are rare in reactive arthritis, and vascular or CNS involvement is also rare. Sacroiliitis and axial involvement are common in reactive arthritis, while not in Behcet disease. Urethritis, penile lesions on the glans penis, and conjunctivitis, which are features of reactive arthritis, are not usually seen in Behcet disease.

- Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE): SLE can have a very similar presentation to Behcet disease and can involve all the organs similarly involved in Behcet disease. However, inflammatory thrombi are not usually seen in SLE; the SLE-specific autoantibodies can help differentiate these two conditions.

- Herpetic infections: Oral and genital lesions can be seen in herpetic infections, and when appropriate, a culture shall be done from the lesion to rule out herpes before considering Behcet.

- Behçet-type disease manifests in patients treated with interleukin (IL) 17 inhibitors.

Other differential diagnoses that shall be considered (depending on organ involvement) include sarcoidosis, other systemic vasculitides, relapsing polychondritis, and multiple sclerosis.