Symptoms of sickle cell hepatopathy vary based on the underlying acute or chronic processes.

- Patients with acute sickle cell hepatic crises and acute sickle intrahepatic cholestasis present with right upper quadrant pain and fever, physical exam revealing jaundice and tender hepatomegaly, with jaundice being more prominent in the latter.

- Patients undergoing hepatic sequestration present with a rapidly increasing, tender hepatomegaly.

- Overt liver failure presents similarly to acute liver failure in patients without SCD. Patients present with encephalopathy, right upper quadrant pain, and tender hepatomegaly.

- Acute viral hepatitis presentation includes jaundice, malaise, right upper quadrant pain with tender hepatomegaly; chronic viral hepatitis, on the other hand, is mainly asymptomatic.

- In more advanced cases of iron overload where patients have cirrhosis, they can present with signs of chronic liver disease, including ascites, gastrointestinal bleeding, and hepatosplenomegaly. It is important to also look for other signs of iron overload involving the cardiovascular and endocrine system, such as lower extremity edema, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, orthopnea indicating heart failure, and endocrine involvement characterized by diabetes mellitus and decreased libido.

- Patients with cholelithiasis can present with complications, including acute cholecystitis and choledocholithiasis. Both can present with right upper quadrant pain that is intermittent, worse with fatty foods. This can be complicated with jaundice and fever secondary to obstruction resulting in cholangitis.

- Patients with sickle cell cholangiopathy in the early stages present with jaundice from the initial cholestasis, however with disease progression involving biliary strictures, symptoms can include pruritis, clay-colored stools, and dark urine, indicating obstructive jaundice.