In the initial week after pregnancy, the mother secretes colostrum, a thick and yellow liquid. From days 7 to 14, the mother secretes transitional milk, a combination of colostrum and mature milk. After two weeks, the mature milk is formed and secreted.foremilk, present at the beginning of a feed which contains less fat, and the creamy white hindmilk secreted towards the end of a feed that is rich in fat.  Breast milk can differ depending on maternal health and diet, environmental exposure, gestational age, and the infant's age.

**Fats**

The fat content varies considerably with maternal diet and is also positively associated with weight gain during pregnancy.

**Carbohydrates**

Breast milk mainly contains lactose. There are 30 or more oligosaccharides with the terminal Gal-(beta1,4)-Glc as well. They range from 3 to 14 saccharide units per molecule.

**Proteins**

During early lactation, the protein content in human milk ranges from 1.4–1.6 g/100 mL, to 0.8–1.0 g/100 mL after three to four months of lactation, to 0.7–0.8 g/100 mL after six months.

Glutamine is the amino acid present in the highest amount. It is approximately 20 times greater in mature milk than its lowest value in colostrum.

**Vitamins and Minerals**

Breast milk contains sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, and chlorine. The minerals iron and zinc are present in relatively low concentrations, but their bioavailability and absorption are high. Iron, copper, and zinc are also present in breast milk but vary in quantity. The infant's iron needs depend upon the mother's diet and health.

Breast milk contains most vitamins except vitamin K and D.

**Bioactive Substances**

Breast milk contains white blood cells, IgA, IgG, IgM, cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, hormones, and anti-microbial substances.