The cervical vertebrae serve as the origin and insertion points for muscles that support and facilitate head and neck movements. Posteriorly, the erector spine muscles of the deep back traverse the entire length of the spine and insert onto the spinous and transverse processes of the upper thoracic and cervical vertebrae. These muscles provide postural support and assist in flexion and extension of the vertebral column. The muscles of the posterior neck and suboccipital triangle are associated with the cervical vertebrae and enable the extension, rotation, and lateral bending of the neck. These include:

- Suboccipital muscles:

- Rectus capitis posterior major
- Rectus capitis posterior minor
- Oblique capitus supoerior
- Oblique capitis inferior

- Longissimus capitis

- Semispinalis capitis

- Semispinalis cervicus

- Splenius capitis

- Splenius cervicus

The anterior neck muscles also originate at various landmarks of cervical vertebrae before attaching to the skull or first or second ribs. These muscles are responsible for neck flexion, rotation, lateral bending, and stabilization of the skull. These include:

- Sternocleidomastoid (SCM)

- Scalenes

- Platysma

Note: the above does not include the deep muscles of the anterior neck in the submental, submandibular, and carotid triangles, whose primary functions are not related to gross cervical motion but do participate in neck movement to a lesser degree.

Several other muscles with cervical spinal attachments that participate significantly in neck movement include the trapezius, interspinales, levator scapulae, semispinalis, and rhomboid minor.