The median is a commonly reported number in the scientific literature for a good reason. Often in science and medicine, we are interested in the time to a certain event, such as the decay time of a radioisotope or survival time of a patient with specific cancer. If we start with 11 radioisotopes with decay times of (1, 1, 1, 2, 4, 5, 5, 5, 6, 11, 41) seconds, then within one minute, we can calculate both the median of 5 seconds, which is the middle value of the set, as well as the mean of 7.45 seconds.

If, however, the same dataset of {1, 1, 1, 2, 4, 5, 5, 5, 6, 11, 41} represents survival in years for patients with specific cancer, the median may be more useful. We can calculate the median after the sixth patient passes away from cancer at 5 years, as half of the patients have died, and half are still living. To calculate the mean, we must have the total survival of all patients. Thus we have to wait 41 years for the final patient to die before we can calculate the mean. Waiting for the event to occur in all patients to allow us to calculate the mean thus becomes a lengthy process and makes the median a more palatable number to calculate.

A second desirable characteristic of the median versus the mean is that the median is less affected by outliers or extreme values. If we return to our dataset of (1, 1, 1, 2, 4, 5, 5, 5, 6, 11, 41), we can see that 41 seems to be well away from the mean of 7.45 of the dataset.  If we eliminate this outlier, we can get a new dataset of (1, 1, 1, 2, 4, 5, 5, 5, 6, 11) with a median of 4.5 and a mean of 4.1. We see that the median only changed by 10% (went down to 4.5 from 5), while the mean decreased by 45% (went down to 4.1 from 7.45). Thus the median may be a better indicator of the realistic middle of the data compared to the mean in skewed data. Skewed data is any data set where there are one or more outliers or values at either the extreme high or extreme low end of the dataset.

If we go back to our dataset of (1, 1, 1, 2, 4, 5, 5, 5, 6, 11, 41) for years of survival for patients with specific cancer, is it more realistic to report the median survival is 5 years, that is that half of patients are no longer alive at 5 years? Or, is it better to report mean survival is 7.45 years, which is on average for our 11 patients they lived 7.45 years? With the mean, we should note only two lived longer than the mean. We may all want to be the outlier in this example, living 41 years, but this may not provide a realistic picture of the data.