Management initially focuses on identifying and addressing life-threatening complications of cerebral venous thrombosis, including increased intracranial pressure (ICP), seizures, and coma. If a patient seizes and has a lesion such as a hemorrhage or infarction on neuroimaging, then specific anticonvulsant therapy, as well as seizure prophylaxis, should be initiated. If a seizure does not occur, then seizure prophylaxis is not indicated. In the case of increased ICP, the head of the bed should be elevated, and administration of dexamethasone and mannitol should be done promptly to reduce increased ICP. This is followed by admission to the intensive care unit or stroke unit for close ICP monitoring, with a neurosurgical consultation if the patient decompensates and requires surgical decompression. Next, attention should be shifted to specific therapy, including anticoagulation and, in certain cases, catheter-directed fibrinolysis and surgical thrombectomy.

**Anticoagulation**

Anticoagulation has been a controversial topic due to the potential for hemorrhagic transformation of cerebral infarcts before administering anticoagulation. The goal of anticoagulation is to prevent thrombus propagation, help recanalize the lumen of occluded cerebral veins, and to prevent the complications of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism in patients who already have thrombus burden and are predisposed to forming additional thrombi. The results of two randomized controlled trials, which compared anticoagulation with placebo, although statistically insignificant, showed that anticoagulation had a favorable outcome more often than controls. They also showed that anticoagulation was safe and not contraindicated, even in patients with cerebral hemorrhage.

Based on these randomized controlled trials and other observational studies, anticoagulation is recommended as a safe and effective treatment of cerebral venous thrombosis. It should be initiated immediately upon diagnosis of cerebral venous thrombosis. Anticoagulation with intravenous unfractionated heparin or subcutaneously administered low-molecular-weight heparin is recommended as a bridge to oral anticoagulation with a vitamin K antagonist. There are no outcome differences while comparing unfractionated heparin (UFH) or low molecular weight heparin (LMWH). The European stroke organization (ESO) guidelines advocate unfractionated heparin in patients with renal insufficiency or the probability of requiring emergent reversal.

The target goal of treatment is an international normalized ratio of 2.0 to 3.0 cerebral venous thrombosis 3 to 6 months in patients with provoked cerebral venous thrombosis and 6 to 12 months in patients with unprovoked cerebral venous thrombosis.

**Thrombolysis**

Although most patients see clinical improvement with anticoagulation therapy, a small subset of patients do not, and these individuals clinically deteriorate despite anticoagulation. In these cases, where the prognosis is poor, systemic and catheter-directed thrombolysis is indicated in patients with large and extensive cerebral venous thrombi who clinically deteriorate despite treatment with anticoagulation. As is the case, whenever fibrinolytics are used, there is an increased risk of intracranial hemorrhage. Based on a systemic review conducted in 2003, which looked at 72 studies and 169 patients with cerebral venous thrombosis, there seems to be a possible clinical benefit due to the use of fibrinolytics in patients with a severe presentation. Intracranial hemorrhage occurred in 17% of patients treated with fibrinolytics and was associated with clinical deterioration in 5% of cases. Overall, endovascular thrombolytics should be used at centers with staff experienced in interventional radiology and should be reserved for patients who are clinically deteriorating and despite treatment with anticoagulation. A systematic has shown local thrombolysis to be beneficial only in patients with severe CVT, whereas the results are anecdotal for mechanical thrombectomy.

**Surgical Intervention**

Surgical thrombectomy is reserved for cases of severe neurological deterioration despite maximal medical therapy. In the case of large venous infarcts and hemorrhages causing a mass effect with risk of herniation, decompressive surgery has been thought to improve clinical outcomes, especially if done early, although this is level C evidence. Decompressive surgery is life-saving, with favorable outcomes observed in more than 50% of patients, with a mortality rate of approximately 20%.

**Supportive Care**

It is important to elucidate the underlying contributory factors of cerebral venous thrombosis and devise a treatment strategy to correct them. Women on hormonal contraceptive therapy should seek non-estrogen-based methods of contraception such as levonorgestrel and copper intrauterine devices or progestin-only pills. Further testing to identify the etiology of all acquired and reversible thrombophilic states should be conducted and, when possible, corrected. In addition to clinical follow-up, the American Heart Association and American Stroke Association recommend follow-up imaging 3 to 6 months after diagnosis to assess for recanalization.

The risks for ICH following anticoagulation therapy ranged from zero to 5.4%. A systematic review has shown that the overall mortality was 9.4%, and dependency of 9.4% and 9.7%, respectively.

**The quality of evidence and the strength of recommendations of the European Stroke Organization guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of cerebral venous thrombosis (2017) can be summarized as follows:**

**Recommendations**

**Quality of evidence**

**Strength of recommendations**

MRV and CT venography as an alternative to DSA

Very low

Weak

CT venography as an alternative to MRV

Very low

Weak

D-dimer before neuroimaging

Low

Weak

Thrombophilia screening is not recommended

Very low

Weak

Screening for occult malignancy is not recommended

Very low

Weak

**Treatment with heparin at a therapeutic dose, including those with ICH**

**Moderate**

**Strong**

Use of LMWH instead of UFH

Low

Weak

No recommendation on thrombolysis

Very low

Uncertain

Oral vitamin K antagonist for 3 to 12 months

Very low

Weak

No recommendation for using NOACs

Very low

Weak

No recommendation on therapeutic LP

Very low

Uncertain

Acetazolamide and steroid not recommended

Low

Weak

Shunting alone is not recommended

Very low

Uncertain

**Decompressive surgery in impeding herniation**

**Low**

**Strong**

AEDs in supratentorial lesions and seizures

Very low

Uncertain

LMWH in pregnant and puerperal patients

Low

Weak

OCP use is not advised in women of fertile age and prior CVT

Very low

Weak

LMWH during pregnancy/puerperium  with a previous history of CVT

Very low

Weak