Bancroftian filariasis is one of the neglected tropical diseases and is unlikely to be seen in the US. However, clinicians must have a high index of suspicion whenever dealing with immigrants or travelers from endemic areas presenting with limb swelling, hydrocele, lymphadenopathy, or chyluria. Travelers to the tropic should receive education regarding mosquito bite prevention. Since it is a mosquito-borne disease, prevention involves taking vector control measures such as mosquito nets, applying mosquito repellents, wearing trousers and long-sleeved clothes, and reduction of peri-domiciliary water puddles. The two major public health strategies being employed to eliminate the disease include a) mass drug administration (MDA) to reduce the microfilarial density to suboptimal levels for vector transmission b) ensuring the provision of recommended basic package of care in endemic areas to alleviate the suffering caused by the disease.

Upon starting treatment in non-surgical cases, the pharmacist (potentially with a specialty in infectious disease) should educate the patient on compliance with treatment and the need for follow up, as well as verifying dosing and checking for drug interactions. Often most symptoms take months to subside, but disability is rare if the patient completes the treatment course. The lymphedema may decrease but may not completely resolve, and hence the patient must be told to wear compression garments for life. Nursing can provide ongoing education and monitoring, verify treatment compliance, and alert the treating clinician of any issues. For surgical cases, the nursing staff will be involved pre, during, and postoperatively, providing preparation assistance, and postoperative care, and keeping the surgeon informed following the procedure. Even in light of the rarity of this disease, an interprofessional team approach to care is necessary to achieve optimal results for the patient. [Level V]