# Introduction

The renal system consists of the kidney, ureters, and the urethra. The overall function of the system filters approximately 200 liters of fluid a day from renal blood flow which allows for toxins, metabolic waste products, and excess ion to be excreted while keeping essential substances in the blood. The kidney regulates plasma osmolarity by modulating the amount of water, solutes, and electrolytes in the blood. It ensures long term acid-base balance and also produces erythropoietin which stimulates the production of red blood cell. It also produces renin for blood pressure regulation and carries out the conversion of vitamin D to its active form. The renal development, the process of urine production and excretion, and the clinical significance of the renal system will be the focus of this article.

# Development

Three different sets of kidneys develop consecutively from the urogenital ridges, and the last set persists to become the adult kidney. The first renal tubular system is called the pronephros. Pronephros develop during the fourth week of embryonic development but quickly degenerates as mesonephros appears. Mesonephric kidney degenerates as the metanephros develops through its remnant is incorporated into the male reproductive system. The metanephros begins its development around the fifth week of embryonic development as ureteric buds. As the ureteric buds develop, it induces the formation nephrons.

# Mechanism

**Glomerular Filtration**

Glomerular filtration is the initial process in urine production. It is a passive process in which hydrostatic pressure pushes fluid and solute through a membrane with no energy requirement. The filtration membrane has three layers: fenestrated endothelium of the glomerular capillaries which allow blood components except the cells to pass through; basement membrane, which is a negatively charged physical barrier that prevents proteins from permeating; and foot processes of podocytes of the glomerular capsule that creates more selective filtration. The outward and inward force from the capillaries determines how much water and solutes crosses the filtration membrane. Hydrostatic pressure from the glomerular capillaries is the major filtration force with a pressure of 55mmHg. The other potential filtration force is the capsular space colloid osmotic pressure, but it is zero because proteins are not usually present within the capsular space. Then the capsular space hydrostatic pressure and the colloid osmotic pressure in glomerular capillaries negate the filtration force from the hydrostatic pressure in the glomerular capillaries, creating a net filtration pressure which plays a big role in the glomerular filtration rate (GFR).

GFR is the volume of fluid filtered in a minute, and it depends on the net filtration pressure, the total available surface area for filtration, and filtration membrane permeability. The normal GFR is between 120 to 125ml/min. It is regulated intrinsically and extrinsically to maintain the GFR. The intrinsic control function by adjusting its own resistance to blood flow via a myogenic mechanism and a tubuloglomerular feedback mechanism. The myogenic mechanism maintains the GFR by constricting the afferent arteriole when the vascular smooth muscle stretches due to high blood pressure. It dilates the vascular smooth muscle when pressure is low within the afferent arteriole allowing more blood to flow through. Then the tubuloglomerular feedback mechanism function to maintain the GFR by sensing the amount of NaCl within the tubule. Macula densa cells sense NaCl around the ascending limb of the nephron loop.

The extrinsic control maintains the GFR and also maintains the systemic blood pressure via the sympathetic nervous system and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone mechanism. When the volume of fluid in the extracellular decreases excessively, norepinephrine and epinephrine get released and causes vasoconstriction leading to a decrease in blood flow to the kidney and the level of GFR. Also, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis gets activated by three means when the blood pressure drops. The first is the activation of the beta-1 adrenergic receptor, which causes the release of renin from the granular cells of the kidney. The second mechanism is the macula densa cells which senses low NaCl concentration during decreased blood flow to the kidney and trigger the granular cells to release renin. The third mechanism is the stretch receptor around the granular cells senses decreased tension during decreased blood flow to the kidney and also trigger the release of renin, therefore, regulating the glomerular filtration.

T**ubular Reabsorption**

The four different tubular segments have each unique absorptive properties. The first is the proximal convoluted tubule (PCT). The PCT cells have the most absorptive capability. In the normal circumstance, the PCT reabsorbs all the glucose and amino acids as well as 65% of Na and water. The PCT reabsorb sodium ions by primary active transport via a basolateral Na-K pump. It reabsorbs glucose, amino acids, and vitamins through secondary active transport with Na and an electrochemical gradient drives passive paracellular diffusion. The PCT reabsorbs water by osmosis that is driven by solute reabsorption. It also reabsorbs lipid-soluble solutes via passive diffusion driven by the concentration gradient created by reabsorption of water. Reabsorption of urea occurs in the PCT as well by passive paracellular diffusion driven by a chemical gradient.

From the PCT, the non-reabsorbed filtrates move on to the nephron loop. The nephron loop functionally divides into a descending and an ascending limb. The descending limb functions to reabsorb water via osmosis. This process is possible due to the abundance of aquaporins. Solutes do not get reabsorbed in this region. However, in the ascending limb, Na moves passively down its concentration gradient in the thin segment of the ascending limb, and also sodium, potassium, and chlorides get reabsorbed together through a symporter in the thick segment of the ascending limb. The presence of Na-K ATPase in the basolateral membrane keeps this symporter functional by creating an ionic gradient. There is also the reabsorption of the calcium and magnesium ions in the ascending limb via passive paracellular diffusion driven by the electrochemical gradient. No water reabsorption in the ascending limb.

The next tubular segment for reabsorption is the distal convoluted tubule (DCT). There is a primary active sodium transport at the basolateral membrane and secondary active transport at the apical membrane through Na-Cl symporter and channels. This process is aldosterone regulated at the distal portion. There is also calcium reabsorption via passive uptake controlled by the parathyroid hormone. Aldosterone targets the cells of the distal portion of the DCT causing synthesis and retention of apical Na and K channel as well as the synthesis of Na-K ATPase.

Right after the DCT, there is a collecting tubule where the final stage of reabsorption occurs. The reabsorptions that occur here include primary active sodium transport at basolateral membrane; secondary active transport at apical membrane via Na-Cl symporter and channels with aldosterone regulation; passive calcium uptake via PTH-modulated channels in the apical membrane; and primary and secondary active transport in the basolateral membrane.

**Tubular Secretion**

Tubular secretion function is to dispose of substances such as drugs and metabolites that bind to plasma protein. Tubular secretion also functions to eliminate undesirable substances that were reabsorbed passively such as urea and uric acids. Elimination of excess potassium via aldosterone hormone regulation at collecting duct and distal DCT are part of tubular secretion function. There is an elimination of hydrogen ion when the blood pH drops below the normal range. Then when the blood pH increases above the normal range, reabsorption of chloride ions occurs as bicarbonic acid gets excreted. The secretion of creatinine, ammonia, and many other organic acids and basics occur.

**Storage of Urine**

Once the production of urine is complete, it travels through a structure called ureter for urine storage in the bladder. There are two ureters in a human body; one on each side; left and right. They are slender tubes with three-layered walls: the mucosa that contains a transitional epithelial tissue; muscularis that is composed of the internal longitudinal layer and the external circular layer; and adventitia that is a fibrous connective tissue that covers the ureter's external surface. As urine make its way to the ureters, the stretching of the ureter's smooth muscle results in peristaltic contractile waves that help move the urine into the bladder.

The bladder is essentially a muscular sac with three layers. Its three layers are similar to the ureter except that the muscular layer has muscle fibers organized in inner and outer longitudinal layers and a middle circular layer. The muscular layer is also known as the detrusor muscle. The distensibility of the bladder allows it to hold a maximum capacity of up to 1000ml, though normal functional capacity is 300 to  400mL.

The urethra is a thin-walled muscular tube that functions to drain urine out of the bladder. Its mucosa lining consists of mostly pseudostratified columnar epithelium through the proximal portion has transitional epithelial tissue. The thickening of the detrusor muscle at the bladder-urethra junction forms the internal urethral sphincter which has an autonomic nervous system control. The urethra has an additional function for males as it transports semen. In males, the urethra is approximately 22.3 cm long with three regions which include the prostatic urethra, membranous urethra, and the spongy urethra.

**Micturition Process**

Micturition process entails contraction of the detrusor muscle and relaxation of the internal and external urethral sphincter. The process is slightly different based on age. Children younger than three years old have the micturition process coordinated by the spinal reflex. It starts with urine accumulation in the bladder that stretches the detrusor muscle causing activation of stretch receptors. The stretch sensation is carried by the visceral afferent to the sacral region of the spinal cord where it synapses with the interneuron that excites the parasympathetic neurons and inhibits the sympathetic neurons. The visceral afferent impulse concurrently decreases the firing of the somatic efferent that normally keeps the external urethral sphincter closed allowing reflexive urine output. However, after the age of 3, there is an override of reflexive urination where there is conscious control of the external urethral sphincter.

# Clinical Significance

The renal system pathologies have a wide range of clinical presentations. Emphysematous urinary tract infections, chronic kidney disease, nephrolithiasis, and urinary incontinence in men and women are topics of discussion below.

Emphysematous UTI is a form of UTI, where infections of the lower or upper urinary tract present with gas formation. Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae commonly cause emphysematous UTI although Proteus, Enterococcus, Pseudomonas, Clostridium, and Candida spp can be part of the causative organism.

Chronic kidney diseases are not uncommon. Approximately 16.8% of the US population has chronic kidney disease (CKD).

Nephrolithiasis is another pathology commonly seen in the renal system. Nephrolithiasis is the presence of crystallized calcium, magnesium, cystine, or uric acid in the renal system. Calcium stones are known to cause eighty percent of nephrolithiasis. Calcium stone has two forms: calcium oxalate which is the most common and the calcium phosphate.

Urinary incontinence is also a common renal pathology. It is an involuntary leakage of urine. There are four types of incontinence: urgency incontinence, stress incontinence, mixed incontinence, and incontinence due to incomplete bladder emptying. There are similarities and differences in the causative factors for the different types of urinary incontinence between men and women. In men, 11 to 34 percent of men older than 65 years have urinary incontinence.

Approximately 50 percent of adult women experience urinary incontinence.