Zaleplon is a Schedule IV prescription medication. It is available as 5 mg and 10 mg oral capsules. It comes in a capsulated form with an opaque green cap and an opaque pale green body with 5 mg and 10 mg written with black ink on the body. The recommendation is to start with 5 mg by mouth, to be taken immediately before bedtime. The usual dose is 10 mg by mouth immediately before bedtime. It is given 7 hours before the planned awakening. The maximum dose can go up to 20 mg by mouth to be taken directly before bedtime. The maximum dose in elderly or debilitated patients should be 10 mg by mouth taken immediately before bedtime. If the provider plans to stop the medication, they should taper it down slowly.

Zaleplon is metabolized mainly by the liver, and correspondingly the dose of zaleplon requires a reduction in patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment. The oral clearance of zaleplon decreases by 70% and 87% in compensated and decompensated cirrhotic patients compared to healthy subjects. In cases of hepatic impairment, the dose should be lowered to 5 mg by mouth, taken immediately before bedtime. Its use is not recommended for use in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

The kidneys minimally metabolize zaleplon, and hence the pharmacokinetics of zaleplon is not altered in patients with renal insufficiency. Doses do not require modification for patients with mild to moderate renal impairment. The medication has not had adequate research in patients with severe renal impairment.

Currently, there is a lack of randomized controlled trials and the availability of evidence regarding the safety and appropriateness of usage of hypnotics in the pregnant population. One of the studies from Wikner and colleagues in 2011 reported that there did not seem to be an increased risk of malformations with these medications, and the tentative association with some intestinal malformation may be due to chance alone.

A small amount of the medication is secreted in breast milk, especially about 1 hour after its use. Even these small amounts of the drug from breast milk may result in potentially significant concentrations in infants. Because its effects on a nursing infant are unknown, it is not recommended for lactating mothers.

There is also currently a lack of data regarding the safety and effectiveness of zaleplon in the pediatric population.