A bicornuate uterus can exist as an isolated anomaly or in association with complex uterine and genital malformations. An isolated bicornuate uterus is associated with significant reproductive complications. A meta-analysis study of 25 comparative studies reported a significantly increased risk of

- First and second-trimester loss of pregnancy.

- Preterm delivery <28 weeks.

- Low birth weight babies.

- Malpresentation at delivery.

Most of the patients with bicornuate uterus do not have any symptoms in their adolescence. Some women may present to the clinic with menorrhagia or dysmenorrhea owing to the presence of two uterine cavities. A few women are also diagnosed when they present for routine evaluation during pregnancy. A significant number of women are diagnosed when they present with obstetric complications, as mentioned beforehand. Physical exam in isolated anomalies is usually insignificant.

A longitudinal vaginal septum exists in 25% of cases associated with a bicornuate uterus, which may lead to obstructive symptoms or dyspareunia. The patient may present with an inability to control menstrual bleeding with tampon in such cases.

Renal anomalies are frequently found in affiliation with Mullerian anomalies due to the interlinked development of mesonephric and Mullerian ducts along with urogenital sinus. The most common defect is renal agenesis associated with didelphys uterus.  However, it can also present along with the bicornuate uterus. An ectopic ureter can also be found.

Bicornuate uterus with non-communicating uterine cavities, associated with renal agenesis and blind hemivagina, present with acute urinary retention, pelvic pain, and dysmenorrhea. On a physical exam, a bulge can be found in the vagina, making it challenging to explore the cervix.

In another variant, a communicating bicornuate uterus can exist with renal agenesis and hemivagina. In such cases, patients present with a Gartner duct pseudocyst. On physical exam, a cyst is present in the anterolateral wall of the vagina, which indeed is blind hemivagina. A bicornuate uterus can also exist with the non-communicating uterine horn. Such patients can present with infertility in consequence of endometriosis due to retrograde menstruation.