**Mucocutaneous Manifestations**

**Isolated oral and genital aphthae:**

- Initial treatment with topical triamcinolone acetonide cream 3 to 4 times a day until the pain from the ulcer is relieved

- Topical sucralfate 1g/5mL four times daily with or as an alternative to topical corticosteroids

- Topical anesthetics, generally not as effective as steroids or sucralfate, can also provide temporary relief

**Prevention of recurrent oral and genital ulcers:**

- Colchicine 1 to 2 mg/day in divided doses

- First-line drug 
- Doses in the range of 1.2 to 1.8 mg can be used when 0.5 mg tablets are unavailable.
- More effective in genital ulcers.
- Has a narrow therapeutic index.
- Cytopenias are a significant side effect.

- Apremilast is titrated at a rate of 10 mg daily over six days to attain a maintenance dose of 30 mg twice daily.
- More effective in oral ulcers.
- Adverse events include nausea, diarrhea, and headache.

**Multiple lesions or isolated oral aphthae or genital ulcers are refractory to the therapy mentioned above:**

- Prednisone 15 mg/day, tapering to 10 mg/day after one week and completing the course over a two- to three-week period

- Low-dose prednisone (e.g., 5 mg/day) with a prolonged course may be used in case of recurrent oral aphthae

**When all the treatment mentioned above fails:**

- Azathioprine

- The initial dose of azathioprine is 50 mg daily.
- As tolerated, increase the daily dose by 50 mg every four weeks.
- The target dose is 2.5 mg/kg/day.
- Complete blood count (CBC) is monitored every two weeks initially till the maximum required dose is achieved and then every 6 to 12 weeks.
- A lower dose is used in case of renal compromise.
- Genetic testing for thiopurine methyltransferase is advised before starting therapy. A deficiency of thiopurine methyltransferase can cause an increased risk of developing severe, potentially life-threatening bone marrow toxicity with conventional doses of azathioprine or mercaptopurine.
- It can be combined with tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha inhibitors (infliximab, adalimumab, etanercept)

- Interferon

- Interferon alfa-2a and Interferon alfa-2b (generally given 3 to 6 million units three times weekly)

**Cutaneous lesions (except erythema nodosum and pyoderma gangrenosum):**

- Mild:

- Colchicine 1 to 2 mg daily in divided dose

- Lesions unresponsive to colchicine:

- Prednisolone up to 40 mg/day initially and a maintenance dose of 5 and 10 mg/day

**Erythema nodosum:**

- Initial therapy is a combination of oral prednisone  (40 to 60 mg daily) and azathioprine.

- The initial dose of azathioprine is 50 mg daily.
- As tolerated, increase the daily dose by 50 mg every four weeks.
- The target dose is 2.5 mg/kg/day.
- Complete blood count (CBC) is monitored every two weeks initially till the maximum required dose is achieved and then every 6 to 12 weeks.
- The initial prednisone dose is administered for one month and then tapered gradually to complete the course over three to four months.

**Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG):**

- Extensive debridement is discouraged.

- Sterile saline or a mild antiseptic for wound care

-  Mild, localized PG:

- Topical corticosteroid (high potency or superpotent) or topical tacrolimus (0.03% to 0.3%)


- More extensive or rapidly progressing PG:

- Systemic glucocorticoids

- Oral prednisolone (0.5 to 1.5 mg/kg per day) or its equivalent is started initially, with a maximum daily dose of 60 mg.
- Intravenous pulse therapy with 1 g methylprednisolone daily for one to five days can be started initially for very aggressive or painful disease.
- Taper off glucocorticoids within 4 to 10 weeks and monitor closely for continued improvement or adverse effects.


- Systemic cyclosporine

- Alternative for glucocorticoid intolerant or glucocorticoid unresponsive cases.
- Initiated at a dose of 4 to 5 mg/kg and subsequently tapered as tolerated
- Treatment is limited to less than one year due to side effects, such as hypertension and renal toxicity

**Arthritis**

- Initial treatment:

- Colchicine 1 to 2 mg/day in divided doses
- Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for symptomatic pain relief

- Uncontrolled with colchicine:

- Prednisone 10 mg/day is initiated.
- Low-dose prednisone (e.g., 5 mg/day or lower) when a prolonged course may be required

- Refractory or persistent arthritis:

- Azathioprine and/or TNF-alpha inhibitors

- Refractory to the therapy mentioned above:

- Interferon alfa or methotrexate
- Apremilast

**Gastrointestinal Disease**

**Gastrointestinal ulceration:**

- Glucocorticoids plus azathioprine

- Starting dose of prednisone 0.5 to 1 mg/kg daily
- Given for at least one month or until the resolution of symptoms improve
- Decrease the daily dose to 10 mg/day over two to three months.


- Azathioprine started at the same time as prednisone

- The initial dose of azathioprine is 50 mg daily.
- As tolerated, increase the daily dose by 50 mg every four weeks.
- The target dose is 2.5 mg/kg/day.
- Complete blood count (CBC) is monitored every two weeks initially till the maximum required dose is achieved and then every 6 to 12 weeks.

- TNF-alpha inhibitors
- Used when patients do not respond to glucocorticoids plus azathioprine
- Infliximab and adalimumab have been used successfully.

**Renal disease**

**Minimal or mild nephritis:**

- No specific therapy is indicated

**Secondary amyloidosis:**

-  Colchicine 1 to 1.2 mg daily

**Ocular Involvement**

**Anterior uveitis:**

- Initial therapy:

- Topical corticosteroids (scopolamine 0.25% or cyclopentolate 1%

- Unresponsive to initial therapy:

- Prednisone at a starting dose of 40 mg and may be tapered to discontinuation over one month.

**Posterior uveitis:**

- Initial therapy:

-  Combination of oral prednisone and azathioprine

- Starting dose of prednisone 1 mg/kg per day for one month and tapering as tolerated
- Methylprednisolone as pulse therapy at a dose of 1 g/day for three days may be used empirically to save the sight.
- The initial dose of azathioprine is 50 mg daily.
- As tolerated, increase the daily dose by 50 mg every four weeks.
- The target dose is 2.5 mg/kg/day.
- Complete blood count (CBC) is monitored every two weeks initially till the maximum required dose is achieved and then every 6 to 12 weeks.

- Severe or refractory disease:

- Infliximab and adalimumab have been used successfully.
- The initial dose of infliximab is 5 mg/kg at 0, 4, 8, 16, and 24 weeks or 0, 2, 6, and every eight weeks.
- Adalimumab is given at a loading dose of 80 mg, followed by 40 mg one week later and 40 mg every two weeks thereafter.

**Vascular Disease**

**Large artery disease:**

- High-dose glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide

- Interventions or surgeries should preferably be done when the disease is not active.

**Venous thrombosis:**

- Data does not support using anticoagulant, antiplatelet, or fibrinolytic agents in patients with thrombosis.

- Anticoagulation may be recommended case by case bases in patients with Behçet-associated dural sinus thrombi.

- Treatment includes glucocorticoids with another immunosuppressive agent as prescribed for posterior uveitis.

**Neurologic Disease**

- Treatment includes high-dose glucocorticoids with another immunosuppressive agent as prescribed for posterior uveitis.