# Continuing Education Activity

Cowden disease, also known as Cowden syndrome or multiple hamartoma syndrome, is an uncommon autosomal dominant genodermatosis and is a member of the spectrum of disorders involving mutations in the phosphatase and tensin homolog gene. Cowden syndrome represents the most common phenotype associated with this spectrum and it is classically is characterized by multiple benign hamartomas that can occur in any organ. Patients with Cowden syndrome characteristically develop mucocutaneous lesions and macrocephaly. The majority of patients with Cowden syndrome develop a malignant neoplasm of the thyroid, endometrium, or breast. This activity describes the pathophysiology, evaluation, and management of Cowden syndrome and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of Cowden syndrome.
- Describe the presentation of a patient with Cowden syndrome.
- Describe the utility of routinely screening for malignancy in patients with Cowden syndrome.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by Cowden syndrome.

# Introduction

Cowden disease, also known as Cowden syndrome or multiple hamartoma syndrome, is a genodermatosis originally described in 1963 by Lloyd and Dennis.PTEN).

# Etiology

Autosomally dominant inherited mutations in the tumor suppressor gene PTEN are responsible for Cowden disease.PTEN gene.

# Epidemiology

Some studies have shown a female predominance in Cowden syndrome, and most patients reported in the literature are of the white race. Some estimates show the incidence to be about 1 in 200,000 people.

# Pathophysiology

The protein encoded by the PTEN gene contributes to the control of apoptosis and the cell cycle.PTEN gene product, resulting in decreased cellular proliferation and survival.PTEN gene is lost by a "second hit" mutation, the resulting phenotype of multiple hamartomas and neoplasms is produced.

# Histopathology

The histopathological analysis of Cowden disease varies based upon the particular lesion biopsied. Tricholemmomas often have pale glycogenated cells attached to the epidermis and an associated hair follicle with peripheral palisading.Starry Night can be seen in sclerotic fibromas.

# History and Physical

Cowden syndrome is generally characterized by hamartomas that can involve any organ and have the potential for malignant transformation.

Multiple extra-mucocutaneous manifestations can also occur in Cowden disease. The skeletal system may form a high-arched palate, scoliosis, or macrocephaly. More than 85% of patients may have gastrointestinal involvement with hamartomatous polyps.

# Evaluation

Evaluation of patients with suspected Cowden disease consists of various tests. A skin biopsy can be very useful if skin lesions such as tricholemmomas or sclerotic fibromas are present. A complete blood count, thyroid function test, stool for occult blood, imaging, or urinalysis can be very useful for identifying possible malignancies. The International Cowden Syndrome Consortium has established diagnostic criteria.

**Major Criteria**

Patients need to have two major criteria to be diagnosed with Cowden disease. (*One of the two must be either Lhermitte-Duclos disease or macrocephaly.)

- Lhermitte-Duclos disease*

- Thyroid carcinoma

- Macrocephaly*

- Breast cancer

**Minor Criteria**

Patients with one major and three of the following minor criteria or four minor criteria may be diagnosed with Cowden disease.

- Genitourinary tumors or malformations

- Lipomas

- Fibromas

- Mental retardation

- Fibrocystic disease of the breast

- Gastrointestinal hamartomas,

- Other thyroid lesions such as goiter

Mucocutaneous lesions or palmoplantar keratosis can meet the criteria alone if 6 or more are present.

# Treatment / Management

Management of patients with Cowden disease is interprofessional and mainly stems from patient-specific findings.

# Differential Diagnosis

An autosomal dominant disease with mutations in the SDHB/C/D genes can present with similar findings as Cowden syndrome such as thyroid, breast, and renal cancers. Facial lesions such as fibrofolliculomas (Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome) or angiofibromas (MEN 1 or tuberous sclerosis) may be clinically similar to tricholemmomas.PTEN disorder, but it does tend to have genital lentigines characteristically.

# Prognosis

Prognosis is fair, and if cancers are recognized early on in the process, then patients may live close to normal life spans.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The PTEN Hararmatoma Tumor Syndrome Foundation is a recommended resource of support for patients and families. Patients should have regular screening and should be encouraged to avoid sun exposure.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Because of the diverse presentation and multiple organ involvement, Cowden syndrome is best managed by an interprofessional team including oncology nurses.

Even though Cowden syndrome is associated with benign hamartomas, clinicians need to be aware that long term monitoring of these patients is mandatory because of the risk of malignancy. The risk of colon cancer in patients is slightly elevated] Uterine leiomyomas and ovarian cysts can occur in females and may produce menstrual abnormalities along with a possible 20% to 30% increased risk of endometrial carcinoma. Females with Cowden disease are also at a much higher risk of breast carcinoma, with about 85% of females with Cowden syndrome developing breast carcinoma at some time in their life. Thyroid abnormalities such as goiter, thyroglossal duct cysts, and adenomas are also common. Thyroid carcinoma risk is also increased by up to 30%. Melanoma skin cancer is also increased in patients with Cowden disease and may occur in 5% of patients. In order to improve patient outcomes, a screening program must be in place to ensure that the malignancies are detected at an early stage.

The quality of life of most patients is poor because of the continuing hospital admissions and work up to rule out malignancy.