Metoclopramide is widely used in most hospitals and is an effective drug for gastroparesis and postoperative nausea and vomiting. However, the drug does have several side effects that all healthcare practitioners must be familiar with, so an interprofessional team approach is necessary. The nurse and pharmacist are in a prime position to monitor the drug and, hopefully, reduce its adverse effects by closely monitoring the patient and recommending discontinuation when symptoms arise. Of all the side effects, the most concerning are the extrapyramidal reactions that are more likely to occur in diabetics, children, seniors, and those already taking antipsychotic medications. The risk of developing tardive dyskinesia from metoclopramide varies from 1 to 15%, and the condition is quite debilitating. Hence, before using this drug, the nurse, pharmacist, and prescriber should obtain informed consent from the patient. All patients should be told about the potential for developing dyskinesias before treatment. If the patient has an adverse risk profile, the pharmacist should offer another agent option to the prescriber for consideration.

All interprofessional team members are also responsible for communicating concerns with other team members. They must also maintain accurate and updated records of their observations and interventions with the patient so that all team members have the most recent data on the case. Closely monitoring the patient is critical, and the interprofessional team, including clinicians, nursing, and pharmacy, will drive optimal outcomes.

**Outcomes**

Metoclopramide has proven valuable in managing diabetic gastroparesis, postoperative nausea, and vomiting. However, the potential risk for dyskinesias has led to a re-evaluation of this agent. Experts indicate that metoclopramide should be started with the lowest possible dose and the shortest duration of time. The drug is effective in the short term, but its CNS adverse drug reactions are worrisome.