Treating pediatric obesity and its comorbid conditions is challenging, time-consuming, and often frustrating for clinicians and families. Obesity impacts multiple organ systems, the most common being cardiovascular and endocrine.

Orthopedic problems occur more often when there is increased pressure on growing bones due to extreme body weight. The exact causes of Blount disease and slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) are likely multifactorial, but obesity is often present. Patients with Blount disease present with knee pain, a limp, and severe bowing of the tibias. SCFE is suspected when a child presents with hip pain and decreased internal rotation of the limb on examination.

Pulmonary comorbidities include asthma and obstructive sleep apnea. Asthmatic patients may complain of shortness of breath, cough, and exercise intolerance. Snoring, restlessness, daytime sleepiness, and behavioral problems can indicate obstructive sleep apnea. Pulmonary function tests and polysomnography may be warranted.

The psychological complications of obesity can have a profound impact on a child's day-to-day life and should be addressed early. Interviewing children in a non-judgemental manner with open-ended questions may help them disclose any concerns. In addition, the clinician should ask about symptoms of anxiety or depression, worsening grades, or bullying at school. Professional counseling may be necessary to prevent the progression of psychological symptoms. [American Academy of Pediatrics Clinical Practice Guidelines for Obesity 2023]