The most well-known function of hCG is the promotion of progesterone production during pregnancy. hCG stimulates ovarian corpus luteal cells to produce progesterone, thus reinforcing the endometrial walls and preventing menstrual bleeding. This promotion of progesterone production is active in approximately 10% of the total length of the pregnancy or around 3 to 4 weeks following implantation. In a non-pregnant female, LH promotes progesterone production.

The hCG hormone is a dimer made of an alpha and beta subunit. The alpha subunit is common to all isomers, as mentioned earlier of hCG except for the free beta-subunit form of the hormone.

Studies done over recent years have shown hCG to be involved in a plethora of functions supporting the placenta, uterus, and fetus throughout pregnancy. These functions include the promotion of angiogenesis, immunosuppression, and blockage of phagocytosis of invading trophoblasts, promotion of growth and differentiation of fetal organs, and involvement in the adult brain and brainstem.

hCG promotes angiogenesis and vasculogenesis through the upregulation of EG-VEGF.

Several studies have supported the function of hCG in the prevention of fetoplacental tissue rejection through inhibitory immune-mediated mechanisms.

Maternal hCG has implications in the development of fetal organs during development. There are hCG receptors in the fetal liver and kidney that are completely absent in adult organs. hCG has also been shown to support the growth and development of the umbilical cord.

Researchers have found hCG receptors in various areas of the adult female brain, including the hippocampus, hypothalamus, and brain stem. Speculation is that the presence of these receptors in the brain are involved in the pathophysiology of hyperemesis gravidarum. Other contributing factors may involve a combination of rising hormone levels overall, including estrogen, progesterone, and serum thyroxine, in addition to elevated hCG.