1) The patient must be informed that these are not drugs per se, and these cosmeceuticals are not a substitute for pharmaceutical-grade dermatological topicals. As a corollary, the time taken for improvement may be more.

2) A very common issue that has become daunting for a practicing dermatologist is that the patient seeking improvement in his/her skin texture/tone/pigmentation/hair loss etc. often approaches the dermatologist enquiring about branded cosmeceuticals that they have been using in the past. The dermatologist should make an attempt to verify the contents of the creams, lotions, and other products being used by the patient, and allow or stop their use depending on the patient's condition, tolerance, and the impact of them being in addition to the planned topicals to be prescribed. A cost factor assumes importance here since the majority of cosmeceuticals are not inexpensive. Thus the treating dermatologist should prescribe cost-effective topicals and have a duration in mind for which it should/can be used. The cosmeceutical may have to be changed depending on the improvement or lack thereof, and if any concomitant drugs (like oral isotretinoin) or physical procedures (peels/laser toning) are planned.

3) There is another facet to the cost-related aspect of cosmeceuticals - Patients often insist on continuing to use 'expensive' skin-care products 'gifted' or 'bought' by them It is prudent to explain to the patient that in your opinion, what will help and what may not.

4) Similarly, often, patients ascribe a new problem, e.g., acneiform eruption to the prescribed cosmeceutical. If the clinician is convinced that this cannot be the result of the prescribed topical, counsel, and observe. If the issue persists or worsens, it is advisable to stop all applications and consider doing a patch test. In patients with known sensitive skin, always advise any new topical to be first tested as a patch over a small area of the face or away from the face for 2 to 3 days, and if tolerated, then only go ahead with the therapy. Short contact therapy has been found very useful in certain situations, especially with topical retinoids and AHA-based lotions. The patient with sensitive skin should be advised to start with short duration exposure (5 to 15 min) followed by rinse off and generous use of a moisturizer.

5) Patient compliance - Checking for patient's compliance of using all the prescribed medicines is essential on each visit. Often patients apply retinoids religiously at night but forget to use the sunscreen in the day time as advised. This is a common reason for otherwise unexplainable reactions like redness, aggravated by sun exposure.

6) Undisclosed applications/parlor procedures - The clinician must determine (especially with relatively stronger agents like retinoids) that the patient is not using additional undisclosed skincare products. These agents can include astringents, toners, SA-based face-washes, or taking parlor treatments like facials, bleaching, 'cleansing' etc. since the latter may result in an unwanted complication that the patient often tends to blame on the doctor's prescribed topical instead of his/her own 'mild' skincare products.