NODAT management should ideally start before the organ transplant. Pre-transplant patients should receive counseling regarding the risk factors of developing NODAT and the ways to prevent it. Attention to avoid weight gain is an established step to prevent NODAT. Weight loss can prevent NODAT in overweight patients with prediabetic status. In high-risk groups such as obese patients, the goal should include weight loss with diet and increasing physical activity with target weight loss of 5% to 10% of total body weight and following up with the dietitian before and after transplant. Patients should be advised to eat a healthy, low-calorie, and low-fat diet. Weight loss immediately after transplant is not recommended, as it will delay wound healing.

After being diagnosed with NODAT, as with DM, self-glucose monitoring and compliance with treatment are essential. Also, patients should be aware of the importance of an annual eye exam, which is even more important than in traditional diabetes patients. NODAT patients are prone to have an acceleration of cataracts due to the universal use of both corticosteroids and immunosuppressants. Foot exams should be part of every clinical visit. Immunosuppressants place NODAT patients at increased risk of different infections, so compliance with annual influenza and pneumococcal vaccines is critical in this population. Those patients who desire to get pregnant should be encouraged to wait at least 1 year after the transplantation to decrease the risk of rejection. The transplant team should be involved in all stages before, during, and after pregnancy to reduce the comorbidities of both mother and baby.