The procedure starts after the patient is in the operating room and attached to the standard monitors. An anesthesiologist may place an arterial line for invasive monitoring of the patient’s blood pressure before induction of general anesthesia. After general anesthesia is induced and the patient is intubated, a central line for venous access and a pulmonary artery catheter may be placed followed by insertion of a transesophageal echocardiography transducer. The patient is sterilely prepped and draped, and a time-out is performed before surgical incision. Median sternotomy is performed by the surgeon for preparation of takedown of the LIMA to use as a conduit. A trained assistant, usually a physician assistant, nurse first assistant, or another surgeon, simultaneously removes the saphenous vein from one or both legs using open or video-assisted techniques. After suitable conduits are acquired, the surgeon orders anticoagulation, most often heparin, given in preparation for cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). The patient’s aorta and heart are centrally cannulated, and the tubing is attached to the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit. After starting CPB, the heart is arrested using high-potassium containing cardioplegia so the surgeon can anastomose the harvested conduits to the coronary arteries distal to the blockages. After the surgeon anastomoses the distal portions, the conduits are attached to new ostia created in the proximal aorta. Then the cardioplegia is washed out, the heart begins to contract, and the surgeon can check the grafts for both blood flow and competence as well as checking for bleeding from the anastomosis sites. After that, the chest is closed using sternal wires, and the patient is transferred to the intensive care unit for monitoring of hemodynamic stability and extubation.