**Rod dystrophies:**Rod dominated dystrophies include rod and rod-cone dystrophies, where either rod photoreceptors are predominantly affected, or rod photoreceptors are the first affected. This includes Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and Congenital stational night blindness (CSNB).

**Retinitis pigmentosa:**It is the most commonly seen retinal dystrophy. RP is a progressive rod-cone disease with rods affected first and has a high level of clinical and genetic heterogeneity. The age of presentation and the prognosis depends on the type of inheritance. Like other forms of RD, it may be sporadic or inherited in an autosomal dominant (AD), autosomal recessive (AR), or x- linked recessive (XLR) pattern. AD is the most common form, and XLR is the least common but most severe form. Non-syndromic and syndromic forms are reported.

Nyctalopia is a constant feature, although it is not pathognomic of RP. Most cases do not report night vision problems until the ocular disease is in an advanced stage. Patients also notice an insidious progressive loss of peripheral field of vision. In most cases, the inferior retina is affected first. Hence superior field losses are commonly seen. Visual field loss, coupled with night vision problems, makes these patients prone to accidents, especially at night.  In typical RP, the rate of progression of visual field loss is usually slow, and usually patient does not notice these changes until it reaches the stage of tunnel vision when the patient becomes acutely aware of the changes. Central vision can be affected earlier due to secondary changes such as cystoid macular edema, epiretinal membrane, or development of retinal pigment epithelial defects (RPE) in macular or fovea.

Fundus appearance of RP classically includes a triad of retinal vessel attenuation, waxy pallor of the optic disc, and bone spicule intraretinal pigmentation. Patients with very early RP without fundus pigmentary abnormalities are termed as RP sine pigmento. This is no longer considered as a subtype of RP as it is a stage of RP through which some patients pass. Fine dust-like pigment cells are noted in the vitreous cavity; these are released from the degeneration of RPE.

Phenotypic variants, based on retinal involvement are sectoral retinitis pigmentosa, pericentral RP, and unilateral or extremely asymmetric RP. Sectoral RP is characterized by pigmentary changes limited to one or two quadrants with limited visual field changes, good electroretinogram (ERG) responses, and minimal progression with time. True sector RP can be autosomal dominant or recessive. Sporadic cases are, however, common and may possibly result from non-genetic causes of retinal degeneration. The pericentral variant shows field loss between 5 and 15 degrees from fixation. The areas of field deficit enlarge and coalesce over time and encroach the central field of vision early, causing greater disability. Unilateral RP is typically an acquired condition and is commonly referred to as diffuse unilateral neuroretinitis. However, extremely asymmetric RP is an entity with a genetic association.

**Congenital Stationary Night Blindness:**CSNB is a non-progressive form of night blindness. Various inheritance patterns (autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked) are now recognized. CSNB is further categorized as- CSNB with normal fundus and abnormal fundus.

Some cases of CSNB with normal fundi present with reduced vision ( 20/50) and no history of night blindness. CSNB with abnormal fundi includes two entities: Oguchi disease and fundus albipunctatus.

In Oguchi disease, the Mizuo Nakamura phenomenon is classically observed. In this variant, golden sheen over the retina is noted with an unusually dark macula on exposure to light. However, the retina appears normal after prolonged dark adaptation. Color vision and visual acuity are normal in these cases. Histopathological studies suggest the presence of an abnormal layer between outer segments of photoreceptors and RPE. Fundus albipunctatus is another type of CSNB with yellow-white dots over the fundus. In most cases, these dots are found incidentally on routine eye checkups. Color vision and visual acuity are usually normal.

**Cone disorders:**Cone dominated diseases can be further subdivided into diseases with early-onset with no progression and late-onset forms that are usually progressive. The progressive forms include cone dominated dystrophies and cone dystrophies. The stationary forms include achromatopsia and blue cone monochromatism.

**Achromatopsia:**It is an autosomal recessive condition with patients presenting with poor visual acuity since birth,  photosensitivity, and poor color discrimination.  Photosensitivity is due to poor visual acuity in bright lights, instead of actual light intolerance. It has two subtypes- Complete and incomplete achromatopsia. Cases with complete achromatopsia, also known as rod monochromats, usually have visual acuity less than 20/200. Incomplete or atypical forms retain a visual acuity between 20/80- 20/200. Color vision is completely absent in complete achromatopsia cases. Pendular nystagmus may be present but usually improves with age. Fundus examination is usually normal in these cases; however, some cases may have a granular appearance of the macula or temporal optic disc pallor. Visual field testing may reveal central scotoma; however, peripheral fields are usually normal or mildly constricted. Characteristically, these are non-progressive changes.

**Cone Monochromatism:** It is an X linked recessive congenital disorder where two of the three cone systems are absent or significantly affected. The most common variety is blue cone monochromatism, in which both red and green cone systems are completely absent. Visual acuity in affected individuals ranges from 20/80 to 20/200. Clinical signs and symptoms resemble achromatopsia cases. They can perceive blue color.

**Cone rod dystrophy (CRD): **It is usually misdiagnosed as RP with more involvement of cones than rods. Patients present with the early loss of vision and color vision abnormalities with subsequent peripheral field constriction. The fundus examination reveals macular pigmentation and atrophy in the early stages, followed by peripheral bone spicule pigmentation in advanced cases. Often mid periphery is affected later in the course of the disease. The diagnosis of CRD is essentially based on ERG changes, which show cone affliction more than rods.

**Generalized Retinal dystrophies:**This category includes disorders like Leber congenital amaurosis.

**Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA): **It is a group of disorders due to a mutation in at least 16 different genes, all presenting with severe visual impairment or blindness from infancy and extinguished ERG. Most patients show either a normal fundus appearance or subtle RPE changes and retinal vascular attenuation. Eye rubbing, also known as the oculo-digital sign is a common association. Keratoconus is seen in 29% of cases.