There is no cure for HPV. Removing visible warts does not necessarily reduce the transmission of the underlying HPV infection.

Treatment varies depending on the number, size, and location of warts. Treatment can cause permanent depigmentation, itching, pain, and scarring.

Urethral meatus warts are best treated with surgery to minimize long-term complications.

The American Urological Association does not recommend treating sub-clinical (invisible) lesions.

Treatments are either ablative (vaporization, resection, coagulation, or excision) or involve the use of topical agents. Physically ablative treatments are more effective at wart removal; but in many cases, topical agents are preferred by patients as initial therapy, especially for smaller lesions.

**Topical Agents**

Topical agents may be very effective, are self-applied by patients, and are less traumatic than surgical intervention. However, patient compliance is spotty and recurrences are common.

**Podophyllotoxin**solution 0.15% to 0.5% in a gel or cream can be applied to the affected area and is not washed off. Podofilox (an anti-mitotic drug) appears to be safer than podophyllin.

**Imiquimod**is a topical immune response cream applied to the affected area but may cause fungal infections and flu-like symptoms. Imiquimod is an immune enhancer and increases cytokines (such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) and interferon alfa). This causes an enhanced cytotoxic immune reaction based on T cell-mediated response factors.

**Sinecatechins**are an ointment of catechins extracted from green tea that appear to have a higher wart clearance rate than podophyllotoxin and imiquimod while causing less local irritation, but clearance takes longer than with imiquimod. The overall wart clearance rate is reported as high as 57.2%.

Sinecatechins are available as a 15% ointment. The exact mechanism of action is unknown, but they have immuno-stimulatory, anti-proliferative and anti-tumor properties and appear to work by reducing HPV gene products E6 and E7.

**Isotretinoin**is a medication typically used for acne. It acts to reduce sebum, shrink sebaceous glands, provides an anti-inflammatory effect, and has anti-bacterial benefits. Isotretinoin has also shown significant efficacy when used as an adjunct to standard treatment of genital warts in immunocompromised patients, where the condyloma are extensive or if the lesions have proven resistant to initial therapy.

**Trichloroacetic acid**is not as effective as cryosurgery and should be avoided on the vagina, cervix, or urinary meatus.

Skin erosion and pain are most commonly reported with imiquimod and sinecatechins.

**Physical (Surgical) Removal or Destruction**

Direct surgical excision or physically destructive therapies are considered more effective on keratinized warts, especially if they are larger in size.

**Simple surgical excision**under local anesthesia is simple and direct but will leave a scar and requires a small surgical procedure.

**Liquid nitrogen cryosurgery ablation**is inexpensive, considered safe for use during pregnancy, and does not usually cause much scarring but requires cryosurgical equipment and training. It may require anesthesia due to pain and multiple treatments are often necessary.

**Electrocauterization**is considered effective but causes scarring and requires some level of anesthesia.

**Laser vaporization**has minimal bleeding but may be somewhat less effective than other ablative techniques. It is typically used for extensive areas of genital wart involvement, is relatively expensive, and may cause a plume of virus-containing smoke.

**Surgical removal under general anesthesia**may be necessary for more extensive lesions, intra-anal warts, or in children.

**Photodynamic therapy**with a photosensitizing agent (such as aminolevulinic acid) has demonstrated efficacy in eliminating external warts. The aminolevulinic acid is applied topically or directly intralesionally. The photosensitizing agent is absorbed quickly into the most rapidly growing cells. Light exposure activates the aminolevulinic acid releasing free oxygen singlet radicals resulting in the destruction of the wart by direct oxidative injury.

**Discontinued**

- 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) 5% cream is no longer considered acceptable due to side effects.

- Interferon intralesional injections initially showed moderate efficacy with a complete response rate of 36% - 63% as monotherapy, but it has largely been supplanted by other treatments. Might still be considered for intractable cases as an adjunctive therapy.

- Podophyllin, podofilox, and especially isotretinoin should be avoided during pregnancy.