Escitalopram is administered via the oral route. It is available as a 1 mg/mL oral solution and 5 mg, 10 mg, or 20 mg tablets. It is taken once daily, either with or without food. The typical starting dose for escitalopram is 10 mg. After one week, the dose can be increased to achieve proper symptom control.

**Specific Patients Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**10 mg per day dose is recommended for patients with hepatic impairment as oral clearance was reduced by 37%, and half-life was doubled in patients with hepatic dysfunction.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**No dose adjustment is needed for patients with mild or moderate renal impairment. However, it is recommended to use escitalopram with caution in patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance < 20 mL/min).

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**It is considered pregnancy category C medicine. It is recommended to monitor patients closely and adjust the dose based on individual patient needs, as escitalopram and desmethylcitalopram can cross the placenta and be distributed into the amniotic fluid.

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**It is recommended to calculate and use****a relatively smaller dose as escitalopram, and its desmethylcitalopram (DCT) metabolite is excreted in breast milk.

- **Pediatric Patients:**In a single-dose study in adolescent patients (12 to 17 years of age), the AUC of escitalopram decreased by 19%, and Cmax increased by 26% compared to adult patients. There is no adjustment needed in these patients.

- **Geriatric Patients:**In single and multiple-dose studies, peak plasma concentration remained unchanged while AUC and half-life were increased by approximately 50% in geriatric patients. Per the manufacturer's label, a 10 mg dose of escitalopram is recommended for geriatric patients.