The treatment and management will depend on what the clinician's concerns are and what a patient or their parents desire. Most commonly retrognathia will be identified in children between the ages of four to ten years old and if the child has a dental home, will likely be referred to an orthodontist for evaluation ideally around the ages of seven to eight. Generally, this is a benign condition without any other effects. This will allow the orthodontist to begin tracking the patient with serial cephalometric radiographs and potentially intervene early with non-surgical therapy like headgear or newer intra-oral techniques that have a similar effect in repositioning the mandible. If the child does not have a dental home or has not seen an orthodontist, a referral is recommended.

If a clinician is concerned about airway management on a patient with retrognathia, this should be a strong indicator of a potentially difficult airway. Underdeveloped structures, anatomic distortion, potential malpositioning of the epiglottis, and tighter constriction of the muscles and surrounding structures all need to be considered. These patients are much more likely to have a Cormack and Lehane grade III or IV view, and that needs to be planned for.

If the infant or child presents with retrognathia, or even if they are older and have associated findings that lead the clinician to suspect a syndrome or myriad of issues, consider the following conditions:

**Pierre-Robin Sequence**

This is the classic triad of micrognathia (colloquially synonymous with retrognathia), glossoptosis, and cleft palate. Airway obstruction is likely, though the disease can present with a range from mild to severe. The patient will need a referral to a cleft and craniofacial team for evaluation and treatment.

**Hemifacial Microsomia**

Part of the spectrum of oculo-auriculo-vertebral (OAV) syndromes, this is another entity with variable penetrance. It arises due to pathologic dysregulation of the first and second pharyngeal arches and can be unilateral or bilateral. It results in hypoplastic growth of not only the mandible and lower face but can affect the midface, temporomandibular joint, orbits, ears, and soft tissue. A common classification system used is the Kaban Classification (types I, IIa, IIb, and III), which helps guide surgical correction. If discovered as an infant, the patient will need a referral to a cleft and craniofacial team for evaluation and treatment. A surprisingly high number of adults have a mild expression which needs to be taken into close account during facial and orthognathic surgical planning.

**Goldenhar Syndrome**

Also part of the spectrum of oculo-auriculo-vertebral (OAV) syndromes, the etiology behind Goldenhar Syndrome is unclear, with multiple chromosomes potentially affected and only theories offered as to a cause. This entity combines features of hemifacial microsomia with further facial clefting, colobomas of the eyes, vertebral anomalies, and other findings. The patient will need a referral to a cleft and craniofacial team for evaluation and treatment as well as ophthalmology.

**Treacher Collins Syndrome**

This syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition of a mutation of the TCOF1 gene with variable expression. Patients will have a unique facial appearance with extreme retrognathia leading to a very convex facial profile when viewed from the side, antimongoloid slanting eyes (that is the lateral corners of the eyes are turned down), colobomas, significant facial hypoplasia of the midface of the hard and soft tissues, and auricular deformities. Once born, these infants will need immediate and intense interprofesional therapy.

**Nager Syndrome**

Similar to Treacher Collins. However, the cause is unknown. The therapies are similar.

**Mobius Syndrome**

A very rare entity with unclear etiology, this presents with a characteristic “masklike face” as a component is paralysis of some or all of cranial nerves III, IV, V, VI, VII, IX, X, and XII. Retrognathia, ocular deformities, and other skeletal and limb abnormalities. The patient will need a referral to a cleft and craniofacial team for evaluation and treatment, as well as any other specialties warranted.