Epidemiological studies of the consequences of exposure to hydrazine can be divided into acute and chronic exposures.

**Acute Exposure**

Acute exposures have been documented since 1965 and were primarily associated with military occupational exposures to hydrazine.

Frierson et al described 2 cases where young men were exposed to vapors of hydrazine mixed with unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine (UDMH). Both were treated with pyridoxine with rapid improvement of their symptoms.****

Reid et al described a young sailor who accidentally ingested liquid hydrazine while working in the ship’s engine room.****

Kirklin et al described a case of a man exposed to a hydrazine industrial explosion and went into a coma that responded to pyridoxine.

Harati and Niakin describe a case of a young man who accidentally ingested a mouthful of liquid hydrazine.

Dhennin et al described a chemical technician exposed to a UDMH industrial explosion.****

Binyamin et al 2018 described a case of an aircraft technician who developed elevated creatine phosphokinase (CPK) levels after exposure to hydrazine vapor.****

Dermal exposures are mostly linked to occupational injuries through the gold-plating industry, chicken feed additives, herbicides, or steam power plants.

**Chronic Exposure**

Chronic exposures have been further studied in epidemiological studies for various reasons, but mainly to determine the carcinogenicity of hydrazine. Unfortunately, many epidemiological studies on hydrazine were confounded by concomitant exposure to other chemicals, making direct correlations difficult.

Wald et al studied 427 men exposed to varying levels of hydrazine, among other chemicals, in a hydrazine manufacturing plant.

Contassot et al described 130 men exposed to hydrazine at various levels over six months. They showed a statistically significant higher incidence of cancer in the high-exposure group (>1 ppm), which was reduced when skin cancers were excluded.****Morris et al followed up with 95% of the workers initially evaluated by Wald et al (1984) and Roe et al (1978) 10 years after their initial evaluation. They determined that there was also no all-cause mortality increase from occupational exposure to hydrazine.

Ritz et al 2006 performed an epidemiological study of 6107 aerospace workers exposed to varying amounts of hydrazine for at least 2 years and showed an increased risk of lung cancer mortality, increased incidence of colon and rectal cancers, and a possible dose-response association with pancreatic cancer. This study also had patients that developed leukemias, lymphomas, and kidney cancers; however, the numbers of exposed individuals were too small to show significance.****Common criticisms of this study are that there were many other chemicals the workers may have been exposed to.

Zhao et al 2005 examined the same group and founder a higher incidence of lung cancers and melanoma with a possible higher incidence of esophageal cancer, stomach cancer, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and leukemias; however, they concluded that it was most likely attributed to mineral oil exposure. In addition, they found a higher incidence of kidney cancers which they attributed to trichloroethylene exposure.

Krishnadasan et al 2007 also evaluated the same cohort of aerospace workers and found a higher incidence of prostate cancer; however, they attributed it to trichloroethylene exposure.

The World Health Organization (WHO) in 1987 described populations with potentially high occupational exposures as workers at facilities producing hydrazine itself and/or its salts and derivatives, propulsion testing facilities, rocket launching sites, and locations where aircraft using hydrazine as an emergency fuel are assembled or refueled.****

The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) in 1997 stated that human exposures to hydrazine and 1,1-dimethylhydrazine occur mainly in the workplace or the vicinity of aerospace or industrial facilities or hazardous waste sites.