The patient will complain of double vision or "rotating images" (oscillopsia). The symptoms may be present for a few seconds to hours and generally occur many times a day. Because the symptoms are present with the eyes open, the patient does not complain of any symptoms when asleep. With hemifacial spasms, on the other hand, it will be observed that the spasms are visible even when the patient is asleep.

**Triggers:**patients will often associate the symptoms with stress, fatigue, nicotine, caffeine, and in one case, heat. In most patients, the symptoms are spontaneous. When the symptoms occur, the patient will be aware of the sensation of an abnormal movement of the eye and will describe double vision and oscillopsia. Although the episodes occur spontaneously, they may be induced by having the patient look in the direction the superior oblique muscle moves the eye: in and down.

**Clinical Findings:**the movements caused by the superior oblique muscle tend to be of high frequency (up to 50 Hz) and low amplitude (less than 4 degrees). There is torsion of the eye with rapid nystagmic monocular movement (see Videos). There will generally be fast 2 to 3 Hz intorting movements followed by slower extorting of the eye. Although the amplitudes are low (2 - 4 degrees), it is not uncommon to see occasional jerking amplitudes of 5 degrees or more.

Wertenbaker noted an audible phenomenon when two patients were examined with a stethoscope on the affected eye. He described "an irregular, rapid, machine gun sound." Others have not reported this finding, and in three patients, we could not elicit such a sound. Remissions and exacerbations of SOM can last days to weeks, months, and even years.

**Extraocular Movements:**generally, there are no ocular movement abnormalities on examination, although, in some patients, a slight weakness of the superior oblique muscle may be detected with associated hypertropia, which changes to a hypotropia where there is an episode of spasm. Signs of superior oblique palsy should be looked for: patients will demonstrate ipsilateral hypertropia snd excyclotorsion. Patients may also demonstrate an overshoot of saccades in the downgaze in the affected eye.

**Torticollis:**subtle torticollis with a contralateral head tilt with a chin down position may occur as the patient tries to position the head where the oscillations are least troublesome.