# Continuing Education Activity

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) are a group of pharmacologic agents that disrupt the signal transduction pathways of protein kinases by several modes of inhibition. This activity will review the currently available drugs, their mechanism of action, routes of administration, indications, contraindications, and adverse effects.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the different types of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) drugs and the currently available TKIs.
- Describe the mechanism of action of tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
- Summarize the indications and contraindications for each type of tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
- Review the adverse effects and toxicity of tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

# Indications

Mutations, dysregulation, and overexpression of protein kinases are involved in a multitude of disease processes. Around 1 in every 40 human genes codes for a protein kinase and nearly half of those genes map to either disease loci or cancer amplicons.

Tyrosine kinase enzymes (TKs) can be categorized into receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), non-receptor tyrosine kinases (NRTKs), and a small group of dual-specificity kinases (DSK) which can phosphorylate serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. RTKs are transmembrane receptor that includes vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFR), platelet-derived growth factor receptors (PDGFR), insulin receptor (InsR) family, and the ErbB receptor family, which includes epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR) and the human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2). NRTKs are cytoplasmic proteins that consist of nine families, including Abl, Ack, Csk, Fak, Fes/Fer, Jak, Src, Syk/Zap70, and Tec, with the addition of Brl/Sik, Rak/Frk, Rlk/Txk, and Srm, which fall outside the nine defined families. The most notable example of DSKs is the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases (MEKs), which are principally involved in the MAP pathways.

As of now, there are over 50 FDA-approved TKIs. Comprehensive lists of FDA-approved TKIs with additional information are available at NIH PubChem and FDA.gov. Due to the broad reach of this topic and the rapid development of new drugs, this list is not fully comprehensive.

**TKI**

**Target**

**Indication**

**Deucravacitinib**

TYK2

moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis

**Avapritinib**

PDGFR

GIST (gastrointestinal stromal tumors)

**Capmatinib**

c-MET

NSCLC (non-small cell lung cancer)

**Pemigatinib**

FGFR

Cholangiocarcinoma with FGFR2 fusions or rearrangements

**Ripretinib**

KIT/PDGFR

GIST

**Selpercatinib**

RET

NSCLC and thyroid cancer

**Selumetinib**

MEK1/2

Neurofibromatosis type 1

**Tucatinib**

Her2

HER2-positive breast cancer

**Entrectinib**

TRKA/B/C, ROS1

ROS1-positive NSCLC, Solid tumors with NTRK fusion proteins

**Erdafitinib**

FGFR

Urothelial bladder cancers

**Fedratinib**

JAK2

Myelofibrosis

**Pexidartinib**

CSF1R

Tenosynovial giant cell tumors

**Upadacitinib**

PDGFR

GIST

**Zanubrutinib**

BTK

Mantle cell lymphoma

**Baricitinib**

JAK1/2

Rheumatoid arthritis

**Binimetinib**

MEK1/2

Melanoma

**Dacomitinib**

EGFR

EGFR-mutant NSCLC

**Fostamatinib**

Syk

Chronic immune thrombocytopenia

**Gilteritinib**

Flt

Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML)

**Larotrectinib**

TRKA/B/C

Solid tumors with NTRK fusion proteins

**Lorlatinib**

ALK

ALK-positive NSCLC

**Acalabrutinib**

BTK

Mantle cell lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic  leukemia (CLL), small lymphocytic lymphomas

**Brigatinib**

ALK

ALK-positive NSCLC

**Midostaurin**

Flt3

AML, advanced systemic mastocytosis, mast cell leukemia

**Neratinib**

HER2

HER2-positive breast cancer

**Alectinib**

ALK, RET

ALK-positive NSCLC

**Cobimetinib**

MEK1/2

combination therapy with vemurafenib for BRAF-positive melanoma

**Lenvatinib**

VEGFR, RET

Differentiated thyroid cancer

**Osimertinib**

EGFR

NSCLC

**Ceritinib**

ALK

ALK-positive NSCLC resistant to crizotinib

**Nintedanib**

FGFR

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis

**Afatinib**

EGFR, HER2, ErB4

NSCLC

**Ibrutinib**

BTK

CLL, graft vs. host disease, mantle cell lymphoma, marginal zone lymphoma

**Trametinib**

MEK1/2

Melanoma

**Axitinib**

VEGFR

Advanced renal cell carcinoma

**Bosutinib**

BCR-Abl

Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML)

**Cabozantinib**

RET, VEGFR

Advanced medullary thyroid cancer, hepatocellular and renal cell carcinoma

**Ponatinib**

BCR-Abl

Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML or acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)

**Regorafenib**

VEGFR

Colorectal cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma, GIST

**Tofacitinib**

JAK3

Rheumatoid arthritis

**Crizotinib**

ALK, ROS1

ALK or ROS1-positive NSCLC

**Ruxolitinib**

JAK1/2/3, Tyk

Myelofibrosis, polycythemia vera

**Vandetanib**

VEGFR2

Medullary thyroid cancer

**Pazopanib**

VEGFR

Renal cell carcinoma, soft tissue sarcomas

**Lapatinib**

EGFR, HER2

HER2-positive breast cancer

**Nilotinib**

BCR-Abl

Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML

**Dasatinib**

BCR-Abl

CML

**Sunitinib**

VEGFR2

GIST, pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, renal cell carcinomas

**Sorafenib**

VEGFR

Hepatocellular carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma, differentiated thyroid cancer

**Erlotinib**

EGFR

NSCLC, pancreatic cancer

**Gefitinib**

EGFR

NSCLC

**Imatinib**

BCR-Abl, KIT, PGFR

Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML or ALL, aggressive systemic mastocytosis, chronic eosinophilic leukemia, hypereosinophilic syndrome, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, GIST, myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative disease

# Mechanism of Action

As a whole, tyrosine kinases phosphorylate specific amino acids on substrate enzymes, which subsequently alter signal transduction leading to downstream changes in cellular biology. The downstream signal transduction set off by TKs can modify cell growth, migration, differentiation, apoptosis, and death. Constitutive activation or inhibition, either by mutations or other means, can lead to dysregulated signal cascades, potentially resulting in malignancy and other pathologies.

Despite the diverse primary amino acid sequences, human kinases share similar 3D structures, particularly when it comes to the ATP-binding pocket located in the catalytically active region. The starting amino acid sequence (ASP-Phe-Gly or DFG) of the flexible activation loop that controls access to the activation site is also typically conserved.

Kinase inhibitors are either irreversible or reversible. The irreversible kinase inhibitors tend to covalently bind and block the ATP site resulting in irreversible inhibition. The reversible kinase inhibitors can further subdivide into four major subtypes based on the confirmation of the binding pocket as well as the DFG motif.

Below are listed various binding modes of TKIs.

- **Type I inhibitors**: competitively bind to the ATP-binding site of active TKs. The arrangement of the DFG motif in type I inhibitors has the aspartate residue facing the catalytic site of the kinase.

- **Type II inhibitors**: bind to inactive kinases, usually at the ATP-binding site. The DFG motif in type II inhibitors protrudes outward away from the ATP-binding site. Due to the outward rotation of the DFG motif, many type II inhibitors can also exploit regions adjacent to the ATP-binding site that would otherwise be inaccessible.

- **Type III inhibitors**: do not interact with the ATP-binding pocket. Type III inhibitors exclusively bind to allosteric pockets adjacent to the ATP-binding region.

- **Type IV inhibitors**: bind allosteric sites far removed from the ATP-binding pocket.

- **Type V inhibitors**: refer to a proposed subset of kinase inhibitors that exhibit multiple binding modes.

# Administration

Nearly all TKIs are effective when taken orally. Therapeutic loading and maintenance dosages are unique to each drug and should require unique dosing for each patient. When administering specific TKIs, many factors can contribute to reduced potency and the development of acquired resistance. These factors include such as whether or not food intake affects bioavailability, the mechanism of drug metabolism and elimination, liver and kidney function, drug-drug interactions, the presence of other medications that alter stomach pH, and patient demographics.

# Adverse Effects

Adverse events of TKIs are usually dose-based, with broad side effect profiles unique to each drug. However, due to similarities in drug targets, different classes of TKIs can have similar side effect profiles. Clinicians use BCR-Abl and KIT inhibitors to treat Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML and GIST, respectively.

EGFRs are a large family of RTKs associated with several cancers, including NSCL, breast, colorectal, pancreatic, esophageal, and head-and-neck cancers. The most common severe adverse effects associated with EGRF inhibitors are related to cutaneous adverse drug reactions.

Angiogenesis is a critical step in cancer growth. VEGF is a key inducer of pathological angiogenesis expressed in nearly all human tumors.

Common adverse events related to TKIs are listed below. Not all adverse events are associated with every TKI, occurring at different frequencies depending on the drug.

**General**

- Fatigue

- Fevers/Chills

- Weight loss/gain

**Gastrointestinal**

- Abdominal pain

- Diarrhea

- Dysgeusia

- Constipation

- Nausea/vomiting

- Hepatotoxicity

- Stomatitis

**Cardiovascular**

- Hypertension

- Hypotension

- Congestive heart failure

- Thrombosis

- Cardiac ischemia

- Myocardial infarction

- Strokes

- Intestinal hemorrhage

- QT interval prolongation

**Dermatological**

- Steven Johnson syndrome

- Toxic epidermal necrolysis

- Drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms

- Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis

- Palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia

- Maculopapular rashes

- Cheilitis

- Facial edema

- Eczema

- Pruritis

- Photosensitivity

- Xerosis

- Alopecia

- Hair color changes

- Paronychia

**Endocrine**

- Hypokalemia

- Thyroid dysfunction

- Lacrimation

**Hematologic**

- Anemia

- Thrombocytopenia

- Neutropenia

- Bruising

**Musculoskeletal**

- Myalgias

- Arthralgia

**Ophthalmic**

- Central serous retinopathy

- Retinal pigment epithelial detachment

- TKI keratitis

**Renal**

- Kidney dysfunction

- Proteinuria

**Respiratory**

- Interstitial pulmonary disease

- Pneumonia

- Upper respiratory tract infection

- Dyspnea

- Epistaxis

- Rhinorrhea

**Neurological**

- Cognitive impairment

- Peripheral neuropathy

- Headaches

- Dizziness

# Contraindications

There are very few contraindications for TKIs. Considering the use of TKIs in life-extending cancer therapy, the benefits associated with TKI use generally outweigh the risks.

Data on TKI use during pregnancy is still lacking in most cases. As a result, TKIs are typically co-prescribed with an effective contraception method during therapy and several weeks after discontinuing the TKI. Other limitations to using TKIs include severe adverse reactions. Patients at particular risk for one of the known adverse effects of the TKIs about to be prescribed, such as hypertension, interstitial lung disease, and long-QT syndrome, should receive an alternative therapy if possible.

# Monitoring

While TKIs relieve the disease burden of most cancer patients, acquired resistance through various mechanisms remains a bottleneck in cancer targeted therapy. Patients require monitoring for disease progression after the initial benefit, which could be a sign of acquired resistance.

# Toxicity

TKIs are generally well-tolerated, especially when compared to non-targeted cancer therapy. However, only a few of these drugs are selective for only one target. Due to the ubiquitous physiological role protein kinases play in the body, toxicities affecting various organs can occur. Organs commonly affected include the heart, lungs, liver, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, thyroid, blood, and skin.

The toxicity and efficacy of TKIs are often closely linked; this allows on-target toxic effects to act as biomarkers of effective pharmacological inhibition for certain TKIs. For example, skin rashes can serve as a monitoring mechanism for the effects of some TKIs that target EGFR and hypertension and can generally help monitor the inhibition of VEGFR.

The optimal TKI of choice and dose is a requirement to reduce toxicities and adverse events. While TIKs are mainly administered at a fixed dose, several factors must guide dosing when devising an optimal TKI regimen. These factors include drug-drug/drug-food interactions, genetic polymorphisms of ABC transporters, patient adherence, intestinal absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The development of TKI represents one of the most significant medical breakthroughs of the 21st century; however, one of the drawbacks of this drug class, endemic to small molecule therapies for cancer treatment in general, is the financial burden to the patient.

Given the non-specific nature of this drug class, it is imperative that therapy is ordered and subsequently followed through the collaborative efforts of an interprofessional team. This interprofessional team includes clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), specialists, nursing staff, and pharmacists. Each team member needs to be knowledgeable about the indications, dosing, and potential adverse effects of these drugs so they can counsel the patient regarding expectations and monitoring for adverse events, which will allow any needed changes in therapy to be made promptly, thereby driving optimal patient therapeutic outcomes. [Level 5]