Stringent neurological evaluation is paramount in assessing patients with brain herniation. Early identification of pupillary asymmetry and rapid correction of the underlying pathology help limit secondary insults.

There are salient neurological signs and symptoms, while the patient progresses through the herniation syndromes.

In the case of subfalcine herniation, there is lower limb weakness owing to infarction of the corresponding motor homunculus following compression of pericallosal and callosomarginal vessels.

There will be ipsilateral anisocoria with contralateral motor weakness following uncal herniation. However, occasionally Kernohan notch phenomenon can give rise to ipsilateral weakness as well.

With further progression of raised intracranial pressure, there will be the lateral shift of the diencephalon leading to altered sensorium from distortion of the reticular activating system as well as hydrocephalus from torsion and obliteration of CSF pathways.

The onset of downward transtentorial herniation is evident by the presence of decorticate and decerebrate posturing along with loss of brainstem reflexes. The respiratory patterns progress through Cheyne stoke pattern of breathing to stages of hyperventilation, ataxia, and finally apnoea, which eventually leads to fixed dilated pupils and respiratory arrest owing to compression of the medullary respiratory centers.

In upward transtentorial herniation, there is an onset of Parinaud syndrome along with features of diabetes insipidus resulting from damage to pituitary stalk.