The fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) combined the substance abuse and dependence criteria to diagnose SUD.

- hazardous use

- social/interpersonal problems due to using

- neglect of expected roles

- withdrawal

- tolerance

- using more or for longer than intended

- repeated attempts to quit

- related physical/psychological problems

- craving

- use preferred over other activities

A comprehensive medical history and a complete physical examination are the first steps in establishing the diagnosis of SUD. Some pregnant women readily admit to substance use, but others may be reluctant to disclose this sensitive information due to fear of repercussions, judgmental treatment, and social services involvement. When a stated history of substance use is absent, other features of the medical history can point to possible SUD, including a history of endocarditis, HIV, hepatitis C, sexual and/or physical abuse, and psychiatric conditions. A pregnant woman with late or no prenatal care may have avoided appointments due to concerns about revealing her substance use and the perceived adverse consequences. Many fear arrest, prosecution, and loss of child custody.

Physical examination begins with vital signs, with hypertension being a clue for possible cocaine or amphetamine use. Nasal septal perforation may be an additional clue for cocaine use. An underweight patient may be malnourished due to drugs or alcohol. Clinical staff, including medical assistants, nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and physicians, should observe the patient's general appearance. Women who are obtunded, agitated, or sleepy may be under the influence of substances. Dilated or constricted pupils and injection marks on the skin suggest possible opioid use. Bruises should elicit questions about maltreatment. If a pregnant woman smells strongly of tobacco, alcohol, or marijuana, she should be asked specifically about these substances in a confidential setting. Another frequent but nonspecific physical finding is poor dentition.