The essential elements in the evaluation of distal radial fractures are history and physical. These will guide a clinician in deciding what further imaging to obtain. X-rays are the standard imaging modality in the diagnosis of DR fractures. X-rays examination should look for radial height, radial inclination, radial shift, volar tilt, ulnar variance, ulnar styloid fracture, and DRUJ widening.

Computed tomography (CT) images may be necessary if X-rays are equivocal, but the history and physical are strongly suggestive of a fracture. CT imaging may also be useful in subsequent surgical planning for fractures that will go to the operating suite for fixation, especially intra-articular fractures. MRI adds little utility over X-ray and CT in the diagnosis of DR fracture. They may be useful if ligamentous disruption is highly suspected, but these studies are not necessary to perform in the Emergency Department. Advanced imaging such as MRI is more frequently performed in the outpatient setting by orthopedic specialists.

There have been several classification systems devised to over the years to help grade distal radial fractures once diagnostically imaged. Eponyms, such as “Chauffeur’s Fracture,” are helpful in remembering the presentation and mechanism of injury. However, they are unhelpful in describing injury severity or the need for surgical treatment. The Frykman Classification is frequently used for grading these injuries and applies to all eponymous DR fractures. It grades DR fractures based on articular involvement, the degree of radiocarpal joint and DRUJ involvement, and presence or absence of ulnar styloid fractures. It does not account for the degree of comminution, displacement, or other factors that are important in predicting the need for surgical intervention. The Frykman Classification and other similar grading systems have received criticism for their lack of treatment guidance, inter-rater reliability, and poor ease of use. There is no consensus on the best classification system for DR fractures.

When describing X-ray findings to an orthopedist, it is best to use the anatomic approach. A clear description of fracture location, open/closed status, neurovascular status, the degree of angulation, displacement, comminution, impaction, rotation, and presence of articular findings will provide more useful information for an orthopedic surgeon than attempting to grade the fracture using a traditional classification system.