Management of FCS is usually via an interprofessional team, including an endocrinologist or lipidologist, dietician, patient’s support group, and primary care. Dietary modification is the mainstay management of familial chylomicronemia syndrome. Lipid-lowering therapy such as fibrates, niacin, and omega-3 fatty acids have little to no role in the treatment as they act by either decreasing VLDL or increasing lipoprotein lipase activity. Both mechanisms will not affect the chylomicrons in FCS. Therefore, patients should follow a very-low-fat diet with a fat intake of less than 10% to 15% of daily calories (i.e., no more than 20 to 30 gm fat per day). Patients should be encouraged to use medium-chain triglycerides because they are water-soluble, not incorporated in the chylomicrons, and readily absorbed in the portal vein. They should also take essentials fatty acids such as alpha-linolenic acid and linolenic acid in addition to fat-soluble vitamins. Moreover, they should avoid alcohol intake and take caution with certain medications that can increase triglycerides levels, such as beta-blockers, thiazide diuretics, and exogenous estrogen.

The goal of the dietary modification is to keep the triglycerides levels below the threshold for acute pancreatitis (i.e., in the range of 750 mg/dl to 880 mg/dl.) Often, the diet regimen is so rigid that patients are unable to maintain it regularly. Therefore, counseling and close follow-up with a dietician along with an endocrinologist or lipidologist are necessary. In settings of complicated acute pancreatitis, plasmapheresis may be an option in selected cases, especially in pregnant patients.

Alipogene tiparvovec is the first gene therapy approved in Europe and was thought to decrease the triglyceride by 40% within 12 weeks post-therapy. However, it was then discontinued in 2017. Further, volanesorsen, an Apo C-III ASO, has been shown to reduce triglyceride by 50 to 80% in phase II and III trials and is pending approval right now.