**Basics of Doppler Ultrasound**

Doppler ultrasonography is based on a physics principle called the Doppler effect, first described in the mid-1800s by Christian Doppler. It describes how a sound wave frequency changes when it hits a moving object; in this case, a red blood cell is contained within a vessel. The ultrasound probe emits a soundwave with a known frequency; as this travels into the tissue and hits a moving red blood cell, the frequency changes as it reflects back to the probe. Based on this, the computer can determine the direction relative to the probe and the velocity of the moving red blood cell. Velocity measurements are also dependent upon the Doppler angle (theta). This is the angle between the direction of insonation and the direction of blood flow. For general vascular ultrasound, this angle should be less than 60 degrees.

**Basic Transcranial Doppler Exam**

Transcranial Doppler ultrasound utilizes various principles to allow interrogation of intracranial vessels for various uses. Firstly, a low-frequency ultrasound probe is utilized (2-3 MHz) due to improved penetration through structures with low-frequency sound waves, in the case of TCD, the cranial bones. Classically, the power M-mode is utilized for common indications (although color Doppler can also be used). During insonation of the cranium identifying the vessels is dependent upon a few variables and knowledge of normal intracranial vascular anatomy. Identification is based on (1) Which Doppler window is being utilized, (2) the direction of flow relative to probe position, (3) the depth of the target vessel, and (4) the Doppler spectra.

Insonation windows with depth and direction of flow for vessel identification:

- Transtemporal:

- M1 branch MCA: Depth of 45-65mm with direction toward the probe.
- MCA/ACA bifurcation: Depth of 60-65mm with bidirectional flow.
- ACA: Depth of 60-75mm with direction away from the probe.
- PCA (P1): Depth of 60-75mm with direction toward the probe.
- PCA (P2): Depth of 60-75mm with direction away from the probe.
- Terminal ICA: Depth of 60-65mm with direction toward the probe.

- Transorbital:

- Ophthalmic artery: Depth 45-60mm directed toward the probe.
- Carotid siphon

- Supraclinoid: Depth 60-75mm directed away from the probe.
- Genu: Depth 60-75mm with the bidirectional flow.
- Parasellar: Depth of 60-75mm directed toward the probe.

- Transforaminal:

- Vertebral artery: Depth of 65-85mm directed away from the probe.
- Basilar artery: Depth of 90-120mm directed away from the probe.

Common parameters investigated:

- Mean cerebral blood flow velocity: Calculated using peak systolic velocity (PSV) and end-diastolic velocity (EDV) based on the following formula: [PSV + (EDV x 2)]/3

- Resistive index: Measure of resistance to blood flow. RI = (PSV - EDV)/PSV

- Lindegaard ratio (LR): The LR is a calculated value that normalizes the MCA velocity to the ICA. This is calculated by the mean velocity of the MCA divided by the mean velocity of the ICA. This ratio is important for differentiating hyperemia from true vasospasm on TCD study. The idea is if the patient has an elevated velocity on examination, this could be related to hyperemia causing increased velocity. If the MCA is increased at a higher proportion than the ICA, it indicates vasospasm as the source of the elevated velocity. A normal LR is considered < 3, mild vasospasm 3.0-4.5, moderate vasospasm 4.5-6.0 and severe vasospasm >6.0.

Common values for velocity measurements related to arterial vasospasm:

Middle cerebral artery:

Normal = MFV <120 cm/s, Lindegaard Ratio <3

Mild vasospasm = MFV 120-150 cm/s, Lindegaard Ratio 3-4.5

Moderate vasospasm = MFV 150-200 cm/s, Lindegaard Ratio 4.5-6.0

Severe vasospasm = MFV >200 cm/s, Lindegaard Ratio >6

Anterior cerebral artery: Vasospasm = MFV >80 cm/s

Posterior cerebral artery: Vasospasm = MFV >85 cm/s

**Technique for right-to-left shunt evaluation**

Before starting the procedure, an IV line should be started in one of the antecubital veins with a 3-way stopcock attached to tubing. Utilizing a head strap, bilateral TCD probes are used to insonate the MCA vessels utilizing the transtemporal windows. Once the bilateral MCAs are selected, agitated saline is prepared using 9mL saline and 1mL of air. One bolus is given, and the MCAs are monitored for microemboli ("hits" of noise related to echogenic microbubbles shunted to systemic circulation). Then, after a 5-minute delay, another bolus is given with the addition of having the patient perform a Valsalva maneuver (potentially worsening shunting) after the full bolus is given.

**TCD in Sickle Cell Disease**

TCD is used as a screening tool to determine stroke risk in pediatric patients with sickle cell disease. This screening method is based on the STOP trial, which used the time-averaged mean velocity of the MCA and distal ICA as parameters to determine the stroke risk. The time-averaged mean velocity (TAMV) is utilized for pulsatile flow and essentially measures the mean velocity over multiple heartbeats. For these studies, the highest TAMV of either the MCA or ICA is used to determine risk. Normal is considered <170 cm/s, conditional is assigned to TAMV of 170-199 cm/s and abnormal is considered >/= 200 cm/s.