Targeted temperature management is associated with multiple physiologic changes, some of which may give rise to complications during treatment. The personnel involved in the care of patients undergoing therapeutic hypothermia must be aware of and anticipate these potential complications, as taking preventative measures and early recognition and treatment of complications can improve the overall survival.

**Cardiovascular**

Most of the complications of targeted temperature management affect the cardiovascular system since cardiac disease is in the background of approximately 80% of patients without hospital cardiac arrest. The decrease in core temperature activates certain thermoregulatory mechanisms, including sympathetic stimulation-induced peripheral vasoconstriction and increased catecholamine production, which may exacerbate preexisting cardiac dysfunction by increasing myocardial oxygen demand.

**Renal**

Cold-induced diuresis is a significant concern in hypothermic patients. It is a diuretic response caused by a combination of increased venous return secondary to vasoconstriction, increased Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), decreased Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), and tubular dysfunction. Left untreated, this may cause hypovolemia, electrolyte disturbances, and hemoconcentration.

**Electrolytes**

The hypothermia induced diuresis, along with tubular dysfunction and intracellular ion shifts, resulting in a decreased serum concentration of several electrolytes, including magnesium, potassium, and phosphate. Regular measurement and correction (if necessary) should be performed. A study comparing electrolyte levels between normothermic patients and patients undergoing therapeutic hypothermia after severe head injury found that Mg levels decreased from 0.98+/-0.15 to 0.58+/-0.13 mmol/L (mean +/- standard deviation; p < 0.01), phosphate levels from 1.09+/-0.19 to 0.51+/-0.18 mmol/L (p < 0.01), Ca levels from 2.13+/-0.25 to 1.94+/-0.14 mmol/L (p < 0.01), and K levels from 4.2+/-0.59 to 3.6+/-0.7 mmol/L (p < 0.01) during the first 6 hours of cooling.

The rewarming phase may also be associated with electrolyte disturbances. Hyperkalemia often occurs in this phase due to the release of intracellular potassium and may result in cardiac arrhythmias. Rewarming the patient at a slow and controlled rate can prevent this complication by giving the kidneys more time to excrete the excess potassium.

**Immune System**

Hypothermia induces several immune function changes, many of which are thought to contribute to the protective effects of hypothermia against brain injury. However, they may also increase the risk of infectious complications. Hypothermia inhibits various inflammatory responses. It impairs the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and suppresses leukocyte migration and phagocytosis.

**Metabolic**

Hypothermia causes a linear decrease in the metabolic rate by 5% to 7% per 1 degree Celsius decrease in core body temperature. A left shift in the oxygen hemoglobin dissociation curve reduces tissue oxygen availability and may contribute to the development of metabolic acidosis (Schubert (1995)). Oxygen consumption and CO2 production are equally decreased. If ventilator settings are not properly adjusted, decreased CO2 production may promote respiratory alkalosis and hypocapnia. This results in cerebral vasoconstriction increased cerebral vascular resistance and decreased cerebral blood flow. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic alterations in drug metabolism can occur in patients receiving therapeutic hypothermia. These patients receive multiple drugs during their treatment course, including paralytics, anticonvulsants, sedatives, and cardiovascular drugs. Unanticipated drug toxicity may occur due to changes in metabolism, especially since many of these drugs have a narrow therapeutic window. The mechanisms involved in these changes are drug-specific and can occur in one or more of the different phases of drug metabolism, response, or elimination. Clinical studies evaluating the effect of hypothermia on the metabolism of specific drugs found that for many commonly used drugs such as propofol, vecuronium, rocuronium, midazolam, and phenytoin, there was an increase in serum concentration, decrease in clearance rate, and increase in the duration of action.

**Shivering**

Shivering is a thermoregulatory response to hypothermia that occurs when the core body temperature decreases below 36.5 degrees C. Shivering produces heat through the rhythmic contraction and relaxation of skeletal muscle, which increases oxygen consumption, energy expenditure, and induction time. These changes counteract many of the beneficial effects of therapeutic hypothermia; therefore, shivering must be suppressed to ensure maximal benefit from hypothermia. This is achievable through various pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic interventions.

**Rewarming**

Rewarming is associated with several complications, the most important of which are electrolyte disturbances and hemodynamic instability. The intracellular shift of electrolytes that occurs during cooling is reversed in this phase, and the resultant increase in extracellular ions, especially potassium, can lead to fatal cardiac arrhythmias. To prevent hyperkalemia, rewarming should occur at a slow and controlled rate, and this allows the kidneys to excrete the excess potassium more efficiently. Renal replacement therapy should be initiated in oliguric patients before rewarming. Besides, potassium-containing fluids should be discontinued before the initiation of rewarming in all patients. Rewarming causes peripheral vasodilation and redistribution of blood, resulting in hypotension and consequently reduced tissue oxygen delivery. This can be prevented by volume loading with normal saline 4 to 8 hours before rewarming. It is essential to closely monitor hemodynamics during this phase, with a routine assessment of blood pressure, urine output, and serum lactate.