The implantation of an intraocular lens is the final link in a long series of events. The process starts with an examination of the patient in an outpatient clinic by the optometrist, who checks the patient's vision and refractive error.

A decrease in the best-corrected visual acuity, which is attributable to the development of cataracts, is confirmed by the ophthalmologist, who then recommends cataract surgery. The optometrist then performs biometry for the calculation of the IOL power. Keratometry and measurement of the axial length (by optical biometry or ultrasonic biometry) of the eye are done for regression formulas such as the Sanders-Reztlaff-Kraff (SRK) formula.

Newer formulas like Holladay, Barret's, and Lada's Super formula have improved the predictability of postoperative refractive error in highly hyperopic or highly myopic, or post-refractive surgery eyes.

Swept-source biometry by devices such as IOL master has improved the accuracy of IOL power calculations.

Following this, pre-anesthetic evaluation is done by the clinician and anesthetist in patients with comorbidities. Many comorbidities must be addressed. Control of diabetes, hypertension, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is taken care of by the physician. The ability to lie flat for the duration of the procedure is essential.

Diseases such as ankylosing spondylitis may make positioning the patient difficult. Drug history assumes its own importance. Certain medications like tamsulosin may cause floppy iris during surgery.

Stopping blood thinners prior to cataract surgery is debatable. Patients who have undergone mitral or aortic valve replacement, have stents placed for coronary thrombosis, or have suffered strokes due to thrombosis, may be receiving blood thinners like aspirin, clopidogrel, or heparin. Such patients may be given topical instead of local anesthesia. When complicated or longer procedures are anticipated, such as small pupil, floppy iris, or hard cataract, local anesthesia in the form of peribulbar block may be needed. In such cases, the anesthetist or the attending clinician has to make the judgment call on stopping the blood thinners prior to surgery and assess the risk to life.

When congenital cataract surgery with monofocal lens implantation is performed, general anesthesia is chosen. IOL power calculation is done under GA. Here, the clinician, anesthetist, and nursing staff are all involved in preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative care.