The optic nerve is distinctive among cranial nerves in that it is a central nervous system (CNS) white matter tract that shares a similar developmental origin with the CNS. As such, the optic nerve covering is the same outer connective tissue membranes as the brain: the pia, arachnoid, and dura mater. The pia lies on the surface of the brain and follows along the brain’s gyri and sulci. The arachnoid mater lies just above the pia mater, and CSF flows in the subarachnoid space (SAS) between the pia and the arachnoid. The dura mater is a strong connective tissue covering that overlies the other arachnoid and pia mater, encasing the brain and spinal cord. The SAS of the optic nerve is contiguous with that of the brain via the suprasellar cistern, allowing the circulation of CSF between the intracranial SAS and the optic nerves in a 3-compartment system. As a result, increases in ICP can be transmitted to the optic nerves and can cause optic disc edema known, in this clinical setting, as papilledema. Optic nerve sheath fenestration is a surgical procedure performed to relieve perioptic pressure in cases of elevated ICP causing papilledema.

The subarachnoid space of the human optic nerve is not homogenous but possesses a complex system of arachnoid trabeculae and septa that subdivide the subarachnoid space between the arachnoid and pia mater. The trabeculae, septa, and pillars vary in their density as well as their arrangement depending upon their specific location within the different portions of the optic nerve. They appear to be more densely and tightly packed in the immediate retrobulbar segment of the optic nerve than the more distal mid-orbital and canalicular segments. This variability may play a role in the CSF dynamics between the subarachnoid space of the optic nerve and the suprasellar cistern that connects it to the intracranial space and may contribute to the understanding of the pathophysiology of papilledema and the sometimes variable response seen to ONSF.

Increased ICP can result from a multitude of CNS disease states, including intracranial hypertension, venous sinus thrombosis, CNS infections, inflammatory diseases, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and intracranial malignancies or other lesions causing obstructive hydrocephalus. Vision loss in the setting of papilledema is thought to occur as a result of the disruption of axonal transport and intraneuronal ischemic damage to the optic nerve.