As discussed above, there are various hypercoagulable and hypercoagulable conditions resulting from defects in the coagulation pathways. The full extent is beyond the scope of this topic. Here are several examples:

- **Cardiovascular.**There has been increased incidence of bleeding while on antiplatelet agents and anticoagulant agents for recent myocardial infarction, stroke, cardiac stents, peripheral vascular stenting, atrial fibrillation, pulmonary embolism, deep venous thrombosis as well as many other conditions; this has led to the development and use of reversal agents.

- **Renal.**Pathological conditions like end-stage renal disease can lead to uremic platelet dysfunction which can be corrected with dialysis and renal replacement therapy.

- **Immunological.**Replenishing the deficient clotting factors, removing the antibodies against the clotting factors, use of medications to enhance or ameliorate functionality of the clotting cascade- these newer developments have led to significant advances in the field of medicine and provided treatment options for various challenging to manage clinical scenarios. Transfusion of blood products such as packed red blood cells, platelets, and clotting factors aid further in management. Prothrombin complex concentrate and other formulations are available to replace the deficient clotting factors.

- **Pharmacological.**Prudent use of the antiplatelet agents such as aspirin, clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticagrelor as well as the anticoagulant agents such as unfractionated heparin, low molecular weight heparin, fondaparinux, warfarin, rivaroxaban, apixaban, dabigatran, argatroban, lepirudin, as well as use of vitamin K, transfusion of blood products and specific modalities like hemodialysis, plasmapheresis and others are recommended as indicated for the management of various hemostatic disorders and can enhance patient care and improve clinical endpoints significantly.