Treatment for BHDS skin lesions includes destruction by electrocautery, curettage, and laser ablation, but is often followed by recurrence. Because folliculin has been implicated in the mTOR pathway, medications such as rapamycin, an mTOR inhibitor, have theoretical application in the treatment of Birt-Hogg-Dube lesions. In animal models using BHDS-condition knock-out mice, rapamycin decreased kidney pathology and increased overall survival. However, a double-blind, randomized facial left-right controlled trial in 2014 by Gijezen et al. using topical rapamycin revealed no significant difference in the treatment of fibrofolliculomas. The exact function of folliculin has yet to be elucidated.

Patients with BHDS are at increased risk of developing renal tumors lifelong, with an average age of onset at 50 years. Lifelong renal surveillance should begin at the age of twenty. Some experts recommend initial MRI followed by annual MRI or ultrasound, while others suggest CT scans every 3 to 5 years. There is also a risk for pneumothoraces, which occur in 25% of patients during the third to sixth decades. Ninety percent of adult patients will show radiographic evidence of lung cysts. Patients should be counseled on pneumothorax symptoms, and a high baseline resolution CT of the chest should be performed with follow-up scans every 3 to 5 years. There is no data to support the idea that patients with BHDS should be advised against air travel. However, they should be counseled on smoking cessation to prevent pneumothoraces. Additionally, a full-body skin examination at routine intervals to evaluate for suspicious pigmented lesions should be implemented since there may be an association between malignant melanoma and BHDS.