The following investigational studies can be done to diagnose endocarditis due to eosinophilic infiltration:

- Electrocardiogram (ECG)

- Echocardiogram

- Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR)

- Endomyocardial biopsy

- There is no single pathognomic electrocardiogram finding of Loeffler endocarditis. ECG shows T-wave inversions, left atrial enlargement, left ventricular hypertrophy, incomplete right bundle branch block, and left axis deviation. These all are non-specific findings for Loeffler endocarditis.

- Two-dimensional echocardiography is used to test cardiac abnormalities due to eosinophilic deposition. Echocardiography shows left ventricular hypertrophy, endomyocardial thickening, bilateral ventricular apical thrombus, and posterior mitral valve cusp involvement (enmeshment chordae tendineae causing valvular regurgitation)  entrapment of the chordae tendineae with valvular regurgitation.

- Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging is the new diagnostic modality used for Loeffler endocarditis evaluation. It is more sensitive and specific than both transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiogram to diagnose ventricular mural thrombus. CMR with gadolinium should be done to visualize myocardial fibrosis and inflammation. CMR can differentiate between inflammation and fibrosis based on delayed enhancement intensity. The intensity of delayed enhancement due to fibrosis is more intense than the intensity of delayed enhancement due to inflammation.

- The gold standard diagnostic modality for eosinophilic endocarditis is still endomyocardial biopsy. Currently, clinicians prefer CMR over endomyocardial biopsy as it is non-invasive and a more practical way to diagnose Loeffler endocarditis.