**Cellulitis**

Histopathologic findings include vascular and lymphatic dilatation with marked edema in the dermal and subepidermal areas. Dense and diffuse neutrophil infiltration is usually seen beneath edema.

**Erysipelas**

Histopathologic evaluation reveals significant dermal edema, vascular dilatation, and bacterial invasion to the lymphatics and connective tissue. Blood vessel invasion is rarely seen.

**Dermatomyositis and SLE**

The main histopathologic findings of dermatomyositis and SLE are epidermal thinning, basal layer with hydropic degeneration, and disrupted dermo-epidermal junction; upper dermis edema; sparse lymphocyte infiltration in the dermis; and connective tissue with fibrinoid degeneration. On direct immunofluorescence microscopy, deposition of immunoglobulin G (IgG), immunoglobulin M (IgM), and C3 are detected at the basement membrane in both involved and uninvolved skin of SLE patients which is not true for patients with dermatomyositis.

**Rosacea**

Histopathologic findings of rosacea include dilated vessels, lymphohistiocytic infiltration in perifollicular and perivascular area, neutrophils in intrafollicular area, and edema. Sebaceous gland hyperplasia, expansion of connective tissue, and elastosis are also seen.

**Pellagra**

Microscopic findings of pellagra are nonspecific and almost similar to other nutritional deficiencies, which include acanthosis, hyperkeratosis, and parakeratosis. Psoriasiform hyperplasia may also be detected. Other histopathologic findings are ballooning keratinocytes and increased melanin in the upper epidermis, perivascular inflammatory infiltrate, and telangiectasia.