Xerostomia has many causes, including medications and radiation. Despite being a common disorder, its diagnosis usually gets delayed, and the treatment is not satisfactory. For this reason, an interprofessional team is the best management strategy.

Xerostomia is a clinical diagnosis primarily based on history and physical examination.

Patients with Sjögren disease usually have poor results with present-day treatments. The constant dry mouth also leads to dental cavities and a poor quality of life. The dentist and rheumatologist should be involved in the care of these complex patients and report their findings back to the entire interprofessional healthcare team.

The primary care providers, specialists, nurses, and pharmacists should provide interprofessional education to the patient regarding hydration and avoid triggers like tobacco, coffee, alcohol, and dry or hard-to-chew foods. If medications are involved in treatment, the pharmacist should verify all dosing, perform medication reconciliation, and report any concerns to the nursing staff, informing the treating physicians. Nursing staff can check progress or lack thereof in treatment and report therapy and lifestyle compliance to the team.

Finally, patients should be aware that several intra-oral appliances and electrical therapies are available, but none of these work reliably, and most have not had testing in clinical trials. The patient needs to speak to a clinician before investing in these therapies.

Because of the wide variety of xerostomia etiologies, the condition requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, dentists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]