The American College of Cardiology (ACC), in conjunction with American Heart Association (AHA) and the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), has formulated guidelines and set technical standards for ECG equipment.

The conventional ECG machine consists of 12 leads divided into two groups, i.e., limb leads and precordial leads. Limb leads are further categorized as standard bipolar limb leads (I, II, and III) and augmented unipolar leads (aVL, aVF, and aVR). The precordial leads include V1 to V6. The limb leads view the heart in a vertical plane, and the precordial leads record the heart's electrical activity in the horizontal plane. The ECG represents a graphic recording of the electrical cardiac activity traced on the electrocardiograph paper.

- A current of repolarization traveling away from the positive electrode is seen as a positive deflection and towards a positive electrode as a negative deflection.

- When the current is perpendicular to the electrode, it touches the baseline and produces a biphasic wave.

These concepts are easily applied to the heart while recording the ECG. Several types of ECG monitoring equipment are available, including continuous ECG monitoring, hardwire cardiac monitoring, telemetry, ambulatory electrocardiography, transtelephonic monitoring, wireless mobile cardiac monitoring systems, etc.

The equipment for performing a conventional 12-lead ECG includes:

- Electrodes (sensors)

- Gauze and skin preparation (alcohol rub) solution

- Razors, clippers, or a roll of tape (for hair removal)

- Skin adhesive and/or antiperspirant

- ECG paper

- Cardiac monitor or electrocardiography machine