Bone age assessment: Best imaging - based on age:

- Children less than 18 years:  Left hand and wrist radiograph

- 18-22 years: Medial end of the clavicle (CT versus MRI); sexual, dental, and hand maturity indicators are of not much use in this age group

Specific clinical significance of skeletal indicators in orthopedic surgery:

Scoliosis

- Phase 1 - 0 to 5 years

- Phase 2 - 5 to 10 years

- Phase 3 is beyond 10 years

The most rapid growth happens during phases 1 and 3. Curve acceleration phase (CAP) is a time of rapid change in curve magnitude, and patterns of curve progression have been described as low, moderate, and rapid. Sanders et al.[

Risk factors for curve progression (at presentation) include a curve of magnitude greater than 25° before skeletal maturity will continue to progress after skeletal maturity, greater than 50° thoracic curve will progress at the rate of 1 to 2° per year, and greater than 40° lumbar curve will progress at the rate of 1 to 2° per year. Other risk factors for curve progression are remaining skeletal growth, younger age (less than 12 years) at presentation, Tanner stage (less than 3 for females), Risser stage (0-1), and open triradiate cartilage. Peak growth velocity is considered the best predictor of curve progression. In females, growth spurt occurs just before menarche and before Risser 1. Also, if the curve is greater than 30° before peak height velocity, there is a strong likelihood of the need for surgery. The thoracic curve is more likely to progress than lumber. Double major curves are more likely to progress than single curves.

Limb length discrepancies

SCFE: The modified Oxford bone age score (16-18) has been described as the best predictor of contralateral slipped capital femoral epiphysis in patients with unilateral SCFE.