The treatment focuses on medical management and supportive care to decompress the colon to avoid perforation. The treatment of the underlying cause, correction of any electrolyte disturbances (ex. hypokalemia), symptom management, and prevention of further complications are also important components of a good treatment plan.

**Medical Management**

Initial treatment involves supportive therapy and medical management. This approach is usually successful in about half of the patients. Patients should obtain admission to the intensive care unit in case of unexpected deterioration. Initially, checking complete blood count, abdominal films, and electrolytes should take place every 12 hours. Once patients improve, images and labs can scale back to once daily. All the medications which can aggravate the megacolon, such as opioids, anticholinergics, etc., should be stopped. Patients should be started on IV fluids to provide adequate hydration.C. difficile are oral vancomycin or oral fidaxomicin. If those are not available, oral metronidazole is an alternative.

Patients with ulcerative colitis should also be given steroids as soon as possible. Generally, the recommendation is hydrocortisone 100 mg over 6 hours (400 mg daily) or methylprednisone 60 mg daily for 5 days. Higher doses did not show significant benefits.

Lastly, patients must be on bowel rest. A nasogastric tube can be inserted to help decompress the stomach, but it will not decompress the colon. As the patient continues to improve, they can gradually start eating to promote gut healing.

**Surgical Management**

A surgeon should be involved in the patient's care from day 1, in case intervention might be necessary. The current surgical treatment of choice in acute toxic megacolon is subtotal colectomy with ileostomy and either a Hartmann pouch, sigmoidostomy, or rectostomy. Previously there were two additional surgical methods used: total proctocolectomy and the Turnbull method. Turnbull's method was essentially a colon decompression technique that served to prepare a patient for a colectomy. However, studies showed that this method was associated with increased bleeding and high mortality (71%) versus those with subtotal colectomy with ileostomy (8%). Studies conducted with patients treated with total proctocolectomy showed a mortality of 21%.

The exact time of surgery in toxic megacolon patients is still unclear. If there is perforation, bleeding, or clinical deterioration of a patient, surgical intervention is unavoidable. Nevertheless, some studies conclude favorable outcomes in patients where surgical intervention is done soon after making the diagnosis of toxic megacolon, whereas other studies show an increase in mortality, especially in patients older than 65.