Fluoroscopy remains a valuable modality in the modern era of radiographic studies. It can provide real-time evaluation of anatomic structures and their function with concurrent use of contrast while utilizing lower doses of ionizing radiation compared to computed tomography. With medical imaging being the primary means of radiation exposure to the general population and each exposure being a potential nidus for the development of cancer, medical providers must be prudent about the amount of radiation to which patients are exposed to minimize the development of cancerous complications. Ionizing radiation is measured in Gray (Gy). However, the type of ionizing radiation (i.e., alpha, beta, or gamma rays) determines the effect on biological tissue. Thus, an equivalence unit named sievert (Sv) was created to express the "equivalent dose" in gamma rays since gamma rays are used in radiographic imaging.

The significance of the difference between these two units lies in the fact that 1 Gy of gamma rays equals 1 Sv, but 1 Gy of alpha rays has a much more damaging effect on biological tissue, producing a much higher Sv dose. A myelogram (2.5 mSv), barium swallow (1.5 mSv), and hysterosalpingogram (1.2 mSv) all have less radiation exposure to the patient compared to computed tomography (CT) scans of their respective areas: spine CT (5 mSv), head CT (5 mSv), neck CT (5 mSv), and pelvis CT (up to 10 mSv).  One Sv equals 1,000 mSv. Fluoroscopy also provides a functional and focused evaluation of anatomy and pathology to allow for interventional procedures to be performed safely and accurately.  Contrast agents combined with fluoroscopy allow for greater accuracy of procedures being performed.

Radiographic contrast agents in accompaniment with fluoroscopy permit a much clearer delineation of tissues of similar radiodensity. By enhancing the radiodensity of a specific tissue or luminal tract, pathophysiology can be observed in real-time and therapeutic interventions can be better guided.  Contrast can be administered through a vast array of means including but not limited to enterically to detect luminal defects in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract (i.e., barium swallow, barium enema, upper GI series), intrathecally (i.e., lumbar puncture, myelogram), intraarticularly (i.e., arthrogram), and intravascularly (angiograms). Fluoroscopy in accompaniment with contrast administration can be used for an extensive list of clinical scenarios both intraoperatively and on an outpatient basis to help better identify pathology and therapeutic interventions.