SLE is a systemic disease with multiorgan involvement, and several other diseases can mimic SLE.

- 
**Other Autoimmune Diseases**

- 
              
- Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) can present with several extra-articular manifestations in addition to the classic polyarticular inflammatory arthritis and may be difficult to differentiate from SLE. Positive ANA, Anti-Ro, and Anti-La can also be seen in RA, although other SLE-specific autoantibodies and hypocomplementemia are rare. SLE can be associated with a positive rheumatoid factor, but the Anti-CCP is negative in SLE
              
              
- Drug-induced lupus may be difficult to differentiate from SLE, especially due to a significant overlap in the clinical and serological features. Drug-induced lupus is characterized by the resolution of symptoms after drug withdrawal and lack of more severe manifestations, although the autoantibodies may remain positive for several years.
              
              
- Adult-onset Still disease characterized by arthralgia, fever, lymphadenopathy, and splenomegaly but no malar rash or other organ manifestations and lacks the SLE specific autoantibodies.
              
              
- Behcet disease presents with aphthous ulcers, uveitis, and arthralgia but lacks the other systemic and serological features of SLE.
              
              
- Sarcoidosis presents with fever, cough, dyspnea, fatigue, night sweats, rash, and uveitis. It shows non-caseating granuloma on chest radiography and bilateral adenopathy, which is rarely present in SLE.

- 
**Infections**

- 
              
- Several viral infections can mimic SLE. Parvovirus B19 infection can cause fever, rash, inflammatory arthritis, and cytopenias. ANA and rheumatoid factor have been reported. Hepatitis B and C can be associated with arthralgia/inflammatory arthritis and positive ANA and rheumatoid factor. CMV and EBV viral infections can cause fever, fatigue, cytopenias, and transaminitis. HIV can cause fever, fatigue, oral ulcers, and cytopenias. More specific autoantibodies and systemic manifestations of SLE are absent in these viral infections. Further, positive viral serologies may help make the right diagnosis.
              
              
- Infectious endocarditis characterized by fever, arterial emboli, arthralgia, myalgia, and a heart murmur; may be confused with cardiac manifestations of SLE but can be differentiated by the absence of specific SLE associated autoantibodies and positive blood cultures.

- 
**Malignancies**

- 
              
- Lymphomas, especially non-Hodgkins lymphoma, can present with fatigue, weight loss, fever, arthralgia, cytopenia, lymphadenopathy, and a positive ANA. The more specific SLE-associated autoantibodies are absent. In elderly patients presenting with lupus-like symptoms, malignancy shall be ruled out by cancer screening.