Before implantation, time should be spent with the patient to decide on the side and location of the pump.  Currently, the only on-label location for implantation is the right or left lower quadrant of the abdomen.  The anatomical boundaries tend to be the iliac crest and costal margin, as these areas should not make contact with the pump post-implantation. The following steps should be carried out:

1) After the type of anesthesia is decided, position the patient in the lateral decubitus position on the operating room table with the side of the pump implantation upward.  The back and abdomen should be sterile prepped and draped.  The C-arm is necessary to confirm access to the intrathecal space and for positioning of the catheter tip.

2) Position the C-arm to allow for the appropriate anterior-posterior view, allowing easy lumbar puncture, visualization of catheter threading, and pinpointing tip position.

3) Make a small incision in the skin down to the dorso-lumbar fascia in the spine to expose the supraspinous ligament.  Through the exposed tissue, place a Tuohy needle into the intrathecal space using a paramedian approach.  Whenever possible, the intrathecal space should be entered below the level where the spinal cord ends (L1 or L2) to avoid possible spinal cord injury.  A slight cephalad needle angle optimizes cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow and decreases the risk of catheter kink or fracture. Upon documentation of adequate CSF flow, thread the catheter through the Tuohy needle confirming catheter and catheter tip position with intermittent fluoroscopy.  Place two fascial sutures on either side of the Tuohy needle. During this suturing step keep the Tuohy needle in place to prevent accidental catheter damage.  Once final catheter tip positioning is confirmed, remove the introducer Tuohy needle, withdrawing the needle and guidewire together leaving just the catheter in place.  Again recheck CSF back-flow.  Insert the catheter into an anchor and secure it with fascial sutures.  After securing the catheter to the dorso-lumbar fascia, clamp the distal intrathecal catheter to prevent CSF loss.

4) Turn attention to the lower quadrant of the abdomen.  Make an approximately 8cm lengthwise incision down to the underlying subcutaneous fat layer.  Create a subcutaneous pocket large enough to contain the pump being used.  Generally, if all four fingers can fit into the pocket, it is large enough and allows closure without tension.  The depth of the pocket below the skin is critical for programmable pumps.  A depth of greater than 2.5 cm may not allow reliable telemetry and will make pump refilling more difficult.

5) It is important to maintain hemostasis in both incision sites to avoid postoperative hematoma formation.  Irrigate pockets with antibiotic solution.

6) Next, assemble the malleable tunneling device and prepare a subcutaneous tunnel from the midline back incision to the pump pocket.  Once there is a successful placement of the tunneling device, push the catheter through the tunnel to the abdominal pocket.

7) Cut any excess catheter but ensure adequate length for a stress relief loop in the midline incision and pump pocket.  If the catheter length is too long, this may increase susceptibility to catheter kinking.

8) Attach the catheter to the pump nipple and verify that it is secure.

9) Place a programmable pump into the subcutaneous pocket.  Stitches may be placed through the anchoring loops of the pump to prevent rotation.  If this technique is used, place the stitches into the pocket first, then through the pump suture loops.

10) Carefully close the pocket and spinal incisions with a suture.  Proximate the skin edges with steri-strips.  If tension is a problem, use surgical staples to reinforce the incision site closure.