**Variability in Anti-Seizure Medication Levels**

Multiple clinical studies have been conducted to test the efficacy of monitoring AEDs levels in various clinical settings. One study involved 114 inpatients in the UK. The medications studied included phenytoin, valproate, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, and phenobarbitone. To a lesser extent, other levels had been ordered, such as benzodiazepines, topiramate, gabapentin, and vigabatrin. The study concluded that AED levels were most helpful and useful with phenytoin, carbamazepine, and phenobarbitone. Lamotrigine has different ranges, making interpretation of the levels unhelpful and leading to inappropriate dosage changes.

Conversely, phenytoin has a long half-life, and hence, the AED level is more reflective of long-term usage. The newer AEDs have broader indications and tend to be safer than the older ones. Also, there are no generalizable reference ranges for some of them. For these reasons, level monitoring with newer agents is not useful.

One study demonstrated that AED levels vary considerably between patients treated for idiopathic generalized tonic-clonic seizures with phenytoin. The variety of AED levels may provide some patients seizure-free quality of life and yet correlate with symptoms of toxicity in other patients. Thus, it is impractical to generalize the efficacy of AED-level monitoring.

**Drug-Drug interactions affecting Anti Seizure medications**

Clinicians should be aware of the pharmacokinetics of medications because of polypharmacy. Drugs utilizing metabolic pathways through the liver are often affected by interactions. These are commonly seen in medications like valproic acid and carbamazepine, to cite two examples. Non-seizure medications are also an important consideration, especially in the hospital setting. Carbapenem, an antibiotic, can reduce valproic acid levels significantly and cause breakthrough seizures.

**Clinical Monitoring versus Drug-Level Monitoring**

Multiple studies concluded that clinical monitoring could optimally achieve seizure control. One investigation studied patients taking phenytoin and compared medication adjustment based on clinical grounds in one arm and adjustment based on drug level in the other. They found that most cases could successfully be managed clinically, and only a small number of patients benefited from drug-level monitoring.

**Anti-Seizure Medication Compliance**

Compliance with epilepsy treatment plans is challenging due to the chronicity of the disease, often requiring long-term pharmacologic therapy. There are different types of non-compliance. Erratic non-compliance is the most common and manifests as inconsistent dosing. This results in unreliable therapeutic AED levels and variability in seizure control.

Compliance and adherence had been used interchangeably to describe the status of not taking the medication or following the treatment plan.

**Other Ways to Promote AED-Level Monitoring**

To assume responsibility for directing the patients about their medications, clinicians must explore the reasons for non-adherence and try to help the patients overcome them. However, it depends on the patient eventually to adhere to their medications. Many methods help to measure compliance, such as:

- Patient reporting, which depends on the patient recalling, whether the reliable patient historian, and the pattern of compliance with other medications

- Drug level, which has traditionally been used as the only reliable way to monitor adherence by most the clinicians

- Diaries

- Direct observation of drug taking

- Pill counts

There are many effective ways to help patients adhere to their medication other than monitoring drug levels. The dilemma with monitoring the drug level is that it is costly, non-reliable, and in some instances, would lead to unnecessary dosage changes, which could increase the risk of side effects.