Traction alopecia is condition seen commonly associated with Afro-Caribbean hairstyles like tight braids. The onset of hair loss occurs commonly in the temporal regions,  preauricular region and above the ears but may involve other parts of the scalp, particularly where "corn row" patterns are adopted. The other findings that may also occur include folliculitis, hair casts, reduction in hair density and replacement of few with vellus hairs and the occasional presence of broken hairs in the affected areas, which finally proceeds to alopecia that leaves scars. It can be associated with a headache, relieved when the hair is loosened. The pattern of the alopecia is characteristic and reflects the distribution of the traction. Problems typically start in childhood, where they may initially be reversible. A degree of temporal thinning may also be part of a genetic hair pattern seen in those with no traction. Ponytails, hair twisting in Sikh boys, and tight scarf styles can all result in hair loss. Common hair care practices that involve tension are ponytails/pigtails, chignon, braids, cornrows, twists, sister locks, dreadlocks, weaves, extensions, and curlers.

On examination of the scalp, TA manifests with hair loss usually along the marginal hairline (frontal, temporal, or occipital) with decreased retained follicular markings and the presence of a “fringe” of finer, or miniaturized hairs. The characteristic finding is the retention of hair follicles of lesser diameter along the frontal and/or temporal hairline. This sign is called the 'fringe sign, ' and it correlates with the presence of vellus hairs seen in the histology. The presence of hair casts is a sign of ongoing or persistent TA. Linear, curved, or geometric patterns of lost hair should alert the clinician to the possibility of TA. Body hair, eyebrows, skin, and nails are unaffected in TA.