**Staging: The TNM System**

- T stands for tumor size.

- N indicates whether nearby lymph nodes are involved.

- M denotes whether cancer has metastasized (spread).

**In the Numerical System**

- Stage I describes cancer confined to the testicle.

- Stage II describes cancer with metastases in the pelvis and abdomen.

- Stage III refers to cancer with metastases in the chest.

**Management (National Comprehensive Cancer Network - NCCN Guidelines)**

**Stage 0 Seminomas**

Carcinoma in situ (CIS) where the levels of tumor markers like HCG and AFP are not elevated. Treatment may not be needed as long as there are no signs that the CIS is growing or turning into invasive cancer. (The diagnosis is typically made via a biopsy.)  If CIS is treated, it is with an orchiectomy (to remove the testicle) or with testicular radiation.

If tumor marker levels are high, then the cancer is not stage 0, even when only CIS is found in the testicle, and there are no signs of cancer spread. These cases are treated like stage I cancers. CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis is required to verify the extent of the malignancy in such cases.

All of the following cancers are treated initially with initial radical orchiectomy. After surgery, there may be several treatment choices as follows:

**Stage I Seminomas**

- Careful observation (surveillance over 10 years): Usually, recurrence is found in the first 2 years

- Single-agent chemotherapy with carboplatin

- Radiation therapy: Seminoma is quite radiosensitive, but the general trend is to go with chemotherapy in more advanced disease, as seminoma is also very thermosensitive, and this avoids radiation-related side effects when there is extensive disease.

**Stage II A**

- Radiation Therapy

- Chemotherapy with Bleomycin, Etoposide, and Cisplatin (BEP) or Etoposide and Cisplatin (EP).

**Stage II B and C**

- Chemotherapy with BEP or EP is preferred.

- Radiation therapy is acceptable if affected nodes are less than 3 cm.

**Stage III**

- Stage III is treated with BEP or EP chemotherapy.

Small tumors are often watched with CT scans to see if they grow. If they do, further treatment is needed. If the tumors are detected on a PET scan, surgery, or different chemotherapy is indicated.

**Stage IV**

Stage IV refers to cancer that has spread to any other organ.