There are two main clinical classifications of nerve injuries. The Seddon and Sunderland classifications.

The Seddon classification describes three categories of nerve injuries. The mildest form is a neurapraxic injury and results from focal ischemia or compression. Neurapraxia affects the myelin layer of the Schwann cells resulting in demyelination. These histological changes lead to a reduction in nerve conduction or complete nerve conduction block at the level of the injury. The muscles do not show atrophy or features of denervation (spontaneous fibrillation) on EMG as the axons are intact in this type of injury. Spontaneous functional recovery is complete after weeks or months from the injury. There is no Wallerian degeneration in this category.

The second category, axonotmesis, represents axonal disruption without disruption of perineurium or epineurium. It leads to a loss of sensory and motor function. It results in Wallerian degeneration distal to the injury site. Therefore, EMG shows features of muscle denervation. The intact surrounding structure facilitates axonal regeneration. However, spontaneous functional recovery depends on several factors such as branching pattern of the affected nerve, the distance from the injury site to the neuromuscular endplate (target muscle), nerve component pure motor or sensory, or mixed. The third and most severe is neurotmesis, which results from a complete disruption of the axons and surrounding structures.[8] Because no axons to conduct the stimulation response distally, EMG shows features of muscle denervation. Neurotmesis usually results in complete functional loss. Axonal regrowth can not happen as this injury results in either a gap or fibrosis, and it requires surgical repair to remove fibrosis and bridge the gap.

On the other hand, the Sunderland classification has five grades based on the severity of the injury. The first corresponds to neuropraxia in Seddon’s classification and includes nerve conduction block due to focal myelin sheath disruption. The clinical picture entails mainly motor weakness (paralysis) and disturbance in joint sensation. Other sensory modalities and sympathetic activity are usually preserved.