Ideally, before managing a difficult airway, it is recommended to identify the CTM (cricothyroid membrane) in all patients, especially before the induction of anesthesia and in the critical care setup. It plays a crucial role in emergency front-of-neck access (eFONA) to prevent complications such as device misplacement, injury to local structures, and airway trauma. The methods to identify CTM include several methods. Visualization of the anterior neck crease is only effective in 50 percent of patients and should not be relied upon solely.

The Difficult Airway Society (DAS) recommends a three-step technique called the "laryngeal handshake" technique. In case of insufficient clinical examination, ultrasound identification should be taken into account to confirm the position of CTM, which is superior to the palpation technique in morbidly obese patients.

The literature describes several techniques, including tools, dilators, or specialized cannulas, to obtain tracheal access. It is the author's belief, and the idea of many within the Emergency Medicine/Critical Care community, that the bougie-aided cricothyroidotomy, also known as the "Three-Step Method," combines the most critical steps in both the Seldinger technique and the "rapid four-step" surgical approach, providing a simple process to maximize success in this rarely performed, high-stress situation.

- Using your non-dominant hand, identify the cricothyroid membrane with your index finger while stabilizing the larynx between the thumb and middle finger.

- Make a 4 cm vertical incision through the skin overlying the cricothyroid membrane.

- Bluntly dissect with fingers through the subcutaneous tissue until the cricothyroid membrane is identifiable. **Ignore bleeding

- Using the scalpel, puncture the cricothyroid membrane, slicing horizontally.

- Insert your finger through the incision.

- Slide a gum elastic bougie through the incision, using your finger to guide it inferiorly into the trachea.

- Pass a 6.0 cuffed endotracheal tube over the bougie until the balloon is no longer visible, and inflate the cuff.

- Using a BVM, confirm placement with end-tidal capnography.

- Secure the ET tube in place with a securement device.

**Standard Technique**

- Immobilize the larynx and identify the cricothyroid membrane by palpation with the index finger of your non-dominant hand. This is achieved by placing the inferior border of the thyroid cartilage and the superior border of the cricoid cartilage in the midline of the neck.

- While keeping the larynx stable, create a vertical incision in the skin overlying the CTM in the midline of the neck, extending the incision approximately 3-5 cm in length.

- After creating your vertical skin incision, palpate the CTM and make a horizontal incision through the membrane. Be sure to direct your scalpel caudally to avoid the vocal cords and carefully create the incision, preventing the trachea's posterior wall.

- Keep the tip of your index finger in the incision through the CTM while you insert a tracheal hook into the hole under the thyroid cartilage. Put traction upwards on the thyroid cartilage.

- Insert a trousseau dilator to extend the horizontal incision vertically.

- Insert the tracheostomy tube through the trousseau dilator and advance it caudally into the trachea.

- Remove the trousseau dilator and tracheal hook.

- Remove the obturator of the tracheostomy tube.

- Insert the inner cannula of the tracheostomy tube.

- Inflate the balloon.

- Attach the tube to a BVM or ventilator.

**Needle Cricothyroidotomy**

- Stabilize the larynx and create tension overlying the cricothyroid membrane (CTM) by using your non-dominant hand's thumb and middle finger to stretch the skin in a vertical direction, palpating the CTM with the index finger.

- With your dominant hand, use a 3-10 mL syringe filled with 50% saline attached to an angiocatheter, and puncture the skin overlying the CTM at the inferior margin of the CTM. Direct your needle caudally at a 30-45 degree angle. While advancing, apply continuous negative pressure on the syringe. When air bubbles are visualized within the syringe, you have confirmed placement within the trachea. Stop running the needle.

- Advance the catheter until the hub abuts the skin. Remove the needle.

- Attach the saline syringe to the catheter and confirm intratracheal placement by aspirating air.

- Hold the catheter in place at all times. Do not rely on a suture to maintain correct positioning.

- Connect the catheter to high-pressure tubing or a BVM with 100% oxygen. Ventilation should be at a rate of 10-12 breaths per minute, using an I: E ratio of approximately 1:4.