Exposure to hydrocarbons may be systemic, affecting many organ systems.

**Pulmonary effects**

Inhalation or aspiration may lead to an asthma-like reactive airway syndrome as well as a chemical pneumonitis. Hydrocarbon has low surface tension and a low viscosity, therefore it penetrates deep into the lungs. This leads to a severe necrotizing pneumonia. The chemicals may also destroy surfactant, airway epithelium, alveolar septae, and pulmonary capillaries, leading to inflammation, atelectasis, and fever. Symptoms typically present as a cough and/or shortness of breath.

**CNS Effects**

CNS effects can be both short and long-term. In an acute setting, generalized depression may be seen with slurred speech, disorientation, headache, dizziness, ataxia, syncope, nausea, hallucination, agitation, violent behavior, and seizure activity. The exact mechanism by which hydrocarbons affect the CNS is not exactly known; however, some studies show that the hydrocarbons may affect NMDA, serotonin, nicotinic, glutamate receptors, voltage-gated ion channels, and the dopamine and GABA pathways in the brain. Some effects also may be due to the metabolism of the hydrocarbon into a neurotoxin. Prolonged exposures, such as seen in workplace exposures, also can result in neuropathy, reduction in brain size, and encephalopathy.**Cardiovascular Effects**

Arrhythmias may be induced following exposure. The hydrocarbons, mostly in halogenated form, may increase myocardial sensitivity to epinephrine, leading to a nonperfusing rhythm. They also may have a negative inotropic effect and dromotropic and chronotropic effects on the myocardium. The exact mechanism is unknown but appears to be due to altered function of calcium, potassium, and sodium channels in the myocardium. Chronic abusers may demonstrate murmurs associated with pulmonary hypertension such as a load S2.**Gastrointestinal Effects**

Ingestion may cause GI tract irritation and breakdown of the epithelium, leading to nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and hematemesis. Some solvents may lead to hepatic toxicity. Vomiting hydrocarbons may lead to aspiration and pneumonitis.**Renal Effects**

Hydrocarbons (mostly due to toluene) may cause a metabolic acidosis, leading to renal tubular acidosis, urinary calculi, glomerulonephritis, hyperchloremia, and hypokalemia. Abuse may lead to both proximal and distal tubular injury.**Dermatologic Effects**

Skin exposure may cause mild irritation, or with prolonged exposure, chemical burns ranging from superficial to full thickness burns. Full thickness burns may lead to systemic symptoms. Skin irritation found periorally is known as “glue sniffer's rash.” Skin lesions may present as bullae or blistering. Other skin manifestations include jaundice and/or mucous membrane irritation.