Visual deficits can lead to the following:

- Limited work opportunities where a minimum visual acuity is required

- Difficulty in reading due to uncorrected visual deficits that may lead to educational delays

- Inability to obtain driver’s license due to visual impairment

Infection risk in Chediak-Higashi syndrome

Bleeding Diathesis in Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome

Solar damage: Pachydermia (coarse, rough, thick skin), actinic keratoses, solar lentigines (in non-OCA1A albinos), solar erythema

Malignancy: Basal and squamous cell carcinomas (BCC, SCC). SCC is by far the most common malignancy reported among albinos (representing more than 75% of cases of malignancy), developing as early as the teens. One study found that more than 70% of them were diagnosed on the head and neck areas.  Another study found the head, face, and hands equally affected at approximately 20% each. Albinism increases the relative risk of SCC as much as 1000 times, at least in the African population. Cumulative sun exposure is the major risk factor, with the incidence of cancers increasing with patient age. BCC account for about 24% of malignancies, with the remaining 1% being melanoma. Melanomas are rare in albinos with only a few case reports in the literature, despite melanocytes still being present in the skin in the same relative number.  Surprisingly, melanomas often occur in non-exposed areas, which speaks against UV-radiation being the culprit.  Practitioners need to have a high level of suspicion since these lesions are both rare and tend to be amelanotic in albinos.