cAMP plays a vital role in the body. The 60 years since its discovery have led to understanding many of its unique contributions and finding potential interventions for therapeutic possibilities within the pathway. Because cAMP is prevalent in many biological processes in the body, the levels of cAMP can determine the state of function in a disease or healthy state, by mediating various biological processes including but not limited to metabolism, immune function, and gene regulation.

**Microbial pathogens**, exploit the cAMP mechanism and increase cAMP levels either directly or indirectly by eliminating the mediators (e.g. PGE2, histamine) responsible for increasing the generation of cAMP. An example is Bordetella pertussis that releases the pertussis toxin which catalyzes the ADP ribosylation of the inhibitory subunit of G-protein and inactivates it, thus increasing the intracellular cAMP concentration in the host cells. As a result, this weakens cellular defense and increases the susceptibility to infection. ****

**Pharmacologic agents:**Caffeine, a nonselective PDE inhibitor, is a common stimulant found in coffee, tea, sodas, chocolate, and several medications. PDE inhibition prevents the cAMP to be degraded to 5’-AMP, allowing the cAMP-mediated signaling to go on for a prolonged time. In vitro studies have shown that caffeine’s PDE inhibiting properties may influence smooth muscle relaxation. The increased concentration of cAMP causes increased phosphorylation of myosin light chain kinase (MLCK) to act on myosin light chain (MLC) in the actin-myosin contractile apparatus. This activity desensitizes MLC to calcium resulting in elevation of calcium concentration. The decreased MLC activity thus allows MLC-phosphatase to promote relaxation of the smooth muscle.  While the cardiovascular effect of caffeine is debatable, the increased cAMP levels may play a part in vasodilation properties in cardiovascular health; however, further research is necessary.****

Other drugs such as rolipram, 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine, theophylline, pyrazolopyridines, and cilostazol are examples of PDE inhibitors that raise cAMP levels. Since there are over 100 types of PDE enzymes, these drugs act upon different PDEs as inhibitors. Chronic inflammatory diseases can be treated with S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), a PDE4B inhibitor. Pentoxifylline, another competitive nonselective phosphodiesterase inhibitor that works as an immunosuppressant, has anti-fibrotic activity and improves hemodynamics. A PDE3 inhibitor, cilostazol, is an anti-inflammatory drug that can promote vasodilation and possesses the potential to inhibit platelet aggregation.****Besides the PDE inhibitors, certain other pharmacologic agents like beta-adrenergic agonists, PGI2, and PGE2 analogs also increase the levels of cAMP. On the other hand, NSAIDs decrease cAMP levels.****

**Role of cAMP in metabolism: In the Liver-**A a major role of cAMP is seen during fasting conditions when glucagon levels increase. Glucagon binds to glucagon receptors, a GPCR, and causes cAMP-mediated activation of PKA. PKA further activates the glycogen phosphorylase enzyme to break down glycogen in hepatocytes in order to release glucose into the blood circulation. In the liver, cAMP-mediated PKA causes the inactivation of pyruvate kinase, thus inhibiting glycolysis. This causes the phosphoenolpyruvate to accumulate and enter gluconeogenesis instead. Furthermore, elevated cAMP and PKA cause allosteric activation of fructose 1, 6-bisphosphatase that also favors gluconeogenesis.****

**In Muscle**-During exercise, cAMP-driven PKA activation plays a valuable part in skeletal muscle contraction by activating the phosphorylation of calcium pumps. Once again the level of cAMP is regulated by PDE that degrades cAMP to 5’-AMP. PMID:****Muscle glycogen phosphorylase carries out muscle glycogen breakdown during intense exercise in order to provide energy to the contracting muscle. During exercise, epinephrine activates the generation of cAMP that triggers the cascade of reactions and breaks down muscle glycogen PMID: 2853269, PMID: 3064902, PMID: 6139934.  In the heart, cAMP exerts a vital role in regulating myocardial contraction and relaxation. cAMP, produced from beta-adrenergic stimulation, activates PKA and induces a positive inotropic effect on the heart by coupling with the phosphorylation of L-type Calcium channels and ryanodine receptors. PKA phosphorylates phospholamban, an integral membrane protein in cardiac myocytes, and causes the reuptake of calcium into the sarcoplasmic reticulum in the myocytes causing cardiac muscle relaxation. cAMP involvement in the heart has become a point of focus in understanding the complexity of the cAMP pathway interactions. Unlike skeletal and cardiac muscles, high levels of cAMP cause relaxation in smooth muscles. cAMP inhibits the contraction of smooth muscles by inhibiting myosin light chain kinase and therefore preventing the myosin phosphorylation required for smooth muscle contraction.****

**Immune function:**Research shows high levels of cAMP may lead to suppression of**the immune function**due to disruption of white blood cell functions including inflammation, phagocytosis, and killing of intracellular pathogens.****On the other hand, diseases including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), inflammation, asthma, autoimmune diseases, depression, learning, and memory disorders may be treated by increased levels of cAMP.****Studies support the use of the drug, forskolin, which increases the production of cAMP by acting on adenylyl cyclase. Elevating cAMP levels with Forskolin has many benefits including increasing lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammatory factor and vascular endothelial growth factor expression.  the cAMP has shown to be upregulated in conditions where the immune system is compromised such as HIV infection, Burns, bone marrow transplants, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and cancers. Research suggests deregulation of cAMP pathways and aberrant activation of cAMP-controlled genes is linked to the growth of some cancers****

**Role in other diseases:**There is evidence to suggest that cAMP pathways are upregulated in Alzheimer's disease. As such cAMP has been implicated in pathophysiologic neurodegeneration that contributes to dementia in Alzheimer’s disease.****Reduced levels of PKA activity resulting in impaired glycogenolysis have been shown in several studies. In fact, during ischemic conditions leading to stroke, glycogen breakdown is impaired, the molecular basis of which includes reduced glycogen debranching enzyme expression level together with reduced glycogen phosphorylase and PKA activity.****Studies further show cAMP and PKA may even play a vital role in mood disorders. Bipolar patients demonstrate higher PKA activity in comparison to patients with unipolar depression. Animal studies demonstrate that stress may play a potential regulating factor with cAMP and PKA regulation.****

Because cAMP is a ubiquitous effector across many biological systems, understanding the organization of its signaling pathway becomes important. Besides temporal control, studies reveal cAMP signal transduction is regulated by spatial control which is the compartmentalization of molecular components of a system that are confined to a specific subcellular location and found in the variability of isoforms. Studying the organization of cAMP transduction pathways may result in a better understanding of cAMP signaling and further create opportunities for therapeutic interventions. ****