Nerves coursing through and around the infratemporal fossa are responsible for providing a vast majority of sensory and motor function to the lower face and other important structures such as the dura mater. The largest of these nerves is the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve that passes through the foramen ovale of the sphenoid before entering the infratemporal fossa. The mandibular nerve bifurcates into a smaller anterior branch and a larger posterior branch. Just before this bifurcation, the mandibular nerve gives off motor nerves to supply the medial pterygoid, tensor tympani, and tensor veli palatini muscles, as well as the meningeal branch of the mandibular which supplies the dura mater.

Following the bifurcation, the anterior division of the mandibular nerve provides motor supply to the masseter, temporalis, and lateral pterygoid muscles via individual branches. Additionally, the buccal nerve from the anterior division courses between the two heads of the lateral pterygoid to provide sensory innervation from the buccal membrane in the oral cavity and the posterior lower second and third molar teeth.

The larger posterior division of the mandibular nerve gives rise to three main nerves: the auriculotemporal, lingual, and inferior alveolar nerves. Both the inferior alveolar and lingual nerves course between the lateral and medial pterygoid muscles, crossing the lateral side of the medial pterygoid. The inferior alveolar provides sensation to the lower teeth and terminates as the mental nerve, providing sensation to the lower lip and chin. The inferior alveolar nerve also provides the motor function to the mylohyoid and anterior digastric muscles. The lingual nerve carries general sensation from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. The lingual nerve is joined by the chorda tympani nerve in the infratemporal fossa to provide presynaptic parasympathetic axons to the submandibular ganglion from the facial nerve. The chorda tympani nerve is also responsible for carrying taste sensation from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. The auriculotemporal branch of the posterior division is a sensory nerve supplying various regions on the lateral portion of the head.

Further autonomic nervous system association within the infratemporal fossa includes the otic ganglion on the medial side of the mandibular nerve close to the foramen ovale. The otic ganglion is presynaptically linked with the glossopharyngeal nerve, and postsynaptic parasympathetic axons innervate the parotid gland by joining fibers of the auriculotemporal nerve.