**Tobacco**

Smoking tobacco is the greatest risk factor and cause of oral cancer due to its carcinogenic chemicals, including nitrosamines, benzopyrenes, and aromatic amines.****

In various parts of the world, tobacco is chewed or held in the mouth rather than smoked.  Nicotine is absorbed via the mucous membranes to provide the desired effect. It is most closely linked to oral cavity cancers due to direct contact with tissues affected but is also associated with oropharyngeal malignancies.

- Chewing betel quid: also known as ‘pan’ or ‘paan,’ uses a combination of betel leaf, areca nut, slaked lime, and tobacco, which is then chewed. It is a widespread practice in Asia and is associated with an even higher risk of malignancy compared with smoking tobacco alone due to the prolonged exposure of the carcinogens to cells in the mouth.

- Snuff/Snus: a moist form of smokeless tobacco commonly placed under the upper lip for prolonged periods of time. This practice is most common in Scandinavia and North America.

**Alcohol**

Consuming alcohol, particularly in conjunction with smoking, increases the risk of oral cancer. Despite no clear carcinogenic properties of ethanol itself, alcohol has been shown to increase the permeability of oral mucosa, thus enabling damage by other carcinogens.

**HPV**

Human Papilloma Virus (HPV), mainly types 16 and 18, have been shown to be associated with malignancy. Although it is most closely associated with cervical cancer and oropharyngeal cancer (particularly tonsillar and base of tongue tumors), there is some evidence to suggest that there is an association with oral cancers. In the oral cavity, HPV infection is 4 times more likely in those with squamous cell carcinomas by comparison to healthy mucous membranes.

**Stem Cell Transplants**

Patients who have undergone hemopoietic stem cell transplants are 4 to 7 times more likely to develop oral cancer compared with the average population. Evidence of graft versus host disease in the oral cavity often precedes this. Symptoms include mucositis, xerostomia, and lichenoid changes. The tongue and salivary gland are the most common cancer sites developing 5 to 9 years after transplant.