The goal of treatment is to decrease airway obstruction. Treatment includes nebulized epinephrine, corticosteroids, and at least 3 hours of observation after the last dose of epinephrine. Supplemental oxygen via blow by or nasal cannula can also be used for hypoxic patients with croup.

**Nebulized Epinephrine**

Racemic epinephrine 2.25% 0.05 mL/kg nebulized with a maximum of 5 mL or L-epinephrine 0.5 mL/kg nebulized with a maximum of 5 mL is reserved for moderate and severe croup. Admit patients requiring more than 1 to 2 doses of nebulized epinephrine in the emergency department.

**Corticosteroids**

Regardless of severity, all patients with croup benefit from oral steroids. Dexamethasone 0.15 mg/kg to 0.6 mg/kg by mouth with a maximum of 10 mg as a one-time dose is the typical dose (the intravenous dose can be given by mouth).

**Observation**

Patients with croup should be observed for a minimum of 3 hours after the completion of each dose of nebulized racemic epinephrine. Watch for worsening or recurrence of symptoms, including persistent stridor at rest, increased work of breathing, and hypoxia, during the observation period. Admit patients requiring more than one or two doses of nebulized epinephrine in the emergency department.

**Heliox**

Several trials have been conducted on helion in the management of croup, and the results are mixed. Overall, there is no harm from trying heliox because most anecdotal reports indicate that it helps ease breathing.

**Intubation**

Intubation is reserved for severe cases of croup not responding to medical treatment. The endotracheal tube size should be smaller than typical for the patient's age and size to avoid trauma to the already edematous airway.