Individuals at extremes of age, such as neonates and the elderly appear to be the most vulnerable to STP. This is likely attributable to undeveloped host defenses in neonates, and a decline in immunologic function as well as additional comorbid disease in the elderly.

The current incidence of catheter-associated (peripheral) STP is estimated at 0.5 cases of bloodstream infections per 1000 days of a peripherally inserted intravenous device. For non-tunneled, non-medicated, central venous catheters, the incidence is estimated at 2.7 per 1000 intravenous device days. Approximately 4.2% of burn patients have been reported to experience peripheral STP.

Deep (non-catheter associated) STP is seen much less common; the exact incidence, therefore, not yet described. However, in the case of pelvic STP, which is seen most frequently in women of childbearing age, younger than 20 years old, the frequency has been reported to vary from 1:500 to 1:2000 in cesarean deliveries, while the frequency for vaginal deliveries has been reported to be 1:9000. Other risk factors associated with pelvic STP are the black race and multiple gestations.

Pylephlebitis, which is STP of the portal vein, has been cited for having a mortality rate of up to 25% despite the use of antibiotics and an incidence of 2.7 per 100,000 person-years.

Other rare conditions such as Lemierre syndrome, which commonly occur in healthy, young adults have been cited to occur at an incidence of 14.4 cases per million per year in patients between 15-24 years old. The mortality rate reported in a 3-year prospective study was 9%.

Prior to the widespread use of antibiotics, STP was the main cause of cerebral sinus thrombosis and was nearly universally fatal. However, it is now considered rare. Despite this, the mortality is still reported to be approximately 30%  for STP of the cavernous sinus and 78% for STP of the superior sagittal sinus, with less than 50% achieving full recovery. This condition is also more common in children than in adults.