Naloxone administration is usually via IV, but if no IV access is available, it can also be administered via an IO line, subcutaneously (SQ), IM, or via the intranasal (IN) route. When administered IV, naloxone usually fully reverses the opioid effects within a few minutes. The dose is titrated to effect, with the goal to increase the patient's respiratory drive to allow for adequate spontaneous respiration and oxygenation but not bring to full reversal, which can result in withdrawal and can include combative or aggressive behavior. A small initial dose, usually 0.04 mg to 0.1 mg IV, is recommended in opioid-dependent patients with symptoms of opioid overdose to avoid opioid withdrawal symptoms. Larger initial dosing, such as 0.4 mg IV, is recommended in patients without a known history of opioid dependency. In patients who present apneic or near-apnea with cyanosis, especially in the prehospital setting, providers should not hesitate to give larger initial doses, such as 1 mg to 2 mg IV or 2mg intranasal, IM, or SQ. Clinicians can administer subsequent doses of 0.1 mg to 0.4 mg IV or 0.4 mg to 1 mg NAS, IM, or SQ in any opioid overdose patient until reaching the desired effect.

**Continuous Intravenous infusion (Off-label)**

Some patients may have overdosed on long-acting opioids like methadone, and in such cases, an intravenous drip of naloxone may be useful. In general, one can use two-thirds of the initial effective dose of naloxone (0.1 to 6 mg/hr) as a bolus every 60 minutes, or one can administer one-half of the initial bolus dose 15 minutes after starting the continuous IV infusion; this maintains a consistently high dose of naloxone.

**Endotracheal Administration**

Although emergency medical personnel and emergency healthcare workers often administer naloxone via the endotracheal tube, there is little evidence to support the effectiveness of this mode of administration. In dire circumstances with a patient in extremis, there may be no other choice, with doses of naloxone from 0.8 to 5 mg used.

**Intranasal Spray**

Recently, the FDA approved the intranasal spray (NAS), which is available as an autoinjector. This device delivers 4 mg of naloxone and is usable by caregivers or family members. Initially, one spray is administered, which provides 4 mg of naloxone. Since the NAS is a recommended intervention for non-healthcare professions, there are a few recommendations when using this agent to reverse opiate overdose:

- Immediately following the administration of the first NAS, one should seek emergency medical assistance and not assume that the patient is fine, even if full mental recovery occurs.

- The individual requires close monitoring for his or her vital status, and repeat dosing may be necessary. If the patient relapses and the respiration rate decrease before emergency medical personnel arrive, administer the second dose.

- If repeat dosing is necessary, then it should be administered in alternate nostrils every two to three minutes.

- If the patient fails to respond to additional doses, then one must be prepared to perform other resuscitative maneuvers, including CPR.

The key reason for the development of the NAS formula is to permit medically untrained individuals to safely administer naloxone with a good probability of reversing opioid-induced respiratory depression, especially if the patient has labored and shallow breathing. Unlike the parenteral route of administration, there is no need to worry about the accessibility of the peripheral veins, needlestick injuries, or disposal of sharps. However, even though NAS naloxone campaigns are widely promoted in most states, the pricing of this formula is still a major issue and might be a deterrent to widespread acceptance. Until a low-cost alternative is available, some consumers may not buy this product because of its expense, and the opioid epidemic will continue unabated.

**Dosage Modifications**

Partial opioid agonists or mixed agonist/antagonists

If the patient has overdosed on longer-acting opioids or partial agonists (e.g., buprenorphine, pentazocine), the recovery may be incomplete, and one requires higher doses of naloxone or repeated administration. Repeat dosing of naloxone can be done every two to five minutes. However, in some cases, the patient may benefit from an IV drip of naloxone.

**Dosing Considerations**

Intended for immediate administration of emergency therapy in settings where opioids may be present

It is vital not to assume that naloxone is the only treatment for opioid overdose. Naloxone is not a substitute for emergency medical care, and one must follow the ABCD trauma protocol when resuscitating these patients.

Providers should be aware that redosing of naloxone may be required. Given the presence of synthetic opioids, such as fentanyl or carfentanil, being implicated more in overdoses, providers should prepare to deliver larger total doses, upwards of 10 mg, of naloxone. This fact was highlighted in a recent paper out of Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami, Florida. At their institution, there was a 119% increase in opioid overdoses over three months in 2016 compared to the same three months the previous year. There was a disproportionate increase in the amount of naloxone administered to patients during this period, with the number of naloxone vials used increasing by 476%. The thinking was that due to a more potent synthetic opioid, such as fentanyl, being present in the heroin circulating through the area in 2016 compared to more traditional heroin in 2015.

For those patients in the emergency department who have required multiple doses of naloxone and are under consideration for admission, a continuous naloxone infusion may be necessary. The typical dose for this infusion is determined by calculating the wake-up dose needed for the patient and administering two-thirds of that dose per hour via continuous infusion.

If the patient fails to respond to repeated doses of naloxone, one must consider other causes of unconsciousness. After the acute treatment of the overdose, the patient should be enrolled for substance abuse treatment and encouraged to enter rehabilitation.