Foscarnet is not an orally administered drug due to poor bioavailability, possibly due to the poor metabolism of the drug and its inclination to deposit within bone and cartilage.

Some specific dosing regimens are as follows:

- AIDS-associated CMV retinitis (note: not first-line treatment):

- Induction: 90 mg/kg/dose IV every 12 hours for 2 to 3 weeks, or alternately 60 mg/kg/dose IV every 8 hours for 2 to 3 weeks.
- Maintenance treatment: 90 mg/kg/dose IV every 24 hours or 120 mg/kg/dose IV every 24 hours.

- Acyclovir-resistant mucocutaneous HSV infection:

- 40 mg/kg/dose IV every 8 to 12 hours until healed; alternately apply 1% cream five times daily until healed (requires pharmacy compounding.)
- Immunocompromised patients must maintain adequate hydration before and during IV treatment.

- Ganciclovir-resitant CMV (off label):

- Induction: 90mg/kg/dose IV for a minimum of 2 weeks, alternately 60 mg/kg/dose IV every 8 hours for a minimum of 2 weeks.
- Maintenance treatment: 90 mg/kg/dose IV every 24 hours or 120 mg/kg/dose IV every 24 hours.
- Immunocompromised patients must maintain adequate hydration before and during IV treatment.

- Acyclovir-resistant varicella (chickenpox) or acyclovir-resistant herpes-zoster (shingles) (off label):

- 90 mg/kg/dose IV every 12 hours.
- Immunocompromised patients must maintain adequate hydration before and during IV treatment.

In adults with CMV infection and retinitis, for example, it is administered commonly at a rate of about 1mg/kg/minute.

For all patients, the duration of therapy is dependent on the patient's immune status and the progress of the lesions. While the IV route is the most used method, intravitreal administration is also used on occasions by experienced healthcare providers for ophthalmic complications of viral pathogens.

In cases of renal compromise, including hemodialysis, significant dosing reductions are necessary; clinicians should consult package inserts and institutional protocols in such instances.