**Doses**

Successful vaccines must promote immune responses that induce optimal adaptive immune responses. Effectiveness is usually measured based on immunogenicity, which is evaluated by serum bacterial activity (SBA) to determine the patient's level of protection and his need for a booster dose or not. Doses of each type of vaccine depend on the patient's age, personal status, and the type of vaccine used.

Up to this moment, there is not any vaccine that provides lifelong immunity. Since these polysaccharide vaccines induce only 3 to 5 years of immunity among adults, conjugating these vaccines was supposed to provide a longer duration of immunity. Unfortunately, this would not occur after single-dose administration.

For initial vaccination, the recommendation is to use a single dose of meningococcal vaccine in most adults and children (age greater than or equal to 24 months). Due to the low incidence of meningococcal disease in most of the world, indication for additional doses occurs in specific groups and conditions such as infants and toddlers (age greater than or equal to 24 months) and cases where underlying medical conditions and low immunity are present, as significantly low antibody titer is present after a single dose.

According to the WHO recommendations, countries with high (greater than 10 cases per 100000) or intermediate (2 to 10 cases per 100000) endemicity have to conduct large-scale meningococcal vaccine programs and mass vaccination campaigns including young individuals (e.g., nine months to 18 years of age) with a favor for the use of conjugated vaccines for population protection. On the other hand, areas with low meningococcal incidence (less than 2 cases per 100000) are very challenging. Guidelines regarding these countries are usually available, but most recommend vaccines for defined "at-risk" groups based on age, immunity, and underlying precipitating conditions.

It is worth knowing that malignant diseases are not associated with IMD, but the recommendations state to revaccinate any previously immunized children after hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT).

**Vaccine Administration**

In general, plain and conjugate polysaccharide vaccines are given by injection, subcutaneously, and intramuscularly, respectively. Conjugated vaccines are usually injected in the deltoid muscle except in patients under 12 months, in whom the anterolateral thigh is a preferential site. It is Contraindications include administering the vaccine intravenously and mixing it with other vaccines in the same syringe. Coadministration with other routinely used vaccines is generally safe and effective with separate sites of injection taken into consideration.

Most recently, investigations regarding the safety and immunogenicity of the intradermal administration of meningococcal vaccines are in progress. As the skin (dermis) contains a much higher density of antigen-presenting cells (dendritic cells) than in muscles and subcutaneous regions, that would be sufficient to achieve an effective protective immune response. Since the lymphatic skin system is extensively prepared and drained into several plexus systems, it makes the transportation of these presenting dendritic cells very efficient. Consequently, the patient will need a lower dose of the vaccine to have the same immunogenic response.

**Administration Errors**

Unusually, administration errors could occur due to healthcare providers' unfamiliarity with the new vaccines and their requirements for appropriate use. These errors rarely cause a serious safety problem. Additional vaccine doses may be necessary as the patient may remain unprotected in some situations, potentially leading to a local adverse reaction, additional cost, and loss of trust of the health care provider.