The liver metabolizes nicotine. Therefore, swallowing pills through the gastrointestinal (GI) system will be subject to first-pass metabolism by the liver, and bioavailability would only be about 20%. This process will reduce the bioavailability of nicotine in the system and possibly cause GI side effects. Hence, the only available methods for nicotine are in a non-pill form, such as a lozenge, sublingual tablets, transdermal patches, gum, inhaler, and sprays. These dose forms let the nicotine enter the oral or nasal mucosa or skin and bypass the GI system for more extended bioavailability. The route of absorption is pH-dependent. Acidic foods and drinks can lower the absorption of nicotine. The skin patch releases nicotine at a slower rate. This controlled delivery makes toxicity from nicotine much less likely and prevents any GI side effects. Symptoms in the rare event that the patient overdoses on nicotine include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dizziness, difficulty breathing, tachycardia, weakness, or rash.

In patients who have poisoning from nicotine cartridge, repeated doses of activated charcoal should be given till the nicotine cartridge remains in the gastrointestinal tract since it will continue to release nicotine for a long time. Healthcare professionals must stop nicotine immediately and secure and maintain airways. The clinician should provide hemodynamic support for hypotension and cardiovascular collapse. Administer benzodiazepines for seizures and atropine for bronchial secretions and diarrhea.