Tumor Node Metastasis (TNM) classification system, outlined by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), is used to stage renal cancer both clinically and pathologically.

Data taken from the National Cancer Data Base (http://www.facs.org/cancer/ncdb/ index.html) provide the rationale for breaking up T2 into T2a (>7 cm but not more than 10 cm) and T2b (>10 cm). Substantially different outcomes were reported for subgroups. Ipsilateral adrenal involvement has similar outcomes as patients with T4 or M1 disease. Additionally, the presence of multiple adverse features can act collaboratively to further worsen the prognosis. The adverse features include peri-renal fat invasion, tumor size as a continuous variable, size of the largest involved lymph node, and extra-nodal extension. Although, all nodal involvement irrespective of extent suggests a poor prognosis, therefore, nodal involvement is consolidated as N1.

However, tumors with renal vein thrombosis are known to have a relatively favorable prognosis and are therefore staged as T3a rather than T3b. In addition, there are a number of potential molecular prognostic factors, including genetic variables, proliferative markers, angiogenic parameters, growth factors and receptor, and adhesion molecules. Most of these are still not fully validated. Although future staging protocols may capture this information to build individualized management protocols.

TABLE 1: Anatomic stage and Prognostic groups

**Stage       T                   N                   M**

**I**T1                 N0                 M0

**II**T2                 N0                 M0

**III**T1 or T2         N1                 M0

T3                 N0 or N1        M0

**IV**T4                  Any N             M0

Any T             Any N             M1

T1: Tumor ≤7 cm in greatest dimension, limited to the kidney, T1a: Tumor ≤4 cm in greatest dimension, limited to the kidney, T1b: Tumor >4 cm but not >7 cm in greatest dimension, limited to the kidney.

T2: Tumor >7 cm in greatest dimension, limited to the kidney, T2a: Tumor >7 cm but ≤10 cm in greatest dimension, limited to the kidney, T2b: Tumor >10 cm, limited to the kidney.

T3: Tumor extends into major veins or perinephric tissues but not into the ipsilateral adrenal gland and not beyond Gerota fascia, T3a: Tumor extends into the renal vein or its segmental branches, or invades the pelvicalyceal system, or invades perirenal and/or renal sinus fat but not beyond Gerota fascia, T3b: Tumor extends into the vena cava below the diaphragm, T3c: Tumor grossly extends into the vena cava above the diaphragm or invades the wall of the vena cava, T4: Tumor invades beyond Gerota fascia (including contiguous extension into the ipsilateral adrenal gland).

**Regional Lymph Nodes (N)**: NX: Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed, N0: No regional lymph node metastasis, N1: Metastases in regional lymph node(s).

**Distant Metastasis (M)**: M0: No distant metastasis, M1: Distant metastasis.