As mentioned previously, the Seldinger technique is by far the most commonly used method for placing PICCs. Peel-away cannulas or brake-away needle methods are other options. However, they require large veins to accommodate larger sized needles and introducers, which potentially exposes the patient to increased risk of excessive bleeding. Additionally, peel-away catheters are known to cause air emboli.

Below are the steps for the sterile, modified Seldinger technique:

- Obtain consent from patient or their decision make

- Gather supplies (PREPARATION IS KEY)

- Measure patient's arm circumference; this serves as a reference to determine any arm swelling should it occur due to complications from PICC placement

- Locate which vein will be accessed for line placement; this can be done using ultrasound

- Applying a tourniquet and ensuring that the patient is adequately hydrated can also help in locating veins

- Mark insertion site using a marker or by creating skin indentation using a pen

- Measure length required to advance the catheter to the SVC/right atrial junction.

- This is commonly done by measuring from the site of insertion to the mid-right mid-clavicular line, and down to the third intercostal space. Perform proper hand hygiene

- Cleanse the portion of the upper arm with chlorhexidine/alcohol

- Don mask with face shield and hair cover followed by sterile gown and gloves

- Create sterile field by placing sterile towels and drape

- Anesthetize skin (if necessary)

- Re-identify vein using ultrasound.

- Access vein using needle and syringe until blood is aspirated

- Remove the syringe and advance guide wire through the needle. Remove the needle and confirm wire placement in vein using ultrasound

- Using the scalpel, create small nick at insertion site alongside guide wire to accommodate dilator

- Insert dilator and introducer over the guide wire

- Remove guide wire and dilator, leaving only the introducer in place

- Insert catheter through introducer and advanced to predetermined length

- Remove introducer

- Confirm proper placement of the catheter in atriocaval junction by obtaining chest x-ray before using PICC.

After placement and functionality have been confirmed, appropriate maintenance, which includes the use of stabilization devices, frequent flushing of line with saline and heparin-containing solutions, and sterile dressings replaced at regular intervals, should be employed to minimize complications.