CALMs are diagnosed clinically. While evaluating a child with multiple CALMs, it is important to know whether these lesions represent a marker of an underlying systemic disorder. Patients presenting with multiple CALMs (more than 6) should raise suspicion of a genetic syndrome, most commonly NF1. Skin freckling in the inguinal/axillary region and cutaneous neurofibromas can be seen in thorough skin examination. Ophthalmological examination with a slit lamp is equally important to identify Lisch nodules and signs of optic glioma. CALMs are usually distributed in a random pattern, but when found in a single body region, segmental NF1 should be suspected.

Patients with CALMs should be carefully examined for the features of other associated syndromes. Developmental history and progression of the child in school are important for diagnosing syndromes associated with CALMs. Genetic testing can be performed to confirm the diagnosis of suspected genetic syndromes associated with CALMs. For confirmed cases, family members should be evaluated further for findings like multiple CALMs, cutaneous neurofibromas, learning disabilities, skin tumors, spinal cord or brain tumors, etc.

A suspected case of NF2 should be further evaluated with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain to know the location of the vestibular schwannoma as well as other tumors associated with NF2 such as meningioma and ependymoma.

A skin biopsy is usually not needed to confirm the diagnosis. On biopsy, an increased amount of melanin in the basal layer along with giant melanosomes can be seen in NF1-associated CALMs.