Treatment of vertigo is dependent upon the etiology, and often, treating the underlying etiology will improve the symptoms of vertigo.

Medications may be useful to suppress vestibular symptoms in acute episodes that may last a few hours to days. The most common medications used for symptomatic relief include antihistamines, benzodiazepines, and antiemetics. The most common antihistamine used is meclizine, which is safe during pregnancy.

Additional non-pharmacologic treatments for patients with permanent unilateral or bilateral vestibular dysfunction include physical therapy with vestibular rehabilitation.

In some patients, particularly those diagnosed with vestibular neuritis, a combination of pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic therapy is recommended. In vestibular neuritis, corticosteroids are recommended in the acute setting in addition to vestibular rehabilitation. In patients with Ménière disease, lifestyle adjustments in addition to medication and vestibular rehabilitation have shown to be effective.

Patients with Ménière disease may be particularly sensitive to a high salt diet, caffeine, and alcohol. Avoiding known triggers can help to alleviate symptoms. Diuretics may also be prescribed when diet modification alone is not sufficient in controlling symptoms. Acute episodes can be symptomatically treated with vestibular suppressants like meclizine.

Patients with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo benefit from non-pharmacologic agents. The primary treatment for BPPV is focused on head rotation maneuvers that displace calcium deposits back to the vestibule through canalith repositioning or the Epley maneuver.