The aim should be to improve the individual's overall function, which is multiphasic and multifactorial. Supportive treatment may be provided during detoxification; enabling access to psychiatric services allows addressing underlying disorders; psychological counseling can modify behavior, develop healthier coping skills in the face of stressors, and enlighten them regarding their temperament.

As cannabis strains become more potent and accessible, the risk will increase for the frequency and severity of serious adverse reactions. For individuals with marked intoxication or withdrawal or cannabis use disorder, the goal should be to stop the drug altogether. As opposed to abrupt cessation, a gradual decrease is likely to decrease the discomfort of the withdrawal and prevent relapse. Cannabis intoxication most often does not require medical management and will self-resolve. Supportive management such as a calm, non-stimulating environment helps patients. Symptomatic treatment can be considered for specific symptoms such as alpha-2-adrenergic agonists or beta-blockers for tachycardia, benzodiazepines for panic attacks, off-label use of first-generation antihistamines for anxiety and restlessness, and neuroleptics for psychosis. It is important to monitor psychological symptoms, which may be features of the withdrawal or part of the patient’s primary psychiatric illness - which may not have been previously identified.

Pharmacologic detoxification is still under investigation. A systematic review indicates most studies are preliminary and cannot statistically support clinical rationale as they are small sizes, inconsistent, and have a risk of attrition bias.

No medication has FDA approval to treat cannabis use disorder. Tetrahydrocannabinol does show some potential in treatment, but more information is needed to demonstrate the validity and inform on the dose, duration, formulation, and adjunct therapies.