Each of the five mechanisms of lasers has clear and separate clinical applications.

**Thermal lasers**are the most commonly used in ophthalmology, and photocoagulation is used to treat a wide array of pathology, including retinal detachments, laser barricade of retinal tears, treatment of retinopathy of prematurity and proliferative diabetic retinopathy, laser trabeculoplasty in glaucoma, focal laser in diabetic macular edema and central serous chorioretinopathy, and transpupillary thermotherapy for choroidal melanoma.

The laser's wavelength is important as absorption is heavily dependent on it. Common targets in the retina, such as hemoglobin and melanin, generally absorb wavelengths of light between 400 to 700 nm.

It is no surprise that common lasers used are frequency-doubled yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd: YAG) green laser at 532 nm, green argon lasers at 514 nm, Krypton red lasers at 647 nm, and yellow semiconductor at 577 nm and diode laser at 810 nm with the two most common being frequency-doubled Nd: YAG and argon.

Additionally, there is the PASCAL (PAtterned SCAnning Laser), which uses the frequency-doubled Nd: YAG laser that incorporates patterned, short, multiple shots at a very short duration which results in reduced discomfort and collateral retinal damage during procedures such as pan-retinal photocoagulation (PRP).

Thermal laser (photocoagulation) is also used in laser thermal keratoplasty [LTK, holmium: yttrium aluminum garnet (YAG), 2060 nm (contact LTK) or 2130 nm (noncontact LTK)], which causes corneal shrinkage to treat hyperopia.

**Photodisruption**is another widely used laser mechanism in ophthalmology, being only second to thermal lasers. It commonly uses the Nd: YAG laser at 1064  nm in posterior capsulotomy, anterior laser vitreolysis, and peripheral laser iridotomy.

**Photochemical interaction**is the basis of a number of techniques in ophthalmology, such as photodynamic therapy (PDT) in central serous chorioretinopathy or age-related macular degeneration (AMD), corneal collagen cross-linking in keratoconus, and prevention of graft rejection in corneal grafts by reducing corneal neovascularization.

In AMD, by injecting verteporfin into the patient's circulation, the blood vessels can be thrombosed by irradiating the blood vessels with the low-energy red laser at 689 nm.

**Photoablation**is used in refractive surgeries, such as laser in situ keratomileuses (LASIK) and photorefractive keratectomy (excimer 193 nm), eliminating injury or dystrophy caused by superficial corneal opacities and in phototherapeutic keratectomy which is used in the treatment of recurrent corneal erosions as the cornea absorbs UV light under 315nm.

**Plasma-induced ablation**has been used for refractive surgery, such as the formation of LASIK stromal flaps (femtosecond laser 1053 nm). Further research is being done into its use in other laser procedures that use photoablation.

**Diagnostic Use of Laser In Ophthalmology**

Although lasers are used in various therapeutic techniques, they are also an integral part of diagnostic imaging in ophthalmology. For instance, scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (SLO) uses confocal laser scanning microscopy for diagnostic imaging of the retina or cornea. It uses lasers to rapidly scan a sample whose reflected light is imaged through a pinhole that suppresses reflections outside those in the focal plane.

This process allows a sample to be scanned at multiple levels, which then is reconstructed in 3-dimensional images using computer software. This technique is used to track glaucoma-induced changes in the optic nerve head, along with imaging structures of the eye such as the cornea, lens, and macula. Additionally, there is optical coherence tomography (OCT) which creates high-resolution images of parts of the eye such as the retina or the anterior segment.

It typically uses either superluminescent diodes or ultrashort pulsed lasers to scan the eye and creates the image using the principles of low-coherence interferometry. OCTs are used to manage many pathologies such as glaucoma, AMD, and diabetic macular edema (DME). Finally, there is OCT angiography (OCT-A) which uses OCT to image vasculature in the eye by using the reflection of light off of moving red blood cells.

Common wavelengths for diagnostic lasers are 850-1050 nm laser in OCT, 840 nm or 1050 nm laser in OCT-A, and SLO uses a combination of lasers at 532 nm, 658 nm, and 840 nm.