Several types of debridements can achieve the removal of devitalized tissue. These include surgical debridement, biological debridement, enzymatic debridements, and autolytic debridement.

**Autolytic Debridement**

This is the most conservative type of debridement. This debridement is a natural process by which endogenous phagocytic cells and proteolytic enzymes break down necrotic tissue. It is a  highly selective process whereby only necrotic tissue will be affected in the debridement.

It is indicated for noninfected wounds. It may also be used as adjunctive therapy in infected wounds. It can be used with other debridement techniques, such as mechanical debridement in the case of infected wounds.

It requires a moist environment and a functional immune system. The use of moisture-retentive dressings can enhance it. This debridement induces softening of the necrotic tissue and eventual separation from the wound bed.

The effectiveness of this type of debridement is mandated by the amount of devitalized tissue to be removed and the actual wound size.

Autolytic debridement will take a few days. If a significant decrease in necrotic tissue is not seen within 1 or 2 days, a different debridement method should be considered.

**Biological Debridement**

Biological debridement, also known as larval therapy, uses sterile larvae of the Lucilia sericata species of the green bottle fly. It is an effective mode of debridement, particularly appropriate in large wounds where a painless removal of necrotic tissue is needed. The mechanism of action of mega therapy/debridement consists mainly of the release of proteolytic enzymes containing secretions and excretions that dissolve necrotic tissue from the wound bed. Other modes of action contributing to the overall result of larval therapy are:

- Bacteriocidal, as the larvae ingest and digest bacteria

- Inhibiting bacterial growth by producing in releasing ammonia into the wound bed, which increases the wound pH

- Breakdown of existing biofilm at the wound bed and inhibition of new biofilm growth

- Direct ingestion of necrotic tissue

**Chitosan**, the major derivative of chitin, has been widely investigated for biomedical applications for several reasons, including, but not limited to, 1. highly porous structure, 2. its strong biocompatibility profile, and 3. its intrinsic antibacterial nature.

It should be noted that chitosan alone cannot be applied for the purpose of ECM replacement due to its limited mechanical properties. Therefore, to provide nanofibrous scaffolds, chitosan should be combined with synthetic polymers, specifically electro-spun polymers, including polycaprolactone (PCL).

Maggots can be applied to the wound bed. They can be enclosed in a biological bag or are in free range.

Studies have shown that free-range maggots can debride a wound at least twice as fast as bag-pain maggots. Comparison studies of either free-range maggots treatment versus bio bag contained maggots versus hydrogel autolytic debridement shows days to complete debridement to be 14 versus 28 versus 72 days, respectively.

Contraindications to biological debridement are an abdominal wound contiguous with the intraperitoneal cavity, pyoderma gangrenosum in patients with immunosuppression therapy, and wounds in proximity to areas afflicted by septic arthritis.

**Enzymatic Debridement**

This is a selective method for debridement of necrotic tissue using an exogenous proteolytic enzyme, collagenase, to debride Clostridium bacteria. Collagenase digests the collagen in the necrotic tissue allowing it to detach.

Enzymatic debridement is a slow method of debridement from hair to mechanical and sharp debridement.

Collagenase and moisture retentive dressings can work in synergy, enhancing the debridement.

Enzymatic debridement is not recommended for an advanced process or in patients with known sensitivity to the product's ingredients.

A relative contraindication of enzymatic debridement is its use in heavily infected wounds. Furthermore, collagenase should not be used in conjunction with silver-based products or with Dakin solution.

**Surgical Debridement with Sharp Instruments**

This is a type of debridement where devitalized tissue (slough, necrotic, or eschar) in the presence of underlying infection is removed using sharp instruments such as a scalpel, Metzenbaum, and curettes, among others. This can be done bedside, in the office or wound care center, or the operating room, depending on the adequacy of anesthesia and the ability to control perioperative complications like bleeding. The healthcare professional should be skilled, trained, qualified, and licensed to provide surgical treatment.

Sharp-instrument debridement can be combined with all the other debridement methods during the perioperative period.

Disadvantages of surgical debridement include adverse events from the debridement itself, for example, bleeding and possible general complications from the anesthesia.

Contraindications for surgical debridement in the operating room would have to take into account the particular surgical risk stratification of the patient. Sharp surgical debridement is contraindicated in patients with an intact eschar and no clinical evidence of an underlying infection. In these cases, the intact eschar is a biological covering for the underlying skin defect. This is usually seen in unstageable pressure injuries at the sacrum, buttocks, or heels with intact and/or dry eschars.

**Mechanical Debridement**

Mechanical debridement is a nonselective type of debridement, meaning that it will remove both devitalized tissue and debris and viable tissue. It is usually carried out using mechanical force: wet-to-dry, pulsatile lavage, or wound irrigation.

It is indicated for acute and chronic wounds with moderate to large amounts of necrotic tissue, regardless of the presence of an active infection.

The contraindications include, depending on the modality of mechanical debridement used, the presence of granulation tissue in a higher amount than the devitalized tissue, inability to control pain, patients with poor perfusion, and an intact eschar with no gross clinical evidence of an underlying infection.