The inferior vena cava (IVC) returns blood to the heart, along with superior vena cava (SVC). Obstruction or compression to the IVC reduces the venous return to the heart, causing an imbalance in the hemodynamic equilibrium. Decreased venous return causes hemodynamic instability in several ways. When there is a decrease in venous return, it will decrease the oxygenation of the blood, which results in hypoxia and subsequent tachycardia. Besides, decreased venous return causes a decrease in heart preload, which leads to decreased cardiac output, and the heart compensates by beating rapidly to maintain adequate perfusion to end organs.

Thrombosis of the IVC can be caused by either compression or physical obstruction, which leads to venous stasis. Venous stasis is one of the three criteria of Virchow's triad of thrombus formation; the other two: hypercoagulable state and endothelial damage. The impedance in blood flow causes stasis, which promotes thrombus formation.

The decreased venous return in inferior vena cava syndrome (IVCS) mimics the presentation of hypovolemic shock and causes tachycardia, diaphoresis, hypotension, shortness of breath on exertion, dizziness, and cold extremities. IVC congestion causes pallor, ascites, lower extremity peripheral edema, and hypoxia. IVCS also presents with generalized symptoms such as nausea, headache, malaise, and fatigue. In extreme cases, the decreased blood, either through thrombotic or non-thrombotic mechanisms, can lead to altered mental status and even death.