**Osseous**

The distal humerus, radial head, and olecranon comprise the elbow joint.  The olecranon process articulates with the trochlea of the humeral condyle forming a hinge joint for flexion and extension.  The radial head is held in place with the annular ligament arising from the proximal ulna and articulates with the ulna and the distal humerus.  The joint is encapsulated and contains the articular surfaces of the structures mentioned above. This space contains synovial fluid and is the target of elbow aspiration.

**Muscular Compartments**

The biceps crosses the elbow anteriorly, and the triceps crosses the elbow posteriorly, facilitating flexion and extension, respectively.  The flexor carpi radialis, palmaris longus, humeroulnar head of flexor digitorum superficials, and the humeral head of the flexor carpi ulnaris contribute to the flexor compartment and supination of the wrist originating at the medial epicondyle.  They primarily receive innervation via the median nerve.  The wrist extensors and supinators, including extensor carpi radialis brevis, extensor digitorum, and extensor digiti minimi, all originate on the lateral epicondyle and are innervated by the radial nerve.

**Vasculature**

Blood supply to the elbow is via extensive anastomoses originating from the brachial and radial arteries

**Positioning**

The patient should have their elbow bent to 90 degrees with their hand pronated (palm down); this exposes the approach trajectory by rolling the head of the radius out of the way.

The aiming point for needle insertion is the juncture of the lateral humeral condyle, radial head, and olecranon process. These three landmarks form the anconeus triangle, and the insertion point is located centrally.  The needle is then inserted into the sulcus directed medial and perpendicular to the radius toward the distal end of the antecubital fossa.

Ultrasound guidance for evaluation of fluid collection and needle guidance is recommended.