Clinical diagnosis by symptoms has low sensitivity and specificity, and some patients are asymptomatic. Standardized testing for diagnosis includes direct and indirect methods and usually involves spirometry measurement of FEV1 changes from baseline expressed as a percent decrease.

Direct stimulation of smooth muscle receptors by methacholine to induce bronchoconstriction is well established. Sensitivity at predicting EIB has been reported to be 58.6% to 91.1%.

Indirect testing, which is more specific for EIB, can involve aerobic exercise in a controlled environment with cold, dry air as these conditions are known to precipitate EIB in susceptible individuals. Alternatives to exercise testing include eucapnic voluntary hyperpnea or hyperventilation of dry air, and airway provocation testing, including hyperosmolar 4.5% saline or dry powder mannitol, which act to dehydrate the respiratory epithelium to induce EIB. The sensitivity and specificity of the alternatives are not well established and may vary by the lab.

**Exercise Challenge Testing**

The ATS recommends exercise challenge testing in a controlled dry environment. Exercise testing parameters outlined by the ATS include recommendations on ventilation level, heart rate, time at maximal capacity, and medications to hold before testing, including caffeine. The patient must avoid entering the refractory period before exercise testing. Serial measurements of spirometry, specifically FEV1, are recorded during exercise at 5,10,15, and 30 minutes. FEV1 has good repeatability and is recommended by ATS to diagnose EIB.

**Pulmonary Function Testing**

CHEST guidelines provide 2B recommendation for pulmonary function tests (PFT), exercise or bronchoprovocation studies as described above, and allergy testing for common airborne allergens to distinguish between the most common causes of exercise-induced cough.

**Fractional Excretion of Nitric Oxide (FENO) Testing**

A few smaller studies suggest fractional excretion of nitric oxide (FENO) may replace FEV1 to diagnose and measure the severity of EIB instead of spirometry with FEV1 percent change. The FENO can be used with direct or indirect testing and can be easily performed by younger children. FENO measures the T helper cell type 2 (Th2) inflammatory response, versus airway hyperresponsiveness, and may be better suited to distinguish EIB from another etiology of symptoms. Cut off values of 27 to 46 ppb FENO have been suggested as diagnostic, with greater than 46 ppb being 100% specific.