Staphylococcal Scalded Skin Syndrome is caused by toxin-producing strains of Staphylococcus bacteria. These toxins target the desmoglein 1 complex in the zona granulosa of the epidermis, resulting in skin exfoliation. It can range from a mild localized form to exfoliation of the entire body. Those with previous antibodies are more likely to have the localized form. The resultant skin loss predisposes patients to hypothermia and a large volume fluid loss, as well as, the potential for additional or worsening infections.

The exfoliative toxins target desmoglein, which is an important keratinocyte that plays a critical role in cell to cell adhesion. This protein is only found in the superficial epidermis. The relative concentration of desmoglein varies in the skin. It is believed that in patients with renal failure the exotoxins are not excreted and thus contribute to disease. Adults rarely develop the syndrome because of antibodies to the exotoxin. Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome can be mistaken for bullous impetigo. Both cause blistering skin lesions caused by the staphylococcus exotoxin, but in the latter, the exotoxins remain localized to the site of infection. In staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, the exotoxins are spread via the systemic circulation to distant sites. Further staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome can be differentiated from toxic epidermal necrolysis by the fact the former is intraepidermal, whereas in TENS there is necrosis of the entire epidermal layer.