Treatment depends on the etiology and severity of the disease. Mild inherited factor V deficiency may be managed with antifibrinolytics, while more severe phenotypes require fresh frozen plasma (FFP) transfusions to replenish factor V levels.

Due to the rarity of factor V deficiency, there is no factor V concentrate available for therapy. Additionally, the amount of factor V available in other blood products such as platelets, prothrombin complex, or cryoprecipitate is minimal. FFP, therefore, remains the mainstay of treatment for moderate to severe factor V deficiency. The goal of FFP is to maintain factor V levels above 25 to 30% when experiencing bleeding or undergoing invasive procedures. Higher levels may be necessary to achieve hemostasis in more severe or life-threatening hemorrhages.

For patients with acquired factor V deficiency who are asymptomatic, treatment is usually not required since the inhibitors present in the blood are transient.

Methods to control bleeding include FFP, platelet transfusions, prothrombin complex concentrate, and recombinant activated factor VII. Although the alpha-granules of platelets contain a minimal amount of factor V, platelet transfusions alone have shown a 71% success rate in treating acquired factor V deficiency due to the protective function against inhibitors and promotion of hemostasis.

Recombinant activated factor VII, a mainstay of treatment of inhibitors in patients with hemophilia A or B, may also be effective to control bleeding as it leads to direct activation of factor X and bypasses the need for factor V or other factors in the coagulation cascade.

However, the gold standard for eliminating the inhibitors is immunosuppression, which includes corticosteroids, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab. These agents, used alone or in combination, have been shown to suppress the production of autoantibodies against factor V with a 63% success rate. High-dose intravenous immunoglobulins and plasmapheresis also aid in reducing inhibitors in the blood, thereby increasing factor V activity. Their success rate is 60% and 53%, respectively.