**Histology**

Basic histological methods to identify osteoblasts include visualization of cell characteristics and location. Osteoblasts are cuboidal mononuclear cells located on bone surfaces.

**Cytochemistry**

Cytochemical methods to identify osteoblasts include toluidine blue stain (also known as tolonium chloride), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) enzymatic stain, immunochemical markers, and fluorescent protein reporters.

Toluidine blue

Toluidine blue is a basic thiazine metachromatic dye used to identify osteoblasts in paraffin sections. The dye selectively stains acidic tissue rich in nucleic acids, and other tissue components (sulfates, carboxylates, and phosphate radicals). Four adjacent labeled cuboidal cells are required to categorize a surface as osteoblast populated.

Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP) Enzymatic Stain

ALP is a membrane-bound metalloenzyme that is instrumental in catalyzing the hydrolysis of phosphate monoesters. Depending on the site of tissue expression, one of four ALP glycoprotein isozymes is present. Specifically, bone contains a heat-labile isozyme that is a tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP or liver/bone/kidney - L/B/K). Slight variations exist between the L/B/K ALPs from different tissues.

Immunochemical Markers

Immunochemical markers proposed to be of utility in identifying osteoblast precursors in either human or non-human models include: osterix, nestin, alpha smooth muscle actin, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) and paired related homeobox 1 (Prx1). Identifying pre-osteoblasts/osteoblasts include type I collagen, bone sialoprotein (BSP), osteocalcin (Oc), and osteopontin.

Fluorescent Protein Reporters

Fluorescent protein reporters have also proven useful and reliable for characterizing pre-osteoblasts (Col3.6) and mature osteoblasts (Col2.3, BSP, and Oc) in in vitro and in vivo applications. More recently, Roeder et al. proposed a novel method for introducing visual transgenes into the osteoblast cell lineage in murine models to explore and identify different stages of osteogenic lineage maturation.