The causes of hypocalcemia can be divided into three broad categories:

- PTH deficiency

- High PTH

- Other causes

**PTH Deficiency (low or low normal serum PTH)**

This occurs as a result of decreased PTH secretion, which can be due to destruction of the parathyroid glands (postsurgical or autoimmune), abnormal regulation of PTH production and secretion, or abnormal development of the parathyroid gland. Post-surgical is the most common cause of hypoparathyroidism.

- **Post-surgical:**This is the most common cause of hypoparathyroidism. It can occur after thyroidectomy, parathyroidectomy, or radical neck surgery. The normal parathyroid gland is made up of about 30% capillary cells. This makes the parathyroid gland very sensitive to disruption of arterial blood supply or venous drainage, which can result from mechanical, thermal, or electrical injury during thyroidectomy. The resulting hypoparathyroidism is usually transient but can also be permanent with subsequent transient or permanent hypocalcemia. Accidental removal of all 4 parathyroid glands during thyroidectomy, though not common, is also a major cause of hypoparathyroidism. Hypoparathyroidism after parathyroidectomy is usually a result of suppression of the remaining parathyroid glands by hypercalcemia from parathyroid adenoma before surgery. This is also transient in most cases but is usually permanent if all 4 glands are removed without autotransplantation of the parathyroid gland. In cases of severe hyperparathyroidism with significantly elevated PTH levels before surgery, as in tertiary hyperparathyroidism in kidney disease, the abrupt drop in PTH levels after surgery can lead to severe hypocalcemia due to unopposed osteoblast activity causing significant calcium uptake into the bones. This condition is termed “hungry bone syndrome.”

- **Autoimmune:**Autoantibodies against the parathyroid gland are the main cause of autoimmune hypoparathyroidism which can be a manifestation of polyglandular autoimmune syndrome type I along with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis and adrenal insufficiency.

- **Abnormal parathyroid gland development**: X-linked or autosomal recessive hypoparathyroidism causes abnormal parathyroid gland development. This can be isolated or associated with complex congenital syndromes like DiGeorge syndrome.

- **Parathyroid gland destruction:**This can also be due to rare causes such as infiltrative diseases of the parathyroid glands like granulomatous diseases, hemochromatosis, Wilson disease, or irradiation. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection is also a rare cause of symptomatic hypoparathyroidism. Lastly, activating mutation of calcium-sensing receptors (CaSR) decreases the setpoint of CaSR, causing hypoparathyroidism and hypocalcemia.

**High PTH Levels**

- **Absolute or relative vitamin D deficiency:**Vitamin D maintains normal calcium by enhancing intestinal calcium absorption and bone resorption. Vitamin D deficiency could be from decreased intake or malabsorption, inadequate sun exposure, liver disease, kidney disease results, and decrease conversion to its active metabolite (1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D). This can lead to decreased calcium absorption and bone resorption. The resulting hypocalcemia leads to a compensatory increase in PTH secretion (secondary hyperparathyroidism).

- **Chronic kidney disease (CKD):**CKD leads to impaired phosphate excretion and impaired hydroxylation of 25 hydroxyvitamin D to 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D. This drives PTH secretion and can cause secondary hyperparathyroidism. However, due to impaired vitamin D metabolism and high phosphorus level, the serum calcium remains low despite the high PTH

- **Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP):**This is a genetic disorder that causes end-organ resistance to the action of PTH and is characterized by hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and elevated PTH concentration.

**Other Causes**

- **Pseudohypocalcemia:**Serum calcium is normally bound to proteins in the blood, most prominently albumin, and therefore low albumin states can give a falsely low total serum calcium level. Ionized calcium level is usually normal in these states, and thus a correction of adding 0.8 mg/dL to serum calcium level for every 1gm drop in serum albumin below normal (4 gm/dL) is recommended.

- **Acidosis/alkalosis:**Calcium binding to albumin is dependent on the serum pH, and thus in states of severe acidosis, ionized calcium is increased and vice-versa decreased in severe alkalosis. There is no reliable correction factor to estimate this shift in ionized calcium level, so direct measurement of ionized calcium is recommended in these cases to guide therapy.

- **Acute pancreatitis:**Hypocalcemia is often seen in the setting of acute pancreatitis due to calcium deposition in the abdominal cavity as a result of ongoing inflammation.

- **Severe sepsis/critical illness:**Severe sepsis can lead to hypocalcemia through unclear mechanisms. Impaired PTH secretion, dysregulation of magnesium metabolism, and impaired calcitriol secretion have been identified as potential mechanisms, but none have been proven as of yet.

- **Hypomagnesemia/hypermagnesemia:**Low serum magnesium can cause hypocalcemia due to induced PTH resistance. This usually occurs when the serum magnesium level drops below 0.8 mEq/L (1 mg/dL or 0.4 mmol/L). Decreased PTH secretion can occur in more severe hypomagnesemia

- **Acute hyperphosphatemia:**This is an uncommon cause of hypocalcemia which is likely precipitated because of extravascular deposition of calcium phosphate products.

- **Drugs:**Bisphosphonates and denosumab both inhibit osteoclastic bone resorption, which can cause hypocalcemia which can be severe in some cases. Concomitant vitamin D deficiency makes hypocalcemia more likely to occur in patients treated with those drugs. Patients being treated with these agents should have their calcium and vitamin D levels checked, and low levels should be corrected before initiation of treatment. Cinacalcet is a calcimimetic agent that works by stimulating the CaSR and thus decreasing PTH secretion. It is used in the treatment of both primary and secondary hyperparathyroidism. The resulting decrease in PTH secretion can cause hypocalcemia. Cisplatin, a chemotherapeutic drug, can also cause hypocalcemia through hypomagnesemia. Foscarnet can cause hypocalcemia by forming complexes with ionized calcium, thereby reducing levels of ionized calcium. It is therefore important to regularly monitor calcium levels during treatment with all of the above-mentioned drugs.

- **Massive blood transfusion:**Massive blood transfusion can cause an acute decline in ionized calcium due to calcium binding with citrate, which is used as an anticoagulant in the stored blood.

- **Pregnancy**: There are reports of hypocalcemia during pregnancy, mostly related to poor diet, hyperemesis gravidarum, or underline diseases.

**Osteoblastic metastasis,**as in prostate cancer, can cause hypocalcemia which can be severe in rare cases. This is a result of increased calcium uptake into the bones from increased osteoblastic activity.