The etiology of intermittent exotropia is not very clearly defined. However, the following theories have been proposed by different researchers, which explains the underlying pathogenesis.

- **Innervational factors:**Duane proposed that exodeviations occur secondary to innervational imbalance, which upsets the reciprocal relationship between active convergence and divergence mechanisms.

- **Mechanical factors:**Bielschowsky suggested the role of the abnormal position of rest associated with exodeviations. This abnormal position is determined by anatomic and mechanical factors such as the orientation of orbit, shape, and size of orbits and globes, volume and viscosity of retrobulbar tissue, insertion, and functioning of the eye muscles, length, elasticity, the anatomical and structural arrangement of fascias and ligaments of the orbits.

- **Fusion faculty:**Any obstacle which causes disturbance in binocular vision can lead to deviation of eyes. A defect of the fusion faculty has been suggested as the essential cause of squint. An inadequate fusion faculty of eyes lead to an unstable state of equilibrium, and eyes deviate inwards or outwards even on slight provocation.

- **AC/A ratio:**Cooper and Medow proposed the role of high accommodative convergence/accommodation ratio in intermittent exotropias.

- **Refractive errors:**Underlying uncorrected refractive errors have been postulated as a mechanism for exodeviations. Among uncorrected myopes, lesser than normal accommodative effort is needed for near vision. This decreased accommodative convergence has been described as the underlying cause for increased exodeviations among myopes.

Anisomyopia and anisometropia result in unclear retinal images, which function as an obstacle to binocular fusion and thus facilitate suppression. This again predisposes to exodeviations.

- **Hemiretinal suppression:**Knapp and Jampolsky postulated bilateral, bitemporal hemiretinal suppression as the underlying mechanism which leads to progression from exophoria to intermittent exotropia.