# Continuing Education Activity

This activity reviews the role of cryoanalgesia (the use of cold temperatures for analgesia) for pain control, its indications, contraindications and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of patients with chronic pain.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the technique of cryoanalgesia.
- Describe the indications for cryoanalgesia.
- Review the complications of cryoanalgesia.
- Outline interprofessional team strategies for improving outcomes in patients undergoing cryoanalgesia.

# Introduction

The use of cold temperatures for analgesia has been in medical practice for thousands of years, with the first written account by Hippocrates where he described snow being carried down from high places and applied to wounds for pain control.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The anatomy to avoid is based on the planned procedure. Care should be taken to localize the target nerve with high fidelity, using ultrasound, fluoroscopy, imaging-guided or a nerve stimulator.

# Indications

Cryoanalgesia can be utilized for numerous persistent and intractable painful conditions, particularly when mediated by a peripheral nerve that can be confidently identified as the causative location. Common targets include:

- iliohypogastric nerves

- ilioinguinal nerves (laparotomy, nerve entrapment, post-therapeutic herniorrhaphy pain)

- intercostal nerves (neuralgia mastectomy and thoracotomy pain, rib fractures)

- pudendal nerves (perianal, rectal pain)

- lateral femoral cutaneous nerves (meralgia paresthetica)

- sacral nerve roots S4-5 (coccydynia)

Cryoanalgesia has also been shown to be beneficial for managing temporomandibular joint pain, paroxysmal trigeminal neuralgia, phantom limb pain, neuroma, and idiopathic neuralgia pain.

There are multiple acute pain indications for cryoanalgesia, including intra-operative cryoneurolysis of ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves for postherniorrhaphy pain

However, the use of cryoneurolysis for thoracotomy pain has fallen out of favor based on increased neuropathic pain at eight weeks postoperatively, though no difference was noted at six months.

Additionally, topical cryoanalgesia has been used in the treatment of painful cutaneous processes from intravenous access, joint aspiration, and neuropathic pain due to herpes zoster.

# Contraindications

Absolute contraindications to this procedure include:

- bleeding diathesis where bleeding would be catastrophic

- infection at the site

- patient refusal

Relative contraindications include:

- locations on the face or highly visible locations as there is a risk of hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation at the ablation site.

- Alopecia may also occur at the cryoablation site, which can be a concern for the eyebrow during supraorbital lesions.

- Postprocedural pain and damage to adjacent structures can occur

- Skin frostbite can occur if the lesion is too superficial.

- There are reports of moderate to severe neuralgia for intercostal cryoanalgesia for thoracotomy, making this a relative contraindication.

In the case of pneumothorax, patients should be placed on 100% oxygen to de-nitrogenate the pneumothorax (if nitrogen was used as the expansion gas).

# Equipment

A small-gauge needle is needed for local infiltration of skin. The method is to localize the nerve to be blocked, including but not limited to fluoroscopy, ultrasound, and nerve stimulators.

# Preparation

Preparation and patient positioning depend largely on the target location and the implicated nerve. Access to all necessary personnel and equipment should be verified. Room temperature gas should be purged from the system. Sedation is rarely required, and heavy sedation should be avoided to facilitate patient localization of stimuli. Appropriate informed consent should be obtained. The patient should be positioned comfortably. A pre-procedural pause and time-out is then performed, identifying correct patient, side, site, and allergies. Aseptic technique should be observed.

# Technique or Treatment

The nerve that is to be blocked is identified with fluoroscopy, ultrasound, nerve stimulation, or other reliable methods.

# Complications

Post-procedural complications include the usual complications of interventional procedures: bleeding, infection, and damage to adjacent tissue structures like muscle (myonecrosis).

# Clinical Significance

Cryoanalgesia has shown good postoperative pain reduction, with a possible increase in long-term pain when used intraoperatively.

Long-term postoperative pain scores may be worsened with intraoperative cryoanalgesia. A double-blind, randomized study of 42 patients after posterolateral thoracotomy found increased pain scores in the cryoanalgesia arm at eight weeks and statistically more neuropathic-type pain, this resolved at six months with no difference between groups.

For chronic pain, cryoanalgesia can be effective for lumbar facet pain, intercostal neuralgia, and phantom limb pain. In a retrospective study of 91 patients who underwent cryoneurolysis for lumbar facet pain, the mean pain scores (VAS) were decreased from 7.70 to 3.72 following treatment.

Cryoneurolysis is an old technique with many possible future applications. Data for its use is encouraging for postoperative pain, and in select groups, for chronic pain.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Cryoanalgesia was once used by several healthcare professionals to manage pain. However, today its use is limited because of better options. Healthcare workers like the primary care provider, pain specialist, anesthesiologist, anesthesia nurse and internist who use cryoanalgesia should educate the patient on possible complications that includes neuroma formation, which can be more painful than the original pain. Follow up of patients is important to ensure that they have acquired pain relief.