The principal cause of dystonia has been thought to be dysfunction of the basal ganglia, which emerged from the concept of the basal ganglia as the brain region responsible for integrating motor control. Also, secondary dystonia is often due to lesions of the basal ganglia, specifically the putamen or globus pallidus.

However, the absence of neurodegeneration in primary dystonia, as well as observations that lesions of brain regions other than the basal ganglia can cause secondary dystonia, has guided to the idea that dystonia is a neuro-functional disorder, i.e. a disorder characterized by abnormal connectivity that may occur in a structurally normal-appearing brain.

Dystonia is considered to be a motor system disorder rather than a disease of a particular motor structure. Studies have provided evidence of dysfunction in almost every region of the central nervous system involved in motor control and sensorimotor integration, including cortex, brainstem, cerebellum, and spinal cord.

Although standard MRIs have not revealed structural pathology, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) has shown subtle abnormalities in the sensorimotor circuitry of dystonia patients. In DYT 1 mutation carriers there is reduced functional anisotropy (FA) in a sub-gyral white matter of the primary sensorimotor cortex, pons and left superior cerebellar peduncle. Abnormal functional anisotropy has also been observed in the lentiform nucleus and the white matter adjacent to the nucleus in patients with focal dystonia.

Neurophysiological studies demonstrate a variety of changes consistent with abnormalities in inhibitory control, sensorimotor integration, and brain plasticity. The EMG in the dystonia show co-contraction of agonist and antagonist muscles with prolonged bursts and overflow to the muscles.

Dystonia is worsened by stress, fatigue, anxiety, or lack of sleep.