- Over 90% of all angiomyolipomas never need treatment.

- A number of experts recommend an evaluation of all patients with newly diagnosed angiomyolipomas for tuberous sclerosis.

- Conversely, all patients with tuberous sclerosis should be screened for angiomyolipomas.

- All patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis should receive renal imaging for angiomyolipomas.

- Asymptomatic patients with <2 lesions smaller than 4 cm are unlikely to have tuberous sclerosis.

- Consider a biopsy if the diagnosis cannot be reliably made from CT and MRI scanning alone.

- If the diagnosis is still in doubt, treat the lesion as a malignancy.

- Ultrasound is not sufficiently detailed to make a definitive diagnosis but can track previously diagnosed lesions.

- The risk of a percutaneous biopsy is no greater for patients with low-fat or invisible-fat angiomyolipomas than for other renal tumors.

- MRI imaging is more sensitive in detecting fat than CT and is, therefore, most useful for fat-poor lesions. (No imaging will show a fat-invisible lesion.)

- If all measures have failed to confirm a diagnosis reliably, treating the lesion as malignant is recommended.

- Active bleeding is best controlled with selective angiographic embolization, but there is a 30% retreatment rate.

- Surgical intervention with minimally invasive ablative techniques should be considered when possible.

- Women of childbearing age should consider prophylactic treatment of angiomyolipomas due to the high risk of complications during pregnancy.