# Continuing Education Activity

Hemorrhagic stroke is due to bleeding into the brain by the rupture of a blood vessel. Hemorrhagic stroke may be further subdivided into intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) and subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Hemorrhagic stroke is associated with severe morbidity and high mortality. Progression of hemorrhagic stroke is associated with worse outcomes. Early diagnosis and treatment are essential given the usual rapid expansion of hemorrhage, causing sudden deterioration of consciousness and neurological dysfunction. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the evaluation and treatment of hemorrhagic stroke.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the pathophysiology of hemorrhagic stroke.
- Identify the most common causes of hemorrhagic stroke and the most common site of the bleeding.
- Review the common presentations of this hemorrhagic stroke.
- CT scan is the initial investigation of choice. Prompt medical, sometimes surgical (in indicated cases), management is needed for recovery from hemorrhagic stroke.

# Introduction

**Cerebrovascular accident (CVA)**, otherwise called a stroke, is the third major cause of morbidity and mortality in many developed countries. Stroke can be either ischemic or hemorrhagic. Ischemic stroke is due to the loss of blood supply to an area of the brain. It is a common type of stroke.

**Hemorrhagic stroke**is due to bleeding into the brain by the rupture of a blood vessel. Hemorrhagic stroke may be further subdivided into intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) and subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). ICH is bleeding into the brain parenchyma, and SAH is bleeding into the subarachnoid space. Hemorrhagic stroke is associated with severe morbidity and high mortality.

# Etiology

**Hypertension**is the most common cause of hemorrhagic stroke.

- Longstanding hypertension produces degeneration of media, breakage of the elastic lamina, and fragmentation of smooth muscles of arteries.

- Lipohyalinosis, fibrinoid necrosis of the subendothelium, microaneurysms, and focal dilatations are seen in the arterioles. The microaneurysms are named as Charcot-Bouchard aneurysms.

- The common sites of hypertension-induced intracerebral hemorrhage are the small penetrating arteries originating from basilar arteries or the anterior, middle, or posterior cerebral arteries.

- Small artery branches of 50 to 700 μm in diameter often have multiple sites of rupture associated with layers of platelet and fibrin aggregates.

- Hypertensive change causes non-lobar intracranial hemorrhage (ICH). As seen in eclampsia, acute hypertension can also cause ICH, known as postpartum ICH.

**Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA)**is an important cause of primary lobar intracerebral bleeding in older adults.

- It is characterized by the deposition of the amyloid-β peptide in the capillaries, arterioles, and small- and medium-sized arteries in the cerebral cortex, leptomeninges, and cerebellum.

- This causes ICH in older adults, commonly associated with variations in the gene encoding apolipoprotein E.

- A familial syndrome can occur in young patients, typically associated with mutations in the gene encoding amyloid precursor protein.

- The incidence of CAA increases with age to the extent that around 50% of those aged more than 70years have CAA. Recurrent hemorrhages can occur due to CAA.

**Other Important Risk Factors**

- Cigarette smoking and moderate or heavy alcohol consumption, and chronic alcoholism are significant risk factors.

- Chronic liver disease also increases the chance of ICH due to coagulopathy and thrombocytopenia.

- Decreased low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and low triglycerides are also risk factors.

- Dual antiplatelet therapy has an increased risk of ICH than monotherapy.

- Sympathomimetics such as cocaine, heroin, amphetamine, ephedrine, and phenylpropanolamine carry an increased risk of a cerebral hemorrhage.

- Cerebral microbleeds (CMBs) associated with hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cigarette smoking increase the risk of ICH.

- Old age and male sex. The incidence of ICH increases after 55 years of age. The relative risk after 70 years is 7.

- The tumors which are more prone to bleed are glioblastoma, lymphoma, metastasis, meningioma, pituitary adenoma, and hemangioblastoma.

The usual causes of spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) are ruptured aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, vasculitis, cerebral artery dissection, dural sinus thrombosis, and pituitary apoplexy. The risk factors are hypertension, oral contraceptive pills, substance abuse, and pregnancy.

Intracranial hemorrhage of pregnancy (ICHOP-intracerebral or subarachnoid hemorrhage) occurs with eclampsia. It is due to the loss of cerebrovascular autoregulation.

# Epidemiology

Hemorrhagic stroke contributes to 10% to 20% of strokes annually.

# Pathophysiology

The common sites of the bleed are the basal ganglia (50%), cerebral lobes (10% to 20%), the thalamus (15%), pons and the brain stem (10% to 20%), and the cerebellum(10%)(fig.1,2,3).

The primary injury is due to the compression of brain tissue by the hematoma and an increase in the intracranial pressure(ICP).

Secondary injury is contributed to by inflammation, disruption of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), edema, overproduction of free radicals such as reactive oxygen species (ROS), glutamate-induced excitotoxicity, and release of hemoglobin and iron from the clot.

Usually, the hematoma enlarges in 3 hours to 12 hours. The enlargement of hematoma occurs in 3 hours in one-third of cases. The perihematomal edema increases within 24 hours, peaks around 5 to 6 days, and lasts up to 14 days. There is an area of hypoperfusion around the hematoma. The factors causing deterioration in ICH are an expansion of hematoma, intraventricular hemorrhage, perihematomal edema, and inflammation.

Non-aneurysmal spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage may be either perimesencephalic or non-perimesencephalic SAH. In perimesencephalic SAH, bleeding is mainly in the interpeduncular cistern. Physical exertion, such as the Valsalva maneuver producing increased intrathoracic pressure, and elevated intracranial venous pressure, is a predisposing factor for perimesencephalic nonaneurysmal SAH (PM-SAH).

# History and Physical

The common presentations of stroke are headache, aphasia, hemiparesis, and facial palsy.

- Headache is more common in a large hematoma.

- Vomiting indicates raised intracranial pressure and is common with cerebellar hematoma.

- Coma occurs in the involvement of the reticular activating system of the brainstem.

- Seizure, aphasia, and hemianopia are seen in lobar hemorrhage. A prodrome consisting of numbness, tingling, and weakness may also occur in lobar bleed.

- Contralateral sensorimotor deficits are the features in hemorrhage of the basal ganglia and thalamus.

- Loss of all sensory modalities is the main feature of thalamic hemorrhage.

- Extension of thalamic hematoma into the midbrain can cause vertical gaze palsy, ptosis, and unreactive pupil.

- Cranial nerve dysfunction with contralateral weakness indicates brainstem hematoma.

- Usually, pontine hematoma produces coma and quadriparesis.

Cerebellar hemorrhage produces symptoms of raised ICP, such as lethargy, vomiting, and bradycardia. Progressive neurological deterioration indicates the enlargement of hematoma or an increase in edema.

The clinical features of subarachnoid hemorrhage are severe headache described as a thunderclap, vomiting, syncope, photophobia, nuchal rigidity, seizures, and decreased level of consciousness.

# Evaluation

Computerized tomography (CT) is usually the initial investigation.

In the subacute phase, the hematoma may be isodense to brain tissue, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be necessary. The volume of the hematoma can be measured by the formula AxBxC/2, where A and B are the largest diameter and the diameter perpendicular to that.

Extravasation of contrast in CT angiogram (CTA) indicates ongoing bleeding associated with fatality.

Certain imaging characteristics help in the differentiation of the underlying disease.

- Multiple hemorrhages of different ages in parieto-occipital lobes are seen in cerebral amyloid antipathy.

- Hemorrhage in an arterial territory indicates hemorrhagic infarction.

- Multiple stages of bleed in the same hematoma with a fluid level are seen in anticoagulation-induced hemorrhages.

- A combination of small ischemic and hemorrhagic lesions indicates vasculitis.

- Hemorrhage in the presence of occlusion of arteries is the feature of Moyamoya disease.

Four-vessel digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is necessary in the case of SAH. A repeat study is needed to confirm if the DSA is negative for an aneurysm. Repeat angiography is advisable at 1-week and 6-weeks intervals.

Vascular abnormalities need to be suspected if the following findings are present on a plain CT scan:

- Subarachnoid hemorrhage

- Enlarged vessels or calcifications along the margins of the ICH

- Hyperattenuation within a dural venous sinus

- A cortical vein along the presumed venous drainage path

- Unusual hematoma shape

- Presence of edema out of proportion to the time of presumed ICH

- An unusual hemorrhage location

- Presence of other abnormal structures in the brain (like a mass)

An additional MRI scan will be beneficial in the following circumstances to identify a secondary cause for ICH:

- Lobar hemorrhage location

- Age <55 years, and

- No history of hypertension

Magnetic resonance venography or CT venography is indicated based on the following conditions that suggest cerebral venous thrombosis:

- Hemorrhage location

- Relative edema volume

- Abnormal signal in the cerebral sinuses

Blood investigations such as bleeding time, clotting time, platelet count, peripheral smear, prothrombin time (PT), and activated partial thromboplastin time(aPTT) will detect any abnormality of bleeding or coagulation and any hematological disorder which can cause hemorrhage. Liver function tests and renal function tests are also needed to exclude any hepatic or renal dysfunction as a cause. The investigations to rule out vasculitis are the quantitative evaluation of immunoglobulins, thyroid antibodies, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-double-stranded DNA (ds-DNA antibodies), Histon antibodies, complement, anti-Ro [SS-A] and anti-La [SS-B-] antibodies, cytoplasmic staining and perinuclear staining antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (c- and pANCA), and anti-endothelial antibodies.

# Treatment / Management

There are many different opinions on the treatment of hemorrhagic stroke. There are many trials on the optimal management of hemorrhagic stroke - Antihypertensive Treatment in Acute Cerebral Hemorrhage(ATACH), Intensive Blood Pressure Reduction in Acute Cerebral Hemorrhage Trial (INTERACT), Factor VIIa for Acute Hemorrhagic Stroke Treatment (FAST), and Surgical Trial in Intracerebral Haemorrhage (STICH).

**Blood pressure (BP) Management**

BP should be reduced gradually to 150/90 mmHg using beta-blockers (labetalol, esmolol), ACE inhibitor (enalapril), calcium channel blocker (nicardipine), or hydralazine.

**Management of Raised Intracranial Pressure (ICP)**

The initial treatment for raised ICP is elevating the head of the bed to 30 degrees and using osmotic agents (mannitol, hypertonic saline). Mannitol 20% is given at a dose of 1.0 to 1.5 g/kg.

**Hemostatic Therapy**

Hemostatic therapy is given to reduce the progression of hematoma.

**Antiepileptic Therapy**

Around 3 to 17% of patients will have a seizure in the first two weeks, and 30% of patients will show electrical seizure activity on EEG monitoring.**C**ontinuous EEG monitoring is indicated in patients with a decreased level of consciousness. Otherwise, prophylactic anticonvulsant medication is not recommended, according to ASA guidelines.

**Surgery**

The different types of surgical treatment for hemorrhagic stroke are craniotomy, decompressive craniectomy, stereotactic aspiration, endoscopic aspiration, and catheter aspiration.

Minimally invasive surgery plus recombinant tissue plasminogen activator(rt-PA) for Intracerebral Hemorrhage Evacuation (MISTIE) was a randomized, prospective trial that tested image-guided catheter-based removal of the blood clot.

The Clot Lysis: Evaluating Accelerated Resolution of IntraVentricularr Hemorrhage (CLEAR IVH) trial showed that low-dose rt-PA can be safely administered to stable intraventricular clots and can increase lysis rates.

**Cerebroprotection**

The secondary injury of hemorrhagic stroke comprises inflammation, oxidative stress, and toxicity of erythrocyte lysates and thrombin. So, strategies to reduce these are being tried. Pioglitazone, misoprostol, and celecoxib are tried to reduce inflammatory damage. Edaravone, flavanoid, and nicotinamide mononucleotide can reduce oxidative stress. The iron chelator deferoxamine is also in the experimental phase. The safety and neuroprotective efficacy of the cell membrane component citicoline (cytidine-5-diphosphocholine) has been shown in some studies.

**General Care**

Good medical care, nursing care, and rehabilitation are paramount.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnoses of hemorrhagic stroke are:

- Acute hypertensive crisis

- Pituitary apoplexy

- Cerebral venous thrombosis

- Dural sinus thrombosis

- Cervical artery dissection

- Reversible cerebral vasoconstrictive syndrome (RCVS)

- Hemorrhagic neoplasms

- Arterio-venous malformations

- Meningitis

- Acute subdural hematoma

- Hemorrhagic infarct

Imaging studies such as CT and MRI can rule out these entities.

# Prognosis

The poor prognostic factors are coma, large hematoma with volume greater than 30 ml, intraventricular hemorrhage, posterior fossa hemorrhage, old age greater than 80 years, hyperglycemia, and chronic kidney disease.

ICH score introduced by Hemphill et al. predicts mortality.

# Complications

Complications of ICH include cerebral edema, increased intracranial pressure, hydrocephalus, seizures, venous thrombotic events, hyperglycemia, increased blood pressure, fever, and infections.

Vasospasm, ischemia, rebleeding, seizure, hyponatremia, and hydrocephalus are the complications of SAH. Neurogenic pulmonary edema, an increase in interstitial and alveolar fluid, commonly occurs in subarachnoid hemorrhage.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

There is a chance of recurrence of ICH. Hypertension and old age are risk factors. BP should be controlled. Lifestyle modifications should be advised, including avoidance of alcohol, tobacco, and illicit drugs. Continued multidisciplinary rehabilitation should be done.

The following are the possible risk factors for a recurrent ICH:

- Lobar location of the initial ICH

- Older age

- Presence and number of microbleeds on gradient echo MRI

- Ongoing anticoagulation

- Presence of apolipoprotein E epsilon 2 or epsilon 4 alleles

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients with hemorrhagic stroke should be managed in a dedicated stroke unit with emergency and critical care, neurology and neurosurgery, and neuroradiology for the best outcome. The intensivists, physicians, and critical care nurses should be well versed in emergency neurological life support (ENLS). This is especially necessary in low- and middle-income countries. The surgical methods should be done and assessed in a standardized manner. More trials are needed to confirm the role and usefulness of surgical interventions. Cognitive rehabilitation therapy (CRT) also should be given to the survivors.