Many studies have shown that low HDL levels are inversely related to coronary heart disease (CHD). A study published in 1977, titled The Cooperative Lipoprotein Phenotyping Study, included 6859 men and women. It showed an inverse relationship between HDL-C levels and CHD prevalence, despite adjusting for LDL-C and triglyceride levels.

The Münster Heart Study (PROCAM) concluded that participants with a serum HDL cholesterol level <35 mg/dL had a 3-fold greater risk for developing coronary artery disease compared to participants who had HDL cholesterol levels >35 mg/dL.

The Framingham Heart Study described the higher cardiovascular disease risk related to a low HDL cholesterol level, regardless of LDL cholesterol levels. In all tertiles of LDL cholesterol levels of participants, the relative risk of a cardiac event increased as HDL cholesterol levels decreased.

A meta-analysis of four prospective American studies (Framingham Heart Study, Lipid Research Clinics Prevalence Mortality Follow-up Study, Coronary Primary Prevention Trial, Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial) was published by Gordon et al. in 1989. An increase of 1 mg/dL of HDL cholesterol was associated with a significant coronary heart disease risk decrease of 2% in men and 3% in women.

A study published in April 2022 by Dong et al. showed that many gene loci identified with low HDL levels are associated with various types of cancer.

Genes with the highest prevalence of damaging variants were:

- ABCA1 (Chronic myelogenous leukemia)

- Stab1 (Bladder cancer and Acute Myelogenous Leukemia)

- OSBPL1A

- CPS1 (Hepatocellular carcinoma)

- CD36 (Ovarian cancer)

- LRP1

- ABCA8 (Hepatocellular carcinoma)

- GOT2

- AMPD3 (Gastrointestinal stromal tumors and lung cancers)

- WWOX

- IRS1 (Medulloblastoma, breast cancer, and osteosarcoma)

A large-population study by Pedersen et al. revealed substantial increases in tumor growth associated with low HDL levels. The increased risk was most documented in hematological and nervous system cancers. It was also seen to a minor extent for breast and lung cancer.