Modern-day psychiatric treatment often involves teams nested within larger systems.

Transference issues between provider and patient may influence interactions with other providers on the treatment team. Patients may view their treatment team as a surrogate family, which can be a conscious or unconscious process. Team members' awareness of the patient's family of origin and transference can provide context for a patient's differential reaction to individual providers.

The following case example may serve to illustrate these points: a patient, who was raised by an abusive parent, experiences a transference reaction towards their advanced practice provider (APP) as a similarly domineering and abusive parent. During the session, the patient appears curt with the APP, despite the prompt diagnosis, medication recommendation, and prescription. Both patient and provider remain unaware of the patient's transference. While at the pharmacy, the patient perceives the pharmacist as similar to their benevolent sibling from their family of origin, who was a strong support during the abuse. The pharmacist provides a list of common side effects for the patient during a brief medication education session.

The patient begins the medication and experiences similar side effects. Because of the initial negative transference to the prescriber, the patient experiences these side effects as "abuse" by the APP, and the patient feels unsafe discussing this with the APP, as they did with their abusive parent. Instead, the patient speaks with the pharmacist, criticizing the APP's decision-making and competence. The patient praises the pharmacist for warning about these potential side effects. Unaware of their countertransference reaction, the pharmacist feels flattered and unknowingly contributes to a split within the treatment team. Also unaware of the complicated emotional territory they are in, the pharmacist does not reach out to the APP and begins to question the provider's competence.

Over time the patient continues to privately devalue the APP and becomes nonadherent with the treatment. Since the patient does not disclose their misgivings about treatment to the APP, the prescriber is unable to address the emotional issues in the background. After several months the pharmacist becomes aware of the patient's nonadherence and attempts to confront it. The patient feels betrayed and isolated by the pharmacist's actions, perceiving this as their once-supportive sibling taking the side of their abusive parent. The patient subsequently attempts self-harm, leading to psychiatric hospitalization.

This case provides an example of the so-called "drama triangle," as first described in the 1960s by Stephen Karpman.

In this case, the lack of awareness of transference and countertransference led to an adverse outcome and aided a lack of communication in this case. Earlier intervention at several points could have prevented this outcome. Attention to transference may have led to the APP focusing first on therapeutic alliance and addressing the transference before initiating medication. The pharmacist's recognition of their countertransference may have led to recognizing a split sooner, and in turn, the pharmacist may have reached out to the APP to collaborate openly. The pharmacist could then empathically facilitate a discussion between the APP and the patient. Pharmacists are essential intermediaries between patients and providers.

APP could also have recommended therapy before starting the medication, where the patient's transferential reaction is explored. Many other team members can utilize these techniques, including psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, nursing staff, case managers, sitters, front desk staff, concierge, and security staff. [Level 4]

Providing treatment that facilitates emotional expression from the patient can augment treatment effectiveness and outcomes.

Awareness and management of these countertransference reactions can facilitate bonding between providers and patients, reduce confrontation and increase patient satisfaction. Consultation between providers about countertransference reactions can provide support for each healthcare team member, enhance an understanding of the patient and presenting issues, and facilitate a unified front.

Systems psychodynamics is another field that discusses psychodynamic principles and how they may apply in various systems. Systems psychodynamics combines the practice of psychodynamics along with group relations theory and perspectives on open systems; it was initially developed in the late 1800s and early 1900s using these developing theories and practices, with open systems theory having origins at least as far back as Plato's Republic.

According to this theory, transference and defense mechanisms can interact between each individual in the organization and towards leadership, which can subsequently affect individuals in other parts of the organization. Unconscious processes can therefore impact others in a group. A proposed view of residential treatment from a systems psychodynamics approach has been discussed in the literature.

In this model of care, each provider works individually with the patient and collectively as a group to deliver thoughtful, empathic care. Providers in this model include therapists, social workers, nurses, activity program managers, dietary staff, and support staff. This model has been proposed to help with treatment-resistant patients and has shown benefits in case studies. [Level 5]

Systems psychodynamics has also been used to help augment nursing students' experiences with preceptorship via an understanding of conscious personal and professional development as well as unconscious contributors to difficulties in taking on professional roles.

Nursing practice that is informed by transference can help foster nurse-patient relationships. This has been primarily discussed in the context of psychiatric nursing and can also be applied to medical-surgical floors.

There is evidence that psychodynamic psychotherapy may help reduce healthcare utilization and cost.

Integration of psychodynamics and neuroscience has also been offered as a method to provide holistic and antireductionistic education to psychiatry residents.