No single definitive test is available for diagnosing pulmonary edema but clinically one proceeds from simple to the more complex tests while searching for the diagnosis and the associated etiology.

**Blood Tests**

- CBC (to rule out anemia and sepsis)

- Serum electrolytes (patients on diuretic therapy may have disturbances )

- Pulse oximetry and ABGs (assessing hypoxia and oxygen saturation)

- BNP (brain natriuretic peptide levels: low levels rule out cardiogenic type )

**ECG**

Used to rule out ischemic changes and rhythm abnormalities.

**Radiologic Investigations**

Chest X-ray (It is one of the most important investigations required for the evaluation of pulmonary edema and overload states.

Early Stage

- In the early stages, cardiomegaly is present, usually identified as an increase of cardiothoracic ratio over 50%.

- Broad vascular pedicle

- Vascular redistribution

- Cephalization

Intermediate Stage

- Interstitial edema

- Kerley B lines

- Peribronchial cuffing

- Thickened interlobar fissure

Late Stage

- Alveolar edema

- Perihilar batwing appearance

- Pleural effusion

**Ultrasonography**

Ultrasonography may be helpful in further strengthening of diagnosis. Transthoracic ultrasound usually differentiates COPD from CCF as a cause of acute exacerbation of chronic dyspnea.

**Echocardiography**

Extremely important in determining the etiology of cardiogenic pulmonary edema. It differentiates systolic from diastolic dysfunction and valvular lesions.

- Cardiac tamponade

- Acute papillary muscle rupture

- Acute ventricular septal defect

- Valvular lesions

**Invasive Technique**

**Pulmonary Arterial Catheter**

A Swan-Ganz catheter is inserted into the peripheral vein and advanced further till the branch of the pulmonary artery is reached, and then the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is measured.