TSH level needs to be measured. Total or free T4, total or free T3 can be obtained if TSH is abnormal. Alternatively, free T4, free T3, and TSH can be measured at once to assess thyroid hormone status. At the initial evaluation, some healthcare professionals also obtain anti-thyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO) and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies to assess for Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, which may coexist with substernal goiter.

A thyroid ultrasound is recommended to assess the cervical component of the goiter. Thyroid ultrasound cannot assess the extent and characteristics of the intrathoracic portion of the substernal goiter, because ultrasound waves cannot penetrate bone and do not propagate well through the air in the lungs.

Chest X-ray may show an upper mediastinal mass and tracheal deviation and/or compression.

The preferred imaging modality is computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the chest. They accurately assess the size and extent of substernal goiter and its relationship with other anatomic structures. Iodinated contrast use for CT scanning can induce hyperthyroidism and precludes nuclear medicine thyroid scan until iodine load is cleared from the body. Nuclear medicine thyroid (iodine or technetium) scan may show thyroid tissue in the thoracic cavity. The absence of uptake may indicate a cold nodule in the mediastinum and does not rule out substernal goiter.

Barium esophagography or upper endoscopy can be considered if the predominant symptom is dysphagia, but none of them are routine.

The most important and recommended imaging modality is CT of the chest. CT allows for characterization of the thyroid mass, its size, morphology, anatomic relationship with surrounding structures, enables detection of tracheal deviation, and quantification of tracheal compression. If the tracheal dimension is 10 mm or less, surgical intervention is required.

A pulmonary function test with a flow-volume loop study is required. Even if the patient has no symptoms, pulmonary function tests may be abnormal. Substernal goiter may cause a blunted flow-volume loop with an almost equal degree of flow limitation in both inspiration and expiration with flattening of both limbs of the flow-volume loop, indicating a mechanical fixed upper airway obstruction. Pulmonary function tests are helpful to differentiate from other causes of dyspnea, like COPD.

Thyroid cancer has been reported in 0-19% of substernal goiters.