Most Americans consume only half the levels of recommended fiber per day, which is almost 15 grams per day.

There is not a single universally accepted definition for fiber. In 1953, Hinsley first defined dietary fiber as a “non-digestible constituent that makes up the plant cell wall.”

Dietary fibers are defined as follows:

Based on availability in nature,

- Dietary fiber: This consists of non-digestible carbohydrates and lignin that are intrinsic and intact in plants. The term non-digestible refers to the material that is not digested or absorbed in the human small bowel. Non-digestible plant carbohydrates are components of the plant cell walls and intercellular structures that maintain their three-dimensional properties even after mechanical treatment.

- Added fiber: These are indigestible carbohydrates isolated or extracted from animal or plant sources and have beneficial physiological effects in humans. These include attenuation of blood glucose and cholesterol levels and improved laxation. Synthetically manufactured non-digestible carbohydrates like resistant starch are also included in this category. An essential aspect of defining added fiber relative to its physiological benefits is that extraction or isolation of fiber by chemical means can either enhance or diminish its beneficial effects. Any fiber synthesized in the lab cannot be listed under fiber until it demonstrates the health benefits.

Based on physicochemical properties;

- Soluble fiber: They are water-soluble and derived from the inner flesh of plants such as pectin, gums, and mucilage. They form a viscous gel and are usually fermented by bacteria in the colon into gases and by-products such as short-chain fatty acids. They alter the blood glucose and cholesterol concentrations.

- Fruits

- Oat

- Barley

- Legumes, peas, and beans

- Vegetables such as broccoli and carrots

- Most root vegetables

2. Insoluble fibers: They derive from the outer skin of plants. They are insoluble in water and usually cannot undergo fermentation by bacteria in the colon. As a result, they form the bulk of the stool and promote laxation. Cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin are insoluble fibers.

- Cellulose:  Corn bran, potatoes, and skin of most fruits from trees such as apples, banana, and avocado, many green vegetables such as zucchini, green beans, celery, and cauliflower, some fruit plants such as tomatoes and kiwi.

- Hemicellulose: whole grains

- Lignin: nuts and seeds