The St. Jude staging system is routinely used for pediatric patients, whereas the Ann Arbor system and Murphy staging system are commonly used for adults. The Ann Arbor system accounts for the patient’s symptoms. The Murphy staging system is used because of its emphasis on extranodal disease, and for distinguishing bone marrow involvement from central nervous system disease. Because of the aggressive nature of the disease in adult patients, staging should be performed using bone marrow, and lumbar puncture samples and treatment started immediately after confirmation of diagnosis.

**St. Jude/Murphy Staging System (Children)
**

- Stage I: A single tumor (extranodal) or a single anatomical area (nodal), excluding mediastinum or abdomen or a tumor (extranodal) with regional node involvement, on the same side of the diaphragm.

- Stage II: A single tumour (extranodal) with regional node involvement, lymph node involvement on same side of the diaphragm (two or more nodal areas or two single extranodal tumours, with or without regional node involvement), or a primary gastrointestinal tract tumour (usually ileocecal) with or without associated mesenteric node involvement, grossly completely resected.

- Stage III: On both sides of the diaphragm (two or more nodal areas or two single extranodal tumours), all primary intrathoracic tumours (e.g., mediastinal or pleural thymic), all extensive primary intraabdominal disease; unresectable abdominal disease, even if only in one area, or all primary paraspinal or epidural tumours, irrespective of other sites.

- Stage IV: Any of the above with initial CNS or bone marrow involvement (only if less than 25% of the marrow is composed of Burkitt cells).

**Murphy System (Adult)
**

- Stage I: Single nodal or extranodal site excluding the mediastinum or abdomen.

- Stage II: Two or more nodal areas on one side of the diaphragm.

- Stage IIR: Completely resectable abdominal disease

- Stage III: Two or more nodal areas on opposite sides of the diaphragm, or a primary intrathoracic tumor, paraspinal or epidural tumors, extensive intra-abdominal disease

- Stage IIIA: Completely non-resectable abdominal disease

- Stage IIIB: Widespread multiorgan intra-abdominal disease

- Stage IV: Central nervous system or bone marrow involvement

Favorable: Stage I or IIR

**Ann Arbor System (Adult)
**

- Stage 1: Single nodal or extranodal site

- Stage II: Two or more nodal areas on one side of the diaphragm, or localized involvement of an extra-lymphatic site and one or more sites on the same side of the diaphragm (IIE)

- Stage III: Two or more nodal areas on opposite sides of the diaphragm which may include/ involvement of the spleen (IIIs), or localized involvement of an extranodal site (IIIE)

- Stage IV: Diffuse or disseminated involvement of one or more extra-lymphatic sites, or two single extranodal tumors on opposite sides of the diaphragm

Favorable: Stage I, II, III