Considering all the behavioral, bodily, and lifestyle changes associated with weight loss procedures, it is no surprise that the psychological care of a bariatric patient plays a major role in both the pre- and postoperative setting. Preop psychological evaluation is advised to ensure patients are prepared for such a dramatic undertaking. Patients suffering from a major depressive disorder, substance abuse, or binge eating disorder may require further psychiatric care or even be disqualified from surgery.

Even considering the physical and emotional stress associated with bariatric surgery, most patients experience an improved quality of life with enrichment of their psychosocial functioning, mood, self-image, and perceived health. In addition, patients have superior mobility and reduction in anxiety that translates into expanded confidence and interaction with others, ultimately resulting in amplified productivity and economic opportunities.

While bariatric surgery has known medical, surgical, and nutrition-related complications, it has been proven to have a positive effect on patients' longevity, comorbidities, and quality of life. A team comprised of surgeons, internists, dieticians, and psychologists, in addition to a strong emotional support group, are essential for optimal outcomes following weight loss surgery. With close monitoring, surgical, medical, and nutritional complications can be identified and remedied with minimal sequelae. With continued psychologic support, patients are prepared for lifestyle changes that will aid in successful weight loss and, ultimately, improved confidence and productivity. If properly selected preoperatively and properly monitored postoperatively, bariatric patients will surely reap the benefits of weight loss surgery.