The valvular vegetations associated with PVE are usually larger than those found in native valve endocarditis (NVE). For the antibiotics to penetrate the total vegetation, they should be used in the dosages, which result in maximum, non-toxic serum concentrations.

When starting the treatment for a patient with PVE, it is required to identify the causing microorganism, select the appropriate antibiotic, evaluate for any complications of the endocarditis, and evaluate the need for surgical intervention if the antibiotics treatment fails, the infection causes a valvular abscess.

Empiric treatment with antibiotics should be started after 3 blood cultures are obtained. This treatment should consider coverage of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. This empiric treatment should include vancomycin, gentamycin, and anti-pseudomonal carbapenem or cefepime. When the causing organism is identified, treatment should be tailored towards the coverage of this causative agent. American Heart Association recommends at least six weeks of antibiotics treatment.

When PVE is caused by staphylococcus, recommendations from AHA are to start triple antibiotical treatment.S. aureus or S. epidermidis, the susceptibility to methicillin is the main consideration in selecting the combination therapy. When PVE is caused by methicillin-sensitive staphylococcus, the triple antibiotic regimen will include nafcillin or oxacillin (total of six weeks) combined with both gentamicin (which is given for the first 2 weeks of treatment only) and rifampin (total of six weeks of treatment). If the patient reports being allergic to penicillin without evidence of anaphylaxis, a first-generation cephalosporin should be the next choice.

In the case of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus, vancomycin should be combined with both gentamycin and rifampin. If the bacteria is resistant to gentamycin, another aminoglycoside should be selected depending on the antibiotic susceptibilities.

In streptococcal induced PVE, the combination therapy with a beta-lactam antibiotic and an aminoglycoside is the treatment of choice. This combination provides a synergistic killing of the causative bacteria.

If the streptococcus is resistant to penicillin, an aminoglycoside can be used alone for the entire treatment duration.

In enterococcal induced PVE, the combination of cell wall-active agent (penicillin, ampicillin, or vancomycin) and an aminoglycoside (gentamycin or streptomycin) is considered. In penicillin allergy, vancomycin is considered a better alternative than cephalosporine combined with an aminoglycoside, as cephalosporins are not effective against enterococcus.

In the setting of aminoglycoside resistance, the enterococcus PVE should be treated with a cell wall-active agent (penicillin, ampicillin, or vancomycin) alone for a longer period (8 to 12) weeks.

In the setting of vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VRE), daptomycin and linezolid are considered acceptable choices for treatment.

When PVE is caused by Haemophilus, Aggregatibacter (previously Actinobacillus), Cardiobacterium, Eikenella, or Kingella (HACEK), third-generation cephalosporins are usually the first line of treatment and used for a total treatment period of six weeks. Ampicillin can be used if the organism showed sensitivity to the cultures. A fluoroquinolone can be used in the case of allergy to cephalosporins and ampicillin.

Treatment of gram-negative bacilli induced PVE is usually combination therapy with a beta-lactam (penicillins, cephalosporins, or carbapenems) and either a fluoroquinolone or an aminoglycoside. The recommended duration of treatment is 6 weeks.

For patients with culture-negative PVE onset ≤1 year, the antibiotics coverage should consider the possibility of infection due to staphylococci, enterococci, and aerobic gram-negative bacilli. The antibiotics combination should include vancomycin, gentamicin, cefepime, and rifampin as per AHA recommendations.

AHA recommends patients with culture-negative PVE onset >1 year after surgery to receive infection coverage due to staphylococci, viridans group streptococci, enterococci, and HACEK organisms. The empiric combination should include vancomycin and ceftriaxone.

AHA recommends repeating 2 blood cultures every 24 to 48 hours till blood cultures are negative and start the count of antibiotics treatment days after the first negative blood culture is achieved.

Early surgical intervention for PVE is indicated if:

- The patient develops heart failure due to valve dehiscence, the development of intracardiac fistula, or the presence of severe prosthetic valve dysfunction.

- The presence of persistent bacteremia for 5 to 7 days after the appropriate antibiotic regimen, with other bacteremia sources, is excluded.

- Evidence of heart block, development of abscess (annular or aortic), or presence of destructive penetrating lesions

- Fungi or highly resistant bacterial organisms cause the PVE.

Early surgery is reasonable in PVE in the following scenarios: developing recurrent emboli despite the appropriate antibiotic treatment, relapsing PVE, or large mobile vegetations >10 mm.

Surgical intervention decreases the mortality when performed on patients with PVE who develop heart failure.

Paravalvular invasion of the PVE can be manifested as a complete heart block, annular or aortic abscess, destructive penetrating lesions, or an intracardiac fistula. These complications require early complex reconstructive surgery, which can improve the survival rate by 80%.

S. aureus PVE is associated with high mortality, and often early surgery is indicated when complications are present. Such an early surgical approach was associated with decreased mortality in these patients. Other organisms that may require early surgical intervention are gram-negative (non-HACEK) microorganisms ( Pseudomonas aeruginosa and multidrug-resistant gram-negative bacilli), multidrug-resistant enterococci, and fungi.

After the surgical intervention is completed, six weeks of intravenous antibiotics are recommended if the intraoperative valve culture was positive.