The management of global brain ischemia is generally targeted at correcting the underlying cause. Supportive care should be undertaken to ensure adequate cerebral blood flow; this may be facilitated by placing the patient flat or in the Trendelenburg position while other supportive measures are being taken.

In the case of acute ischemic stroke, the first priority is determining whether the patient is a candidate for acute reperfusion therapy. Intravenous thrombolytics have been in use for the treatment of acute ischemic stroke for more than 25 years. Tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) is currently the only thrombolytic agent approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the management of acute ischemic stroke, though studies into the efficacy of tenecteplase are underway.

For patients with acute ischemic stroke due to occlusion of a large vessel, mechanical thrombectomy may be indicated. As discussed above, determining whether a patient is a candidate for thrombectomy relies on the time of symptom onset, the severity of the patient's deficits, the location of the large vessel occlusion, and the viability of the ischemic tissue. Patients with suspected large vessel occlusion should be transferred to a comprehensive stroke center or thrombectomy-capable center as soon as feasible. However, the decision to transfer the patient should not delay or preclude treatment with thrombolytics if the patient also meets the criteria for TPA.

Outside of the acute period, the treatment of ischemic stroke is focused on secondary prevention and promoting recovery. A thorough medical history is necessary to evaluate stroke risk factors, including diabetes mellitus, hypertension, tobacco use, hyperlipidemia, and atrial fibrillation. Management of risk factors should be optimized in order to minimize the risk of recurrent stroke.  For most stroke survivors, antiplatelet agents, such as aspirin or clopidogrel, are indicated for secondary stroke prevention. In some stroke subtypes, a short course of dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin as well as clopidogrel may decrease the risk of early recurrence.

In addition, high-intensity statin therapy has been shown to be beneficial.

For all stroke survivors, smoking cessation, maintenance of ideal body weight, and regular exercise should be encouraged. In fact, there is evidence that lifestyle modifications provide more benefit than stroke prevention medications.