**Prevalence = (Total number with disease) / (Population at risk for the disease)**

Alternatively, if the disease process tends to last a long time and both the incidence and cure/death rates are relatively stable then prevalence can be calculated based on the incidence and duration of disease.

- Prevalence = (Incidence) x (disease duration)

Let us use an example to examine and clarify prevalence.

**Example 1**

You talk to all 200 people in your town on a spring day and find 60 of them have allergy symptoms.  The point prevalence of allergies in your town would be 30% or 3 in 10 individuals calculated as:

- (60 people with allergy symptoms) / (200 people at risk) = 0.3 = 30%

You spend the next week interviewing all 1500 people in the next town over and find 300 people report allergy symptoms.  The period prevalence for the next town over is 20% for the week or 2 in 10 individuals calculated as:

- (300 people with allergy symptoms during the week) / (1500 people at risk) = 0.2 = 20%

**Example 2**

As stated previously, we can use the incidence and disease duration to calculate prevalence if both are relatively constant.

The annual incidence of the brain tumor glioblastoma is approximately 2.5 / 100,000 people annually in the United States.  The median survival at the time of diagnosis is approximately 15 months (1.25 years).  What is the prevalence of glioblastoma?

- Prevalence = (Incidence) x (disease duration)

- Incidence = 2.5 new cases / 100,000 people annually

- Disease duration = 1.25 years

- Prevalence = (2.5 cases / 100,000 people annually) x (1.25 years) = 3.125 cases / 100,000 people

Thus approximately 3.125 people out of every 100,000 individuals in the United States currently have a glioblastoma or approximately 10,125 people in the United States are currently living with the diagnosis of a glioblastoma.  This figure was calculated as:

- (3.125 cases / 100,000 people) x (324,000,000 people in the United States) = 10,125 cases of glioblastoma in the United States

It should be stressed that the second method is only valid if both the incidence and surival/disease duration are relatively constant.