Diabetes is a disabling chronic illness, and the obesity epidemic is increasing the incidence of this disease. Treatment of obesity is the cornerstone in the prevention and management of T2DM. This requires the combined efforts of every member of the healthcare team. An interdisciplinary approach will achieve the best clinical outcomes. The first step is the early recognition of patients with obesity in primary care practices. Nurses, the initial medical contact, must accurately measure body weight and height and record the BMI. Nursing staff should review diet and physical activity at baseline and each follow-up visit. Patients with elevated BMI are at higher risk for diabetes. All patients should know their BMI category when discussing treatment options. Clinicians should help them set a personal weight loss goal, with a target of losing at least 10% of body weight, optimal for a positive metabolic effect on diabetes. Intensive lifestyle interventions and pharmacotherapy can be prescribed following recommended guidelines.

Suboptimal glycemic control should be addressed at every visit. Inadequate weight loss (less than 10%) and persistent hyperglycemia should prompt a referral to medical obesity specialists or bariatric surgeons. Physicians, surgeons, and other clinicians work as a team in many weight loss programs. Obesity medicine physicians can help patients achieve the target weights necessary to become eligible for a surgical procedure. They also play a crucial role in the postoperative period, identifying complications and reinforcing healthy behaviors for ongoing weight loss. Many patients are ineligible for metabolic surgery due to potential operative risks from advanced cardiac or pulmonary disease. Obesity medicine teams can still achieve positive outcomes for this population.

Registered dieticians, nutritionists, and therapists are core members of these teams and schedule frequent sessions to promote optimal diet and exercise. These teams can be led by trained dieticians, therapists, nurses, physicians, or surgeons. Endocrinology consultations provide additional treatment strategies for patients with persistent hyperglycemia. Preoperative assessment by a cardiologist or a pulmonologist may be required. High-risk patients should undergo procedures in centers with on-site cardiac and pulmonary critical care. Pharmacists are invaluable in managing medication dosages, especially in the perioperative setting. Many drugs are weight-based and require careful dose adjustments after surgery.

The anesthesia team evaluates patients preoperatively and treats anesthesia-related events during and after metabolic procedures. Physical therapists help patients with muscle strengthening in the postoperative period. Because obesity is often associated with mental health conditions such as anxiety, depression, and body image disorders, psychiatry or psychology consultations should be considered if indicated.

Obesity and T2DM are chronic, systemic conditions requiring an interprofessional approach to prevention and management. Patients should be supported during their evaluation and treatment and provided with ample resources by the multidisciplinary team to make informed decisions about their care.