A mutation in the ATP2A2 gene causes Darier disease. This gene encodes a calcium pump in the endoplasmic reticulum called SERCA2.

In addition to aberrant junctional protein processing, a decrease in calcium stores in the endoplasmic reticulum activates a cellular stress response. The cellular stress response may explain two critical features of the disease: dyskeratosis seen on pathology and disease triggers. On histology, Darier disease is characterized by corps ronds, which are rounded keratinocytes. These keratinocytes likely represent dyskeratotic and/or apoptotic cells. This dyskeratosis/apoptosis is thought to result from the cellular stress response induced by depleted calcium stores in the endoplasmic reticulum.

Expanding on this concept can help differentiate the pathogenesis and histopathology of Darier disease from those of a related entity, Hailey-Hailey disease. On histology, both conditions have some level of dyskeratosis/apoptosis and acantholysis. Darier disease usually shows more dyskeratosis than Hailey-Hailey disease. Hailey-Hailey disease is caused by a mutation in the ATP2C1 gene, which encodes a calcium pump in the Golgi apparatus.

There are two segmentally distributed clinical variants in Darier disease. To understand these variants, one must first understand mosaicism. Autosomal dominant disorders display two types of mosaicism. A post-zygotic mutation causes type 1 mosaicism, meaning that some cells have the change and others do not. In dermatology, type 1 mosaicism presents with areas of diseased skin intermixed with areas of healthy skin reflecting the cells with and without the mutation, respectively. The affected skin often follows lines of Blaschko, reflecting an embryonic migration of skin cells. Type 2 mosaicism arises from a postzygotic mutation in a patient that already has a "prezygotic" mutation. This patient starts with one mutation, or disease allele, in all cells. Then another mutation happens farther into the cell division process that only some of the cells will have. These cells will have two mutations or two dominant alleles for the disease.