In pelvic vein insufficiency, the abnormal dilation of the interlinked venous channels of the internal iliac veins and the ovarian veins is often implicated. The ovarian plexus drains into the ovarian veins on both sides. The hemorrhoidal, utero-ovarian, sacral, and vesicular venous plexuses drain into the internal iliac veins. The broad ligament has both the internal iliac and ovarian veins system running through it.

There can be incompetence of the internal iliac veins and the inferior vena cava. However, most of the cases of the pelvic varices are identified in the ovarian veins. Moreover, about 60% of these develop pelvic congestion syndrome.

The primary vein insufficiency is due to either the absence of the venous valves or the incompetency of the valves. In such patients, the congenital absence of the ovarian valves has been reported in 6% of patients on the right side and 13% to 15% on the left side. There are incompetent valves in 35% to 46% of women on the right and 41% to 43% on the left side. The inclination of multiparous women to develop PCS can be due to the 50% increased pelvic vein capacity due to the physiological changes during pregnancy. This can, in turn, lead to retrograde blood flow and incompetency of the valves. Even 6 months after pregnancy, these vascular changes can persist.

The secondary pelvic vein incompetence is often due to the external compression of the vein causing venous outflow obstruction. Different causes of external compression include the nutcracker phenomenon, also known as left renal vein entrapment syndrome. This phenomenon is due to the compression of the left renal vein between the superior mesenteric artery and the abdominal aorta. Similarly, the compression of the left common iliac vein by the right internal iliac artery in May-Thurner syndrome can also lead to such results.

Regional overload in the venous channels can lead to pelvic venous congestion. This regional overload might be due to left renal vein thrombosis (with renal cell carcinoma), tumor thrombosis in the inferior vena cava, cirrhosis, congenital malformations of arteriovenous and venous channels, and retro aortic left renal vein.

Complete resolution of symptoms after menopause indicates the influence of hormones on pelvic congestion syndrome. Estrogen is a venous dilator and can thus produce the venous dilation implicated in the pathophysiology of the PCS.