Myophosphorylase is a key enzyme in the regulation of glucose metabolism in muscles. It detaches 1,4 glycosyl chains from glycogen and attaches inorganic phosphate to form glucose-1-phosphate. During glycogen breakdown, muscle cells generate glucose-1-phosphate in place of glucose, and due to the polar nature of the former molecule, it disintegrates intracellularly.

PYG is activated when phosphorylated by the enzyme phosphorylase kinase. Glucagon and adrenaline initiate the glycogenolysis in the liver, and they bind to G-protein coupled receptors first. The signaling pathway behind this process involves the following steps: GPCRs (G-protein coupled receptors) - AC (adenylate cyclase) – cAMP (cyclic adenosine monophosphate) – PKA (protein kinase A) – PK (phosphorylase kinase) causing PYG activation. In contrast, PYG becomes inactivated when dephosphorylated by a different enzyme called protein phosphatase 1 (PP1).

There are several tissue-specific isoforms of phosphorylase. Myophosphorylase is found in cardiac myocytes and the brain, and it is the only variant present in skeletal muscle. Most patients with McArdle disease lack myophosphorylase activity therefore they are unable to produce energy in the form of glucose by breaking down glycogen stores in muscles.

During aerobic activity, such as walking, jogging, gentle swimming, or cycling the skeletal muscle derives energy from free fatty acids by oxidizing them in the mitochondria via the beta-oxidation pathway to form acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA is further metabolized via the Krebs cycle and the respiratory chain, leading to the production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). During anaerobic activity, such as weightlifting or sprinting the myophosphorylase of the skeletal muscle breaks down glycogen to glucose, which then enters the glycolytic pathway yielding ATP anaerobically.