To decrease the transmission rate, treating both viral and bacterial conjunctivitis should include patient education.

Bacterial conjunctivitis, while typically self-limiting, can be treated to help reduce the duration of symptoms. No significant difference in outcomes has been observed in trials comparing different types of ophthalmic antibiotic drops. While ointments typically last longer than drops, they tend to interfere with vision. Initial treatment for acute, non-severe bacterial conjunctivitis varies depending on the antimicrobial agent but generally is administered to the affected eye every two to 6 hours for 5 to 7 days. For mild bacterial conjunctivitis, older-generation antibiotics are generally advised. Later-generation antibiotics are reserved for more grave infections to minimize the development of resistance in the ocular surface flora.

In moderate to severe cases of bacterial conjunctivitis, the latest-generation fluoroquinolones are more suitable as they provide strong gram-negative and some gram-positive coverage. Antibiotic options are available as liquid solutions and topical ointments. Liquid suspension/solutions include polymyxin B/trimethoprim, ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin or azithromycin, while bacitracin, erythromycin or ciprofloxacin can be administered as an ointment. Fluoroquinolones should be prescribed for contact lens wearers to provide empiric coverage for Pseudomonas.

The recommended treatment for gonococcal conjunctivitis is ceftriaxone 1 gram intramuscular (IM), and it is recommended to treat concurrent chlamydial infection with 1 gm azithromycin PO as well. The neonatal dosing for gonococcal conjunctivitis is 25 to 50 mg/kg ceftriaxone intravenous (IV)/IM with a max dose of 125 mg, with 20 mg/kg azithromycin PO once daily for three days.

Viral conjunctivitis due to adenoviruses is self-limiting, and treatment should target symptomatic relief with cold compresses and artificial tears. Povidone-iodine 0.8% may be a potential option to decrease contagiousness in patients with adenoviral infections.

Herpes simplex keratitis should receive antiviral therapy. Mild infections can have treatment with trifluridine 1% drops every 2 hours or 8 to 9 times a day for 10 to 14 days, topical ganciclovir 0.15% gel one drop five times a day until epithelium heals and then three times daily for one week, or oral acyclovir 400 mg PO 5 times a day for 7 to 10 days to limit epithelial toxicity. Patients should have a follow-up with ophthalmologists within 2 to 5 days to monitor for complications.

Treatment of herpes zoster conjunctivitis includes a combination of oral antivirals and topical steroids; however, steroids should only be part of therapy in consultation with ophthalmology. Antiviral doses differ from those used for herpes simplex and consist of oral acyclovir 800 mg five times a day, oral famciclovir 500 mg three times a day, or oral valacyclovir 1 g three times a day, each for 7 to 10 days.

A study by Wilkins et al. observed the effect of topical steroids compared with hypromellose in comforting patients with acute presumed viral conjunctivitis. It reported that a short course of topical dexamethasone in acute follicular conjunctivitis cases presumed to have viral origin was not harmful.

Steroid use with antibiotics is controversial, and studies report mixed results in reducing corneal scarring.

Lastly, the treatment for allergic conjunctivitis consists of allergen avoidance, artificial tears, cold compresses, and a wide range of topical agents. Topical agents include topical antihistamines alone or in combination with vasoconstrictors, topical mast cell inhibitors, and topical glucocorticoids for refractory symptoms. Oral antihistamines can also be used in moderate to severe cases of allergic conjunctivitis.

Patients with moderate to severe pain, vision loss, corneal involvement, severe purulent discharge, conjunctival scarring, recurrent episodes, lack of response to therapy, or herpes simplex keratitis should receive a prompt referral to an ophthalmologist. In addition, those requiring steroids, contact lens wearers, and patients with photophobia should also get a referral.