Frailty measures are an essential tool for use in clinical practice to help develop specific interventions and treatment plans accounting for the increased risk of adverse outcomes associated with frailty. Over the years, several instruments for assessing frailty have been developed.

One commonly used frailty assessment tool is the Clinical Frailty Scale (CFS). The CFS is a well-validated scale that evolved from the Canadian Study of Health and Aging and is frequently used in clinical settings. It provides a summary tool for clinicians to assess frailty and fitness based on their clinical judgment and evaluation of a patient. It was initially created with a scale from 1 (very fit) to 7 (severely frail) upon initial publication in 2005.

Applying the Clinical Frailty Scale to patients requires clinical judgment on the part of the examining clinician and thus may be subject to inter-observer variation. Although the CFS is touted as a quick and easy test, it does require data collection beyond that which could be collected by a cursory evaluation. It is heavily weighted on assessing patient function and includes a patient's ability to mobilize as well as inquiring about their habitual physical activity and abilities. It requires the clinicians to assess if the patient can independently perform tasks such as bathing, dressing, housework, going upstairs, going out alone, going shopping, taking care of finances, taking medications, and preparing meals. The main advantage besides its validity is that it is easy to use and may readily be administered in a clinical setting. The CFS is utilized to predict the outcomes of older people hospitalized with acute illnesses.