Imaging with plain radiographs is usually negative at the early stages of a stress fracture, but these studies are needed initially to differentiate other pathologies such as tumors, osteomyelitis, or occult fractures. Conventional radiographs have a sensitivity of 15% to 35% on initial examination, which increases to 30% to 70% over a 2 to 3-week period due to a more pronounced bone periosteal reaction which may be appreciated by the presence of hardly noticeable flake like patches of new bone 2 to 3 weeks after the onset of pain.

MRI has now largely replaced bone scans as the imaging modality of choice. It offers greater specificity and visual resolution over the previously used nuclear bone scan study. Bone scans, however, may still be used in some clinical situations, such as a patient with metal hardware or a pacemaker, which precludes an MRI scan. CT scan can be used to identify incomplete and complete fractures but does not help in the identification of stress reactions. CT, however, is thought to be more useful than MRI for following the healing of stress fractures. As a stress fracture heals, the initial edema seen well on MRI gets replaced by a sclerotic periosteal reaction, which a CT scan visualizes better. There is a role for diagnostic ultrasound as an adjunct to the physical examination. A recent study found the application of point-of-care ultrasound to have a positive predictive value of 99%.

MRI scan is considered the “gold standard” for diagnosing a stress fracture with a reported sensitivity near 100%.