Fenoldopam has a unique mechanism of action compared to other antihypertensive medications: it is a dopamine (D1) receptor agonist that results in decreased peripheral vascular resistance primarily in renal capillary beds, thus promoting increased renal blood flow, natriuresis, and diuresis. Fenoldopam has minimal adrenergic effects.

It is important to understand the basics of vascular smooth muscle cell physiology and the role of D1 receptor agonism in severe hypertension. In arteries, the tunica media is composed of smooth muscle cells activated by various neurotransmitters, hormones, and mechanical perturbations. Examples of endogenous stimuli responsible for inducing arterial smooth muscle contraction include norepinephrine, angiotensin II, endothelin, and thromboxane-A2. Passive stretching also induces arterial smooth muscle contraction and can be of importance when describing the autoregulation of blood pressure. When an endogenous stimulus acts on a vascular smooth muscle cell, calcium (Ca++) is released either from the sarcoplasmic reticulum or from an influx across the cell membrane and binds to cytoplasmic calmodulin. The Ca++/calmodulin complex subsequently activates myosin light chain kinase (MLCK). MLCK phosphorylates myosin heads in the presence of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), thus enabling actin-myosin cross-bridge formation and smooth muscle contraction.

Relaxation of smooth muscle occurs when there is decreased phosphorylation of myosin. There are documented mechanisms by which this can take place: reduced entry or decreased release of Ca++ from the sarcoplasmic reticulum and inhibition of MLCK by increased cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP).

Two mechanisms achieve the removal of Ca++ ions from the cytoplasm. The primary mechanism is a plasma membrane-bound sodium (Na+)/Ca++ antiporter that effluxes one Ca++ ion and influxes three Na+ ions by utilizing the electrochemical gradient created by the Na+/potassium (K+) ATPase. The second mechanism by which Ca++ is removed from the cytoplasm is by a Ca++/ATPase located on the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

The contraction and relaxation of vascular smooth muscle are the mechanisms by which changes in systemic vascular resistance (SVR) occur. Contraction of vascular smooth muscle causes a decrease in the cross-sectional area of the arterial lumen, thus increasing SVR and afterload on the heart. Interpreting how changes in SVR affect blood pressure involves understanding the physiologic relationship between mean arterial pressure (MAP), cardiac output (CO), and SVR. MAP is equivalent to CO multiplied by SVR. Simply stated, this means that CO and SVR directly correlate with MAP, such that increases in SVR cause a rise in MAP. This physiologic perturbation manifests clinically as high blood pressure. In contrast, by decreasing SVR, MAP decreases.

Dopamine D1 receptors are located in the tunica media of arteries and exert their effects through a G-alpha stimulatory second messenger system. Upon ligand binding to D1-receptors, the alpha subunit dissociates from the intracellular domain of the transmembrane receptor and activates adenylate cyclase (AC). AC subsequently converts ATP to cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). All downstream effects get mediated by cAMP, the chief second messenger in this pathway.

Inside the cell, cAMP activates protein kinase A (PKA). PKA phosphorylates MLCK, thus causing its inactivation. Since myosin cannot undergo phosphorylated by MLCK, the cross-bridge formation between myosin and actin does not occur, rendering the arterial smooth muscle cell unable to contract. The result is the dilation of arteries producing decreased SVR, increased renal blood flow, natriuresis, and diuresis. These pharmacologic effects result in a decrease in blood pressure.