The diagnosis of a prostatic abscess based solely on history and physical findings is difficult because the symptoms are non-specific and overlap with other lower urinary tract pathology. A high level of clinical suspicion, particularly in non-responding acute prostatitis patients, is necessary for early diagnosis and timely management.

**Patients with acute prostatitis who do not respond to treatment after 48 hours should be evaluated for a possible prostatic abscess.**

Due to its rare incidence and non-specific clinical features, the diagnosis of a prostatic abscess is often delayed. Necessary investigations include a complete blood count with differential, CMP, urinalysis, and blood and urine cultures used to evaluate underlying infectious diseases and chronic medical conditions and identify the source of infection. If there is any suspicion of a prostate abscess based on history and physical findings or basic laboratory results, imaging studies should be obtained. Imaging studies confirm the diagnosis and guide treatment by assisting in drainage procedures.

Transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) is usually the initial diagnostic test for a prostate abscess. It can accurately identify a prostatic abscess in at least 80% of affected patients.

Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis (with and without IV contrast) can better delineate the spread of any prostatic infection to adjacent organs and is especially useful in more severe cases or sicker patients.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can also be used for prostatic imaging, even in very sick patients. The MRI demonstrates an abscess as a hypointense area on the T1 weighted image and hyperintense on the T2 weighted image.

In summary, high-risk (immunocompromised) acute prostatitis patients and immunocompetent patients with acute prostatitis who fail to improve within 48 hours of initial treatment should be evaluated for a prostatic abscess. Only a targeted imaging study (transrectal ultrasound of the prostate, CT scan, or prostatic MRI) can confirm the diagnosis as the clinical signs of prostatic abscess are indistinguishable from acute bacterial prostatitis. While transrectal ultrasonography is usually the initial imaging study, consideration should also be given to a prostatic MRI as it avoids radiation exposure, easily identifies extraprostatic extensions, and provides clear, detailed images of the prostate without the need for any prostatic manipulation from a transrectal probe. MRI-transrectal ultrasound fusion guidance is available, if needed, to assist with the transrectal aspiration of the abscess.