# Continuing Education Activity

Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is a disease that affects women less than 40 years of age. Commonly, women present with amenorrhea for 4-6 months, low estradiol levels, and elevated follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) level. POI affects mental health, fertility, cardiovascular health, and bone health. This article outlines the evaluation, diagnosis, treatment, and management of primary ovarian insufficiency. In addition, it reviews the role of the interprofessional team in managing and improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Define primary ovarian insufficiency.
- Review the current theories thought to cause primary ovarian insufficiency. 
- Explain the clinical evaluation of primary ovarian insufficiency.
- Outline and describe the current treatments of primary ovarian insufficiency.

# Introduction

Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is a disease spectrum that not only affects female fertility but also contributes to morbidity and mortality associated with the long-term withdrawal of estrogen. This disease spectrum has previously been referred to as premature ovarian failure. However, this terminology has fallen out of favor as the degree of ovarian impairment may fluctuate over time.

# Etiology

Primary ovarian insufficiency is thought to arise from either follicular dysfunction or follicular depletion. However, the exact mechanisms in which POI develops remain unknown.

# Epidemiology

The proportion of women that primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) impacts do not mirror the devastating effects that this disease spectrum causes. POI affects approximately 1 to 2% of women under the age of 40 and even fewer women under the age of 30 (approximately 0.1%).

# Pathophysiology

Oocytes begin to develop in utero and reach their peak number (6-7 million) at 20 weeks gestation.

# History and Physical

To evaluate a patient for POI, it is important to obtain a thorough and complete history. Obtaining the history of present illness is critical as it may help to form the appropriate differential diagnosis. The history should include integral aspects such as age, medical comorbidities, gynecologic history, obstetric history, and social factors including potential stressors. When eliciting past medical history, it is very important to inquire about the history of various illnesses including but not limited to mumps, shigella, tuberculosis, malaria, and varicella. These diseases have the potential to affect the ovary causing oophoritis and potential damage to the oocyte reserve.

The physical exam should include vital signs including blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, and weight/body mass index. Then, a general survey of the patient should be performed looking for any pathognomonic signs of disease. For example, hirsutism, obesity, and acne may be indicative of PCOS or short stature, increased carrying angle, broad chest, and webbing of the neck may be indicative of Turner Syndrome.

# Evaluation

While there is no consensus regarding criteria for evaluating POI, it is important to evaluate any female who presents with primary or secondary amenorrhea. POI is associated with various disease processes that may lead to either primary or secondary amenorrhea.

In the setting of secondary amenorrhea, first and foremost a pregnancy test must be completed to exclude pregnancy. Following a negative pregnancy test, it is appropriate to evaluate for any chronic medical conditions that affect the overall health of the patient (eg. uncontrolled diabetes, heart disease) as well as evaluation for any evidence of hypothalamic-pituitary axis depression in situations of extreme physical activity levels, depression, or anorexia.

It would be appropriate to order various laboratory work such as follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and prolactin to aid in the evaluation and diagnosis of an endocrine abnormality.

If the etiology of POI remains undetermined after all of the aforementioned diseases have been appropriately excluded, then the next step in the evaluation of suspected POI would be to perform genetic screening. It is possible to use a patient’s family history to guide the physician in ordering the correct genetic screening test. However, it is important to remember that the impact of these associated gene mutations on POI has not been robustly determined.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of POI is largely based on estrogen repletion to diminish vasomotor symptoms, maintain bone density, decrease fracture risk, decrease cardiovascular and autoimmune morbidity and mortality, protect cognitive function, and improve the overall well-being of the patients affected.

Of note, in premenopausal women with POI who desire fertility, cyclic bleeding cycles are preferred to maximize their chances of successful embryo transfer or even naturally occurring pregnancy.

In regards to assisted reproduction and fertility, there is no evidence that ovulation induction can be reliably achieved with gonadotropins or GnRH analogs. Spontaneous ovulation in women with POI has shown the greatest success of pregnancy.

Furthermore, diagnosis of POI can incur devastating psychological effects not only for the patient but also for the patients’ significant other and family. It is imperative that the patient is followed closely in the clinic and given the resources necessary to establish care with a behavioral health specialist and therapist to facilitate discussion and coping with the emotional stressors associated with POI.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis may include any of the aforementioned disease processes. However, the presence of POI within each disease is not absolute. In patients with primary amenorrhea, it is necessary to differentiate between chromosomal abnormalities (e.g., Turner syndrome) or Mullerian anomalies (e.g., Mullerian agenesis, imperforate hymen). In women with secondary amenorrhea, it is imperative for pregnancy to be ruled out as the underlying etiology. Nutritional status and activity level must be evaluated to exclude the possibility of functional hypothalamic dysfunction causing menstrual irregularity. Endocrine abnormalities such as hyper- or hypothyroidism, prolactinoma, diabetes mellitus, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia may be the underlying mechanism of infertility rather than POI. Autoimmune disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, or Addison disease can be present without evidence of POI. The polycystic ovarian syndrome may be the etiology of menstrual irregularity and anovulation leading to infertility. Early menopause may be considered in a small subset of the female population greater than 40 years of age but less than 45 years of age.

# Prognosis

The diagnosis of primary ovarian insufficiency should be based upon strong evidence after any confounding disease processes have been excluded. This diagnosis carries with it severe implications on a women’s future health, fertility, and psychological well-being, as discussed above. Currently, there are no treatment modalities that can reverse the damage done to healthy oocytes, increase the functionality of existing oocytes, or even generate new oocytes. Spontaneous pregnancy may be achieved as the course of POI is unpredictable. However, this chance remains low. If a woman with POI desires fertility, the mainstay of successful treatment remains oocyte donation.

# Complications

Symptoms of POI such as hot flashes, mood irritability, night sweats, sleep disturbance, vaginal dryness/irritation, and dyspareunia can be a nuisance for women. However, they are not life-threatening and can be improved by hormone replacement.

# Consultations

If in the setting of amenorrhea with an undetermined etiology in a patient desiring conception, it would be appropriate to refer such a patient to the subspecialty of Obstetrics and Gynecology known as Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility (REI). REI specialists can assist women affected by various disease processes that impair their fertility. In addition, REI specialists are the experts that are needed to assist in the safe induction of ovulation as well as oversee the intense protocols, medications, and procedures involved within the in-vitro fertilization process.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The diagnosis of primary ovarian insufficiency can be devastating, especially to women who desire fertility. While it is not a deadly diagnosis in and of itself, it does impact a woman’s overall well-being. Physicians should be honest with patients regarding this diagnosis and provide encouragement that many of the physical symptoms of POI can be treated with hormone replacement therapy, and the possibility of spontaneous conception exists as the course of POI is variable and unpredictable. It is very important to provide support and resources that these women may utilize to help them cope with the psychosocial stresses (anxiety, depression, guilt, decreased sexual desire) that coincide with POI. Proper counseling for patients includes a discussion regarding how low estrogen levels can affect bone, cardiovascular, neurocognitive, and mental health. Patients with POI require close follow-up to ensure they are receiving the necessary hormonal replacement and are not having complications of such medications. With proper estrogen replacement, women with POI can live healthy, long lives.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The medical care of women with POI is a multi-specialty undertaking. Medical care often begins with establishing care with a family medicine physician (PCP) for routine health maintenance and monitoring of comorbidities. Primary care can also be provided by obstetricians/gynecologists (OB/GYNs) who focus on women’s health maintenance and wellness. Oftentimes, general OBGYNs can guide the initial evaluation, treatment, and management of women with POI. Further specialized care can be provided by Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility (REI) specialists. General OBGYNs as well as REIs can perform a more thorough investigation as to the etiology of POI, however, REIs may be able to provide a more comprehensive analysis of the results and the implications of such testing. REIs would be able to help women with POI better understand how this disease process affects fertility and the available options for fertility management and conception.