As with other soft tissue injuries, all patients with a pit viper envenomation should have their Tetanus updated and receive local wound care with soap/water.

- Dry: Approximately 20 to 25% of bites result in no envenomation. These patients are largely asymptomatic and have minimal to no localized edema or erythema. There are no signs of coagulopathy on serial lab assessments.

- Mild Envenomation: Approximately 35 to 40% of envenomations result in localized erythema and edema. These symptoms do not involve an entire extremity, and again, there are be no signs of coagulopathy on serial lab assessments.

- Moderate Envenomations: Approximately 15 to 20% of envenomations result in more significant erythema and edema. These envenomations can affect an entire extremity. Systemic symptoms may or may not be present. Minor lab abnormalities may be present as well, but clinically significant bleeding does not occur.

- Severe Envenomations: 5 to 10% of envenomations result in life-threatening coagulopathies with profound localized findings of erythema and edema. Severe systemic signs such as hypotension, angioedema, and/or any signs of neurotoxicity may present. The presence of these symptoms marks a severe envenomation regardless of other findings.

Patients with an apparent dry bite or mild envenomations should have monitoring for 6 to 8 hours. A CBC, coagulation testing, and fibrinogen should be repeated near the end of this observation period. If there are no signs of worsening envenomation, these patients can be safely discharged but should be counseled to return for any signs of bleeding, swelling, or worsening symptoms.

In North American there are two Crotalidae Antivenoms approved for use:

**Crotalidae Polyvalent Immune Fab Dosing**

Crotalidae Polyvalent Immune Fab is derived from 4 snake species (Western Diamondback, Eastern Diamondback, Mojave rattlesnake, and Cottonmouth ) and immunized into sheep (ovine-derived). The whole immunoglobin is extracted, affinity purified, and cleaved by papain into the terminal Fab fragment of the immunoglobin. This reduces its size by about 1/3 and allows tissue penetration. However, it is cleared renally, and repeat dosing is usually necessary.

The initial dose of antivenom is 4 to 6 vials regardless of age or body mass.

Repeat coagulation panel (PT/PTT/INR), fibrinogen, platelets, and hemoglobin on days 2-3 and days 5-7. Recurrent coagulopathy without clinically significant bleeding has been known to occur. Some repeat and follow parameters to normalization. Indications for repeat dosing if coagulopathy occurs between 3 and 7 days after the last dose of Crofab are:

- INR > 3.0

- PTT > 50 seconds

- Platelet Count < 25,000

- Fibrinogen < 50 ug/ml

- Multi-component coagulopathy

**Crotalidae Immune F(ab)2 Dosing**

Crotalidae Immune F(ab)2 is derived from 2 snakes species (Bothris asper and Crotalus duressis) and immunized in horses (equine-derived).  The whole immunoglobin is extracted, purified, and cleaved by pepsin digestion into a fragment with 2 binding sites for venom components - F(ab)2.  Despite being derived from horses it is less immunogenic than the original rattlesnake antivenom produced. It is larger in size than Crotalidae Polyvalent Immune Fab and persists in the serum longer with a more sustained duration of the activity, therefore usually not requiring repeat maintenance dosing.

The initial controlling dose consists of 10 vials mixed in 250 mL normal saline (NS) administered over one hour (same number of vials for children). The initial infusion rate for the first 10 minutes should start at 25 to 50 ml/hr, then if no adverse reaction occurs the remaining 250 ml solution can be given over 1 hour.

It is best to evaluate the number fo each of the antivenoms available and not mix loading and maintenance doses between the two products.

In rare severe envenomations, a repeat dose of 10 vials of Anavip may be needed.

Blood products only temporarily correct coagulopathies and thrombocytopenia related to snake envenomation, but this rarely results in long term correction. With this knowledge, blood products such as fresh frozen plasma, platelets, or packed red blood cells should be reserved for patients with medically significant bleeding or patient who have profound coagulopathies despite appropriate antivenom administration.

Aggressive surgical intervention is not indicated, including prophylactic wound excision or fasciotomy. These interventions have not been shown to change outcomes when compared to the administration of antivenom alone and can potentially cause further tissue damage and/or be disfiguring.

Several therapies should be avoided as they have no shown to change outcomes and can potentially cause more harm.

- Excision & Suction: Remains common practice among the lay-public. Patients and healthcare providers understand that this does not remove a significant amount of venom and increases local tissue damage.

- Ice: Commonly used to control localized swelling due to musculoskeletal injury, ice is ineffective at controlling swelling due to envenomation. Furthermore, intensive cryotherapy has been shown to worsen outcomes.

- NSAIDs: These agents are usually effective at pain control and edema reduction. However, they theoretically potentiate the effects of venom on platelet aggregation and thus worsen bleeding. Alternative analgesics, such as opiates, should be given instead.

- Electricity: Electricity plays no role in the treatment of envenomations. It increases local tissue damage and does not denature venom.

- Prophylactic antibiotics: Infection appears to be a rare complication of snakebites. As such, prophylactic antibiotics are not indicated and have not been shown to change outcomes.

- Tourniquets: Tourniquets are a commonly deployed strategy despite evidence that they do not inhibit the absorption of venom effectively and can increase tissue damage. If present on the initial evaluation, any tourniquet should be removed.

- Steroids: There is no evidence of improved outcomes when patients empirically receive steroids. They should be reserved only for hypersensitivity reactions to either venom or antivenom.