Emancipation laws in the US vary by state with little guidance from federal law. In general, minors who are married, on active duty status in the military, or living separately from their parents or legal guardians and independently managing their own financial affairs are considered emancipated.

The “mature minor” doctrine legally recognizes the medical decision-making capacity of adolescents, even though they are still minors under parental or legal guardian control. Very few states recognize a version of the “mature minor” doctrine. Minors usually 12 years or older who demonstrate adequate cognitive maturity and capacity to understand the risks, benefits, alternatives, and likely outcomes of medical evaluation and treatment are authorized to provide consent or refuse without parental permission.

Emergency medical care also presents another exception to the necessity of parental or legal guardian consent to treat a minor. Current federal law under the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA) mandates that a medical screening exam must be performed on all individuals, including minors, presenting to any federally funded emergency department regardless of consent and ability to pay.

In general, adolescents can consent to specific medical services that provide an important public health benefit without parental permission or notification.

- Rape or sexual assault services

- Contraception services

- Sexually transmitted infections

- Prenatal care

- Abortion

- Pediatric care for children of minors

- Substance use disorder treatment

- Mental health treatment

- Immunizations