For PTRA and OA, all patients receive pretreatment with aspirin. Rotary ablation is preceded by administering an anticoagulant, placing the rotation wire across the lesion, and parking the unfolded wire tip in a straight segment of the distal vessel, not in a side branch. When treating large coronary arteries, particularly the right coronary artery, many cardiologists insert a temporary prophylactic pacemaker because of the possibility of bradyarrhythmias. The burr and the drive shaft are manually advanced over the guidewire to a proximal segment of the target vessel.

If the procedure is unsuccessful because the lesion cannot be crossed, the downsizing of the burr may be required. After successful crossing, a polishing run completes lesion preparation for definitive treatment, most commonly using a stent. Both DCA and OA require specialized device-specific wires. These serve to wire the calcified lesion via microcatheters or over-the-wire (OTW) balloons. With both devices, shorter runs with a slower passage of the atherectomy device result in less microthrombi and no-reflow. Following atherectomy, the safe approach for device removal is the meticulous withdrawal of the device over the wire while taking extreme care not to pull the wire. Alternatively, parallel wiring or working over the OA wire is an option.

The guidewires, catheters, and techniques used for CBA are similar to those used for conventional PTCA. However, the cutting balloons are less compliant and may not track as well as conventional PTCA catheter equipment.

Intravenous heparin boluses are administered to keep the activated clotting time of more than 300 seconds. This anticoagulation is vital to avoid the slow-flow/no-reflow phenomenon during the procedure. Slow-flow or no-reflow usually occurs as a result of the distal embolization of microparticles or clots. It is treatable by intra-coronary administration of verapamil, nitroprusside, nicorandil, adenosine, and nitroglycerine.