Tracheoesophageal Fistula

A congenital tracheoesophageal fistula (TE fistula) occurs when an aberrant connection between the trachea and the esophagus forms in utero. This developmental abnormality generally presents in association with esophageal atresia and appears to result from improper septation of the foregut. In a majority of cases, the proximal esophagus forms a blind pouch with an associated distal TE fistula. Other variants including esophageal atresia with proximal TE fistula, TE fistula without esophageal atresia, and esophageal atresia with both proximal and distal TE fistulas may also occur.

In cases of esophageal atresia with a distal TE fistula, polyhydramnios is often a finding on prenatal imaging due to the inability of the newborn to swallow amniotic fluid. After birth, this inability to swallow causes excessive salivation regurgitation after feeds. Infants also classically present with respiratory distress and choking. Urgent surgical intervention is required, and the post-operative survival rate is now greater than 90%.

Tracheomalacia

Tracheomalacia includes a variety of different conditions characterized by weakness of the trachea. This weakness, whether congenital or acquired, causes increased collapsibility of the airway. During normal breathing, pressure changes within the thoracic cavity cause the trachea to change shape. These pressure changes, in the presence of decreased tracheal integrity, can lead to partial or total airway collapse. This airway collapse generally becomes exacerbated when pressure is increased, such as coughing or Valsalva. Symptoms vary based on the extent of trachea collapsibility and breathing patterns. If bronchial weakness/collapse is present, the condition is called tracheobronchomalacia. Bronchoscopy is currently the gold standard of diagnosis for these conditions.