**Acute and Sub-acute HP**

The inflammation is centered around the airway due to the inhalational nature of the injury. The classic finding is bronchiolocentric, poorly-formed, non-caseating granulomas, and inflammatory cell infiltrates, typically lymphocytes. Findings of organizing pneumonia which are small airways filled with fibroblastic plugs (Masson bodies) may be seen.

The main differential diagnosis to consider is sarcoidosis where well-formed non-caseating granulomas are seen along the bronchovascular bundle, without evidence of inflammatory cell infiltrate. Findings of organizing pneumonia are not seen with sarcoidosis. Poorly formed granulomas, giant cells, and lymphocytic infiltration can be seen with lymphoid hyperplasia such as in lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia (LIP). Infections can also cause granuloma formation with cellular infiltration. Hence special stains for organisms are utilized.

**Chronic HP**

As the disease progresses untreated (chronic HP), fibrosis occurs. Sparse poorly formed non-caseating granulomas and chronic inflammation are seen around the bronchioles with variable amounts of fibrosis. Pathologically this can appear similar to usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) or fibrotic non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP). Poorly formed granulomas and fibrosis centered around the small airways support HP over the alternate diagnosis. In advanced fibrosis, histologic changes become indistinguishable from UIP and may require clinical and radiographic correlation.