# Continuing Education Activity

Peritoneal cancer is the invasion of the serous membrane lining the peritoneal cavity by malignant cells. The malignant cells originate de novo in the mesothelioma or disseminate from other primary tumor sites. It represents an advanced stage of cancer with a poor prognosis. To decrease morbidity and mortality, early diagnosis and prompt management are essential. The article reviews the etiology, epidemiology, and pathogenesis associated with the disease. It also highlights the role of the interprofessional team required in the management of peritoneal cancer.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the pathogenesis of peritoneal cancer.
- Review the evaluation of peritoneal cancer.
- Outline the management options available for peritoneal cancer.

# Introduction

The invasion of the serous membrane lining the abdominal cavity, viscera, and coelom in amniotes by malignant cells is called peritoneal surface malignancy or peritoneal cancer (PC). It is divided into primary and secondary types. The de novo origin of cancer in the mesothelium of the abdomen causes primary mesothelioma. In contrast, the dissemination of tumor cells in the peritoneal cavity from other sites results in secondary peritoneal cancer. Primary cancer has been classified based on its histology by investigators. Extraovarian primary peritoneal carcinoma (EOPPC), serous surface papillary carcinoma, papillary serous carcinoma of the peritoneum, extra ovarian Mullerian adenocarcinoma, and normal-sized ovarian carcinoma syndrome all are different terms used for the first type.

Other types include malignant mesothelioma (MPM), multicystic mesothelioma, leiomyosarcomas, leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata, and desmoplastic small round cells tumor (DSRCT).

Primary cancer is classed as stage III or IV and metastasis as stage IV. The vague clinical presentation is responsible for late diagnosis and an overall decrease in survival. The surgical resection and intraperitoneal chemotherapy form hallmarks for disease eradication. However, a better understanding of peritoneum physiology and tumor seeding pathways combined with advancement in technologies has led to the development of effective treatment therapies. In the absence of extensive systemic disease, locoregional control of the disease can provide a promising role in the management of this late-stage cancer.

# Etiology

Primary peritoneal cancer is idiopathic cancer arising from peritoneal layers of the abdominal cavity. Its subtype, EOPPC, resembles serous ovarian carcinoma and occurs exclusively in women (mean age, 56-62 years). There are just a few reports of its occurrence in males. It can be caused by germline mutations in the BRCA 1 gene which has been reported in 17.6% of cases.

Disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis is associated with a high estrogenic state in postmenopausal women. Leiomyosarcoma is a secondary tumor occurring in Li Fraumeni syndrome along with retinoblastoma. Desmoplastic round small cell tumor occurs in adolescents (median age 19 years) and 85% in Caucasians. It is caused by [t(11;22)(p13;q12)] translocation.

Secondary peritoneal carcinomatosis is commonly caused by invading malignant cells from tumors involving the stomach, colon, pancreas, gall bladder, appendix, breast, uterus, ovary, and lungs. The peritoneal involvement in appendiceal cancer is called pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP). It is successfully managed and results in a lifetime without relapse. The metastasis from ovarian, gastric, and colorectal malignancies is associated with increased chances of recurrence and fatality, and they are also the three most common etiologies of metastatic spread in the peritoneum.

# Epidemiology

Peritoneal tumors are rare advanced malignancies of the human body. The age-adjusted incidence rate of primary peritoneal cancer is 6.78 per million.

Peritoneal metastasis is the most common malignant process occurring in the peritoneal cavity. In ovarian cancers, peritoneal metastasis is present in 75% of cases at the time of diagnosis.

# Pathophysiology

The peritoneum is the serous membrane lining the abdomen, which supports the abdominal viscera and provides a conduit for blood, lymph, and nerve conduction. It consists of two layers; the parietal peritoneum, attached with the abdominal wall, and the visceral peritoneum surrounding the organs. The space between the bilaminar layers is the abdominal cavity or coelom and contains the peritoneal fluid, which encloses abdominal organs and provides lubrication for peristaltic movements. Its volume is around 100ml.

The peritoneum is the largest dynamic membrane that can adapt according to different pathologies. Histologically, it consists of mesothelium and submesothelial connective tissue, separated by a thin basement membrane called basal lamina comprising of collagen IV and laminin. The elastic matrix is made of collagen I, III, and cells such as fibroblasts, adipocytes, and macrophages. It also hosts lymphatics and blood vessels. The mesodermal layer is derived from mesoderm and has both the characteristics of epithelial and mesenchymal cells. It acts as the first line of defense due to the tight junctions among the cells and also expresses cytokeratin, fibronectin, and other markers. It binds tumor cells with peritoneum. The peritoneal deposits occur at sites of immune cell aggregates, ‘milky spots’ named by Ranvier, and contain mesothelial cells and blood vessels. The submesothelial stroma causes adhesion to cancer cells via integrins and hence, penetration into the peritoneum.

The carcinogenesis of peritoneal cancers can be explained by ‘seed and soil theory’ given by Stephen Paget. It describes how a malignant tumor gives up cells (seeds) that travel in all directions but can only survive and multiply at tumor accepting localizations (soil).

The primary spread from the tumor is due to the extensive intramural growth beyond the serosal layers. The secondary seeding occurs in surgical tumor resections that result in the spillage of malignant cells. The first step is the detachment of cancer cells from the primary due to the down-regulation of intracellular adhesion molecules called E- Cadherin.

The adhesion molecules on mesothelial cells like intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), and vascular adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) interact with tumor cells’ receptors like CD44 and cytokines such as tumor necrosis alpha (TNFa), interleukin- 1beta, and interleukin-1gamma are released. Hence, the basement membrane is exposed. CD44 has a role in metastasis of colorectal and ovarian cancer.

EOPPC pathogenesis can be explained by the theory of retention of ‘differentiating potential’ by mesothelial cells of peritoneum. The cells undergo a malignant transformation called ‘Mullerian metaplasia’.

Histologically, psammoma bodies are characteristic of this tumor.

Asbestos exposure is linked to the development of MPM. Other risk factors are talc, mica, erionite, volcanic ash, radiation, and chronic peritonitis. Asbestos inhalation is responsible for causing cellular damage, which leads to carcinogenesis. The following essential processes explain it:

- Asbestos in the body produces reactive oxygen species damaging DNA.

- Asbestos fibers either physically disrupt the cell cycle genes by entering mesothelial cells or induce inflammation and tumorigenesis by releasing cytokines and growth factors from macrophages and mesothelial cells. Epigenetic modifiers like BRCA-1 associated protein-1 (BAP-1) and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A/ alternative reading frame (CDKN2A/ARF) genes are specific for mesothelial cell transformation in MPM. High-mobility group box 1(HMGB1) produced by mesothelial cells causes necrosis, inflammation, and carcinogenesis. TNFa released by macrophages causes activation of nuclear factor-kb and promotes cell survival.

- Lastly, the large surface area of asbestos renders it to absorb more carcinogens, thus promoting malignancy.

Histologically, they are divided into epithelial, sarcomatous, and bimorphic types.

Leiomyosarcomas show variable smooth muscle actin and eosinophilic spindle cells. It is caused by a deletion in retinoblastoma gene1 (RB1) 10q and PTEN 13q. The mutations at TP53 also add to the risk.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor, a small round blue cell tumor, is associated with Ewing tumor family chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(p13;q12), causing the formation of EWSR1-WT1 fusion oncogene that result in tumor development.

# History and Physical

Clinical presentation in peritoneal cancer is variable depending on the extent of involvement. It is usually diagnosed in late stages due to the vague symptomatology. EOPPC has an indistinguishable presentation from an epithelial ovarian cancer. The Gynecologic Oncology Group has defined the following criterion for EOPPC diagnosis:

- Both ovaries should be of normal size, and the enlargement is benign.

- The surface area of malignant involvement of extra-ovarian sites should be larger than either of the ovaries.

- There should be no malignancy in either ovaries or the tumor in serosa, and cortex of size less than 5X5 mm can be present.

- The tumor in the extra-ovarian site should be serosal both histologically and cytologically.

All the peritoneal carcinomas present with non-specific symptoms like abdominal bloating, distension, nausea, indigestion, anorexia, weight loss, fatigue, constipation, abdominal or back pain. The most common symptoms for presentation are abdominal distension and pain, while usual signs are palpable abdominal mass and ascites. Non-specific abdominal symptoms and ascites occur in 85% of the patients.

Peritoneal carcinomatosis has characteristic symptoms of the primary tumor itself and non-specific symptoms. The secondary metastatic deposits may range from microscopic involvement to nodules to bulky disease, and this extent of involvement and location determines the symptoms.

The growth in both primary and secondary tumors causes pressure effects resulting in mechanical intestinal obstruction. Such patients present in an emergency with an ‘acute abdomen.’  Bowel obstructions are seen mainly in colorectal cancers in about 20% of cases.

# Evaluation

The ‘hidden’ existence of a malignant tumor in the peritoneum is responsible for increased fatality in patients of PC. Therefore, practical methods for early and timely diagnosis are required to prevent surgeries of unresectable tumors and harm from un-necessary chemotherapy drugs.

Techniques for diagnosing PC are crucial as most tumors are often discovered incidentally during the surgeries. It includes:

**CT Scan**

CT scan is the foremost modality used in patients presenting with abdominal pain and distension. In some cases, a preliminary test like Ultrasound (USG) is done. The USG is, however, unable to detect malignant granulations less than 2 cm in size. In PC, ultrasonographic features include ascites which is echo-free or have low-level echoes, and hyperechogenic nodules representing cell deposition in the peritoneum. Adhesion of bowel loops, omental matting, and lymphadenopathy can also be seen.

CT scans can detect granulations of size as small as 5mm.

The CT scan findings in EOPPC are similar together with normal ovaries and the absence of the primary tumor. Chiou et al. reported that common CT scan findings in primary PC are ascites (82%), peritoneal nodules (73%), omental caking (64%), and pelvic mass (36%).

In MPM, the CT scan identifies a solid, heterogeneous mass with irregular margins. It shows ascites in 60-100% of cases. The MPM usually lacks lymph nodes and distant metastasis.

The leiomyosarcomas show a contrast-enhanced heterogeneous solid and cystic mass with septations, necrosis, and calcifications.

The scan in the DSCRT demonstrates a well enhanced lobulated mass comprising of necrosis, hemorrhage, and fibrous components, usually in retrovesical or rectouterine space.

Hence, the CT scan is the primary diagnostic modality and also helps in guiding the interventional radiologists for conducting biopsies and surgeons for performing cytoreductive surgeries.

**MRI Scan**

Gadolinium (Gd)-enhanced MRI is better than the helical CT scan for visualization of small peritoneal carcinomatosis. The detection sensitivity of MRI is 84% for tumors of all sizes as compared to 54% for CT scans. The sensitivity is further increased for tumors with dimensions less than 1 cm (85-90%).

- The primary site of metastasis.

- The morphology of the main tumor as solid, cystic, or mixed.

- The quantity of ascites.

- The presence/absence of peritoneal dissemination.

- Diffuse or nodular spread.

- The lymphadenopathy and lymph nodes involved.

- Distant sites of metastasis if present or not.

**PET Scan**

The mainstay of imaging modalities for PC is CT scans and MRIs. However, small peritoneal implants are not visible by them. In such cases, FDG PET-CT scan (2-[Fluorine 18] fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography) has the potential to improve the detection. It identifies malignant cells due to their increased glucose metabolism. This method helps in early detection, staging, monitoring treatment response, and long-term follow up.

**Invasive Techniques**

The resemblance in radiological appearances of neoplastic and non-neoplastic lesions is responsible for establishing the requirement of invasive techniques. For example, the histological type and subtypes of the tumor can only be differentiated on biopsy. In PC, invasive procedures include:

1. Abdominal percutaneous paracentesis.

2. Diagnostic laparoscopy.

**1. Paracentesis**

**Ascitic fluid analysis**

In PC, ascites is exudative with high protein (2.5 mg/dl), elevated LDH (400 SU), and low glucose (40 mg/dl). The frank bloody ascites are seen in peritoneal carcinomatosis in only 10% cases, and blood-tinged (RBC >10,000 mm) ascites are seen in 8.3% of cases.

**Tumor Markers**

To assess the effectiveness of tumor markers in diagnosing the malignancy, a study to determine the correlation of tumor markers in serum and ascites was done. Tumor markers such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA 19-9, CA-125, CYFRA (cytokeratin fragments) were studied and reported to be highly correlated in both ascites and serum. Also, CA-125, CEA, and CYFRA are produced by normal epithelial cells and thus can be found in certain benign conditions. CYFRA was the only tumor marker found in higher quantities in malignant conditions. Still, no benefit of measuring the tumor markers in ascites than in serum was found for diagnosis.

**Cytology**

Cytology is positive in first specimens in 83% of cases of malignant-related ascites, and yield increases to 93% and 97% if two and three samples are sent respectively.

**2. Laparoscopy**

Laparoscopy is a minimally invasive procedure that provides direct visualization for a directed peritoneal lavage and tumor identification with a sensitivity of 100%. Biopsy of suspected lesions are taken during laparoscopy, and histological diagnosis is made. It is a useful tool for staging the tumor. It also prevents extensive procedures like open laparotomies by differentiating an unresectable tumor from operatable ones. It is done by calculating PCI (peritoneal carcinomatosis index), which assesses the spread of tumors in thirteen abdominal regions and each of which gets a score of 3. The total score ranges from 0-39. The higher the PCI score, the worse the prognosis. It also predicts the response of surgery in PC patients.

# Treatment / Management

The best therapeutic approach is adopting multimodal therapy for peritoneal cancer. A combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy is the mainstay of treatment. Chemotherapy includes systemic and peritoneal chemotherapy. The foundation for implementing this treatment strategy was laid by Dr. Sugarbaker. Multiple clinical trials and systematic reviews have been done over time, which emphasizes the survival benefits of multimodal therapy over the traditional palliative approach (60 months vs. 4 to 12 months).

EOPPC is managed the same way as the serous ovarian carcinomas. Hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and omentectomy is done in all cases. It is followed by chemotherapy and targeted therapy with poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors that block DNA repair. It includes olaparib, rucaparib, niraparib, or veliparib. Platinum-based chemotherapy is favorable and used for the neo-adjuvant treatment strategy. However, many platinum-resistant tumors have proven unresponsive, and multimodal therapy is advantageous in such cases. A phase III clinical trial has indicated the superiority of intraperitoneal chemotherapy over intravenous in terms of overall survival (60 months Vs. 50 months, p=0.03).

In MPM, cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal chemotherapy (IPC) are considered the first line. In intraperitoneal chemotherapy, heated (HIPEC), or early postoperative (EPIC), data collected favors the HIPEC.

In DSRCT, neo-adjuvant chemotherapy is the primary approach for management. Systemic chemotherapy comprising cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, vincristine, etoposide, doxorubicin, and mesna (P6 protocol) is done, followed by aggressive surgical excision. However, the studies on using HIPEC as an adjunct therapy are still going on. Consolidative whole abdominal radiotherapy in the pediatric population in particular, and in adults generally is essential to improve the outcome.

Primary Leiomyosarcomas of the peritoneal cavity is an aggressive tumor that is managed with extensive wide margin surgeries in resectable tumors and systemic chemotherapy for metastatic disease. Pre and postoperative radiotherapy are of paramount importance.

The CRS and HIPEC have yielded tremendous evidence-based significance in this challenging metastatic disease of the peritoneum. Bypassing the hepatic metabolism and first-pass effect, intraperitoneal chemotherapy provides improved therapeutic ratio for drugs and overall better clinical outcomes.

**Cytoreductive Surgery (CRS)**

It is the procedure of surgically removing all the tumors from the parietal and visceral peritoneal layers, and incorporates both en-bloc resections of affected organs or tissues and peritonectomy. No tumor nodule greater than 2.5 mm is left. Electrosurgery is employed for visceral implants where surgical excision remains difficult and to limit bleeding from the visceral peritoneum.  Hence, the goal is the eradication of the macroscopically visible disease. However, due to associated enhanced morbidity, patient selection for this procedure is deemed essential. The PCI (peritoneal carcinomatosis index), a measure to quantify the extent of peritoneal involvement, and the histological tumor grade are used. Good performance status of the patient is also required. The PCI score > 17 in colorectal associated PC and PCI> 12 in gastric cancer are contraindications for the surgery. The tumor involvement of crucial anatomic sites of the abdomen and multiple extra-abdominal metastatic lesions also precludes the CRS.

**Hypothermic Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy (HIPEC)**

It is the process of pumping powerful chemotherapy drugs at a temperature higher than average body temperature (usually 108F/41-43C) into the peritoneal cavity for 2 hours immediately following the surgery. Hyperthermia impairs DNA repair in cells, induces apoptosis, inhibits angiogenesis, and promotes denaturation of proteins. This cytotoxic effect causes cancer cells to die at 104F while the healthy cells survive the temperature till 111F. The surgery improves the absorption ability of drugs, while the loco-regional action of chemotherapy drugs results in homogenous drug distribution and causes minimal exposure to the rest of the body. The goal of this chemotherapy peritoneal dwelling is to remove the microscopic residual disease efficiently. The agents preferred in HIPEC are mitomycin C, Oxaliplatin, cisplatin, and doxorubicin.

Moreover, instead of CRS, the laparoscopic approach can also be utilized for the administration of HIPEC. Laparoscopic HIPEC was found effective in 95% of cases of refractory malignant ascites in a related systematic review of the literature.

**Early Postoperative Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy (EPIC)**

It is another regimen of intraperitoneal delivery of chemotherapy drugs. It is started on a postoperative day one and continued for 5-7 days. The solution containing chemotherapy drugs bathes the mesothelium for 4 to 24 hours, then is drained over 1 hour and, finally, re-administered.

**EPIC VS. HIPEC**

EPIC has the advantage over HIPEC that increased lingering and longer contact time between drugs, and the peritoneal surface is allowed, resulting in more uniform drug distribution and enhanced cytotoxic effects. The instilled solution of chemotherapy drugs covers only 30 to 40% of the peritoneal surface if allowed for a short period. Moreover, the adhesions following surgery are formed with any delay in chemotherapy induction, which renders the cancer cells entrapped in the fibrin deposits. However, the cells are still susceptible to the actions of chemotherapy drugs over five days allowed in EPIC. Further advantages are that closed abdominal technique in EPIC is easier, and drugs do not need to be heated. Therefore, the studies in mice indicated the superiority of EPIC over HIPEC in terms of overall survival.

**Pressurized Intraperitoneal Aerosol Chemotherapy (PIPAC)**

It is a novel approach to administering intraperitoneal drugs in a minimally invasive manner. It is used as a laparoscopic palliative approach in patients in whom CRS +HIPEC is not an indication, has a considerable tumor load, or large quantities of persistent ascites. The goal is to alleviate symptoms and improve quality of life (QoL). The procedure involves connecting a device called Capnopen with an injector and inserting it into the peritoneum through a trocar. There is a nebulizer technology that pressurizes the chemotherapy drugs into aerosols. The process takes 1 hour, and drugs like cisplatin and doxorubicin are used. The drugs are removed after 30 mins by a closed suction system. Through PIPAC, drug delivery is done in a repeated, safe way without adverse systemic effects. This pressurized delivery results in the requirement of smaller doses with resulting higher drug concentration, deeper penetration, and an effective uniform drug distribution.

The studies on the use of PIPAC in PC from intestinal, appendiceal, gastric, and ovarian cancers have emphasized its safety, better tolerability, and control on ascites production.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Peritoneal lymphomatosis

- Peritoneal tuberculosis

- Granulomatous peritonitis from histoplasmosis

- Peritoneal melanosis

- Gliomatosis peritonei

# Staging

Primary PC are always classed as stage III and IV. Thus, high-grade adenocarcinomas that develop from the mesothelium of the peritoneal cavity are the extrauterine adenocarcinomas of Mullerian epithelial origin and are staged like ovarian carcinomas.

STAGE III is the confinement of the tumor within the peritoneal cavity and has further subdivisions as follows:

IIIA: Cancer is found in pelvic organs and lymph nodes within the abdominal cavity.

IIIB: Cancer has spread to the peritoneum outside the pelvis, and the tumor size in the peritoneum is 2 cm or less. Also, lymph nodes outside the peritoneum will be involved.

IIIC: Cancer involves the peritoneum outside the pelvis, and the tumor size in the peritoneum is greater than 2 cm. It also has spread to lymph nodes outside the peritoneum.

In stage IV, cancer has metastasized to other organs of the body. It is further subdivided as:

IVA: Malignant pleural effusions develop

IVB: Cancer has spread to organs and tissues outside the peritoneal cavity, such as the liver, lungs, or groin lymph nodes

Secondary PC was described by Gilly et al. and is classed as follows:

- 0: no macroscopic disease

- I: Malignant lesion of size < 5mm localized to one part of the abdomen.

- II: Lesion is < 5mm but diffuses to the whole abdomen.

- III: Malignant granulations are >5mm but <2cm

- IV: Large malignant cakes > 2cm

# Prognosis

PC is considered a terminal illness with a poor prognosis. Whether cancer originates in the peritoneum or spreads from somewhere else, it is advanced and stage IV. The primary peritoneal cancer has a survival rate varying from 11-17 months.

The factors affecting EOPPC in the univariate analysis include patient age, stage, performance status, and residual tumor size after CRS, and in multivariate analysis performance status (p<0.001) and residual tumor size (p=0.03) are significant.

In MPM, histological type holds prognostic significance, with the epithelioid subtype having the best prognosis. In a study, median survival in epithelioid MPM was 55 months compared to 13 months in the biphasic subtype. Moreover, sarcomatoid features (p=0.0006), depth of invasion (p=0.02), CCR 2-3 (p=0.02), and inflammatory stroma (p=0.04) were other factors associated with worse prognosis.

In DSRCT, the prognosis is dismal, with a 5-year survival of only 15% to 30%. The extra-abdominal presence of tumors is associated with worse prognosis, while surgical resection in loco-regional disease and radiotherapy in metastatic disease offers better survival.

The stage and size of leiomyosarcoma are the two factors influencing its overall bad prognosis (64% at five years).

Prognostic factors associated with secondary PC from GIT tumors include tumor histopathology, stage of the tumor, PCI score, and CCR score.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Primary peritoneal cancer is a rare malignancy, and dissemination from the primary organ site represents the late stage of cancer. Both manifest a poor prognosis. The bewildering presentation, intricate diagnostic methods, composite management, adverse treatment effects, and despair related to the news of this stage IV are the hurdles associated with it. It demands a competitive and cooperative team consisting of nurses, radiologists, surgeons, oncologists, and psychiatrists to manage the disease physically and psychologically. The continuous uplifting of the spirits of patients during the advanced surgery and perilous chemotherapy is critical. The advancement in technology and the development of HIPEC has increased the survival rate and improved the quality of life.

Further, new non-invasive detection methods should be developed for peritoneal cancer such as liquid biopsy (serum and ascitic fluid) containing biomarkers consisting of ‘exosomes,’ that protect cancer cells from degradation.