CIsplatin has several black box warnings, including nephrotoxicity, peripheral neuropathy, severe nausea and vomiting, and myelosupression.

Gastrointestinal toxicity - Nausea and vomiting are dose-related side effects that can be severe and lead to metabolic derangements; this can persist for up to 1 week after administration. The strong recommendation is for prophylactic treatment with antiemetic agents.

Myelosuppression - The chief concern with myelosuppression secondary to cisplatin use is the morbidity and mortality associated with infection. Monitor CBC and frequently assess for signs of infection. High clinical suspicion is necessary for infection and warrants a full workup.

Neurotoxicity - Cisplatin is a dose-dependent neurotoxin.

Nephrotoxicity - Severe renal toxicity, including acute renal failure, may occur with Cisplatin administration. These effects are cumulative and dose-related. Pretreatment hydration plays a significant role in preventing renal toxicity.

Ocular toxicity/retinopathy - These adverse effects can manifest in a variety of ways, from loss of color discrimination to cortical blindness. Improvement usually occurs after discontinuation of cisplatin, and in some cases, total recovery may be possible.

Ototoxicity - Monitoring for ototoxicity includes assessing the patient for ringing in the ears, high-frequency hearing loss, and decreased ability to follow conversations. Deafness has been reported but is not a common effect of cisplatin use. Loss of hearing acuity can be detrimental to language development in pediatric populations.

Gonadotoxicity - Cisplatin is toxic to the gonads; it can cause impairment of spermatogenesis and dose-dependent ovarian failure leading to premature menopause.