# Introduction

The major and minor psoas muscles and the iliacus muscle make up the iliopsoas musculotendinous unit (IPMU). Commonly called iliopsoas muscle. This complex muscle system can function as a unit or intervene as separate muscles. It is essential for correct standing or sitting lumbar posture, stabilizing the coxofemoral joint, and is crucial during walking and running. The fascia covering the iliopsoas muscle creates multiple fascial connections, relating the muscle to different viscera and muscle areas. Several disorders can affect IPMU at the level of its insertion (tendon) or involving the fleshy part. To solve these dysfunctions, the doctor will indicate which therapy will be most useful, conservative or surgical, as well as physiotherapy or an osteopathic approach. There are multiple anatomical variations of IPMU, and in case of pain and disturbances, it is important to perform instrumental examinations before making a precise diagnosis. With the current scientific knowledge, one can not imagine anatomy as segments but rather as a functional continuum.

# Structure and Function

The iliopsoas musculotendinous unit (IPMU) is the primary flexor of the thigh with the ability to add and extra-rotate the coxofemoral joint. If the latter is fixed, the contraction of the iliopsoas muscle flexes the trunk and inclines it from the contraction side.

The muscles can act separately. The iliacus muscle stabilizes the pelvis and allows a correct hip flexion during the run; the psoas major muscle stabilizes the lumbar spine during the sitting position and the thigh flexion in a supine position or when standing.

The iliopsoas musculotendinous unit consists of three muscles

**Anatomy**

The iliopsoas musculotendinous unit is part of the inner muscles of the hip and forms part of the posterior abdominal wall, lying posteriorly at the retroperitoneum level.

- The psoas major has a fusiform shape and originates from the transverse processes and the lateral surfaces of the bodies of the first four lumbar vertebrae; it involves the transverse process of the last thoracic vertebra and the vertebral body.

- The psoas minor muscle is located in front of the major psoas, originating from the last thoracic vertebra and the first lumbar; it is present in 60% to 65% of the population.

- The iliacus muscle has a fan shape and originates from the upper two-thirds of the iliac fossa and the lateral parts of the sacral bone wing. Its bundles (together with the major psoas muscle bundles) pass under the inguinal ligament and in front of the hip joint. The muscle bundles of the iliac muscle merge into the large psoas muscle tendon and the lesser trochanter. Small fibers that make the iliac muscle, known as the infratrochanteric muscle, lie lateral to the iliac muscle, widening its contact surface to the iliac bone.

Below the tendinous unit is the iliopectineal bursa (aka iliopsoas bursa, which separates the tendon from the bone surface and the proximal portion of the femur.

**Fascia**

The iliopsoas musculotendinous unit has many anatomical relationships through the fascial system surrounding it. Superiorly, the IPMU fascia merges with the chest fascia (endothoracic fascia) and posteriorly merges with the arcuate ligament of the diaphragm muscle.

Anteriorly, the IPMU fascia merges with the fascia that covers the kidneys, the pancreas, the descending aorta, the inferior vena cava, the colon (ascending and descending), the duodenum, and the cecum colon.

# Embryology

There are no detailed studies on the embryological development of the muscles forming the iliopsoas. The iliopsoas musculotendinous unit (IPMU) is derived from the paraxial mesoderm.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The common iliac artery emits thin branches for the psoas major and minor muscle, while the most important artery for the blood supply of the muscle is the external iliac artery (born from the common iliac), which sends blood branches in its course to the iliacus muscle.

The external iliac vein collects blood from the psoas major and minor muscles and the iliacus muscle; it is the continuation of the femoral vein.

The lymphatic system that involves the iliopsoas muscle is the external iliac lymphatic plexus, which will merge into the common iliac plexus.

# Nerves

The short collateral branches of the lumbar plexus (L1-L3) innervate the psoas major and minor muscles, while the femoral nerve or terminal nerve of the lumbar plexus (L1-L4) innervates the iliacus muscle.

# Muscles

In a human model, the psoas major muscle fibers are mainly anaerobic or IIA fibers (about 60%), while the remainder is aerobic or type I fibers (about 40%).

In an animal model, the aerobic and anaerobic fibers of the psoas minor muscle are similar in percentage.

# Physiologic Variants

There are many anatomical variations of the iliopsoas muscle in the scientific literature.

- The iliopsoas tendon is the union between the psoas major muscle and the iliacus muscle; according to a recent review, there is a significant percentage of finding a bifid tendon (two tendons) at the level of the lesser trochanter of the femur (about 26%) unilaterally.

- The psoas minor muscle is bilaterally absent for about 40% of the population.

- There are anatomical variants for the iliacus muscle. In particular, on the left, there may be a supernumerary iliacus; it would start from the middle third of the iliac crest, separated from the main iliacus muscle but consistently innervated by the femoral nerve and with insertion together with the tendon of the iliopsoas complex.

- The innervation that affects the iliopsoas complex may present variations. The lumbar plexus and the femoral nerve normally pass behind the musculature of the psoas major. In some cases, the lumbar plexus can penetrate the psoas major muscle, giving the classic clinical symptoms of nerve entrapment.

# Surgical Considerations

**Psoas Abscesses**

The presence of an abscess in the psoas major muscle body is a rare event but needs aspiration. The causes are different, including the proximity to visceral and lymphatic structures, which can invade the muscle and infect the contractile structure.Staphylococcus aureus, streptococci, or Escherichia coli. A correct diagnosis requires computed tomography and blood tests; treatment requires abscess drainage and eventual cleaning of necrotic tissue and antibiotic therapy.

**Impingement of the Iliopsoas Tendon**

Following an operation to replace the femoral head, the movement of the artificial head during hip extension may beat against the surrounding soft tissues, including the tendon of the iliopsoas complex. In this case, the surgeon may decide to review the space between the femoral head and the tendon.

**Iliopsoas Bursitis**

Bursitis that involves the tendon of the iliopsoas complex is an inflammation that enlarges the volume of the bursa and produces pain on movement; its etiology is not entirely clarified. It can result from trauma, inflammatory arthritis, excessive use of the tendon in sports actions, or previous hip surgery.

**Other Surgical Motivations**

In the pediatric population, in the presence of spasticity (cerebral palsy and other neurological diseases) and the presence of important contractures, surgery is performed with distal tenotomy.

# Clinical Significance

The iliopsoas muscle runs near different viscera; some pathologies affecting the muscle can simulate a disease of the internal organs. In the presence of a lesion of the right muscle, the pain is felt in the lower right quadrant, mimicking appendicitis. Hypertrophy of the muscle can prevent the correct passage of the fecal material of the colon. This may be responsible for compression of the femoral nerve and the lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh at the level of the lacuna musculorum and the genitofemoral nerve at the level of the vessel’s lacuna gap (lacuna vasculorum), below the inguinal ligament.

It is difficult to diagnose a specific problem in the complex iliopsoas, but the following will demonstrate some evaluation procedures for identifying recurrent dysfunctions.

**Iliopsoas Hematoma**

A hematoma in the iliopsoas muscle could occur from direct trauma or a spontaneous hematoma. The latter could be caused by hemophilia, liver disease (cirrhosis), or errors in blood coagulation management (previous cardiac valve interventions).

**Iliopsoas Snapping**

Iliopsoas snapping (IS) or coxa saltans is a dysfunction of the iliopsoas complex, which creates audible and palpable noise during active hip movements, with or without pain. There are three types of IS: external, internal, and intra-articular.

After an accurate history (about 50% of IS occurs after a trauma to the hip) and a general palpatory inspection to highlight some anomalies, the active iliopsoas snapping test is performed. From the position of the Fabere test with the patient supine, the operator places his hand on the inguinal area. The patient returns the lower limb to a neutral position (abduction, external rotation, extension, and rest).

**Iliacus Muscle Hematoma**

Hematoma of the iliacus muscle is an infrequent event. As with the psoas major muscle, hematoma could occur due to diseases related to blood coagulation, either hereditary or acquired.

**Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy**

Using magnetic resonance imaging tests in patients with facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, the iliopsoas muscle was shown to be (in 67% of patients) less involved in the disease, with a course of slower strength loss. The tone and size are maintained over time, but the patient cannot use the muscle well (neuromuscular coordination), particularly during walking. These characteristics are also found in other dystrophies (dystrophinopathy).

**Groin Pain**

Groin pain can result from iliopsoas tendinitis, which could derive from previous surgery or functional overloads. In the first case, an endoscopic iliopsoas tenotomy is generally recommended, while in the second case, it is advisable to reduce the muscle's workload.

# Other Issues

Conservative therapy for iliopsoas snapping includes physiotherapeutic procedures.

In the acute phase, the main approach is rest and anti-inflammatory drugs. When the treating clinician approves physiotherapy, several exercises will be demonstrated for the patient, including stretching the iliopsoas complex, active and passive hip joint mobilization, and exercises that improve the lumbar lordosis posture.

The iliopsoas muscle could cause compression of the femoral nerve and cause knee pain. Before deciding on the surgical treatment to release the femoral nerve, the patient should learn stretching exercises to reduce the tension generated by the muscle. Generally, surgery can be avoided if the patient can follow the physiotherapy indications. According to the British Medical Acupuncture Society, an alternative treatment can be acupuncture for iliopsoas muscle, which has proved to be effective.

The osteopathic manual approach can intervene to support physiotherapy, particularly in the post-surgical phases, to reduce pain or act on deep muscle-articular areas with soft techniques and without side effects.