The development and differentiation of the blood-brain barrier occur in three stages: angiogenesis, differentiation, and maturation.

**Angiogenesis**

The development of the blood-brain barrier begins with angiogenesis, which occurs early in gestation during neural tube development. In angiogenesis, preexisting vessels guided by vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) invade a developing neuroectoderm and give rise to new vessels. Downstream VEGF signaling is essential, supporting angiogenesis via endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and survival.

**Differentiation**

The differentiation phase allows the BBB to be appropriately structured through the induction of anti-angiogenic signals and the recruitment of astrocytes and pericytes to the newly formed vessels.

**Maturation**

Maturation and maintenance of the BBB are accomplished by the persistence of TJ protein expression and their redistribution throughout the BBB structure. Close contact between endothelial cells, astrocytes, and pericytes sustains BBB integrity and function as a stabilized neurovascular unit.

Alterations in the development of the BBB and the expression of TJs may potentially lead to anomalies later in life and an increased predisposition to develop metabolic diseases. Maternal obesity increases BBB permeability in offspring, leading to higher exposure to leptin and ghrelin. This increased exposure to leptin and ghrelin can contribute to metabolic defects in adult life, predisposing children to developing metabolic syndrome in childhood or early adulthood.