Understanding the anatomy of the femoral muscles is incredibly important for clinicians to determine a diagnosis for their patients. Muscle pain and weakness can also signal a nerve or vessel injury.

Damage to the femoral nerve causes paralysis of the quadriceps, so there are significant deficits in the hip flexion and extension of the leg. In cases of obturator nerve damage, the patient will present with weakness in adduction, and a lateral swinging of the limb during walking, then there is a lack of opposition to the abductors. When the sciatic nerve is damaged, the extension of the hip and flexion of the knee becomes impaired, along with several deficits in the foot and ankle. Clinicians can easily recognize this type of injury because the patient will increase the flexion of the hip to lift the dropped foot off of the ground.

**Psoas Abscess**

A psoas abscess is a rare clinical diagnosis of an infectious collection of material contained in the psoas muscle. This condition presents with non-specific symptoms, including back/flank pain, fever, and weight loss. The most common microorganism is Staphylococcus aureus. The abscess can occur from hematogenous spread with increased risk in patients with diabetes mellitus, IV drug use, AIDS, and renal failure. Additionally, the abscess can form from spreading from a secondary site; this is seen in Crohn disease or after surgical instrumentation. A positive psoas sign can be seen on examination, in which hip extension increases a patient's pain. The diagnosis is made using ultrasound and CT. The management includes drainage and antibiotic therapy.

**Pes Anserine Bursitis**

The pes anserine bursa lies between the pes anserine and the medial tibia. The pes anserine is a structure made of the conjoined tendons of the gracilis, semitendinosus, and sartorius. This bursitis is common in middle-aged females. The patient commonly presents with pain on the medial aspect of the knee with tenderness to palpation over the medial tendons at 90 degrees of knee flexion. The management includes rest, ice, and NSAIDs for symptomatic management.

**Hamstring Strains**

The hamstrings are commonly strained in activities such as running or jumping; these injuries can be very painful. Many hamstring injuries exist, including strains, complete and partial avulsions, tendinopathy, and referred pain. Of these injuries, hamstring sprains are the most common. Sports with an increased incidence of hamstring sprains include football, soccer, rugby, and track, as these sports involve the motion of sprinting, kicking, and high-speed movements. Hamstring strains are 64% more likely to occur in a male athlete compared to a female. The injury is managed conservatively and includes rest and physical rehabilitation.

**Patella Tendon Reflex**

This reflex is tested during a physical examination by striking the patellar ligament while the patient is seated with legs dangling. An intact reflex causes the quadriceps muscles to contract, and the leg extends. This reflex tests the femoral nerve and the L2-L4 spinal cord segments.