The majority of the effects of glucocorticoids result from the binding of cortisol to intracellular glucocorticoid receptors (GR). This complex translocates in the nucleus to change gene expression in a variety of ways. Intracellular GR receptors are bound to stabilizing proteins like Hsp-90 in their steroid-free state.

Once bound to the glucocorticoid, the steroid-GR complex moves towards the DNA and acts on the GRE (glucocorticoid response element) elements of DNA.  In this way, the complex induces transcription of the target DNA sequence (transactivation), or it acts in combination with other transcription factors to act on other parts of DNA to transactivate or to repress gene transcription. This complex may also attach itself to nGRE (negative glucocorticoid response elements) to downregulate or repress gene transcription directly.

There is a hypothesis that glucocorticoids act at a post-translational level. They stabilize or destabilize specific mRNAs to further modulate protein formation.

The anti-inflammatory effects of glucocorticoids are exerted via transpression while the metabolic effects via “transactivation.” About 20% of all genes are under the control of glucocorticoids. Transactivation induces the formation of lipocortin-1. Lipocortin 1 decreases the production of phospholipase A2 (PLA2 is involved in the formation of prostaglandins and leukotrienes), inhibits COX-2 (post-transcriptional activity), promotes neutrophil detachment from the endothelium, and reduces neutrophil migration through the endothelium of blood vessels. These events result in an increased WBC count.

Transpression or gene inhibition decreases (a) the production of COX-2, (b) inducible NOS, and(c) most inflammatory cytokines (IL-1 thru IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-13, GM-CSF, TNF-α, Interferon-γ). Other effects of glucocorticoids on protein, fat, and glucose metabolism are also exerted via the same mechanism of action, i.e., by modulating enzyme synthesis, which in turn controls subsequent events.