The standard management of mucormycosis requires early diagnosis, a **reversal of risk factors**and underlying illness, surgical debridement, and prompt administration of intravenous antifungals - usually amphotericin B.  This entails the prompt management of hyperglycemia, acidosis, and cessation of immunosuppressive agents when possible.

Amphotericin B is considered first-line therapy for mucormycosis. The lipid formulation of amphotericin B is administered in high doses intravenously once a day as initial therapy. The initial starting dose is 5 mg/kg IV daily, with a maximum dose of 10 mg/kg IV. Treatment duration depends upon the patient's clinical picture.

Surgical debridement of infected tissue should be urgently performed to limit the further spread of infection. Aggressive surgical debridement of necrotic tissue should take place immediately. This may involve radical facial resections, partial pneumonectomy, colectomy, etc., in accordance with the site of disease. Similar to necrotizing fasciitis, this requires very aggressive surgical management and often carried dramatic morbidity. Unless the immune status can be restored, the outcomes are unfortunately very poor even with the most aggressive therapies and drastic surgical intervention.

Posaconazole or isavuconazole has some evidence as second-line therapy in mucormycosis. For salvage treatment, posaconazole 200 mg IV four times daily is recommended. The guidelines do not support the combination of amphotericin and posaconazole.

Other adjuncts include hyperbaric oxygen. The increased oxygen pressure improves the ability of neutrophils to kill the organism and facilitates wound healing.