# Continuing Education Activity

Posterior shoulder instability is a rare clinical entity that represents a spectrum of instability ranging from posterior subluxation to posterior dislocation. Posterior shoulder instability is much less common than anterior shoulder instability and is challenging to diagnose. Nonoperative management is the first-line treatment in most patients with operative treatment reserved for those with large bony and/or soft tissue defects after a traumatic event as well as those who have failed nonoperative management. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of posterior shoulder instability and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of posterior shoulder instability
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of posterior shoulder instability.
- Review the management options available for posterior shoulder instability.
- Describe the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients who develop posterior shoulder instability.

# Introduction

With little bony constraint, the glenohumeral joint is the most unstable in the human body. Cases of anterior shoulder instability can be found in literature dating back to the time of Hippocrates. However, posterior shoulder instability was not reported in the literature until 1741 by White et al.

Posterior instability is less common than anterior instability but is increasingly recognized in the athletic population due to a better understanding of the underlying pathophysiology and the ability to treat with arthroscopic procedures.

**Anatomy**

The shoulder joint is the least congruent joint in the body with the joint commonly described as resembling a golf ball on a tee. In fact, only about one-third of the humeral head articulates with the glenoid at any given time.

Static stabilizers of the shoulder include the glenoid labrum, which attaches to the periphery of the glenoid and increases the depth of the socket. Other static stabilizers include the articular congruity, glenohumeral ligaments, joint capsule, and negative intra-articular pressure. The most important static stabilizers against posterior translation are the posterior labrum, capsule, and the posterior inferior glenohumeral ligament (PIGHL).

The rotator cuff muscles are the most important dynamic stabilizers of the shoulder. Contraction of the rotator cuff provides a concavity-compression effect of the humeral head against the glenoid aiding stability and increasing the load needed to translate the humeral head.

# Etiology

The etiology of recurrent posterior instability is multifactorial and complex. However, three broad processes have been implicated in the pathogenesis, including repetitive microtrauma, acute traumatic events, and atraumatic causes.

Repetitive microtrauma to the posteroinferior capsulolabral shoulder complex is the most common cause of recurrent posterior subluxation.

Acute trauma to the shoulder may lead to recurrent posterior instability. Patients will often recall the incident prior to the onset of symptoms. These patients sustain a high impact injury to the anterior shoulder or an axial load with the shoulder in the position of flexion and internal rotation. Such injuries can be seen in American football linemen.

Patients may also report posterior instability with no history of trauma. This atraumatic presentation is the least common and is usually attributed to ligamentous laxity.

# Epidemiology

Posterior shoulder instability is much less common than anterior shoulder instability accounting for 2% to 12% of total cases of instability.

# Pathophysiology

**Pathophysiology**

An isolated pathologic lesion causing posterior instability is rare. Most often, the condition is multifactorial, involving several anatomic and pathologic identities. Bony abnormalities that have been implicated include increased humeral retroversion, glenoid retroversion, and glenoid hypoplasia.

- Excessive capsular laxity

- Loss of integrity to the rotator interval (coracohumeral ligament and superior glenohumeral ligament)

- Injury to the superior glenohumeral ligament

- Large capsular recess

- Disruptions of the glenolabral socket

Several studies have also highlighted the importance of the inferior glenohumeral ligament (IGHL) in maintaining the posterior stability of the shoulder.

Episodes of posterior instability commonly occur with the arm in mid-range of motion when the glenohumeral ligaments are not tensioned. Therefore, other pathomechanics must be involved other than the disruption of the capsuloligamentous structures. During mid-range of motion, Antonio and Harryman describe 3 mechanisms as the primary stabilizing forces of the glenohumeral joint:

- Geometric conformity of the articular surfaces

- Labral contribution to the glenoid fossa depth

- Compression of the humeral head into the glenoid by muscular forces

Disruption in any of these stabilizing mechanisms contributes to the development of posterior instability.

Controversy exists in regard to the role of the rotator interval in preventing posterior instability as cadaveric studies have yielded conflicting results. In cadaveric specimens, Harryman et al. demonstrated increased posterior and inferior translation as well as frank dislocation after selective sectioning of the rotator interval.

As one of the primary static stabilizers of the shoulder, labral injury has been associated with posterior instability. A pure detachment of the posterior labrum is described as a reverse Bankart lesion. When associated with a fragment of bone resulting from a glenoid fracture, the pathology is termed a reverse bony Bankart lesion. An incomplete and concealed avulsion of the posteroinferior labrum is known as a Kim lesion, and failure to identify and address this lesion may result in persistent posterior instability.

# History and Physical

**Clinical Presentation**

The clinical presentation of a patient presenting with posterior shoulder instability can be variable and difficult to recognize as symptoms and exam findings are often nonspecific and subtle. Adding to the complexity is that most of these patients are young and involved with athletics. There may be concomitant shoulder pathology such as impingement syndrome.

**Physical Exam**

A thorough physical exam is necessary as the clinical entity may not be apparent in history alone. Findings can be subtle, and both shoulders should be fully examined to detect any side-to-side differences. An examination should include inspection, palpation, range-of-motion (ROM), strength testing, neurovascular tests, as well as provocative maneuvers. Typically, ROM, strength testing and neurovascular examination will be normal in patients with posterior shoulder instability.

Examination maneuvers specific to posterior shoulder instability include the jerk test, Kim test, posterior drawer, and the load-and-shift test.

The Kim test was first reported in the literature by Kim et al. as a means to detect posteroinferior lesions of the labrum.

# Evaluation

**Plain Radiographs**

Initial assessment of the shoulder should begin with plain radiographs. The views to obtain include a true AP of the scapula (Grashey), internal and external rotation views, scapular Y, and an axillary view.

**Advanced Imaging**

Advanced imaging consists of an MRI to better evaluate soft tissue pathology. Contrast enhancement [magnetic resonance arthrogram (MRA)] is the most sensitive diagnostic test for detecting posterior labral and capsular lesions.

- Type I**: i**ncomplete detachment

- Type II: incomplete and concealed avulsion (Kim lesion)

- Type III: chondrolabral erosion

- Type IV: flap tear

Computed tomography (CT) will help to delineate bony morphology better, especially when pathology is noted on plain radiographs. CT scans are indicated when that are concerns for glenoid retroversion, fractures, or hypoplasia, as well as reverse Hill-Sachs lesions. Recognition of these bony abnormalities is important as they may have implications in treatment.

# Treatment / Management

**Overview**

When formulating a treatment plan for a patient with symptomatic posterior shoulder instability, goals should include reducing pain, improving function, and preventing recurrence. However, determining the optimal treatment can prove challenging as management is dictated by many factors, including the underlying etiology, as well as osseous and soft tissue pathology. Furthermore, little is known on the natural history of a single traumatic posterior instability episode or of untreated posterior instability.

**Posterior Shoulder Dislocation**

Posterior shoulder dislocations (PSD) are much less common than anterior shoulder dislocations and are usually associated with high-energy trauma or seizures.

In their systematic review of posterior shoulder dislocations, Paul et al. provide a treatment algorithm that takes into account the general health and activity of the patient as well as the size of the humeral head defect.

Operative management is reserved for those with continued posterior instability secondary to soft tissue lesions or humeral head defects.

For larger HH defects, treatment includes bone grafting procedures or arthroplasty. In their review of posterior shoulder dislocations, Robinson and Aderinto recommend disimpaction of the HH defect with autogenous bone grafting if the injury is less than 2 weeks old and nonanatomic procedures if the lesion is recognized after 2 weeks.

**Nonoperative Management of Posterior Shoulder Instability**

A conservative approach of at least 6 months is typically the first line of treatment for patients with posterior instability, with outcomes dependent on the underlying etiology.

Patients with posterior shoulder instability secondary to a traumatic event may have less success with nonoperative management.

**Operative Management of Posterior Shoulder Instability**

The primary indication of surgical intervention is recurrent symptomatic posterior shoulder instability recalcitrant to conservative treatment. Surgery may be indicated for those with instability secondary to a traumatic etiology and identifiable soft tissue or osseous defect. Surgery is also indicated for those who remain symptomatic after an adequate trial of physical therapy with avoidance of provocative activities.

**Open verse Arthroscopic Stabilization of Soft Tissue Defects**

Several different open soft tissue procedures have been described in the literature, including:

- Subscapularis transfer

- Reverse Putti-Platt procedure

- Staple capsulorrhaphy

- Various capsular shift techniques

While good results have been obtained with open procedures for anterior instability, open treatment of posterior instability has not been proved favorable with a 30% to 70% failure rate.

In the case of minimal bony pathology, the use of all arthroscopic treatment has surpassed open procedures for the management of posterior shoulder instability. Reasons for this include improved instrumentation and implants, less invasive nature and morbidity of arthroscopy, faster recovery, ability to view the entire labrum and to address concomitant pathology in the shoulder.

When treating the patient arthroscopically, the patient is positioned in either the beach chair or lateral position, depending on surgeon preference. Generally, lateral positioning is favored as this allows more effective access to the inferior and posterior quadrants of the shoulder.

The labrum can then be visualized from both the anterior and posterior portals. While viewing from the posterior portal, it is recommended to elevate and prepare the labrum from the midglenoid portal. Approaching the posterior labrum from this portal allows for a flat trajectory relative to the glenoid decreasing likelihood of chondral damage. Additionally, elevating the labrum from the posterior portal may increase the likelihood of further labral injury.

The number of anchors placed is dictated by the extent of the tear and surgeon preference. For isolated posterior capsulolabral pathology, the use of three to four suture anchors spaced roughly 5 mm apart on the glenoid is usually sufficient.

A capsular plication is a technique to reduce redundant capsular tissue arthroscopically by the use of suture fixation.

**Osseous Defects and Procedures
**

Patients with posterior shoulder instability may also have osseous defects, including HH impaction fractures and/or glenoid deficiency that require intervention in addition to soft tissue procedures. As previously discussed, HH defects are seen after a posterior shoulder dislocation, and if the lesion is large enough or if the patient continues to experience symptoms of instability, then intervention is required. Management of HH defects depends on the size of the lesion and includes both nonanatomic and anatomic procedures. Nonanatomic procedures include the transfer of the subscapularis into the defect on the HH as well as the Neer modification of this procedure. Anatomic reconstruction using either autograft or allograft to fill the HH defect has also been described.

Treatment for posterior instability attributable to glenoid defects such as fracture, dysplasia, or excessive retroversion may be organized into two broad categories, including posterior bone block procedure or posterior opening wedge osteotomy. Both of these procedures address posterior glenoid deficiency but may also be indicated in patients with recurrent posterior instability after soft-tissue procedures.

Posterior bone block procedures have been described in the treatment of posterior glenoid wall deficiency.

Posterior glenoid opening wedge osteotomy was first published in the literature by Scott in 1967 and has been described in the treatment of excessive posterior glenoid retroversion.

Debate exists on the amount of glenoid bone loss that necessitates a reconstructive procedure. Studies show that glenohumeral stability is compromised with glenoid articular bone loss of 20% to 25%.

# Differential Diagnosis

Posterior shoulder instability is an uncommon entity and can be difficult to diagnose, especially in cases involving repetitive microtrauma.

- Suprascapular nerve entrapment

- Quadrilateral space syndrome

- Posterior glenoid spur (Bennett lesion)

- Early osteoarthritis

- Tumor

Clinicians should also distinguish between laxity and symptomatic instability. Multiple studies have shown that healthy subjects may demonstrate as much glenohumeral translation as those with symptomatic instability.

Lastly, clinicians should also consider those with psychological problems who are able to voluntarily subluxate their shoulders. These patients may develop instability in adolescence for secondary gain and are able to willingly subluxate their shoulders with the arm at the side.

# Prognosis

Many factors make interpreting the literature of posterior instability challenging, including the low incidence of this clinical entity, variability in patient characteristics, surgical techniques, implants, and rehabilitation protocols, and the limited number of high-quality studies. Literature shows open surgical techniques have been reported to improve outcomes with success rates between 80% to 95%.

Initial reports of arthroscopic management of posterior instability were not as encouraging as those treated for anterior instability. However, recent literature has shown success rates of around 90% for those with posterior instability after sporting injuries.

In the largest patient cohort to date, Bradley et al. reported on 200 shoulders in 183 athletes prospectively treated with arthroscopic capsulolabral repair for posterior shoulder instability.

Arner et al. published a case series on 56 American football players who underwent arthroscopic posterior capsulolabral repair for posterior shoulder instability. At a mean follow-up of 44.7 months, the authors found a 93% return to sport, with 79% returning at the same level. Significant improvements were also seen on the ASES score and subjective scores of stability, ROM strength, pain, and function. The failure rate in this study was 3.5%.

In 2015, DeLong et al. published a systematic review of the literature on arthroscopic and open posterior shoulder stabilization dating from 1946 to 2014.

# Complications

Complications of posterior shoulder dislocations include osteonecrosis, posttraumatic arthritis, and joint stiffness. Osteonecrosis of the humeral head may occur after a simple dislocation but is more commonly seen with associated fracture-dislocations of the anatomic neck.

Surgical complications for recurrent posterior shoulder instability are unique to the specific procedure performed. Complications of open treatment include infection, pain, weakness, and shoulder stiffness.

The most common complication following surgical treatment of posterior shoulder instability is the recurrence of instability with rates varying depending on treatment method and cause of instability. DeLong et al. found an 8.1% rate of recurrence in over 800 shoulders treated via arthroscopic treatment as well as a recurrence rate of 19.4% in over 300 shoulders undergoing open surgical procedures.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Postoperative care following surgery for posterior shoulder instability involves immobilization in a shoulder brace with the arm in a position that decreases stress on the posterior soft tissues of the shoulder. Recommendations are to immobilize the shoulder in about 30 degrees of abduction and neutral rotation with care to avoid internal rotation, which puts stress on the posterior soft tissue structures.

Active range of motion is started around 6 weeks postoperatively with strengthening programs beginning 2 to 3 months after surgery. A sport-specific rehabilitation program may be started once the patient achieves 80% strength of the contralateral shoulder, which is typically seen 6 months postoperatively.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Posterior shoulder instability is rare compared to anterior shoulder instability and is commonly misdiagnosed or overlooked. Posterior shoulder instability may arise secondary to repetitive damage to the posterior shoulder structures in young, overhead athletes or secondary to blunt trauma with the shoulder in a provocative position as seen in contact athletes. Overhead athletes should pay particular attention to their throwing mechanics and improve deficits in their kinetic chain as dysfunction has been shown to be a risk factor for reinjury after surgical stabilization.

Young athletes should seek out an orthopedic specialist if he or she experiences the insidious onset of posterior shoulder pain, symptoms of instability, decreasing performance with throwing activities, or if similar symptoms develop after a traumatic episode. Athletes with symptoms secondary to repetitive microtrauma may benefit the most from nonsurgical treatment. Overhead athletes may be advised to avoid throwing activities for a minimum of 4 to 6 weeks and partake in an intensive rehabilitation program consisting of strengthening the muscles around the shoulder and correcting throwing mechanics.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The optimal management of patients with posterior shoulder instability requires an interdisciplinary effort, which most commonly includes athletic trainers, physical therapists, primary care physicians, and orthopedic specialists. Athletic trainers (ATCs) are often the initial point of contact with athletes who develop symptoms of posterior shoulder instability. They should have a close relationship with team physicians or other orthopedic specialists in the area to help facilitate the necessary care required for these patients. Whether seeking nonoperative management or in the postoperative period, the role of a physical therapist is vital to guiding the athlete back to play. Physical therapists will be required to detail their progression and any barriers to improvement. The orthopedic surgeon is ultimately responsible for the management of the patient’s condition and should be in close communication with their physical therapist and athletic trainer to monitor progress. [Level 5]

In the case of a posterior shoulder dislocation, other disciplines may play an important role. When a patient presents to the emergency department with a posterior shoulder dislocation, the emergency room physician must properly diagnose the condition and subsequently reduce the shoulder. The emergency room physician should direct the patient to the care of an orthopedic surgeon for further management. In patients with epilepsy causing shoulder dislocation, patients will need the care of a neurologist for anti-epileptic management. [Level 5]