Osteomalacia is a metabolic bone disease characterized by impaired mineralization of bone matrix. Bone creation occurs by the deposition of hydroxyapatite crystals on the osteoid matrix. Below details of the most common and sometimes overlooked causes of this disease are described.

**Decreased Vitamin D Production**

- Cold weather climates reduce skin sunlight exposure and cutaneous synthesis.

- Dark skin and relatively increased melanin compete with 7-dehydrocholesterol ultraviolet-B (UVB) light absorption.

- Obesity can lead to increased adipose sequestration, which results in less calcidiol substrate available for activation.

- In the elderly vitamin D production decreases, and in general the storage of vitamin D declines with age.

**Decreased Vitamin D Absorption**

- Nutritional deficiency can cause vitamin D deficiency even with adequate sunlight exposure.

- Malabsorptive syndromes such as Crohn disease, cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, cholestasis, and surgical alteration (i.e., gastric bypass) of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract are associated with deficient absorption of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K).

**Altered Vitamin D Metabolism**

- Chronic kidney disease leads to structural damage and loss of 1-alpha-hydroxylase as well as suppressed enzymatic activity secondary to hyperphosphatemia.

- Nephrotic syndrome leads to pathologic excretion of vitamin D binding protein (DBP), which binds to serum calcidiol.

- Liver disease (i.e., cirrhosis, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis) leads to deficient production of calcidiol.

- Pregnancy is associated with decreased levels of calcidiol, and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists currently recommends 1000 to 2000 international units (IU) per day for identified vitamin D deficiency in pregnant women.

**Hypophosphatemia or Hypocalcemia**

- Renal tubular acidosis such as seen at Fanconi syndrome alters ion absorption and excretion.

- Tumor-induced osteomalacia (TIO), also known as oncogenic osteomalacia, is a rare acquired paraneoplastic disease characterized by hypophosphatemia and renal phosphate wasting. 

-  It is commonly caused by benign tumors involving the skin, muscles, bones of the extremities, or the paranasal sinuses.

**Medications**

- Anti-epileptic drugs, including phenobarbital, phenytoin, and carbamazepine, enhance catabolism of calcidiol via induction of P-450 activity.

- Isoniazid, rifampicin, and theophylline also precipitate vitamin D deficiency in this manner.

- Anti-fungal agents such as ketoconazole increase vitamin D requirements by inhibiting 1-alpha-hydroxylase (CYP27B1).

- Long-term steroid use also has implications in vitamin D deficiency, possibly by increasing 24-hydroxylase activity.