Although sickle cell trait is seen as benign, patients with these traits have a propensity for medical and clinical complications. It is associated with hematuria due to renal papillary necrosis, splenic infarction, renal medullary carcinoma, chronic kidney disease, sudden death due to exertion, and asymptomatic bacteriuria in females.

Papillary necrosis is one of the complications that has been reported in several case studies. In the case study presented by Li EJ and Carroll VG, they mentioned that there are hematologic parameters that allow sickle cell trait patients to have this complication. Sickle cell trait patients with an average HbS level of 34% or higher are more likely to get papillary necrosis compared to those who have HbS of 20%.

The pathogenesis causing splenic infarction is similar to other complications. Like other complications, it occurs when the patient is exposed to low oxygen environment in high altitudes, dehydration, increased acidity, and viscosity.

Renal medullary carcinoma is also another complication associated with sickle cell trait. It is usually an aggressive tumor at the time of presentation with possible metastasis on diagnosis. A case report was published by Goenaga-Vasquez Y and his colleagues on a 9-year-old boy who presented with diffuse abdominal pain and was found to have renal medullary carcinoma with metastasis to the cervical, mediastinal and retroperitoneal lymph node.

Sickle cell trait has also been associated with increased chronic kidney disease in African American males. Studies have shown that the presence of SCT was associated with a decline in GFR, and the development of albuminuria compared to those without the trait.

Sudden death due to exertion has been associated with athletes, police, and military recruits. According to Harmon KG and colleagues, there was a 37 times higher risk of exertional death in Division I football players with sickle cell trait in their database study.

Studies have also shown that sickle cell is associated with exertional rhabdomyolysis. Rhabdomyolysis is the breakdown of skeletal muscle cells during physical exertion causing myoglobinuria. There is a 54% higher rate of rhabdomyolysis during physical exertion in the presence of sickle cell trait.