The posterior abdominal wall is an osseo-musculo-fascial structure made up of the following structures.**Bones:**5 lumbar vertebrae, the eleventh and twelfth ribs and the iliac part of the pelvic bones.**Muscles:**The muscles are mainly five in number. They are

- Psoas major

- Psoas minor

- Iliacus and

- Quadratus lumborum****

- Diaphragm

**Diaphragm**

It is a dome-shaped muscle that serves as a muscular partition between the abdominal and thoracic cavities. The diaphragm shows three openings: the caval hiatus at the T8 level, the esophageal hiatus at the T10 level, and the aortic hiatus********at the********T12 level.  The central tendon is the confluence of the muscle fibers of the diaphragm.  It is an aponeurosis that is essential for the proper functioning of the diaphragm. Additional structures of the diaphragm are the left and right crus, which together form the aortic hiatus and ligament of Treitz.

- **Origin**: Xiphoid process, ribs 7-12, upper lumbar vertebrae.

- **Insertion:**All fibers converge to the central tendon at its depressed middle part.

- **Function**: It is the primary muscle of respiration, helping in inhalation (contraction) and expiration (relaxation).

- **Innervation**: Phrenic nerve (C3-C5).

**Quadratus lumborum**

The quadratus lumborum is the muscle on which the kidneys lie. It is present between medially psoas muscle and laterally transverse abdominis muscle

- **Origin:**Posterior border of the iliac crest, transverse process of L5, and iliolumbar ligament.

- **Insertion**: Transverse process of L1-L5 vertebrae and inferior border of 12th rib.

- **Function**: Laterally flexes the lumbar vertebrae and stabilizes the 12th rib during respiration.

- **Innervation**: Subcostal nerve (T12) and lumber intercostal nerves (L1-L4).

****Psoas Major Muscle:****

- **Origin**: Bodies and transverse processes of T12-L4 and the intervertebral disc present between them.

- **Insertion:**Lesser trochanter of femur.

- **Function**: Hip flexion.

- **Innervation**: Lumbar plexus nerves (Ventral rami of L1-L3).

**Psoas Minor Muscle:**

It is a long slender muscle, usually seen in only 60% of the population or lesser.

- **Origin:**T12 and L1 vertebrae and intervertebral disc

- **Insertion:**Pectineal line of the brim and iliopubic eminence of the pelvic bone.

- **Function:**Weak flexor of the lumbar vertebral column

- **Innervation:**Ventral rami of L1

**Iliacus Muscle:**

- **Origin:**Upper 2/3 of Iliac fossa

- **Insertion:**Lesser trochanter of the femur along with psoas muscle and hence called Ilio-psoas muscle.

- **Function:**Flexes thigh at the hip joint (when the trunk is fixed & vice versa, just like for psoas major)

- **Nerve supply:**Ventral rami of L2 & L3 (femoral nerve)