Management of genital herpes centers around preventing its transmission and suppressing viral shedding through antiviral therapy and counseling regarding the risk of sexual transmission.

**Primary Treatment**

Primary infections with multiple ulcerating lesions will resolve after approximately 19 days, regardless of treatment interventions.

Antiherpesviral agents include those that act as nucleoside analog-polymerase inhibitors and pyrophosphate analog–polymerase inhibitors. The mainstay of therapy remains acyclovir, which has antiviral activity against all herpesviruses and has been FDA approved for the treatment and suppression of both HSV and VZV.

- Acyclovir: available in topical, oral, and IV formulations. The oral formulation has quite a poor bioavailability, which has been improved with valacyclovir (see below). The benefits of acyclovir include its low side effect profile, which allows it to be tolerated for long periods. Suppressive treatment with acyclovir can prevent or delay up to 80% of recurrences, thus reducing shedding by greater than 90%.

- 
              
- Primary herpes genitalis: 3 x 400 mg tablets PO daily for 7 to10 days
              
              
- Severe primary herpes genitalis: 3 x 5 mg/kg IV daily for 5 to 7 days
              
              
- Recurrent herpes genitalis (less than 5 to 6 episodes/year): 2 x 800 mg PO daily for 5 days 
              
              
- Prophylaxis: 2 x 400 mg PO daily for 6 months

- Valacyclovir is another formulation option that is attractive to patients

- 
              
- Primary herpes genitalis: 2 x 500 mg tablets PO daily for 7 to 10 days

- Recurrent herpes genitalis (less than 5 to 6 episodes/year): 2 x 500mg PO daily for 3 days

- or

- 
              
- 1 x 1000 mg tablet daily for 5 days

Prophylaxis: 1 x 500 mg PO daily for 6 months

**Treatments on the Horizon**

Standard therapy for herpes simplex virus type 2 infections include acyclovir and valacyclovir. Medications on the horizon include brincidofovir and maribavir (both against CMV) and valomaciclovir (activity against HSV, VZV, and EBV). As patients seek alternative treatments that have a smaller side effect profile, essential oils have been a focus of interest.

**Vaccinations**

HSV vaccines are being studied to reduce the severity of symptoms and to help expedite visible lesion healing. Furthermore, by reducing shedding, the severity may be reduced, as has been seen with the Varicella-zoster vaccination.