On arrival in the emergency department, patients that have experienced an electrical injury should be stabilized and provided both respiratory and circulatory support as needed (according to advanced cardiovascular life support [ACLS] and advanced trauma life support [ATLS] protocols). Cardiac monitoring should be initiated in all patients that have experienced anything greater than a minor low-voltage burn.

Any patient with facial or oral burns, hypoxia, respiratory distress, loss of consciousness, or other issues resulting in difficulty protecting the airway or maintaining a patent airway should be given oxygen and airway protection (e.g., ventilation, intubation, cricothyrotomy).

Depending on the type of trauma or injury experienced, the patient may require cervical or spinal immobilization. A primary assessment evaluating for traumatic injuries (e.g., pneumothorax, fractures) should be performed as soon as possible. Following the primary assessment, any patient with significant burns or suspected rhabdomyolysis (myoglobinuria) should be given fluid resuscitation (with target urine output 0.5 mL/kg/h to 1 mL/kg/h). An osmotic diuretic (mannitol), a loop diuretic (furosemide), or urine alkalization (with sodium bicarbonate titration) may also be employed if additional diuresis is needed.

Intravenous (IV) access should be obtained in all adult patients that have experienced an electrical injury. If there is significantly associated trauma, cardiac or respiratory arrest, or loss of consciousness, central IV access should be considered.

Proper burn care should be initiated, including a tetanus vaccination, if needed, and proper splinting and bandaging following a thorough neurovascular assessment.

Any patient that has experienced cardiac or respiratory arrest, loss of consciousness, chest pain, hypoxia, arrhythmia, significant trauma or burns, or displays abnormalities on ECG should be admitted for further inpatient care. This may additionally be followed by transfer to burn care or rehabilitation center as necessary.

Finally, consultations with trauma or critical care specialists, surgical specialists, and orthopedists should be considered as soon as possible to avoid any complications or irreversible damage.

Prior to discharge, patients should be educated on potential sources of household and workplace exposures and risks, in addition to any potential long-term effects of their electrical injuries (e.g., neurological, psychological, or physical), and scheduled follow-up as needed.