After the administration of general anesthesia, the patient is positioned prone on a spine frame or designated table. Local anesthesia may be used; however, general anesthesia is preferred to better manage both the airway and hemodynamics. The head is positioned on foam support with orbital and facial cutouts to minimize pressure on the eyes, nose, and mouth while also allowing airway access. The arms are positioned with shoulders at 90 degrees abduction and elbows at 90 degrees flexion with the axillae free of compression to prevent neuropraxia of the brachial plexus. Ensure chest support with padding, so nipples are midline and straight down. The anterior superior iliac spine and knees are positioned on gel pads with slight flexion of the hips and knees. Check to ensure there are no compression on the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve, peroneal and ulnar nerves. Placing the lumbar spine in kyphosis facilitates access by opening the interlaminar space. Ensure the abdomen is free to reduce intra-abdominal pressure, thereby reducing central venous pressure and epidural venous congestion to minimize surgical site bleeding.

Administer prophylactic intravenous antibiotics before skin incision. Fluoroscopic imaging is used for localization and making the most accurate skin incision directed over the appropriate interspace. A spinal needle can be utilized to mark the incision site with image guidance. The skin is prepped in the usual sterile fashion.

**Patient preparation and surgical aspects to be taken into consideration can be summarized as:**

- 
**OT Safety checklist.
**

- 
**Sterile theatre environment.
**

- 
**Antibiotic prophylaxis
****30 minutes prior to incision.**

- **Proper positioning**: Genupectoral ensuring free abdomen, chest support, eyes protection, shoulders in 90° abduction, elbows in 90° flexion, and placing the spine in kyphosis to open up the inter-laminar space.

- **Localization and exposure**- Through surface landmarks and fluoroscopic guidance.