The diagnosis of hypercalciuria obviously first requires a 24 hour urine collection and testing for calcium content. This continues to be the standard recommended practice for all pediatric stone formers, high risk adults with nephrolithiasis (solitary kidney, renal failure, renal transplant, ureteral reimplant, high surgical risk, etc.), recurrent stone formers and any highly motivated patient with a history of urolithiasis.

In clinical practice, a 24 hour urinary calcium level of 250 mg is a useful initial threshold for determining hypercalciuria. In pediatrics, a ratio of more than 4 mg calcium/kg body weight, a random calcium/creatinine ratio of more than 0.18, or a 24-hour urinary calcium concentration of more than 200 mg/liter may be more useful. In practice, it often is used to identify whichever method gives the most abnormal reading and try to "optimize" it.

Spot urinary chemistry has shown poor sensitivity and specificity for hypercalciuria which is why the 24 hour urine test is so critical in making the diagnosis.

Hyperparathyroidism should be suspected in all adult hypercalciuric patients with elevated or borderline elevated serum calcium levels. It can be diagnosed simply by checking a parathyroid hormone level in those individuals.

Checking Vitamin D Levels can help detect Renal Phosphate Leak (where Vitamin D is elevated along with high urinary but low serum phosphate levels). High Vitamin D Levels and possible Renal Phosphate Leak Hypercalciuria should be suspected in patients** **who do not respond to adequate thiazide therapy.