NMS is one of a group of drug-related acute dysautonomias with common features of fever, rigidity, and autonomic dysfunction. Serotonin syndrome has similar features to NMS and is most easily distinguished by the causative agent, most frequently the serotonin-specific reuptake inhibitors. Hyperthermia and muscle rigidity are usually less severe with serotonin syndrome than with NMS; additionally, serotonin syndrome is more commonly associated with gastrointestinal symptoms, hyperreflexia, and myoclonus. Malignant hyperthermia is almost clinically indistinguishable from NMS, but the history of exposure to depolarizing muscle relaxants, most commonly succinylcholine, or inhaled anesthetic agents make the distinction clear in most cases. Malignant catatonia (MC) may present with fever, rigidity, akinesia, and altered mental status. It is important to distinguish from NMS because malignant catatonia shows robust responsiveness--reports reveal a full recovery in up to 80% of patients--with rapid initiation of benzodiazepines and electroconvulsive therapy.

Multiple other medical conditions can mimic NMS, making it easy to misdiagnose. The most common mimics are central nervous system (CNS) infections such as meningitis or encephalitis, heatstroke, agitated delirium, toxic encephalopathies, withdrawal syndromes, metabolic emergencies, and nonconvulsive status epilepticus.

Acute encephalitis, meningitis, or brain abscess must be excluded in patients presenting with fever and mental status changes to avoid delay in treatment of CNS infection. This involves lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid analysis and neuroimaging in certain cases. Patients on antipsychotic drugs are predisposed to heat-related illnesses, which may resemble NMS. Acute intoxication with many recreational drugs such as cocaine, MDMA, amphetamines, methamphetamines, and phencyclidine may have similar features. Abuse of recreational drugs may occur in the setting of medical therapy with antipsychotics making the clinical picture ambiguous. Several withdrawal syndromes may present with features similar to NMS, especially withdrawal from muscle relaxants; the emergence of a withdrawal from an agent like baclofen is best managed by reinitiation therapy or with benzodiazepines. Alcohol and benzodiazepine withdrawal also share features with NMS as do the withdrawal syndromes of other sedatives and hypnotics. Thyrotoxicosis and pheochromocytoma also have overlapping manifestations in common with NMS.