Lumbar puncture (LP) is a diagnostic procedure used to evaluate the contents of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for the presence of blood, infection, or to determine the pressure within the central nervous system. LP procedures involve the insertion of a needle between the vertebrae at the L4 level to access the lumbar cistern through the dura and withdraw cerebrospinal fluid. In order from superficial to deep, the needle pierces through the skin, superficial fascia, supraspinous ligament, interspinous ligament, ligamentum flavum, epidural space, dura, arachnoid, and into the subarachnoid space. Palpation skills and knowledge of the internal and external anatomy are essential; when coupled with ultrasound guidance, the progression and advancement of the needle may be visualized to reduce complications. Due to the mobility of the nerve roots within the fluid-filled lumbar cistern, it is unlikely that an LP can pierce an individual nerve root and iatrogenic cauda equina syndrome presenting after LP is extremely rare.

However, even a straightforward LP is not without risk. Post-lumbar puncture, a headache is a common clinical phenomenon best explained by the notion that the brain and dura are no longer suspended and supported by the initial volume of cerebrospinal fluid. Due to the loss of cerebrospinal fluid after a successful LP, a traction force is exerted on the brain and meninges. This may be prevented by the use of a 22-gauge blunted needle in the lumbar puncture itself and subsequently positioning the patient supine to decrease mechanical stretch on the meninges.