Early identification can significantly affect outcomes. Diagnosis is made by pairing the clinical presentation with appropriate imaging. Imaging can include x-rays, radionuclide bone scanning, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The use of imaging in the context of the patient’s symptoms can help guide appropriate treatment.

Plain-film radiography is typically obtained in two planes, utilizing both anterior-posterior and frog-leg lateral films. Radiographs may show subchondral radiolucency, which is the pathognomonic “crescent sign,” indicating subchondral collapse. Uptake of Technetium-99m can show a “donut sign,” which is a ring of increased uptake around a cold center. This sign represents accelerated bone turnover at the demarcation, where reactive bone meets the dead bone.

Once obtaining adequate imaging, the extent of necrosis can be classified. While multiple staging systems exist, the most commonly used is the Steinberg staging system. It identifies seven stages as follows:

Steinberg staging system

Stage   Features

0          Normal radiograph, bone scan, and MRI

I          Normal radiograph, abnormal bone scan and or magnetic resonance imaging

IA Mild (involves less than 15% of the femoral head).

IB Moderate (involves 15% to 30% of the femoral head)

IC Severe (involves over 30% of the femoral head)

II         Cystic and sclerotic change of the femoral head

IIA Mild (involves less than 15% of the femoral head)

IIB Moderate (involves 15% to 30% of the femoral head)

IIC Severe (involves more than than 30% of the femoral head)

III       Subchondral collapse (crescent sign) without flattening of the femoral head

IIIA Mild (involves under 15% of the femoral head)

IIIB Moderate (involves 15% to 30% of the femoral head)

IIIC Severe (involves over 30% of the femoral head)

IV        Flattening of the femoral head/femoral head collapse

IVA Mild (involves under 15% of the femoral head)

IVB Moderate (involves 15% to 30% of the femoral head)

IVC Severe (involves greater than 30% of the femoral head)

V         Joint space narrowing and/or acetabular changes

VA Mild

VB Moderate

VC Severe

VI        Advanced degenerative joint disease

A laboratory workup should be done to help rule out other causes of hip pain as well as to assess for comorbid factors in patients with suspected osteonecrosis. A workup may include a complete blood count (CBC), lipid panel, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), rheumatoid factor (RF), anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP), and hemoglobin electrophoresis. Elevated ANA and/or RF would indicate an active autoimmune process but are non-specific. Both ESR and CRP are elevated by inflammatory processes but are also non-specific. Elevated anti-CCP antibodies are specific for rheumatoid arthritis, while hemoglobin electrophoresis showing HbS with a low concentration of HbF would indicate sickle cell disease.

A biopsy is not often necessary, as the diagnosis can be made accurately based off imaging and clinical presentation. If a biopsy is performed, however, the characteristic histological findings will be trabecular necrosis (more than 50% of empty osteocytic lacunae) and necrotic hematopoietic marrow without specific evidence of inflammation, tumor cells, or sepsis.