Dissociated vertical deviation rarely presents in infancy. It usually presents around the age of 2 to 5 years. It can present as an isolated finding or associated with other forms of strabismus like infantile esotropia most commonly, or rarely infantile exotropia, or Duane’s retraction syndrome.

- Deviation – This is defined as the upward drifting of the non-fixating eye when the patient fixates on the target with the other eye. This vertical deviation is often associated with extortion and slight abducting movement of the deviated eye. There is no movement seen in the contralateral eye, as the uncovered eye takes up fixation. Thus, DVD is said to disobey the Herring law of ocular motility.

- Head Posture – An abnormal head posture can be associated with one-third of the patients with DVDs. This is a motor adaptation to maintain binocular single vision. Patients presenting with this adaptation have do not complain of double vision and tend to have good vision in both eyes.

- Sensory Adaptations – Patients have binocular vision in the normal state, but fusion is lost when one eye deviates. The image from the deviated eye is suppressed, thus eliminating diplopia.

**Types of DVD**

- Comitant: The vertical deviation is the same in abduction, primary position, and adduction.

- Incomitant: There is a significant difference in the deviation in abduction, primary position, and adduction.

**Types Based on Degrees of Deviation**

This is defined based on the degrees of deviation measured in prism diopters (PD).

- Mild (0 to 9 PD)

- Moderate (10 to 19 PD)

- Severe (>20PD)