Patients with salivary gland tumors often present with a long-standing history of a painless, palpable mass. A detailed history, including pain symptoms, the onset of the mass, growth rate, swallowing difficulties, and facial weakness symptoms, should be obtained. Past medical history, surgical history, family history of malignancies, and social risk factors (such as smoking, past radiation exposure, and occupational hazards) should be elicited.

Physical exam should include a focused head and neck exam. Both benign and malignant tumors can present as painless, fixed masses. Parotid masses most commonly occur at the superficial lobe. Deep parotid lobe tumors are often asymptomatic but can present with oropharyngeal airway narrowing, sleep apnea, or dyspnea on exertion.

- Pleomorphic adenoma presents as a painless, slow-growing, and well-circumscribed mass. As the tumor grows, the overlying skin may become attenuated and bosselated.

- Warthin’s tumor presents as a painless, cystic, compressible encapsulated mass, usually at the tail of the parotid. A bilateral exam is warranted as it can present with bilateral lesions.

- Myoepithelial tumors present as well-circumscribed encapsulated tumors commonly located in the parotid.

- Sialadenoma papilleferum can present as a painless exophytic papillomatous mass, most often seen on the hard palate (80%).

- Ductal papilloma (intraductal type) can present as a unicystic, well-circumscribed, and encapsulated lesion. It can present in the parotid gland or on the lower lip, floor of mouth, palate, and tongue.

- Ductal papilloma (inverted type) can present as a well-circumscribed, unencapsulated endophytic papillomatous mass at the junction of the salivary gland and the surrounding oral mucosa.