Estimates of the effectiveness of the MMR vaccine are 99% in measles prevention after a second vaccination and over 95% in the prevention of mumps, and 90% in the prevention of rubella after a single dose.

- The administration of the first dose should be between 12 to 15 months of age, and the second dose between 18 months of age and school entry. Note that the interval between doses should not be shorter than 28 days.

- For unimmunized children and adolescents, the vaccine can be given in two separate doses between the ages of 12 months and 13 years.

- For unimmunized adults born after 1970, one dose should be given unless they are traveling outside North America, working in health care, students in post-secondary educational settings, or military personnel.

- For unimmunized adults born before 1970, one dose should be given if they are students in post-secondary educational settings or traveling outside North America; two doses if they are working in health care or are military personnel. In general, as mentioned previously, unimmunized adults born before 1970 can be assumed to have natural immunity.

- The recommendation is to give the first and/or second dose of MMR in advance to children who live or travel in areas where there is an outbreak of measles (defined as at least 3 cases that have a temporal and spatial relationship) and children traveling outside US borders. In the situations mentioned above, the first dose of MMR should be given between 6 and 11 months of age and with continued vaccinations according to the current calendar (2 doses of vaccine with an interval of at least 28 days ranging from 12 to 15 months).

- In the case of measles outbreaks, a vaccine can be given to infants after six months of age and then continue vaccinations according to a generally accepted schedule (two doses in 13 to 14 months and ten years, respectively).

- Children between 12 and 23 months should receive the MMR vaccine and a univalent varicella vaccine at the same visit instead of the MMRV vaccine to reduce the risk of fever and febrile seizures. The risk is estimated to be around one additional febrile seizure per 2300 to 2800 doses of MMRV vaccine in this patient cohort.

- Patients with laboratory confirmation of measles, mumps, or rubella immunity are considered immune to this disease, so there is no need for immunization vaccination. In practice, however, two doses of the MMR vaccine are also given in this situation, which is dictated by the lack of availability of monovalent vaccines against measles, mumps, or rubella.

**Post-exposure Prophylaxis**

Immunoglobulin (400 mg/kg) can be administered six days after exposure. The intent is to prevent or reduce the severity of measles, but it is not given to immunocompetent persons who have received one dose of MMR after 12 months of age. This type of post-exposure prophylaxis is only for patients exposed to measles who have an increased risk of complications and also have a contraindication to MMR vaccination. This group includes patients:

- Severe immunodeficiency, regardless of immune status or immunization

- After a bone marrow transplant, up to at least 12 months after the end of immunosuppressive therapy or longer if there is a graft-versus-host reaction

- Treated for acute lymphoblastic leukemia until at least six months after the end of immunosuppressive chemotherapy

- Infected with HIV and a percentage of CD4 cells less than 15 percent (all age groups) or CD4 cell counts below 200 cells / mm^3 (age over five years) and patients. They have not received the MMR vaccine after receiving effective antiretroviral therapy.

Pregnancy Considerations: Pregnant women who have not been vaccinated and have laboratory-confirmed measles disease should receive intravenous immunoglobulin after exposure. Measles in pregnant women may have a more severe course and serious complications.

Newborn babies and infants up to 6 months of age should receive immunoglobulin intramuscularly (IGIM) at a dose of 0.5 ml/kg (maximum dose 15 ml) or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 400 mg/kg within six days of exposure.

Infants aged between 6 and 12 months may receive the MMR vaccine within 72 hours of exposure or IGIM at a dose of 0.5 ml/kg (maximum dose of 15 ml) or IVIG 400 mg/kg within six days of exposure.

For children of at least 12 months of age, the MMR vaccination is preferable to IGIM or IVIG.

Children who have contraindications for MMR vaccination after exposure should receive IVIG 400 mg/kg instead of IGIM.