# Continuing Education Activity

One of the most important causes of liver dysfunction is drug-induced liver injury (DILI) which can lead to a wide spectrum of symptoms ranging from mild non-specific symptoms like asymptomatic transaminitis, acute hepatitis, chronic hepatitis, cholestasis to liver failure. It can be caused by a multitude of prescription drugs, herbal and dietary supplements and commonly leads to withdrawal of the drug from the market. This activity reviews the cause of liver toxicity, the pathophysiology, presentation and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Review the drugs that can cause liver toxicity. 
- Describe the pathophysiology of drug induced liver damage.
- Summarize the evaluation of patients with drug induced liver toxicity.
- Outline the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by liver toxicity

# Introduction

One of the most important causes of liver dysfunction is drug-induced liver injury (DILI) which can lead to a wide spectrum of symptoms ranging from mild non-specific symptoms like asymptomatic transaminitis, acute hepatitis, chronic hepatitis, cholestasis to liver failure.

# Etiology

There are many classes of drugs causing drug-induced liver injury including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), anti-infective drugs (anti-tubercular drugs), anti-cancer drugs, hormonal drugs, immunosuppressive agents, sedative, and neuropsychiatric drugs.

# Epidemiology

Drug-induced liver injury is the most common cause of acute liver failure (ALF) in the United States and Europe

# Pathophysiology

Liver damage can be hepatocellular, cholestatic, or mixed (includes features of both).

# Histopathology

Similar to the clinical patterns, drug-induced liver injury can present in different histopathologic manifestations. It can cause acute and chronic hepatocellular pattern of injury. Acute hepatocellular usually resembles that of acute hepatitis while chronic hepatocellular patterns usually resemble that of chronic hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis, fibrosis, and cirrhosis. A cholestatic pattern shows cholestasis. Some cause steatosis and steatohepatitis pattern resembling that of alcoholic fatty liver disease or nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. It can also present as granulomas, various vascular injury patterns, cytoplasmic inclusions, lipidosis and pigments, and drug-induced neoplasms.

# History and Physical

Some patients present with fatigue, decreased appetite, aversion to oily food, epigastric discomfort and tender liver. Patients with cholestatic type can present with jaundice, light colored faeces and pruritis. Occasionally, they can also have allergic manifestations like fever, rash and aching in joints.

# Evaluation

In most cases, drug-induced liver injury may cause mild to moderate elevation of liver tests, but in rare cases, it can lead to fatal outcomes.

- Alanine transferase greater than or equal to 5 ULN

- Alkaline Phosphatase greater than or equal to 2 ULN, especially in patients with elevated 5'-nucleotidase or GGT, and without bone-diseases-related ALP elevation

- Alanine transferase greater than or equal to 3 ULN and total bilirubin greater than or equal to 2 ULN

This recommendation was given to avoid unnecessary drug withdrawals. But it is difficult to confidently ascribe at times whether it is drug-induced liver injury or aggravation of a pre-existing liver injury.

# Treatment / Management

Discontinuing the suspected drug is the first step in the management of drug-induced liver injury.

# Differential Diagnosis

The diagnosis of drug-induced liver injury is a challenge because it can mimic any form of liver disease.

# Prognosis

Most of the patients of drug-induced liver injury have a favorable prognosis.

# Complications

- Acute Respiratory failure

- Acute liver failure

- Acute renal failure

- Severe metabolic acidosis

# Consultations

Intensive care and consideration of transfer to advanced centers should be done in case of advanced disease.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Many of the herbal supplements, dietary supplements and other over the counter medications are often associated with liver injury which can lead to complications especially in patients with underlying liver disease. It is important to discuss with your primary care provider before starting on any herbal or dietary supplements. It is also important to go over the medications you are taking with you doctor to see if the supplements have interactions with the medications you are taking which ma lead to serious liver injury.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Drug-induced liver injury is an uncommon but important form of liver disease. When evaluating a patient for liver disease, drug-induced liver injury must always be considered as a possible cause of liver disease as it can be severe and even fatal. It can present in a pattern similar to acute hepatitis, biliary obstruction, chronic hepatitis, acute liver disease or fatty liver disease. Drug-induced liver injury is usually reversible, and the first step in its management is discontinuing the drug. However, drug-induced liver injury is a challenging form of liver disease because of the ever increasing number of drugs used in medical care. Hundreds of drugs have been implicated as the cause. Many of the herbal supplements, dietary supplements and other over the counter medications are often underreported. A lot of research in this field is being undertaken, and there is scope for more.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Drug-induced liver injury can be prevented by educating patients by the clinician once starting them on hepatotoxic drugs and warning them about possible side effects. Clinical judgment on the part of clinician and balancing risks versus benefits when starting patients on drugs with the potential to be hepatotoxic are needed. The warnings about the possible presentations of drug-induced liver injury should be clearly stated on the medication. It also involves reporting drugs that are suspected to cause liver toxicity as well as regulatory bodies like FDA to take appropriate steps to withdraw the drugs from the market based on data. The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases of the National Institutes of Health has developed Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network, which constitutes 6 university hospitals working to collect and analyze data. (Level V)