Most patients with MM will respond well to the first line of therapy, but most will relapse as conventional treatment is not curative. A small percentage of patients will have a primary refractory disease to the first line of treatment. Therapies can be repeated in RRMM depending on prior efficacy and length of remission on the initial response. Clinicians must consider the possibility of cross-resistance among drugs from the same therapeutic group.

Devising a treatment plan for each RRMM patient is a highly individualized task using different combinations and dosages that may be needed to determine the most effective. While choosing treatment options, resistance to a specific class of the drug, the patient's age and other comorbidities, and prior or residual toxicities should be considered to achieve a good response to therapy.  During the present COVID era, vaccinations and boosters should be kept updated.

Besides infections, such treatment that might expose the patient to thrombosis (eg, thalidomide) can have this threat compounded by COVID.

**Indications to Initiate Therapy**

Recognizing the relapse or progression of multiple myeloma is crucial for initiating or modifying treatment approaches to reduce patient morbidity and mortality. On evaluation, if the criteria mentioned above for clinical or biochemical relapse are not met, close monitoring of IMWG-recommended perimeters at least every 2 to 3 months is recommended.

If clinical relapse features are absent, checking the biochemical markers of disease progression is imperative. Patients with evidence of biochemical relapse of progression should be started on treatment or have a change in the drug regimen.

In case of clinical relapse, particularly with high-risk cytogenetic abnormalities, high plasma cell proliferation index, elevated lactate dehydrogenase, and elevated M-protein, treatment should be initiated or modified immediately, considering RRMM to be an aggressive disease at that point.

**Selection of Regimen**

Treatment is tailored by considering various aspects, including:

- Patient-related factors: Age, frailty, compliance, transplant eligibility and history, comorbidities, and response to previously used therapies.

- Disease-related factors: Stage according to R-ISS, presence of refractory disease, bone involvement, the aggressiveness of current relapse, Revised-Myeloma Comorbidity Index (R-MCI).

- Treatment-related factors: Single/dual/triple/quadruple combination, availability, cost, bone marrow reserve, immunodeficiency/risk of infections, and thromboembolic events.

Frail patients are usually treated with monotherapy or dual therapy due to higher R-MCI scores with an increased risk of treatment-related morbidity and mortality. However, triple or quadruple therapy can be considered for fit or intermediate-fit patients.

**Treatment Options**

Various anti-myeloma drugs and their combinations are used to select treatment plans for RRMM patients. These include autologous stem cell transplantation, protease inhibitors (PIs), immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs), targeted agents like monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), antibody-drug conjugates, chimeric antigen receptor T-cells (CAR-T-cells), biphasic T-cell engagers (BiTEs), selinexor, venetoclax, and many others.

**First Relapse**

Relapsed MM treatment is usually based on the response to lenalidomide. If the patient progresses within 60 days of standard lenalidomide therapy, it is considered lenalidomide refractory disease. Otherwise, patients are considered lenalidomide sensitive if the relapse or progression is noted after more than 60 days of lenalidomide treatment or if patients are on maintenance lenalidomide only.

Triplet regimens are the current standard of care in relapsed or refractory settings. Lenalidomide and dexamethasone serve as the backbone in commonly used triplet regimens (KRD, DRd, IRD, Elo-Rd). Four-drug regimens like DARA-KPD (Daratumumab, carfilzomib, pomalidomide, and dexamethasone) are usually used in patients with aggressive disease and progression on bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone. Triple or quadruple drug regimens are observed to be superior over the dual combination of thalidomide-dexamethasone in patients who relapsed or developed the refractory disease after auto-HCT.

Despite its drawbacks in terms of curative potential, autologous stem cell transplant (auto-SCT) is still favored for the safe short-term management of RRMM. For patients eligible for autologous hematopoietic cell transplantation (auto-HCT) who did not undergo auto-HCT as part of their initial treatment, high-dose chemotherapy followed by auto-HCT at the time of first relapse has been recommended. Retrospective studies have shown improved progression-free survival following a second auto-HCT in MM patients who relapsed after the previous auto-HCT.

For relapsed myeloma, consecutive HLA-identical sibling donor transplantation carries a significant overall survival (OS) of 35% at 5 years.

Allogenic stem cell transplantation (allo-SCT) has been used as a curative treatment option for MM patients, but its use is limited due to high treatment-related mortality. The 3 main problems when using allo-HCT are graft failure, great versus myeloma effect, and infections. A graft failure occurs with the primary (initial) or secondary (delayed) failure to engraft.

Chronic GVHD (post-day 100 of transplantation) is evidenced by autoimmune-like sequelae included with such findings as lichen planus, fasciitis, myositis, xerostomia, jaundice, sicca, anorexia, and vaginal sclerosis/ulcerations.Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, Aspergillus and Candida species, Pneumocystis jirovecii, herpes simplex, CMV, EBV, and zoster.

The presence of graft-versus-host disease and non-relapse-related mortality have raised concerns regarding this treatment option.

Daratumumab (anti-CD38), lenalidomide, and dexamethasone (DRd) is the preferred treatment combination to treat lenalidomide-sensitive multiple myeloma. Usually, the recommendation is to use the subcutaneous form of daratumumab in a real-life setting, as it has comparable efficacy to the intravenous formulation and fewer infusion-related reactions. POLLUX trial showed higher overall response rates and superior PFS with DRD vs Rd.

Carfilzomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone (KRd) is another preferred regimen in lenalidomide-sensitive multiple myeloma. The ASPIRE trial showed improved OOR, PFS, and superior overall survival with KRd vs Rd. KRd showed higher rates of respiratory infections, hypokalemia, and muscle spasms when compared to Rd. There is a higher incidence of cardiac toxicity, so an echocardiogram and electrocardiogram (EKG) are performed before starting treatment to assess baseline cardiac function.

Ixazomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone (IRd) showed better PFS and duration of response in tourmaline-MM1 compared to Rd alone. The benefit was observed in both high-risk and standard-risk groups. Longer follow-up of a median of 85 months showed similar OS in both groups. The IRd group had a higher rate of grade 3 or 4 thrombocytopenia. Other notable adverse effects in the IRd group were diarrhea, constipation, nausea, vomiting, peripheral neuropathy, peripheral edema, and rash.

Elotuzumab and lenalidomide/dexamethasone (ERd) are primarily used in less aggressive diseases. ELOQUENT-2 trial showed ERd improves PFS and OS, compared to Rd alone. Patients receiving elotuzumab were pretreated with diphenhydramine, ranitidine, acetaminophen, or their equivalents. ERd showed an increased incidence of opportunistic infection, including fungal and herpes zoster infections. ERd also had a higher rate of invasive second primary malignancies (9% vs 6%).

For patients with lenalidomide-refractory MM, future regimens are influenced by whether the disease is refractory to bortezomib and/or daratumumab. The disease, which is refractory to both lenalidomide and bortezomib, can respond to a different proteasome inhibitor like carfilzomib or a different immunomodulator like pomalidomide in combination with dexamethasone and daratumumab. For patients with lenalidomide-refractory MM, treatment options include daratumumab, bortezomib, and dexamethasone (DVd); daratumumab, pomalidomide, and dexamethasone (DPd); bortezomib, pomalidomide and dexamethasone (VPd); or isatuximab, pomalidomide, and dexamethasone (IsaPd).

For patients with MM refractory to both lenalidomide and daratumumab, treatment options include carfilzomib, pomalidomide, and dexamethasone (KPd); bortezomib, pomalidomide, and dexamethasone (VPd); bortezomib, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone (VCd or CyBorD) as studied in the EVOLUTION Trial; or selinexor, bortezomib, and dexamethasone (SVd) as studied in the BOSTON Trial.

The Castor Trial showed improved PFS with DVd compared to Vd alone (16.7 months vs 7.1 months). LEPUS trial showed similar PFS benefits in Chinese patients. Higher rates of thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia, neutropenia, and peripheral sensory neuropathy were noted.

The CANDOR trial showed a 37% reduction in the risk of progression or death in a population with DKd (daratumumab, carfilzomib, and dexamethasone) compared to Kd alone.

**Second Relapse or Subsequent Relapse**

Any drug class considered for the first relapse the patient did not receive can be tried in the second or subsequent relapse.

Disease refractory to lenalidomide and bortezomib: In these cases, some therapeutic options are Dara + pomalidomide + dexamethasone, Dara +  carfilzomib + dexamethasone, elotuzumab + pomalidomide + dexamethasone.

In cases where multiple myeloma is refractory to both lenalidomide and bortezomib, therapeutic options include combinations such as daratumumab, pomalidomide, and dexamethasone; daratumumab, carfilzomib, and dexamethasone; and elotuzumab, pomalidomide, and dexamethasone. These treatment regimens offer alternative strategies to manage the disease in patients who have not responded adequately to lenalidomide and bortezomib.

In cases of triple-class refractory disease, where patients have failed multiple lines of treatment, including PIs, IMiDs, and mAbs against CD38, recently approved therapies are selinexor and dexamethasone; VdT-PACE (bortezomib, dexamethasone, thalidomide, cisplatin, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and etoposide); melflufen-dexamethasone and CAR-T-cells, idecabtagene, and belantamab mafoditin. The HORIZON study has shown that melflufen plus dexamethasone demonstrates a modicum of activity in relapsed and refractory myeloma, especially in triple-class refractory disease.

Novel immunotherapies like CAR-T-cell and bispecific T-cell engagers (BiTE) have revolutionized the treatment of RRMM. Multiple studies have shown the efficacy of CAR-T-cell therapy as a potential treatment for long-term disease control with a higher response rate in patients with high-risk cytogenetics, progressive disease, or extra-medullary disease at baseline.

Response rates of approximately 67% to 83% have been observed with CAR-T-cell therapies in patients refractory to previous treatments.

In 2022, the FDA approved teclistamab, the first bispecific T-cell engager antibody against CD38 expressed on the myeloma cells, for patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma who have failed 4 prior lines of therapy. Belantamab mafodotin is anti-BCMA humanized immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody conjugated with monomethyl auristatin. The drug received accelerated approval in the US for patients who had progressed on at least 4 lines of therapy. It is being withdrawn from the market based on the results of randomized phase 3 trials (DREAMM-3), as it did not show clinical benefit compared to pomalidomide and dexamethasone.

The penta-refractory disease is resistant or refractory to Anti-CD38 monoclonal antibodies, bortezomib, lenalidomide, pomalidomide, and carfilzomib. This is mainly encountered in the third- or fourth-line setting. If any of these agents have not been used before, it is reasonable to use that agent at any time. Patients with the penta-refractory disease have options of BMCA-targeted therapy (Ida-Cel, Cilta-Cel, or teclistamab); alkylator-based combination (VDT-PACE, DCEP, bendamustine); or combination regimens incorporating selinexor, venetoclax (only in cases with t(11;14) or panobinostat). Clinical trials or investigational agents are also encouraged.