Pupillary light reflexes are measured based on a 0 to 4+ gradient that considers the magnitude and speed of the light response. A normal, healthy adult patient is expected to have a 4+ response, which indicates a brisk, large response. A 3+ grading indicates a moderate response, 2+ is a small, slowed response, 1+ represents a tiny/just visible response, and a 0 indicates unresponsive pupils. Commonly, clinicians document PERRL–saying the pupils are equal, round, and reactive to light or PEARL - pupils equal and reacting to light.

In standard clinical testing conditions, the diameter of the pupils will usually range from two to five millimeters. Per decade of aging that occurs, there is a 0.3 mm decrease in the standard pupil diameter that has been associated with iris stiffening. The pupillary light response exhibits varying sensitivity to the chromic spectrum, indicating that the process of light recognition is significantly complex; it is not as simple as a binary response with the detection of “light” versus “no light.” While there is a baseline fluctuation in the steady-state conditions for pupillary dilation, a concern for neurological abnormalities is considered in cases of marked pupillary changes, whether with constriction or dilation. One such condition is anisocoria, and it is estimated at 4% of the general population has anisocoria of greater than 1 millimeter, in which case neurological compromise must be ruled out. Pupillary latency occurs when the reaction time of the pupil is inversely related to the increase in light intensity from the stimulus; this can serve as a cue to a potential neurologic cause. Latency increases by approximately 1 millisecond per year with aging. Overall, normal pupillary response times are about one second for initial constriction and 5 seconds for dilation.

Direct and consensual pupillary light reflexes test for appropriate neurological pathway connections and functioning of both cranial nerve II and III. Light entering the eye is processed through the pupillary light reflex, and signals directed to the iris sphincter muscle to adjust the amount of light that reaches the retina. While there are other reasons for variation in pupillary dilation and constriction, such as arousal leading to changes in the balance of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, here we will focus on its relation to light exposure. Pupils can become mydriatic, or dilate, in response to potential disease, drug toxicity, trauma, increased intracranial pressure, brainstem damage, or nerve damage to cranial nerve II and/or III.

Abnormalities also depend on where in the track the damage has been done. In the event of optic nerve damage, visual field defects or complete vision loss can occur. If this damage is before the optic chiasm, in the optic nerve, then there are deficits noted to bilateral ipsilateral monocular vision loss. This damage leads to a relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD), known as a Marcus Gunn pupil, which is examined using the swinging flashlight test. Causes of a Marcus Gunn pupil include ischemic optic neuropathy, optic neuritis, nerve compression, trauma or through asymmetric glaucoma.

Unilateral optic neuropathies, most notably optic neuritis, can cause RAPDs. Optic neuritis is an anterior or posterior inflammatory demyelination of the optic nerve, leading to atrophy of optic nerve fibers and an RAPD. An RAPD can be detected in 96% of acute unilateral cases of optic neuritis.

RAPDs can occur due to ischemic retinal diseases such as BRVO, CRVO, BRAO, and CRAO secondary to the death of photoreceptors and viable retina, ultimately leading to an uneven pupillary response.

Argyll Robertson pupil, noted in tabes dorsalis from neurosyphilis, is the notable weak-to-absent pupillary light reflex bilaterally, though the pupils will still constrict for the near response. With the near response (accommodation) intact it can be assumed that the afferent and efferent pathways are grossly intact and that the deficit is related to degeneration in bilateral olivary pretectal nuclei or their projections.

Compression damage to the optic chiasm leads to bitemporal hemianopia and is frequently related to a pituitary adenoma. Downstream to the optic chiasm, damage to the optic tract will produce contralateral homonymous hemianopia; for example, if there is damage to the left optic tract, there are right visual field deficits to both eyes. In the case of comatose patients, it has been noted that a majority of the patients had non-reactive, dilated pupils, and the one patient that had pinpoint pupils became vegetative.

Transient mydriasis can be associated with tricyclic antidepressants, typical antipsychotics, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, but usually, these are not long-term consequences. Topiramate, used for migraines, has been associated with acquired myopia and angle-closure glaucoma.

Tumors in the retina, optic nerve, and brain can also cause RAPDs. In children, the most common intraocular tumors are benign, developmental cysts. The most common malignant intraocular tumor is retinoblastoma.

Another cause of RAPD is severe amblyopia, characterized as amblyopia of 20/100 to 20/400. Clinically, RAPDs are found in severe amblyopia with BCVA 20/400 or worse. While the etiology of an RAPD in amblyopia is poorly understood, significant risk factors include anisometropia, early age of onset with a history of strabismus, level of visual acuity at the conclusion of treatment, and extended periods of occlusion therapy.

Pupillary escape is a phenomenon that can occur in the setting of a diseased optic nerve or retina. When light is shone onto the affected pupil, there will be a transient pupillary constriction and then a slow dilation to the original size.

In cases in which one pupil is unable to constrict (such as due to a third nerve palsy), the “reverse RAPD test” can be performed, with direct and consensual responses compared in the reactive pupil. If the reactive pupil constricts more during the direct response, then the RAPD is in the unreactive eye. If the reactive pupil constricts more during the consensual response, then the RAPD is in the unreactive eye.