The nurse’s role before, during, and after a cesarean section is vital. Much like a primary care physician is the coordinator for a patient’s health across multiple locations and specialties, the nurse is a patient’s touchstone during the process of cesarean delivery. Both having a baby and having surgery are two subjects that can cause a patient significant anxiety, and a nurse’s ability to reassure and communicate with the patient has been shown to improve patient satisfaction and reduce stress.

The nurse meets the patient preoperatively, thus beginning her relationship with that patient. If the patient is having an unscheduled cesarean, the nurse may have been helping to manage the patient during that prior time. Often, the nurse obtains the patient’s medical history and enters it into the electronic health record. It is the nurse who ensures that the appropriate labs are obtained and verifies the results. The nurse places the indwelling Foley catheter and the nurse who performs the surgical skin preparation. When the fetus is delivered, the nurse usually assumes care of the infant and performs the resuscitation. The nurse is also the primary source of communication between the operating room and those outside. This activity could include updating others on the status of the surgery, or it could be returning a page and informing that person that the surgeon is busy.

Many details and actions combine to make a cesarean section successful, and the nurse’s role must be appreciated.