**PTSD**

The risk of developing PTSD and the effectiveness of treatments can be influenced by social support. However, it can be challenging for patients to admit to the effects of past traumas and initiate care. There may be a strong sense of fear, vulnerability, and confusion. PTSD affects physical and mental health in ways that are not always apparent. Thus awareness about the signs and symptoms is essential. Patient buy-in and commitment to treatment courses, often alongside treatment of comorbid conditions, are paramount to limiting illness burden for patients and loved ones.

**Depression**

Military members are at risk of developing MDD given risk exposures inherent to both the general population and military service. Despite the DoD’s renewed energy and devotion to providing members adequate access to care, the stigma around mental health remains. Military members and veterans report worrying about appearing weak or being overlooked for a position as reasons not to seek care.

**Suicide**

Due to high rates of suicide among veterans, safety plans are mandated by the VA for those at risk.

- Step 1: Identify warning signs that indicate an impending suicidal crisis

- Step 2: Employ internal coping strategies (meditation, pleasant activities, or relaxation techniques, etc.)

- Step 3: Reach out to social contacts or visit locations that serve as distractions.

- Step 4: Contact a family member or friend for help

- Step 5: Contact a professional or agency (Veterans’ Crisis Line or therapist, etc.)

- Step 6: Remove or reduce access to lethal means

It is important to note that safety plans do not protect patients or clinicians, and patients who agree to their safety plan may still be at high risk. Therefore, thorough evaluations and meaningful therapeutic interactions should also be utilized, particularly in impulsive patients.

**Substance Use Disorders**

Treatment of SUDs usually involves short-term therapy to identify and modify unhelpful thoughts and behaviors tied to substance use. Some, such as opioids, alcohol, and tobacco, are effectively treated medications as well. Others, like cocaine and marijuana, have no approved medications, making counseling the mainstay of treatment. The military and VA offer free counseling, including smoking cessation, which has been effective and improves long-term outcomes. Treatment can be individualized, help rebuild relationships with loved ones, and build valuable life skills.