Muscles of the posterior compartment are in two subdivisions: a superficial and deep layer.

**Superficial Posterior Muscles**

The gastrocnemius muscle is made up of separate lateral and medial heads.

A deep calcaneal bursa between the tendon and bone facilitates frictionless gliding of the tendon over the bone.  The soleus muscle originates on the posterior surface of the fibula as well as the soleal line on the tibia.  As a unit, the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles form the triceps surae.

Deep to the triceps surae lies the plantaris muscle. This muscle originates on the lateral supracondylar line of the femur and inserts onto the tuberosity of the calcaneus adjacent to the AT. The plantaris muscle is commonly a source for grafting material. The triceps surae muscles provide for plantar flexion of the foot. However, the gastrocnemius muscle itself can also facilitate flexion of the knee. The plantaris muscle allows minor plantar flexion as well.

**Deep Posterior Muscle**

The most superior muscle of the deep posterior compartment of the lower leg is the popliteus muscle.

The flexor hallucis longus (FHL) originates from the posterior surface of the fibula and inserts into the base of the great toe's distal phalanx. The FHL tendon travels below the sustentaculum tali and is held in place by the annular ligament. The FHL muscle plantarflexes the talocrural joint and the metatarsophalangeal and interphalangeal joints of the great toe.

The flexor digitorum longus (FDL) muscles originate from the posterior surface of the tibia and inserts onto the distal phalanges of the 2nd to 5ith digits in the foot. The FDL muscle crosses both the talocrural joint and metatarsophalangeal joints, serving as an active plantar flexor of both joints.  The FDL also plantarflexes the metatarsophalangeal and interphalangeal joints of the 2nd through 5th toes.

An accessory FDL muscle is said to be present in 15% of the population.