# Continuing Education Activity

Necrotizing periodontal diseases (NPDs) encompass necrotizing gingivitis (NG), necrotizing periodontitis (NP), necrotizing stomatitis (NS), and in extreme cases, NPDs can lead to noma (cancrum oris). These are all considered stages of the same condition due to their shared etiology and clinical presentation. The most typical features of NPDs are pain, gingival necrosis, interdental ulceration, and in more advanced stages, osteonecrosis. This activity outlines the etiology, evaluation, and treatment of necrotizing periodontal diseases, particularly necrotizing gingivitis and necrotizing periodontitis. It highlights the role of the healthcare team in identifying patients at risk for and managing patients currently with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the etiology of necrotizing periodontal diseases.
- Describe the presentation of a patient with necrotizing periodontal diseases.
- Summarize the management of a patient with necrotizing periodontal diseases.
- Outline the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance care delivery for patients with necrotizing periodontal diseases.

# Introduction

Necrotizing periodontal diseases (NPDs) encompass necrotizing gingivitis (NG), necrotizing periodontitis (NP), necrotizing stomatitis (NS), and in extreme cases, NPDs can lead to noma (cancrum oris). These are all considered stages of the same condition due to their shared etiology and clinical presentation.

Necrotizing gingivitis is the most common form and progresses to necrotizing periodontitis in susceptible populations, such as in immunosuppressed patients. The necrotic destruction is limited to the interdental papillae that exhibit the typical punched-out appearance.

# Etiology

Although necrotizing periodontal diseases are infectious conditions, immunosuppression is the most critical predisposing factor. Cases of necrotizing gingivitis and necrotizing periodontitis are almost always found in patients with an immunosuppressed condition, most notably HIV. A CD4 count of less than 200 in an HIV-positive patient is more strongly linked to necrotizing periodontitis than any other risk factor.

Other contributing factors include tobacco smoking, unusual psychological stress, severe malnutrition, poor sleeping habits, and poor oral hygiene. Most cases of NPDs are seen in patients that are tobacco smokers. Malnutrition has been shown to be an important risk factor. In developed countries, NPDs are associated with populations who display poor eating habits, such as college students, whereas, in developing countries, they are associated with young children with deficient protein intake.

Virulent bacteria, specifically Fusobacteria, Prevotella intermedia, Porphyromonas gingivalis, and Treponema sp, have been identified in the necrotic lesions associated with NPDs.

A limited understanding exists surrounding the actual cause of necrotizing periodontal diseases; however, evidence points to an existing periodontal condition that is given the opportunity to proliferate into a more rapid and destructive state.

# Epidemiology

The worldwide prevalence of necrotizing periodontal diseases is less than 1%.

A major epidemiologic risk factor is malnutrition. NPDs are most commonly associated with very young children in developing countries due to severe malnourishment, specifically a low protein intake.

# Pathophysiology

The exact pathogenesis of necrotizing periodontal diseases is not fully understood. However, the initial stage of NG is believed to be caused by commensal oral organisms that become pathogenic in response to reduced host response.Fusobacteria and spirochete species have commonly been implicated in NPDs; however, it is unclear whether these are causative organisms or represent a secondary or opportunistic infection due to the patient's immunosuppressed condition.

# Histopathology

In 1965, Listgarten provided electron microscopy (EM) data of the invasion of spirochetes in what was previously referred to as necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis (NUG) and differentiated between various zones within NUG. The zones are listed in order of increasing depth.

- Bacterial zone

- Neutrophil-rich zone

- Necrotic zone

- Zone of spirochete infiltration

The most superficial bacterial zone contains a variety of bacterial species. The neutrophil-rich zone contains various leukocytes, with the most prominent cell type being the neutrophil. In the next deeper zone, the necrotic zone, an abundance of dead cells and fragmented connective tissue can be found. Up until this final zone, a variety of bacteria species could be found, including spirochetes. However, in the zone of spirochete infiltration, spirochetes are the sole organism present and can be found in the deep, preserved tissue.

# History and Physical

As previously mentioned, necrotizing periodontal diseases are almost always found in patients with immunosuppression or psychological stress.

Patients will usually report excruciating pain, fetid oral odor, and rapid onset of the condition, characteristic of necrotizing periodontal diseases - necrotizing periodontitis can lead to loss of periodontal attachment in as short as a few days.

The most typical clinical sign of NPDs is tissue necrosis, seen as ulcerated and necrotic gingiva, with a distinctive “punched-out” or “cratered” appearance.

# Evaluation

NPDs are a clinical diagnosis, and intraoral examination should be accompanied by extraoral examination searching for lymphadenopathy or facial asymmetry

On radiographic examination, the bone may show extensive changes or very little. Osteonecrosis of the bone may be seen as “moth-eaten” patchy radiolucency, resembling other conditions such as medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw, osteoradionecrosis, and osteomyelitis.

Blood tests are recommended to investigate predisposing illnesses such as leukemia, neutropenia, and agranulocytosis.

# Treatment / Management

Necrotizing gingivitis and necrotizing periodontitis are mainly managed using local measures. The treatment of NPDs depends on the extent and severity of the disease, but in general, initial management includes:

- Gentle mechanical debridement under local anesthesia,

- Removing pseudomembrane with the help of a cotton pellet embedded in 0.12% chlorhexidine,

- Providing oral hygiene instructions

- Indicating either a 0.12% chlorhexidine mouthwash or hydrogen peroxide mouth rinse

The use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as needed should be advised to the patient to help alleviate the pain.

Modifying risk factors and treating underlying systemic conditions are key in managing NPDs. Tobacco smoking, psychological stress, and malnutrition should be managed to reduce the risk of future disease.

Further advice may include taking vitamin supplements, avoiding spicy food, observing appropriate fluid intake, and improving sleep.

Necrotizing periodontitis is a disease of tissue destruction of both soft tissue (gums) and hard tissue (alveolar bone). As a result of the disease, both soft and hard tissue defects can make oral hygiene difficult. After completing the acute treatment phase, patients may undergo treatments to surgically correct any defects, such as a gingivoplasty for smaller soft tissue defects or osteoplasty to repair larger, bony defects.

# Differential Diagnosis

Necrotizing periodontal diseases should be differentiated from the following:

- Oral mucositis

- HIV-associate periodontitis

- Herpes simplex virus (HSV)

- Scurvy

- Gingivostomatitis

- Desquamative gingivitis

- Invasive fungal disease

- Illicit-drug related gingival disease

- Agranulocytosis

- Leukemia

- Chronic periodontitis

Appropriate testing and history taking must be performed for an accurate diagnosis.

# Staging

According to the 2017 classification system put forth by the American Academy of Periodontology, necrotizing periodontal disease is a category of diseases that affects the periodontium through the extent of ulceration and necrosis. Within this group, there are three major subsets:

- Necrotizing gingivitis

- Necrotizing periodontitis

- Necrotizing stomatitis

The differences between these subsets are based on the extent and site of damage. Necrotizing gingivitis is used to describe necrosis and ulceration limited to the gingiva (gums). A progression of that condition is necrotizing periodontitis, where there is damage to and loss of the periodontium surrounding each tooth, including the gingival tissues, alveolar bone, and periodontal ligament. Lastly, necrotizing stomatitis is a term used to describe the destruction of the mucous membranes in the mouth and the areas beyond the mucogingival junction, such as the cheek, tongue, and palate.

# Prognosis

Recurrence of necrotizing periodontal diseases is not uncommon, and therefore regular recalls are recommended to monitor for signs of future illness. Additionally, a critical factor in the prognosis of NPDs is the management of risk factors. The prognosis is more favorable if patients improve their risk factors such as oral hygiene, nutrition, psychological stress, or smoking cessation. Additionally, treatment of underlying conditions, such as therapy for HIV, may reduce the patient's immunosuppressed state, thus improving their prognosis.

# Complications

There are several noted complications of necrotizing periodontal diseases, most of which are related to the destructive nature of the disease.

- Tooth loss

- Further loss of attachment

- Extensive soft tissue necrosis

- Alveolar bone exposure

- Sequestration of bone fragments

- Bacteremia

- Weight loss and dehydration

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Educate at-risk patients on modifying risk factors such as oral hygiene and nutrition to prevent the occurrence and recurrence of necrotizing periodontal diseases. Interdisciplinary healthcare professionals should work together to identify, monitor, treat, and manage patients with necrotizing periodontal diseases and treat underlying conditions. Patients should be aware of the importance of rapid identification of signs and symptoms of NPDs to provide immediate and effective treatment to limit the extent of the destruction.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Necrotizing periodontal diseases are a clinical diagnosis. They are characterized by their aggressive nature and rapid onset, leading to extreme pain, gingival necrosis, interdental ulceration, and in more advanced stages, osteonecrosis

Although general dentists are responsible for providing the acute and initial management of NPDs, referrals to a periodontal specialist or oral surgeon should be made to manage the disease sequelae. It is imperative that dental and medical professionals simultaneously address the oral complications and underlying systemic conditions. An interprofessional approach will improve NPDs patients' outcomes. [Level 5]