The main aim of treatment modalities is to decrease the formation of ROS, introduce monoclonal antibodies that will prevent the binding of inflammatory mediators to endothelial linings, and to decrease the neutrophilic activation. Ischemic pre or post-conditioning, antioxidants, and controlled reperfusion appear to decrease the degree of reperfusion injury. Pre-conditioning involves exposing the organ to small periods of ischemia before the actual ischemic insult to the organ takes place. On the contrary, post-conditioning involves partial or episodic, limited reperfusion of the ischemic organ; this helps to slow down the washout of adenosine, allows opioids and nitric oxide to form, as well as down-regulate tissue factor production.

Various studies are being done on animals to ascertain the efficacy of these treatment modalities. Therapeutic hypothermia is postulated to have a protective role in ischemia due to its effect on microRNA. Hypothermia also correlates with the upregulation of inhibitor of apoptosis stimulating protein of p53 (iASPP) and decreasing its target organs, which, in turn, has a neuroprotective effect. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy appears to reduce neutrophils and endothelial adhesion by preventing intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) binding to CD18 due to inhibition of CD 18 polarisation.

Clinical trials are underway to assess the protective effect of hypercapnic acidosis in ischemic-reperfusion injuries, mainly involving the retina but also the central nervous system, lungs, and myocardium. Concluding evidence of these studies has shown that hypercapnic acidosis has an attenuating effect on the inflammatory, oxidative, and apoptotic processes.

Further studies done regarding retinal ischemia-reperfusion injuries have shown beneficial effects of pioglitazone.

So far, treatment modalities have not shown promising clinical outcomes due to the following restraints such as multiple mechanisms involved in injury; mechanisms like neutrophilic activation cannot be entirely blunted due to its very essential role in healing; multiple co-morbid like diabetes, hypertension, and elevated lipid levels; and the inability to administer treatment at the optimal time.

Activated platelets and their aggregation along with P- selectins are thought to play a role in reperfusion injury; hence the use of glycoprotein 2b/3a inhibitors are said to have a protective role against reperfusion injuries. Comparative studies between using a combination of hydrogen and carbon monoxide vs. usage of only hydrogen gas to reduce the oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species have also been conducted. These studies concluded that dual gas therapy is more beneficial.