The goal of treatment in patients with RA is early diagnosis and early initiation of treatment to prevent irreversible damage to the joints. The International Task Force Guidelines published in 2014 make the following recommendations regarding the treatment of RA:

- The primary goal of treatment is to achieve long-term clinical remission and optimize quality of life with the absence of signs and symptoms associated with inflammatory disease activity.

- If clinical remission cannot be achieved, low disease activity is an acceptable alternative.

- Disease activity should be assessed every month in patients with moderate to severe disease activity.

- In patients with low disease activity or clinical remission, disease activity should be assessed every 3 to 6 months.

Multiple clinical assessment tools have been developed to assist clinicians in determining the disease activity of patients with RA. An updated recommendation from the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) in 2019 recommended using the following assessment tools because they met the minimum standard for evaluation per their recommendation.

- Clinical Disease Activity Index (CDAI)

- Disease Activity Score (DAS)

- Disease Activity Score 28 Joints (DAS28-ESR/CRP)

- Patient-Derived DAS28

- Hospital Universitario La Princesa Index (HUPI)

- Multi-Biomarker Disease Activity Score (MBDA score, VECTRA DA)

- Rheumatoid Arthritis Disease Activity Index (RADAI)

- Rheumatoid Arthritis Disease Activity Index 5 (RADAI-5)

- Routine Assessment of Patient Index Data 3 (RAPID3)

- Routine Assessment of Patient Index Data 5 (RAPID5)

- Simplified Disease Activity Index (SDAI)

Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) typically used in treating RA include methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, sulfasalazine, and leflunomide. Anti-TNF-alpha inhibitors include etanercept, infliximab, adalimumab, golimumab, and certolizumab pegol. Other biologic DMARDs include interleukin (IL) 6 inhibitors such as tocilizumab and sarilumab, T-cell costimulation inhibitors such as abatacept (CTLA4-Ig), and the anti-CD20 B-cell depleting monoclonal antibody such as rituximab. Targeted synthetic DMARDs include Janus kinases (JAK) inhibitors such as tofacitinib, baricitinib, and upadacitinib.

DMARD therapy, including biologic agents and targeted synthetic agents (tofacitinib), should be temporarily held in patients with a serious active infection. They can be resumed after the infection has resolved and antimicrobial treatment has been completed.

**Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)**

NSAIDs do not have any disease-modifying effects but are commonly used to relieve symptoms related to joint inflammation and pain. There are about 20 such drugs (depending on what country you are in) that are all effective at full doses. There is some variation in side effects and toxicities. There is a class Black Box warning for cardiovascular disease, although there is variation in the cardiovascular effects among NSAIDs.

- Efficacy: indomethacin, piroxicam

- Convenience (1-2 doses per day): meloxicam, naproxen, celecoxib, nabumetone

- Overall safety: nabumetone

- GI safety: celecoxib, nabumetone

- Renal safety: possible nabumetone

- Hematologic safety (no antiplatelet effect): celecoxib, meloxicam, nabumetone

**Corticosteroids**

Corticosteroids are commonly used in patients with RA. There are several situations in which corticosteroids should be considered. In a new patient with very active RA, corticosteroids can be used as bridge therapy while DMARD therapy is instituted. Some studies show that using corticosteroids early in RA patients improves outcomes and has disease-modifying effects, including radiographic progression.

**Nonbiologic DMARDs**

This category includes methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), azathioprine (AZA), sulfasalazine, leflunomide, and cyclosporine. Methotrexate is the initial drug of choice for patients with RA. The recommended treatment plan recommends an initial dose of 10-15 mg/week of methotrexate with an escalation of 5 mg/month and a target dose of 20-25 mg/week.

**TNF inhibitors**

The TNF inhibitors include etanercept, infliximab, adalimumab, certolizumab, and golimumab. The ACR does not recommend using TNF inhibitors until a nonbiologic DMARD has been tried.

**Rituximab**

Rituximab is a biologic DMARD that can be added for treating RA if patients have uncontrolled RA and who did not respond to TNF inhibitors.

**Abatacept**

Abatacept inhibits T-cell activation by binding to CD80 and CD86. It is administered as a monthly intravenous infusion or as a weekly subcutaneous injection. Patients with uncontrolled RA, who have shown an inadequate response to methotrexate and TNF inhibitor therapy, benefit from abatacept therapy with proven efficacy from 6 months to 5 years of therapy.

**Interleukin 6 Inhibitors**

Tocilizumab, an IL-6 receptor inhibitor, is indicated for moderate-to-severe active RA in adults who have had an inadequate response to TNF inhibitor therapy. These patients develop clinically meaningful improvement with the use of tocilizumab.

**Janus kinase (JAK) Inhibitors**

JAK is a group of tyrosine kinases that participate in intracellular signal transduction for hematopoiesis and immune cell function. JAK inhibitors (such as tofacitinib) are oral agents that reduce the production of cytokines and are approved as second-line agents for the treatment of RA.

**ACR and EULAR Treatment Guidelines**

- According to the ACR treatment guidelines for early RA, patients who have not taken disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) therapy should start DMARD therapy regardless of the disease activity level.

- In patients with low disease activity and early disease, monotherapy with methotrexate is the preferred treatment.

- Leflunomide or sulfasalazine are the first-line treatment in patients with a contraindication to methotrexate or intolerance to it.

- If monotherapy with DMARD does not control disease activity (regardless of concomitant glucocorticoid use), therapy should be altered. Methotrexate can be continued or discontinued at this point. Additional therapy options after failed monotherapy with DMARD are recommended as either dual traditional/nonbiologic DMARD therapy, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors, or non-tumor necrosis factor biologic agents.

- In patients with established RA, who are DMARD naive, methotrexate is the preferred agent for initial monotherapy, regardless of the disease activity level.

- If monotherapy with DMARD does not control disease activity in established RA (regardless of concomitant glucocorticoid use), dual DMARD therapy, a TNF inhibitor, a non-TNF biologic agent, or tofacitinib therapy can be added.

- If disease activity remains high on TNF inhibitor monotherapy, DMARD therapy should be added in addition to the TNF inhibitor.

- If disease activity remains high despite a TNF inhibitor switch to a non-TNF biologic agent with or without methotrexate

- If disease activity remains high despite a trial of anti-TNF and non-TNF agents, use another non-TNF biologic agent before considering tofacitinib.

- If still uncontrolled despite the above trials, use tofacitinib

- If disease activity remains high despite the above combination therapies, short-term low-dose glucocorticoid therapy should be added.

- TNF inhibitors should be avoided in patients with congestive heart failure.

- Patients with hepatitis C who have not been treated or are currently not on treatment for it should receive nonbiologic DMARD therapy rather than TNF inhibitors.

**Safety Considerations with Biologic and Targeted Synthetic DMARDs**

- Serious infections: All biologic and targeted synthetic DMARDs are associated with 2 to 3 times the number of infections. Hold all agents during an active infection, hold for surgical procedures, and avoid live vaccines. Opportunistic infections, including TB and fungal infections, all patients should be assessed for latent TB.

- Herpes zoster: JAK inhibitors

- Neutropenia: IL-6 inhibitors, JAK inhibitors, rituximab

- Elevated LFTs, elevated cholesterol: IL-6 inhibitors, JAK inhibitors

- Thrombosis: JAK inhibitors

- CHF: TNH inhibitors

- Cardiovascular events: JAK inhibitors (Black Box warning)

- Demyelinating diseases: TNF inhibitors