**History**

Alkaptonuria is an autosomal recessive disorder; familial genetic analysis shows no other affected member. The typical presentation of alkaptonuria is the darkening of the urine upon standing for longer time or dark urine stains on the diaper to the oxidation and polymerization of homogentisic acid; this could be the only feature suggestive of alkaptonuria in the pediatric age group. A significant amount of people with AKU may not present with black urine, which can be unreliable. The most frequent symptoms are one of the arthritic features confined mainly to the spine, hips, and knees. Practically all people with AKU eventually experience Arthritis. The onset of lumbar back pain, thoracic back pain, or both is frequent, especially around age 30. Progressive kyphoscoliosis, reduced disc space, spinal stenosis, and compressive myelopathy can occur with advancing age.

**Physical Findings**

Alkaptonuria has multiple clinical spectrums. Ochronosis, homogenistic aciduria, and ochronotic osteoarthropathy are called the triad of alkaptonuria. Ochronosis commonly presents in the third or fourth decade, which develops as the deposition of benzoquinone acetate in both extra- and intra-cellularly connective tissue. Finally, ochronotic arthropathy develops as an accumulation of Homogentisinic acid polymer within hyaline articular cartilage.

The clinical features are secondary to ochronosis:

- General: Grey pigmentation in the ear cartilage or the sclerae, also skin discoloration

- Bone and joint: Lumbar pain (ankylosis), arthritis leading to joint effusions, decreased joint mobility, impaired spinal, and thoracic mobility may lead to disability. There is also an increase in the prevalence of fractures secondary to osteopenia.

- Respiratory: Decreased respiratory reserve and restrictive lung disease.

- Cardiac: Valvular heart disease like aortic stenosis(more common), aortic regurgitation, mitral valve stenosis; cardiac arrhythmias; heart failure, and an increase in the incidence of coronary artery disease.

- Neurological: Peripheral neuropathy, tinnitus, diplopia, and an increase in the incidence of stroke.

- Metabolic: Increase in the incidence of renal, gallbladder, and prostatic stones.