**Macroscopic Findings**

- Bulky mass (mean: 6 cm)

- Homogeneous and variegated appearance

- On cut section: light tan and fleshy with zones of necrosis and hemorrhage

- Infiltrating, often into adjacent soft tissues and organs

**Microscopic Findings**

The highly variable microscopic appearances of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma are broadly categorized into three patterns, which can occur singly or in any combination:

- Sarcomatoid

- Giant cell

- Epithelial

- The sarcomatoid form is malignant spindle cells with features commonly seen in high-grade pleomorphic sarcoma.

- The giant cell form is composed of highly pleomorphic malignant cells, some of which contain multiple nuclei.

- The epithelial form manifests squamoid or squamous cohesive tumor nests with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm; occasional keratinization can be present.

Common to all three forms are necrosis, an elevated mitotic rate, and an infiltrative growth pattern. Vascular invasion is also often present.

**Immunohistochemistry**

Immunohistochemistry helps to distinguish anaplastic carcinoma from other undifferentiated malignancies using CD45 and other lymphoid markers along with melanocytic markers to exclude lymphoma and melanoma, respectively.

Common thyroid-lineage markers such as TTF1 and thyroglobulin are usually absent, whereas PAX, also a thyroid-lineage marker, is retained in approximately half of all cases. Positive cytokeratin expression supports the epithelial nature of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, but negative immunostaining for cytokeratin does not exclude the diagnosis.