The diagnostic work of cholinergic crisis can pose a clinical challenge, especially for those unfamiliar with the clinical signs and symptoms. A very detailed history taking with a thorough physical examination is necessary. In the physical examination, particular attention should be paid to the nervous, respiratory, cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal system as this is where the clinical manifestation is most profound.  A good mnemonic to remember is**SLUDGEM**and**DUMBELS**for the muscarinic effect of ACh.

**Clinical Findings Related to Stimulation of Muscarinic Receptors**

**S**- Salivation

**L**- Lacrimation

**U**-Urinary frequency

**D**-Diarrhea

**G**- Gastrointestinal cramping and pain

**E**- Emesis

**M**- Miosis

Another mnemonic that is commonly used for symptoms is "DUMBELS."

**D**- Diaphoresis and Diarrhea

**U**-Urinary frequency

**M**-Miosis

**B**-Bronchospasm and Bronchorrhea

**E**– Emesis

**L**– Lacrimation

**S**– Salivation

**Clinical Findings Related to Stimulation of Nicotinic Receptors**

- Muscular weakness

- Muscular fatigue and fasciculation

- Respiratory muscle weakness

- Tachycardia

- Hypertension

**Clinical Findings Related to Stimulation of  the****Central Nervous System**

- Seizures

- Coma

- Ataxia

- Slurred speech

- Agitation and restlessness

Clinical diagnosis of cholinergic crisis can be established based on the toxidromes listed above.

In the history taking, it is very pertinent to determine the cause of the cholinergic crises:

- Medications for the treatment of myasthenia gravis or glaucoma, including pyridostigmine

- Ingestion or exposure to insecticides, pesticides,  or herbicides

- Exposure to nerve gas

- Reversal of neuromuscular blockage

Time is paramount in the initial assessment. When, how, and where the ingestion or exposure took place is necessary to elicit from the history. This is because there is a 48-hour window during which to administer pralidoxime as an antidote. Pralidoxime will react with the enzyme that breaks down ACh after contact with the inhibitor of AChE, in this instance the nerve gas or insecticide. The reactivated enzyme AChE will expedite the molecular degradation of ACh. The degradation of ACh will terminate the overstimulation of the postsynaptic membrane by ACh.