**Fluorescein Angiogram**

This is the most important modality in establishing a diagnosis of OIS. The most specific feature of the disease is a delay in choroidal filling with the patchy pattern seen in 60% of cases with more than five seconds from the first appearance of dye until complete choroidal filling. Sometimes even delayed more than 1 minute. The most sensitive parameter is prolonged arteriovenous transit time being more than eleven seconds from the first appearance of retinal arterial dye until complete retinal venous filling. This is seen in 95% of cases though it is least specific. The observation of well-demarcated, leading edge of fluorescein dye within a retinal artery after intravenous injection is a distinctly unusual finding secondary to hypoperfusion.

Late arterial staining is present in 85% of cases that occur due to damage to endothelium due to ischemia. This may imitate frosted branch angiitis on angiography.

Macular edema in the late phases of the angiogram is seen in 17% of cases.

**Indocyanine Green Angiography (ICG)**

ICG will better delineate any abnormality in choroidal vessels with prolongation of time in which the dye reaches choroid (normal is around 10 seconds) and in the intrachoroidal circulation time (around 5-6 second). Areas of the vascular filling defect are seen in the posterior pole and mid-periphery. There can also be a delay in filling or occlusion of choriocapillaris in the peripheral watershed area.

**Electroretinogram (ERG)**

There is a reduction in amplitude of both a and b wave in OIS as there is the affliction of circulation of layers of the inner retina (b wave) and outer retinal layers( a wave). In central retinal artery occlusion, where only the inner layers are affected, there is a decrease in amplitude of b wave only. Some patients also have a reduction of oscillatory potential noted in b wave, which may be an early sign of carotid artery stenosis even when the fluorescein angiography is normal. The changes in ERG are somewhat reversible after carotid artery surgery.

**Visual-evoked Potentials (VEP)**

VEP after exposure to intense light stimulation (photostress) shows an increase in latency and a decrease in amplitude. The time required for VEP to return to baseline status (i.e., recovery time after photostress) in normal individuals is 68-78sec, and this is prolonged in patients with OIS. VEP changes may appear before ophthalmic features.

**Ophthalmodynamometry**

This estimated the pressure required to elicit arterial pulsation(Diastolic pressure), whereas the pressure required to cause its cessation is the diastolic pressure. In OIS, there is a reduction in both values, which improves or returns to normal after carotid artery surgery. Positive in unilateral cases. Light, digital pressure is a good substitute in which light, digital pressure on the lids can induce retinal arterial pulsations, if not already present.

**Imaging modalities for evaluation of Carotid Occlusive Disease**

**Color Doppler Imaging of Retrobulbar vessels
**

Distal to obstruction, there is a dampened doppler effect**.**Reversed OA flow pattern is a highly specific indicator of ipsilateral high-grade ICA stenosis or occlusion.

**Carotid Duplex Ultrasound 
**

This combines B mode ultrasound (anatomical imaging) and Doppler scan ( Flow velocity). It is used to measure the peak systolic velocity(PSV), end-diastolic velocity, and ICA/CCA PSV ratio. For detecting stenosis and occlusion, this modality has a sensitivity of 89% and 96% and specificity of 84% and 100%, respectively. The relation of PSV (cm/sec) to ICA stenosis (% diameter) stenosis is as follows 125 to 225 cm/sec: 50 to 70%, 225 to 350 cm/sec: 70 to 90%, >350 cm/sec: >90%. MRA angiography is similar to Doppler ultrasonography in diagnosing carotid stenosis.

**Magnetic Resonance Angiography and Computed Tomographic Angiography
**

With 70 to 99% carotid stenosis, MRA had a pooled sensitivity of 95% and a pooled specificity of 90%, which are superior to a conventional DSA. For the detection of complete occlusions, MRA yielded a sensitivity of 98% and a specificity of 100%, which is similar to duplex ultrasound.

**Carotid Arteriography
**

Intra-arterial digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was considered as the gold standard for imaging the cerebrovascular system, but this is not used routinely for screening and follow up as it is fraught with complications like cerebral infarction, systemic complications, and high cost. So this modality is reserved only for doubtful cases.