**The workup includes:**

- **X-ray**reveals a characteristic radiolucent, geographic appearance with a narrow transition zone found at the lesion margin. This margin, as opposed to that of many other benign lesions, lacks a prominent sclerotic rim. Calcification of matrix, periosteal reaction, and new bone formation are typically absent.

- Imaging modalities such as computed tomographic (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be helpful to confirm the typical subchondral location of these lesions within the bone and the extent of a soft tissue mass, either beyond the bone cortex or through the adjacent joint.

- Modern imaging modalities to determine the extent of disease involvement include MRI, CT scan, functional positron emission tomography (PET), and bone scans.

- **CT scans**give a more accurate assessment of cortical thinning, penetration, and bone mineralization than the plain radiographs. The presence of a primary bone formation within the tumor suggests primary osteosarcoma. CT scan chest may be indicated to look for pulmonary metastasis. The metastatic spread is most common in the setting of a local recurrence; therefore, a chest CT is recommended in patients with locally recurrent disease.

- **MRI scan**helps assess the surrounding soft tissue integrity, such as the neurovascular structures or the extent of subchondral extension into adjacent joints. In the typical GCT, there is homogeneous signal intensity, and the lesion is well-circumscribed. They present with low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and intermediate signal intensity on T2-weighted images. Expansile hypervascular mass with cystic changes and heterogeneous low to intermediate signal intensity on T1-weighted images and intermediate to high intensity on T2-weighted images are its characteristic findings on MRI.

- **Bone scan**can help stage multicentric disease, but findings of the bone scan, typically a decrease in the uptake of radiotracer in the tumor's center, are not specific for GCT. Aneurysmal bone cysts have a similar appearance. There are limited data about the use of fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET for newly diagnosed GCT. GCT accumulates the FDG tracer, unlike many benign bone tumors, presumably because of the active metabolism of osteoclast-like giant cells.