Postnatal infection with rubella can be asymptomatic in approximately 25% to 50% of the patients, especially in young children. The incubation period ranges from 14 to 21 days and is followed by a prodromal illness characterized by low-grade fever, malaise, anorexia, headaches, sore throat, and adenopathy. The lymphadenopathy typically involves postauricular, suboccipital, and anterior cervical lymph nodes. The exanthem could be the first manifestation in children and consists of pinpoint pink macules and papules that classically begin on the face and rapidly spreads to involve the trunk and extremities. Occasionally, the rash is scarlatiniform or purpuric. The rash typically lasts for 3 days and fades in the same directional pattern as it appears.

Rubella infection during embryogenesis leads to the classic triad of cataracts, congenital heart defects, and sensorineural deafness; however, many other defects might be observed. During the neonatal period, CRS has been associated with low birth weight, thrombocytopenic purpura, hemolytic anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, and meningoencephalitis. These manifestations are usually transient. Other clinical manifestations of CRS include ophthalmopathies (retinopathy, glaucoma, chorioretinitis, iris hypoplasia, and microphthalmia), cardiac abnormalities (patent ductus arteriosus, pulmonary artery hypoplasia), psychomotor retardation, and microcephaly.

Of all the manifestations, deafness is the most common finding and could be the only defect observed. Individuals that survive the neonatal period may face severe disabilities (e.g., visual and hearing impairments) and have an increased risk for developmental disorders, including autism. In addition, a variety of late-onset endocrine, cardiovascular and neurological abnormalities have been described.