This disorder can be elicited through routine fasting lipid panel screening in the appropriate individuals. If triglyceride abnormalities are still present in the absence of secondary causes, further investigation could be suggested to screen first-degree relatives due to the high prevalence of familial causes. et al., the following values are the determinants for the severity of triglyceride levels.

- Mild: 150 to 199 mg/dL

- Moderate: 200 to 999 mg/dL

- Severe: 1000 to 1999 mg/dL

- Very severe: ≥2000 mg/dL

Evaluation of hypertriglyceridemia should not stop at the level of a lipid panel. One must check/monitor for other comorbidities development that may augment disease progression. Initially, body-mass-index (BMI) is pertinent to be aware of due to its link to other disease processes like increased insulin resistance, cardiovascular disease, and overall morbidity. Furthermore, the clinical exam can often become the first clue in comorbidity development or increased progression of the hypertriglyceridemia disease state. A common sign of severe triglyceride elevation can often be xanthoma formation on skin exams.

Patients with hypertriglyceridemia commonly can develop comorbid insulin resistance and further progress to diabetes.

If the diagnosis of hypertriglyceridemia is made, monitoring of cardiovascular risk factors is pertinent due to the increased propensity of heart disease.

When suspecting elevated triglyceride levels, consideration of other factors can help elucidate a secondary cause from a primary elevation. Several drugs and substances can lead to a metabolic syndrome that can mispresent as a primary elevation. These substances include estrogen, alcohol, glucocorticoids, beta-blockers, highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) therapy, and others.