The differential diagnosis for uterine fibroids includes conditions that lead to a similar symptom profile of uterine enlargement (e.g., bulk symptoms), HMB, infertility, and/or dysmenorrhea. The main diagnoses to consider when evaluating a patient for these symptoms are pregnancy, adenomyosis, benign or malignant uterine neoplasms, endometrial carcinoma, and uterine leiomyosarcoma.

Adenomyosis often presents with an enlarged uterus, HMB, and dysmenorrhea. However, there are a few factors that can help in discerning between the two. Typically, the uterus is described to be smooth, globular, and boggy. However, this can be difficult to distinguish from fibroids. One of the main differentiating tools is transvaginal ultrasonography.

A fibroid is typically well-circumscribed, whereas adenomyomas are more ill-defined. Adenomyomas are also more difficult to excise than fibroids. Thus suspicion of an adenomyoma might not be discovered until excision is attempted.

Uterine leiomyosarcoma is a malignant neoplasm that is important to consider in the differential for uterine fibroids. They commonly present as fibroids with abnormal vaginal bleeding and a rapidly enlarging uterus. It is important to consider this differential in any post-menopausal women with rapidly enlarging uterine fibroids, as a correct preoperative diagnosis occurs less than 50% of the time. This should prompt further evaluation with hysterectomy without morcellation because the only way to exclude uterine leiomyosarcoma is through excision and pathologic examination.

Endometrial carcinoma is another important differential to rule out when evaluating a patient with uterine bleeding, pain, and enlarging uterus.