The most important determination when evaluating a pregnant patient with symptoms of miscarriage is whether or not this is a true loss, an ectopic pregnancy, molar pregnancy, or a viable pregnancy with complications.

Ultrasound is the gold standard for examining intrauterine contents and viability. This paired with a quantitative human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) hormone level can help determine viability. hCG levels should double in 48 hours on serial exams.

At hCG levels between 1000 to 2000, it has been determined that transvaginal ultrasound (TVUS) is the most sensitive study for identifying intrauterine contents such as a gestational sac with or without a fetus or embryo. There have been multiple studies that reveal a correlation between hCG levels and the stage of embryonic development seen on ultrasound. For instance, at a range of serum hCG between 800 to 1500 UI/I, a 1 to 3 mm gestational sac should be visible on TVUS. Furthermore, a yolk sac should be detectable within the range hCG level of 4500 to 7500 UI/I; with fetal heart motion visible at a range of 8650 to 12,200 U/I.

Cardiac activity should be identifiable at a crown-rump length of 5 mm or greater.

Findings suggestive of but not definitive of early pregnancy loss on transvaginal ultrasound are a crown-rump length (CRL) of 7 mm or greater without fetal cardiac activity or an empty gestational sac with no embryo of 16 to 24 mm or greater in diameter.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), therefore, recommends serial hCG levels as well as serial ultrasounds to determine viability.