Some authors would contend that immediate and complete facial paralysis after a temporal bone fracture is an absolute indication for surgical facial nerve decompression and, if necessary, repair of the facial nerve, but many would treat this group similar to other patients who present with complete hemifacial paralysis in a delayed manner, waiting three days and then performing an ENoG.

The middle fossa craniotomy provides access to the internal auditory canal and geniculate ganglion, while a transmastoid approach exposes the nerve from the geniculate ganglion to the stylomastoid foramen. If the fracture and site of compression are lateral to the geniculate ganglion, the transmastoid approach can be used alone. For patients with complete anacusis due to otic capsule disrupting fractures, a translabyrinthine approach via a mastoidectomy may be employed because it provides exposure of the entire facial nerve.

If a gap in the facial nerve is encountered and it cannot be reconstructed via primary neurorrhaphy, a cable graft from either the sural nerve or the greater auricular nerve may be required; likewise, if more than 50% of the thickness of the nerve has been disrupted, replacing the injured segment with a cable graft is recommended.

Length of convalescence and degree of recovery are variable, depending greatly on the extent of the injury and the patient's overall health. In some cases, it may be useful to place an eyelid weight in order to help prevent corneal ulceration or exposure keratopathy.

Other indications for operative intervention in temporal bone fractures include CSF leak refractory to 14 days of conservative management (head of bed elevation and lumbar drain placement), hemorrhage refractory to packing, ossicular chain disruption, persistent tympanic membrane perforation, external auditory canal stenosis, and entrapment of epithelium that places the patient at risk for cholesteatoma development.