The pathophysiology of pain is complex and not completely understood. Research is ongoing. Pain is divided into acute or chronic primarily by time course. Acute pain is also broadly understood to be protective, whereas chronic pain is often dysfunctional and may be due to nerve damage or inappropriate nerve activation due to sensitization after repetitive stimulation. Central sensitization can lead to the perception of pain without a stimulus (allodynia) or an exaggerated perception of pain (hyperalgesia).

Nociceptors are peripheral nerves that are sensitive to noxious stimuli. Research has uncovered several classes of nociceptors. Some are sensitive to heat and some to mechanical or chemical stimuli. Inflammatory mediators can also activate nociceptors. Different types of nociceptors also conduct impulses differently. There are myelinated A fibers that conduct rapidly and unmyelinated C fibers that conduct more slowly and with less localization. The cell bodies of nociceptors reside in the dorsal root ganglia. Pain signals are transmitted from the dorsal root ganglia via multiple ascending pathways to several different areas within the brain. There are also descending pathways that modulate pain signals.

Psychologic factors also contribute to perception of pain. Patients who suffer from chronic pain may also have psychological stress, particularly anxiety and depression. Some syndromes are characterized as psychiatric disorders, such as somatic symptom disorders that are defined by self-reported pain. As a result, patients may be mischaracterized as having a psychiatric disorder and deprived of appropriate care. Pain may also interfere with cognitive attention, concentration, the content of thought, and memory.