The most common drugs that cause tyrosine kinase inhibitor keratitis are the medications that inhibit the TKI receptor in the EGFR pathway, such as cetuximab, afatinib, erlotinib, and gefitinib. However, other TKIs are also known to cause TKI keratitis, such as imatinib, vemurafenib, ruxolitinib, osimertinib, vandetanib, and ponatinib, as seen in Figure 2.

Cetuximab is a TKI monoclonal antibody targeting the EGFR receptor, primarily used for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Reported toxicities consist of acneiform rash, nausea, electrolyte disorders, weakness, and malaise. The literature on the ocular toxicities of cetuximab is limited, with most complications recorded consisting of trichomegaly or abnormally long eyelashes, conjunctivitis, and blepharitis. There are isolated reports of patients experiencing keratitis while taking cetuximab as monotherapy.

Afatinib is an oral EGFR TKI used as a first-line treatment for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with unique EGFR mutations for either local or metastatic malignancy. The most common recorded complications of afatinib consist of dry eyes, ulcerative keratitis, blurred vision, photophobia, and conjunctivitis. The prevalence of keratitis in patients with this medication is 0.8%.

Erlotinib is an EGFR TKI recently approved for the treatment of advanced NSCLC and a part of combination therapy in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. Erlotinib causes trichomegaly and a periorbital rash, while blepharitis, xerosis, and keratitis are rarer side effects.

Gefitinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, is an oral medication that actively inhibits the epidermal growth factor receptor. The medication was approved as first-line treatment for patients diagnosed with NSCLC who had sensitizing EGFR mutations. The most common side effects are dry skin, diarrhea, and rash, which are reversible and typically mild. In some cases, patients were found to experience TKI keratitis and trichomegaly.

Imatinib is an inhibitor of multiple TK proteins that functions as a treatment for many malignancies. It was shown to cause ulcerative keratitis in a study analyzing patients on dual treatment of imatinib and perifosine for refractory gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST).

Vemurafenib is a BRAF inhibitor that is primarily used as a treatment for melanoma. In a study analyzing the toxicities of vemurafenib, two patients out of 568 were found to develop keratitis, placing the incidence at 0.4%.

Ruxolitinib is a JAK inhibitor used for various types of myelofibrosis pathologies. The literature is limited on the absolute number of cases of patients developing keratitis; however, a study analyzing Aspergillus fumigatus keratitis concluded that the JAK inhibitor made patients susceptible to fungal keratitis.

Osimertinib is an EGFR-TKI that is the first-line treatment for patients with advanced NSCLC found to have an EGFR mutation. In a study done by Scott et al.

Vandetanib is an EGFR TKI that is primarily used as a treatment for medullary thyroid cancer. Studies displaying the incidence of TKI keratitis are limited; however, it is hypothesized that vandetanib makes patients susceptible to keratitis due to the inhibition of the EGFR pathway.

Ponatinib is a BCR-ABL inhibitor used as a treatment for CML. Studies reviewing the incidence of keratitis in patients taking ponatinib are limited. However, it is believed to cause many ocular toxicities, keratitis being one of them.