**Pharmacologic Treatment**

Treatment of non-tumoral hirsutism still includes oral contraception. It inhibits by its progestogen the hypothalamic-pituitary axis, and thus the ovarian production of androgens; by its estrogen, it increases the SHBG. It is combined with an antiandrogenic treatment: flutamide, spironolactone, cyproterone acetate, finasteride are all used with variable but comparable results.

Oral contraceptives are the first treatment of choice as they suppress androgen production by the ovaries. However, they often do not work. In addition, for a female who desires a pregnancy, this treatment may not be ideal.

Spironolactone is known to block androgen receptors and is the second most common treatment. It can even be combined with an oral contraceptive. However, the improvement is slow and takes many months. Thus, compliance with spironolactone is low.

Finasteride is used to treat hirsutism and is preferred as it does not have any estrogenic or progesterone activity. However, it is not recommended in women of childbearing age as there is a risk of ambiguous genitalia in the fetus. Flutamide is another novel treatment, and while it does work, the medication is expensive and has the potential to cause liver damage.

Adrenal hyperandrogenism is slowed down by low dose corticosteroids, possibly associated with the treatments as mentioned earlier.

Fine hair growth can be inhibited by twice, daily topical application of eflornithine. Electrolysis is less used now except for coarse white hairs and also in cases of polycystic ovaries without insulin resistance.

**Nonpharmacologic Treatment******

As the effect of drug treatment that occurs only after 1 to 2 years, clinicians use the cosmetic approaches that are also appropriate for hypertrichoses: shaving, hair removal, discoloration by hydrogen peroxide, chemical depilation (p. thioglycolates). Fine hair growth can be inhibited by twice-daily topical application of eflornithine. Electrolysis is not used as often as in the past, except in the case of coarse white hairs. It has been replaced by long-term depilation with tools like depilatory lasers and various intense pulsed light devices.

**Surgical Treatment**

Surgical excision is necessary in the case of the tumoral process. Ovariectomy may be indicated for severe hyperandrogenism in menopausal or perimenopausal women.