Lipomas typically present as soft, solitary, painless, subcutaneous nodules that are mobile and not associated with epidermal change. A characteristic "slippage sign" may be elicited by gently sliding the fingers off the edge of the tumor. They are typically slow-growing and may grow to a final stable size. However, they are occasionally greater than 10 centimeters and referred to as "giant lipomas." Lipomas may appear anywhere on the body but tend to favor the fatty areas of the trunk, neck, forearms, and proximal extremities. They are rarely seen in acral areas. Lipomas may affect many cutaneous and noncutaneous sites, including dermal, subcutaneous, and subfascial tissues along with intermuscular, intramuscular, synovial, bone, nervous, or retroperitoneal sites.

Multiple lipomas are present in 5% to 10% of affected patients and are usually associated with familial lipomatosis or numerous other genetic disorders described in the differential diagnosis section. The use of protease inhibitors in HIV patients may induce lipomas and lipodystrophy; therefore, a thorough past medical and medication history should be obtained.

Signs and symptoms of lipomas depend largely on the location and size of the lipomas. It can cause respiratory distress related to bronchial obstruction; patients may present with either endobronchial or parenchymal. Cardiac lipomas are located mainly subendocardial, are rarely found intramurally, and are normally unencapsulated; they appear as a yellow mass projecting into the cardiac chamber lesions. Patients with esophageal lipomas can present with obstruction, dysphagia, regurgitation, vomiting, and reflux; esophageal lipomas can be associated with aspiration and consecutive respiratory infections.