Radiation can be exposed internally or externally. Radiation exposure can occur internally when radionuclides enter the body through ingestion, inhalation, or the skin. When the nuclides are deposited into the skin, they undergo radioactive decay and emit radiation. External radiation exposure occurs via sources in the surrounding environment, such as nearby water, ground surfaces, air, or even x-ray tubes. In external radiation, radiation enters the body and penetrates the organs. Another example of this includes terrestrial and cosmic radiation, such as radiation from the sun. The sun continuously emits particles through space, eventually reaching the earth's surface and exposing humans to radiation. These natural exposures commonly occur in our daily life and are typically not destructive due to the body's ability to efficiently repair DNA damage. However, it is important to note that some tissues and organs are more sensitive to radiation than others. Rapidly dividing cells such as ones in the intestinal mucosa and bone marrow are the most vulnerable to radiation.

Other issues of concern relate to geographical locations, house and work environments, and length of exposure. Mining for natural uranium is one example of the harmful effects of radiation. Uranium is known to have a very long half-life and emits powerful alpha particles when it decays. Uranium continues to decay, forming different elements throughout the process until it reaches a stable element of lead. During this decay process, unstable radioactive gas is produced, which can become suspended in the air; this causes a potential problem for miners due to the possibility of inspiring these particles. Alpha emissions contain a large amount of energy but can only travel short distances. When inhaled by miners, these particles can deposit into the lung tissue and cause deleterious effects directly to the alveoli cells. The same concept applies to any radiation that strikes human tissue.

Cancer development is always an issue of concern when it comes to radiation exposure. In both internal and external radiation, ionizing radiation can damage DNA indirectly or directly. Direct damage typically occurs with high ionizing particles such as alpha or beta particles. These particles can interact and transfer their energy directly to the cell's DNA, causing single-stranded or double-stranded breaks or chromosomal damage. Radiation can also cause damage indirectly by the formation of free radicals produced through ionization of surrounding water. This mechanism is present in about two-thirds of all radiation-induced cell damage. It is always important to note the increased risk of cancer development due to DNA mutations that occur with ionizing radiation.