**Initial work-up**

- Complete blood count: Hemoglobin, hematocrit (HCT), MCV, reticulocyte count index

- Comprehensive metabolic panel: Renal and liver function tests

- Iron studies which include serum iron, TIBC (total iron-binding capacity) and ferritin

- Serum vitamin B12, folic acid, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)

- Stool for occult blood

Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) is a measure of the volume occupied by a single red blood cell. Increased values are seen in macrocytic anemia (vitamin B12 deficiency, folate deficiency, alcohol use), whereas decreased values are seen in microcytic anemia.

Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration reflects the average hemoglobin concentration in RBCs. Increased values are seen in spherocytosis, and low values are seen in thalassemia, iron deficiency, and macrocytic anemia.

The reticulocyte count reflects the presence of nonnucleated immature red blood cells in the bone marrow. Increased levels are seen when there is accelerated erythropoiesis, following anemia, hemorrhage, pregnancy, or splenectomy. Decreased levels indicate lower production and can be a result of aplastic anemia, radiation exposure, or chronic infection.

**Differentiation of microcytic anemias based on iron studies**

- Iron deficiency anemia: Low serum iron, high TIBC, and low ferritin.

- Anemia of chronic disease: Low serum iron, low TIBC, and high ferritin.

- Sideroblastic anemia: High serum iron, normal TIBC, and high ferritin.

- Thalassemia: Normal serum iron, normal TIBC, and normal ferritin.

Peripheral smear, hemoglobin electrophoresis, and bone marrow examination if needed. Further testing would include esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy if gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding is suspected and imaging studies if malignancy is suspected.