To provide optimum care to individuals who may require opioid therapy, physicians should follow a multimodal and an interprofessional approach. Prescribers must work with other healthcare professionals and team up with the patient. According to the CDC's guidelines, which are supported by the FDA, a few approaches that physicians can use include:

- Limiting the prescription of opioids or providing short-acting opioids when necessary. Consulting with a pain specialist is required before starting opioid therapy in many states.

- Considering alternative treatment options for pain management, including NSAIDs for lower back pain or osteoarthritis, anticonvulsant, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), or tricyclic antidepressants for neuropathic pain.

- Working with a therapist or psychiatrist to provide CBT for patients dealing with chronic pain.

- Encouraging the patient to participate in exercise therapy to improve function and reduce pain.

- Working with the pharmacist to review all of the patient's medications, provide patient education, and optimize medication safety.

- Teaming with the patient to understand the patient's experiences and knowledge in overdose risk and guide patient education.

- Vital information to obtain includes a history of overdose, history of addiction to any substance, health conditions or prescription of medication associated with respiratory depression, and renal or hepatic dysfunction. It is also essential to obtain a history of suicide attempts, as past suicide attempts and diagnosis of major depressive disorder serve as markers for an increased chance of overdose.

- Discuss treatment goals and when to discontinue opioid treatment with the patient if risks begin to outweigh benefits.

- Surveilling state drug monitoring programs. 

- Prescribers' use of prescription drug monitoring programs and electronic databases that chronicle information regarding prescribing and dispensing controlled medications decreases diversion from patients who "doctor shop" for opioid prescriptions and may prevent overdoses. However, since prescription drug monitoring programs are voluntary in many states, use by providers is often inconsistent.

- Reassessing opioid therapy use and risks and benefits every three months. Often, prescribers obtain urine drug screens as they monitor patients on chronic opioid therapy.

- Providing the patient with evidence-based treatment, such as methadone or buprenorphine, if they present with opioid use disorder.

The most common form of diversion for prescription opioids includes patients providing medication to family members or friends attempting to self-medicate for pain. To combat this issue, prescribers must educate patients on the dangers of sharing medication and the importance of safely storing and disposing of medication.

The FDA also requires pharmaceutical companies who manufacture opioids to develop a training program that would teach prescribers how to decide which patients require opioid therapy, dose and monitor medication, and educate patients on safe use, disposal, and storage of the medication. Companies are also required to provide patient education sheets that physicians can provide to patients on opioid therapy. Moreover, in July of 2019, the FDA adopted a drug safety program called Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) for extended-release and long-acting opioids in hopes of decreasing the risks from inappropriate prescribing and abuse of opioids while allowing patients who need opioid therapy to get the treatment they deserve.

**Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act**

The Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act provision updates federal guidelines to expand the availability of evidence-based treatment to address the opioid epidemic. The MAT Act empowers all health care providers with a standard controlled substance license to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder (OUD), just as they prescribe other essential medications. The MAT Act is intended to help destigmatize a standard of care for OUD and will integrate substance use disorder treatment across healthcare settings.

As of December 2022, the MAT Act has eliminated the DATA-Waiver (X-Waiver) program. All DEA-registered practitioners with Schedule III authority may now prescribe buprenorphine for OUD in their practice if permitted by applicable state law, and SAMHSA encourages them to do so. Prescribers who were registered as DATA-Waiver prescribers will receive a new DEA registration certificate reflecting this change; no action is needed on the part of registrants.

There are no longer any limits on the number of patients with OUD that a practitioner may treat with buprenorphine. Separate tracking of patients treated with buprenorphine or prescriptions written is no longer required.

Pharmacy staff can now fill buprenorphine prescriptions using the prescribing authority's DEA number and does not need a DATA 2000 waiver from the prescriber. However, depending on the pharmacy, the dispensing software may still require the X-Waiver information in order to proceed. Practitioners are still required to comply with any applicable state limits regarding the treatment of patients with OUD.  Contact information for State Opioid Treatment Authorities can be found here: https://www.samhsa.gov/medicationassisted-treatment/sota.

Therapeutic opioid therapy requires the efforts and surveillance of the entire interprofessional healthcare team. Clinicians must follow the concepts outlined above when prescribing these agents. Nurses should counsel patients and be vigilant for signs of "drug-seeking" behavior, informing the prescriber of any concerns. The pharmacist may be in the best position to spot potential misuse since their position serves as the distribution point for the drug; it may be possible to notice "doctor shopping" behavior and report such to the prescribers. All members need to collaborate in these efforts, ensuring that those patients who actually need and can benefit from opioid therapy get the treatment they need and deserve. [Level 5]