**Pharmacological Interventions to Enhance Behavior Modification**

In some cases, behavior modification can be enhanced by pharmacological interventions that modulate physiological pathways involved in behavior regulation. Although these interventions don’t eliminate the need for voluntary and conscious lifestyle improvement, they can facilitate behavioral maintenance and improve health outcomes. Because some of these strategies are underutilized, healthcare teams need to know about these interventions and present them as an option to eligible patients that can benefit from them.

**Weight Loss**

Weight loss is crucial to lifestyle interventions for common conditions such as hypertension and diabetes. While weight loss is classically attempted through diet alone, some medications have been shown to enhance (not replace) lifestyle modification significantly. Semaglutide has been of particular interest in recent years because of the magnitude of the weight reduction that has been seen with its use.

Semaglutide is a selective glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) agonist that is helpful in the regulation of appetite and glucose metabolism. Studies in adults with obesity or overweight with weight-related medical conditions have reported a mean weight reduction of 14.9% with lifestyle interventions and Semaglutide, 12.4% more than what was seen with the same lifestyle intervention and placebo.

Current evidence suggests that the weight reduction seen with semaglutide results from direct and indirect effects on the brain that lead to reduced appetite and decreased energy intake. Semaglutide is currently approved for weight loss in patients with BMI equal to or higher than 30 kg/m2, or patients with a BMI equal to or higher than 27 kg/m2, and more than one weight-related condition such as hypertension, type 2 diabetes, or dyslipidemia.

**Smoking Cessation**

Smoking cessation is considered to be the most effective behavioral measure in the prevention of many cardiovascular conditions.

Studies have shown that smoking cessation rates can be significantly increased when behavioral interventions are accompanied by pharmacological treatments such as varenicline and bupropion. Varenicline is a selective alpha-4 beta-2 partial agonist of the nicotinic receptor that reduces cravings and withdrawal symptoms while also blocking the binding of smoked nicotine (reducing the reward value). Bupropion is a norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake inhibitor that has also been effective in increasing smoking cessation rates.

**Alcohol Cessation**

Problem drinking is a significant public health concern. Alcohol cessation is a highly challenging intervention that can also be enhanced through pharmacological agents. However, studies show that alcohol cessation medications are prescribed to less than 9% of the patients likely to benefit from them.