**Staging (modified from American Cancer Society)**

- Stage I- limited to the vaginal mucosa

- Stage II- involvement of the subvaginal tissue without extension to the pelvic sidewall

- Stage III- extension to the pelvic sidewall

- Stage IVA- spread to adjacent organs

- Stage IVB- spread to distant organs

T1a

N0

M0

The cancer is limited to the vagina and is no larger than 2.0 cm (T1a).

It does not involve lymph nodes (N0) or distant sites (M0).

T1b

N0

MO

The cancer is limited to the vagina but is larger than 2.0 cm (T1b).

It does not involve lymph nodes (N0) or distant sites (M0).

T2a

N0

M0

Cancer has spread to the connective tissues next to the vagina, but not as far as the pelvic wall, and is no larger than 2.0 cm (T2a).

It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or distant sites (M0).

T2b

N0

M0

Cancer has spread to the connective tissues next to the vagina, but not as far as the pelvic wall, but is larger than 2.0 cm (T2b).

It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or distant sites (M0).

T1 to T3

N0/N1

M0

Cancer can be any size and has spread to the pelvic side wall and/or has caused hydronephrosis (T1 to T3).

It has also spread to nearby lymph nodes in the pelvis or groin (inguinal) area (N1) but not distant sites (M0). It may also be N0.

T4

Any N

M0

Cancer involves the bladder or rectum or is present out of the pelvis (T4).

It might or might not have spread to pelvic or inguinal lymph nodes (any N). It has not spread to distant sites (M0).

Any T

Any N

M1

Cancer can be any size and has spread to distant organs (lung, liver, bone) M1. It may invade adjacent organs.

It might or might not have spread to pelvic or inguinal lymph nodes (any N).

In a recent study of 124 patients, data revealed the following distribution: Stage I - 31%, Stage II - 36%, Stage III - 16%, and Stage IV - 17%.