Oral glucocorticoid (GC) is a well-proven treatment. The following summarizes the essential points of EULAR-ACR 2015 recommendations for management:

- 12.5 to 25 mg per day prednisone equivalent as an initial therapy

- Glucocorticoids should be tapered gradually

- Taper to an oral dose of 10 mg per day prednisone equivalent within 4 to 8 weeks

- Once remission is achieved, taper daily oral prednisone by 1 mg every 4 weeks until discontinuation

- Minimum of 12 months of treatment

- For relapse, increase oral prednisone to the pre-relapse dose and decrease it gradually (within 4 to 8 weeks) to the dose at which the relapse occurred

- Individualize dose-tapering schedules, based on regular monitoring of patient disease activity, laboratory markers, and adverse events

- Consider early introduction of methotrexate (MTX) in addition to glucocorticoids, particularly in patients at high risk of relapse and/or prolonged therapy as well as in cases with risk factors, comorbidities, and/or concomitant medications where GC-related adverse events are more likely to occur

Clinical trials used MTX at oral doses of 7.5 to 10 mg/week.

Most of the data for the use of tocilizumab (TCZ) in PMR come from PMR coexisting with GCA. Case series and open-label studies have shown TCZ is useful in PMR with relapse or insufficient response to GC.

Vitamin D and calcium supplementation are routine recommendations for patients on long-term steroids. Bisphosphonate prophylaxis is a recommended option for patients in moderate to high fracture risk categories that would include patients over 40 years with FRAX score of >1% and 10% risk of hip and major osteoporotic fracture respectively.

Close follow-up is recommended. Guidelines published by BSR and BHPR recommend follow-up at weeks 0, 1 to 3, and 6, then months 3, 6, 9, and 12 in the first year (with extra visits for relapses or adverse events).