The American psychiatric association, DSM-5 defines acute stress disorder (ASD) criteria as the followings:

- A: Being exposed to a traumatic event (either physically, sexually, or mentally) plus

- B: Having more than eight of the following symptoms (clustered in five categories) plus:

- Intrusion symptoms: 

- Distressing memories of the traumatic event are recurrent. Children may have repetitive game plays in themes mimicking the main event.
- Having repetitive dreams related to the traumatic event. In children, it might be in the form of night terrors.
- Enactment of the traumatic event recurrence (i.e., flashbacks).
- Intense or prolonged mental or physicological distress in response to the events or themes reminding the patient of the actual traumatic event.


- Negative mood:

- Inability to be happy, feel successful or feel love.


- Dissociative symptoms:

- Having a sense of being detached from self and emotions.
- Dissociative amnesia (that is not related to intoxication or traumatic brain injury [TBI])


- Avoidance symptoms:

- Avoidance of thoughts, memories, and feelings about the traumatic event.
- Avoidance of external reminders of the traumatic event (such as people and places)


- Arousal symptoms:

- Sleep problems (such as difficulty initiating and maintaining quality sleep)
- Irritability and rage attacks with minimum to no provocation
- Highly and abnormally alert to surroundings
- Distractibility
- Unusually strong reflexive reactive to a sudden event in the environment

- C, D, and E: Duration of the symptoms should be between three days and four weeks and cause significant functional impairment and not related to substance use or other medical conditions (such as TBI) to meet the criteria for ASD.