The pulmonary veins originate from individual alveoli within the lung as capillary vessels. These capillary systems converge into larger veins called the interlobar pulmonary veins. An abnormality in the structure and development of these interlobar pulmonary veins results in primarily alveolar capillary dysplasia with misalignment of pulmonary veins.

Further convergence of the interlobar pulmonary veins creates the subsegmental veins. The subsegmental veins may drain multiple segments of the same lobe of the lung. There is limited literature on the total drainage of lobe segments by numerous subsegmental veins. However, some evidence suggests that 33 to 55% of people have middle lung segments drained by one subsegmental vein. Another 45 to 67% of having a middle lung segment with two or more subsegmental veins.

The subsegmental veins form a conflux into the pulmonary veins. The pulmonary veins also contain peripheral drainage from the deoxygenated blood bronchial veins.

The superior pulmonary veins are anterior and caudal to the pulmonary arteries. The inferior pulmonary veins are inferior to the pulmonary arteries and are readily identifiable as the most inferior vessel on each hilum. Both left and right pulmonary ligaments are inferior and medial to the inferior pulmonary veins. The four pulmonary veins run medially to the left atria, where they drain into the left atrium through four distinct openings on the posterior wall.

The anatomical relationship of the junction between the pulmonary veins and the epicardium of the left atrium is different depending on the person. We can find a plane of fibrous-adipose tissue between the adventitia of the veins and the epicardium. We can find a continuity of the epicardial tissue that invaginates in the adventitia of the vessels. Or, the epicardium can cover the vessel before entering the atrial cavity.