The number of cases of celiac disease has gone up in the last three decades. In fact, the disease is initially often mistaken for irritable bowel syndrome, and the diagnosis is delayed for months or years. Celiac disease can have significant complications if it is not treated and hence, an interprofessional team approach to diagnosis and treatment is necessary. Most patients initially present to the nurse practitioner, pediatrician or primary care provider with complaints of diarrhea and abdominal pain.

If the disorder is suspected a gastroenterologist should be consulted. Once the disease is confirmed, patients are generally managed as outpatients. Nurses play a vital role in the monitoring of these patients for complications and compliance with the diet. A dietary consult is highly recommended as these patients need to know the importance of a gluten-free diet.

Further, children will need to be monitored for stunted growth and failure to thrive.

Several national guidelines have recommended an interprofessional approach to celiac disease as it can involve many organs in the body. New evidence reveals that these patients may be prone to a high rate of fractures and hence, bone scanning should be performed.

Comprehensive nutritional management is required with an interprofessional approach to treatment. The nurse should monitor patients for refractoriness to treatment because these patients may require corticosteroids. In addition, all healthcare workers who look after celiac patients should be aware that the disorder can cause lymphomas and adenocarcinomas of the intestine at some point. Further, celiac disease is also associated with psychiatric illness, depression, and infertility.

**Outcomes**

The prognosis for patients who are diagnosed early and remain compliant with their gluten-free diet is excellent. However, there are some patients who do not respond well to a gluten-free diet, and they may require steroids. The prognosis for these patients is guarded.