**SLRT modifications and variants:**the accuracy of SLRT can be better if it is interpreted with other nerve root tension tests:

- **Crossed SLRT**

- **Reverse SLRT**

- **Braggard test**

- **Reverse flip test**: While raising the leg, the foot is held in a plantar-flexed position; this will lessen the pain. But if the patient is complaining of an increase in pain, it can suggest malingering.

- **Bowstring sign**

**Less frequently used nerve root irritation tests:**

For the sake of completion, other tests and signs of nerve root tension or irritation are discussed succinctly below:

- **Sitting SLRT (Bechterew test)**

- **Distracted SLRT**: the sitting SLRT is performed without the patient's awareness. The patient is distracted as if the surgeon is examining the foot or pulsation, and slowly, the examiner extends the knee. If the patient is experiencing true radiculopathy, the same pain will be reproduced. Otherwise, we can assume that the patient may be malingering.

- **Neri's sign**

- **The buckling sign**

- **Sicard sign**: passive dorsiflexion of ipsilateral great toe just at the angle of SLRT will produce more pain.

- **Kraus-Weber test**: the patient may be able to do a sit-up with the knees flexed but not extended.

- **Minor sign**: the patient may rise from a seated position by supporting himself/herself on the unaffected side, bending forward, and placing one hand on the affected side of the back.

- **Bonnet phenomenon**: the pain may be more severe or elicited sooner if the test is carried out with the thigh and leg in a position of adduction and internal rotation.