Octreotide, being a somatostatin analog, requires close monitoring because of the numerous physiological actions of somatostatin in the body. Additionally, various markers are specific indicators of the therapeutic effect of octreotide and the body's response to drug therapy.

In the treatment of acromegaly, serum growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) require monitoring. However, the frequency of monitoring differs by the formulation of octreotide administered. Use of the short-acting formulation requires measurement of serum IGF-1 only once, around 14 days after initiating octreotide therapy or after any change in dose, or a GH assay after every 1 to 4 hours for 8 to 12 hours after administration of every dose. The use of octreotide’s newer long-acting formulation needs less intensive monitoring in the form of a serum GH assay and a serum IGF-1assay around three months before administering the subsequent dose. The maintenance phase in the treatment of acromegaly also requires monitoring to detect delayed adverse effects. Hence, serum GH and serum IGF-1 levels should be obtained every 3 to 6 months.

During the management of carcinoid syndrome, the measurement of 5-hydroxyindole-acetic acid, serotonin, and substance P levels are necessary.

Octreotide treatment for VIPomas requires periodic measurement of the vasoactive intestinal peptide to monitor tumor burden and risk of relapse.

In addition to the above, patients on long-term octreotide therapy require monitoring of various clinical parameters, both at baseline and periodically, for prevention and early detection of adverse effects. These effects include blood glucose levels, including monitoring of glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, cardiac function with periodic electrocardiograms, thyroid function tests, plasma vitamin B and zinc, especially in patients receiving total parenteral nutrition who are at risk of excessive fluid loss, and an abdominal ultrasound to look for abnormalities of the gall bladder in the presence of clinical findings.