Cutaneous or visceral stimulation below the level of the injury initiates afferent impulses to the intermediolateral grey columns of the spinal cord that elicit abnormal reflex sympathetic nervous system activity from T6 to L2. The sympathetic response is exaggerated due to a lack of compensatory descending parasympathetic stimulation and intrinsic post-traumatic hypersensitivity. This leads to diffuse vasoconstriction, typically to the lower two-thirds of the body, and a significant rise in blood pressure despite maximum parasympathetic vasodilatory efforts above the level of injury. In an intact autonomic system, this increased blood pressure activates the carotid sinus and aortic arch baroreceptors leading to a parasympathetic response slowing the heart rate via vagal nerve activity and causing diffuse vasodilation to correct the original increased sympathetic tone.

However, in the setting of a spinal cord injury, the normal corrective parasympathetic response from the medullary vasomotor center cannot travel below the level of the spinal injury, and generalized vasoconstriction affecting the splanchnic, muscular, vascular, and cutaneous arterial circulatory networks continues, ultimately leading to systemic hypertension which is often severe and potentially dangerous. The compensatory vagal and parasympathetic stimulation leads to bradycardia and vasodilation, but only above the level of the spinal cord injury.

The most common stimuli are distention of a hollow viscus, usually the bladder but could also be the rectum. Bladder distention is responsible for about 85% of all cases and is by far the most common trigger followed by fecal impaction.

Pharmacological causes of autonomic dysreflexia are rare, but recently a case was reported in a patient receiving combination therapy with duloxetine and amitriptyline.

Spinal cord injuries below T10 rarely result in autonomic dysreflexia because the splanchnic innervation remains intact and allows for compensatory parasympathetic dilation of the splanchnic vascular network.