**Fine Needle Aspiration (FNA)**

It is frequently the initial diagnostic method used in the detection of PTC. Fine-needle aspiration specimens from conventional PTC are usually cellular and may show papillary structures, monolayer sheets, and 3D groups in a background of watery or thick so-called ropy colloid, nuclear or calcific debris, macrophages, and stromal fragments. The individual tumor cells are enlarged, elongated, or oval, with eosinophilic cytoplasm. The nuclei show elongation, membrane thickening, chromatin clearing, grooves, and pseudo-inclusions. These tumors usually show enlarged follicular cells arranged in monolayer sheets and follicular groups in a background of thin and thick colloid.

**Laboratory Tests**

Thyroid function testing has limited utility in diagnosing PTC because most patients have normal thyroid function.

**Radiographic Features**

On thyroid scans, PTCs typically appear as cold (hypo-functioning) nodules but rarely can appear as hot (hyperfunctioning) nodules.

Ultrasound examination is the imaging modality of choice for PTC. Sonographic features include a hypoechoic or isoechoic solid nodule with irregular or poorly defined margins, micro-calcifications, taller-than-wide shape, and disorganized internal vascularity. Ultrasound findings are also invaluable for guiding fine-needle aspiration biopsy of abnormal nodes. Microcalcifications are highly specific for this type of cancer.

Other imaging modalities, including CT, MRI, and FDG-PET/CT, may be needed to assess the extent of extra-thyroidal extension, evaluate the presence of substernal masses, detect recurrent tumors, and improve diagnostic accuracy.