The type of treatment provided to the patient for type I hypersensitivity depends on the presentation and the etiology of the reaction.

**Anaphylaxis
**

The need for emergent treatment is vital with anaphylaxis, at it is usually rapid in onset and may cause death. The recommendation is that if possible, the offending agent is removed immediately, and patients are placed in a supine position with the elevation of lower extremities unless there is a significant obstruction or airway inflammation. If there is marked stridor or severe respiratory distress, immediate intubation may be required. If the patient has a history of allergic reactions, they will be provided with emergency self-treatment prescriptions, which include: an epinephrine IM autoinjector or 1:1,000 solution, bronchodilators, antihistamines, and/or corticosteroids. The first-line therapy that is recommended to be administered without delay is epinephrine intramuscular (IM) injection and thereafter adjunctive therapy is utilized for symptom control:

- **Epinephrine:**
- Epinephrine has alpha-1, beta-1, and beta-2 adrenergic agonist effects. As such, it can increase vasoconstriction and peripheral vascular resistance and decrease airway or mucosal edema. The beta effects lead to increased inotropy, chronotropy, vasodilation, and decreased release of inflammatory mediators from both mast cells and basophils.
- The dose for the epinephrine is weight-based and may be repeated every 5 to 15 minutes. Studies have demonstrated that in about 35% of cases, a repeat dose is required. 

- Infants weighing <10 kg should be given an exact weight-based dose (not estimated), whenever possible. However, if drawing up an exact dose is likely to cause a significant delay in a patient with severe symptoms or who is rapidly deteriorating, the 0.1 mg dose can be given by autoinjector or by drawing up 0.1 mL of the 1 mg/mL solution. If the 0.1 mg autoinjector is not available, the 0.15 mg autoinjector can be used.


- For weight 10 to 25 kg: the dose is 0.15 mg of epinephrine IM injected to anterior-lateral thigh
- For weight >25 kg: the dose is 0.3 mg of epinephrine IM injected to anterior-lateral thigh
- For the epinephrine solution of (1 per 1,000), the dose is 0.01 mg/kg per dose (maximum of 0.5 mg/dose)
- Epinephrine may also be administered via slow continuous infusion, endotracheal, or intra-osseous route. The recommendation is to monitor blood pressure and heart rate with its administration.

- **Bronchodilators:**
- **Beta-agonists**, such as albuterol, are given as either metered-dose inhaler (MDI), dry-powder inhaler (DPI), or nebulized solution and are usually administered when the patient is not responsive to epinephrine for treating bronchospasm.
- **Albuterol MDI or DPI dose**(90 mcg/actuation): adults are to administer 2 to 3 inhalations as needed for symptoms relief; in severe exacerbations, doses up to 8 inhalations every 20 minutes may be needed. Whereas the pediatric dose is 4 to 8 puffs every 20 minutes for up to 3 doses, data is limited in ages <4 years old.
- **Albuterol nebulization solution**: (2.5 to 5 mg as needed) The nebulized solution can also be given continuously 10 to 14 mg over one hour in critically ill adult and pediatric patients.

- **Antihistamine****s:****i.e.,****diphenhydramine****(H****1****a****nta****gonist), famotidine or ranitidine (H****2****a****nta****gonists)**
- Antihistamines are considered second-line adjunctive therapy and can provide relief of symptoms such as hives or pruritis. However, antihistamines should not be used as monotherapy, as they do not mitigate upper or lower airway obstruction, shock, or hypotension. Although antihistamines are usually used in combination with both an H1 antagonist and an H2 antagonist in anaphylaxis, there is a lack of direct evidence to support their administration. Second-generation H1 antagonists have fewer sedative effects than first-generation agents, and as such, they may also be considered. Some studies suggest that when H2 antagonists are given intravenously (IV), they can increase hypotension.
- **Diphenhydramine**IV dose: 25 to 50 mg per dose in adult patients and 1 to 2 mg/kg/dose in pediatrics (maximum 50 mg/dose); dose may be repeated every 6 hours.
- **Ranitidine**oral (PO) or IV: 1 to 2 mg/kg per dose (maximum 75 to 150 mg of oral and IV in adults and a maximum of 50 mg/dose in pediatrics).
- **Famotidine**IV: 20 mg diluted to 5 ml 0.9% normal saline and pushed over two minutes in adults and 0.25 mg/kg (maximum 20 mg per dose) in pediatrics.

- **Glucocorticoids:**
- Glucocorticoids do not have an acute role in the treatment of anaphylaxis due to their delay in onset of action, and the literature lacks any randomized-controlled trials that have shown benefits for their use. However, the theoretical rationale for their use is to decrease biphasic or protracted reactions that may occur in anaphylaxis.
- **Methylprednisolone****:**1 to 2 mg/kg/day (maximum 125 mg/dose) for one to two days without the need for taper.

Other adjunctive therapies for anaphylaxis include supplemental oxygenation, IV fluids for volume resuscitation, glucagon or vasopressors for refractory hypotension, and/or atropine for bradycardia. During and post anaphylaxis, the following should be ideally monitored: blood pressure, respiratory status, oxygenation, urine output, cardiac function, and heart rate at continuous intervals or frequently.

**Urticaria/Angioedema
**

Treatment of urticaria is similar to anaphylaxis where the offending agent is removed if known, and then the patient is given an H1 antihistamine and glucocorticoids (see above for dosing). There is not a need for epinephrine unless there is suspicion for anaphylaxis.

**Allergic Asthma****/****Allergic Rhinitis****/**** Allergic ****C****onjunctivitis/****Allergic ****D****ermatitis/****E****czema/****W****asp or bee venom/****Drug Allergy****/Food Allergy**

For allergic conditions, avoidance of the offending agent is the first step in treatment. Oral or topical H1 antihistamine and oral or inhaled glucocorticoids may be used for symptomatic control. For allergic rhinitis, topical nasal or optical decongestants can provide temporary relief of symptoms. For allergic asthma, patients can be prescribed inhaled beta-agonists with or without inhaled corticosteroids based on steps of asthma therapy guidelines by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.

Patients with significant symptoms despite avoidance of the allergen and who have a lack of relief from adjunctive therapy can undergo allergen immunotherapy, such as desensitization or hypo-sensitization (allergy shots). The patient must have a documented IgE-mediated allergy (allergic: asthma, rhinitis, conjunctivitis, dermatitis, drug allergy) prior to initiation of immunotherapy. The treatment is carried out in a clinical setting for the first doses, where certain allergens are administered in a slow escalation of subclinical doses. The route of administration is either via subcutaneous immunotherapy (SCIT), sublingual/sallow immunotherapy (SLIT), or mucosal route.

The goal of desensitization is to stimulate the production of immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies on mast cells instead of IgE. This technique is known as isotype switching and usually lasts for three years. Desensitization treatment is successful in about 67% of patients and is usually more beneficial in younger patients and those who have a sensitivity to a monovalent allergen. Patients need to be prescribed and educated about the proper use of epinephrine autoinjectors prior to the initiation of immunotherapy.