**Ankyloglossia**

Ankyloglossia, also known as tongue tie, refers to a short lingual frenulum, which limits the movement of the tongue and may affect speaking, eating, and swallowing.

**Fissured tongue**

Also known as a scrotal or plicated tongue, it occurs when several small furrows form on the dorsal surface of the tongue. It can be an oral manifestation of psoriasis. It is generally painless and benign and is often associated with other syndromes, e.g., Down syndrome.

**Geographic tongue**

A geographic tongue, also known as benign migratory glossitis, is a benign, asymptomatic condition characterized by large red patches with a greyish-white border covering the dorsum of an otherwise normal tongue. It is caused by inflammation of the mucous membrane of the tongue, which results in the loss of lingual papillae. The lesions are known to migrate over time. The name arises from the map-like appearance of the tongue in this condition.

**Obstruction Of The Airway**

The tongue tends to fall posteriorly, thus obstructing the airway. Paralysis or total relaxation of the genioglossus muscle presents a risk of suffocation, which can occur during general anesthesia. An artificial airway is made using intubation, which prevents the tongue from falling backward and blocking the airway.

Ludwig angina infection, once established, evolves to include the tongue. The tongue may enlarge to two or three times its usual size and tends to distend posteriorly into the hypopharynx, superiorly against the palate, and anteriorly out of the oral cavity. Any immediate posterior extension of this process will ultimately involve the epiglottis. The styloglossus muscle creates the connection between the submandibular parapharyngeal spaces, otherwise known as the buccopharyngeal gap, as it leaves the tongue and passes in between the middle and superior constrictor muscles before attaching to the styloid process. Cellulitis of the submandibular space may spread into the pharyngeal space and, from there, into the retropharyngeal space of the mediastinum.

The tongue plays a major role in breathing; as such, it is involved in the collapse of the upper airway in obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome patients.