Rivaroxaban is administered orally with a half-life of 5 to 9 hours (maybe longer in older individuals [e.g., 11 to 13 hours]).

The dose for the common indications of rivaroxaban is:

- Non-valvular Atrial Fibrillation - Stroke prophylaxis: 20 mg once daily with the evening meal

- Acute VTE treatment: 15 mg twice daily with food for three weeks; then 20 mg once daily with food

- VTE primary prevention: 10 mg once daily, with or without food

Patients with renal impairment are at higher risk of thrombosis and bleeding than those with normal renal function.

- Treatment and prevention of recurrence of VTE: 15 mg twice daily (with food) for 21 days, followed by 20 mg once daily (with food)

- If therapy continues for more than six months, the dose can be reduced to 10 mg once daily.

- VTE prophylaxis in surgical patients: 15 mg twice daily (with food) for 21 days, followed by 20 mg once daily (with food). If therapy continues for more than six months, the dose can be reduced to 10 mg once daily. The duration varies from 12 days to 35 days, depending on the type of surgery.

- Thromboprophylaxis in acutely ill medical patients: 10 mg once daily

- Stroke prevention in non-valvular atrial fibrillation: 20 mg once daily with the evening meal (CrCl >50 mL/minute); or 15 mg once daily with the evening meal (CrCl ≤50 mL/minute)

The drug should not be used in individuals with significant hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B and C with coagulopathy). The use of rivaroxaban has not been studied in children younger than 18 years.

While switching to rivaroxaban,

- If previously on warfarin, discontinue warfarin and start rivaroxaban as soon as INR <3

- If previously on low molecular weight heparin, start rivaroxaban 0 to 2 hr before the next scheduled evening administration and omit administration of the other anticoagulant

- If previously on unfractionated heparin continuous infusion, then stop infusion and start rivaroxaban at the same time.

Rivaroxaban should be stopped at least 24 hr before the surgical procedure. In patients with a BMI >40 kg/m or weight >120 kg, the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH) 2016 guideline suggests avoiding the use of rivaroxaban due to the lack of clinical data in this population. If used in a patient with a BMI >40 kg/m or weight >120 kg, ISTH suggests measuring peak and trough levels using an anti-factor Xa assay or mass spectrometry.