Plasticity after injury: Neuroplasticity is a complicated process that is still being elucidated; however, the concept can be applied in the setting of injury to the brain. Neuroplasticity is traditionally thought of as occurring in 3 phases or epochs.

- First 48 hours: Depending on the mechanism of the injury (such as stroke or TBI), there is initial damage that cumulates as cell death with the loss of certain cortical pathways associated with the lost neurons. The brain attempts to use secondary neuronal networks to maintain function.

- The following weeks: Recruitment of support cells occurs in this period as the cortical pathways shift from inhibitory to excitatory. Synaptic plasticity and new connections are made during this period.

- Weeks to months afterward: The brain continues to remodel itself via axonal sprouting and further reorganization around the damage.

**Mechanisms of Neuroplasticity**

**1) Neuronal Regeneration/Collateral Sprouting**

Synaptic plasticity: Synaptic plasticity is the ability to make experience-dependent long-lasting changes in the strength of neuronal connections.

These include:

- Spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP): This incorporates the timing of action potentials generated by presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons to explain how some synapses are strengthened and others are weakened.

- Metaplasticity: This broadens the concept to include networks and involves the activity-dependent changes in synapses and how they respond.

- Homeostatic plasticity: Mechanisms that maintain homeostasis of the synaptic network over time.

As research continues to grow, these concepts will flesh out more of how synaptic plasticity can influence learning and aid in regaining function in the brain.

Adult neurogenesis: Adult neurogenesis is the concept that the brain continues to make new neurons. Studies by Ramon Cajal had failed to find any evidence of new neuron development in adults, which led to his ‘harsh decree’ that there were no new neurons after the development of the brain stopped.

There have been two proposed sites of adult neurogenesis in humans, one in the olfactory bulb and the other in the hippocampus. Studies using specific biomarkers associated with developing neurons have been used to support the idea of adult neurogenesis in humans. These biomarkers are complicated as they have also been found in immature neurons, cells that can be found in the human brain that are not newborn nor migrating cells.

**2) Functional Reorganization**

Equipotentiality and vicariation: Equipotentiality is the concept that when one area of the brain is damaged, the opposing side of the brain would be able to sustain the lost function. This concept stretches back at least to Galen, which was a way to explain why the brain appeared ‘twinned.’ This ‘redundancy theory’ remained until famed researchers such as Pierre Paul Broca demonstrated that unilateral lesions to an area of the left side of the brain caused loss of speech, even though the opposing side was intact. Broca postulated that the relearning of certain functions, such as speech, were easier for a child than if an adult suffered loss. This concept morphed into equipotentiality, meaning that if the damage occurred very early, then the brain has the potential to be able to overtake lost functions.

This is slightly different from the thought of vicariation, which is that the brain can reorganize other portions of the brain to overtake functions that they were not intended to. Broca developed this theory after seeing that some of his patients had a sparing of function even though they had damage to the left hemisphere.

Graveline, Mikulis, Crawley, and Hwang were able to show that after a hemispherectomy (where one-half of the cerebral cortex is removed, typically due to intractable seizures at a young age), the brain can reorganize the remaining half to restore lost function.

Diaschisis: Diaschisis is a concept that damage to one part of the brain could cause a loss of function in another area due to some connected pathway.

An example of this is the hypoperfusion of the ipsilateral thalamus after an acute middle cerebral artery (MCA) stroke. The thalamus, which receives its blood supply from branches of the posterior cerebral artery and a branch of the posterior communicating artery, should be unaffected during an ipsilateral MCA ischemic stroke. Surprisingly, in approximately 20% of acute MCA strokes, there is noted hypoperfusion of the ipsilateral thalamus upon computed tomography (CT) perfusion imaging.

The concept of diaschisis has broadened over time and is used to explain several different concepts about the functional connections of the brain and what ensues when damage occurs. While these are discussed by Carrera and Tononi,

- Diaschisis ‘at rest’: The classic von Monakow type such as ipsilateral thalamic hypoperfusion in MCA stroke.

- Functional diaschisis: This is when an area of diaschisis is found when another part of the brain is activated. An example of this is when lesions affected the putamen, when given a functional task of their ipsilateral hand, causes hypoactivation of the ipsilateral cerebellums, which had no signs of hypoactivation at rest. Dynamic diaschisis can also be used and has been used when areas of the brain can be both hypoactive and hyperactive, depending on the task.

- Connectional diaschisis: This is when a loss of a part of the brain forces the rerouting of information. This has been seen in rat models where subcortical lesions can cause a decrease in interhemispheric connectivity of the motor strips.

- Connectome diaschisis: As advanced imaging has shown the vast complexity of connections between neurons, a map can be generated, called a connectome. This map shows clusters of high connected nodes, which are then linked by a limited number of nodes (hubs). If damage is done to a hub, this can cause much more severe damage than a non-hub node.

As we learn more about the functional connections of the brain, the concept and role of diaschisis will continue to evolve and change.