# Continuing Education Activity

Stargardt disease (STGD1) is the most common cause of juvenile macular dystrophy. It is caused by mutations in the adenosine triphosphate binding cassette transporter 4 (ABCR 4) gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. It is a heterogeneous disease with a myriad of clinical presentations, which vastly vary in the age of onset and the disease progression rates. Patients can be easily misdiagnosed and subsequently subjected to multiple investigations like neuroimaging, lumbar punctures, and therapies like occlusion. Multimodal imaging is required to establish an early diagnosis. Several therapeutic options are currently being evaluated. However, none of them have yet received approval from the United States Food and Drug Administration (US-FDA). This CME activity reviews the pathophysiology, presenting clinical features, various imaging modalities, differential diagnosis, and the various treatment modalities of the disease.

**Objectives:**
- Summarise the pathophysiology of Stargardt disease.
- Review the genetics related to Stargardt disease.
- Describe the various clinical features and differential diagnosis of Stargardt disease.
- Outline the various imaging modalities used to diagnose Stargardt disease.

# Introduction

The term “macular dystrophy” is historically used for a group of heritable disorders that present with retinal abnormalities between the temporal vascular arcades. Stargardt disease (STGD1) is the most common cause of juvenile macular dystrophy.

It is a genetic disorder that leads to the accumulation of lipofuscin, a metabolic waste product, in the retina. It is a heterogeneous disease with a myriad of clinical presentations, which varies vastly in the age of onset and the rate of progression. Patients present with progressive visual impairment, usually beginning in the first or second decades of life. This phenotypic heterogeneity makes the clinical diagnosis of STGD1 challenging. The various reports from the Progression of atrophy secondary to Stargardt disease (ProgStar) study have described the natural history of the disease with the help of various structural and functional investigative modalities.

Several therapeutic options are currently being evaluated. However, none have yet received approval from the United States Food and Drug Administration (US-FDA).

# Etiology

STGD1 is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.

# Epidemiology

Although it is the most common cause of juvenile macular dystrophy, its prevalence is low. Its estimated prevalence in the United States is 10 to 12.5 per 100,000. estimated its annual incidence in the United Kingdom to be around 0.110 to 0.128 per 100 000 individuals.

# Pathophysiology

The ABCA4 gene encodes for Rim Protein (RmP), which is a retinal adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding cassette protein. The protein is present on the membrane of the discs in the outer segment of the photoreceptors (rods and cones). It participates in the visual cycle-related vitamin A metabolism. The light photons lead to isomerization of the 11-cis retinal to the all-trans retinal form. The all-trans-retinal form then enters the intradiscal space, where some of its molecules combine with a phospholipid (phosphatidylethanolamine, PE) normally present in the disc membranes to form a complex called N-retinylidene-PE (N-RPE).

The RmP protein breaks the N-RPE complex and transports it out of the intradiscal space. The absence of the RmP protein leads to the accumulation of the N-RPE complexes. The high levels of N-RPE lead to the formation of N-retinylidene-N-retinyl-PE (A2PE) by combining N-RPE and all-trans-retinal. A2PE is then hydrolyzed to form N-retinylidene-N-retinyl-ethanolamine (A2E). The A2E produced during these reactions leads to lipofuscin formation, accumulating in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells. The accumulation of lipofuscin leads to the formation of flecks. In vivo studies have shown that patients with STGD1 have 2-5 times the amount of lipofuscin compared to the age-matched controls.

Lipofuscin is resistant to lysosomal enzymatic degradation. High levels of A2E slow the phagocytic ability of the RPE cells, ultimately leading to RPE and photoreceptor cell death.

Multimodal imaging studies have suggested that the degeneration of the photoreceptors’ inner and outer segments leads to the formation of hyper-reflective debris on the apical surface of the RPE cells. These are seen clinically as flecks. These flecks cause gradual disruption of the interdigitation zone (IZ), the ellipsoid zones (EZ), the external limiting membrane (ELM), and, eventually, thinning of the outer nuclear layer (ONL).

Light microscopy studies have shown the presence of abnormal RPE cells and loss of photoreceptors and RPE cells in eyes with STGD1. In addition, the RPE cells are heterogeneous in size and contain numerous PAS-positive intracytoplasmic material, which has been determined to be lipofuscin.

# History and Physical

These patients most commonly present with progressive, painless bilateral central vision loss. The presenting visual acuity ranges from 20/20 to 20/200. The other presenting symptoms include central scotoma, delayed dark adaptation, photosensitivity, photopsia, and abnormal color vision.

Mutations in the ABCA4R gene can lead to various clinical phenotypes, i.e., STGD1, bull's eye maculopathy (BEM), and chorioretinal atrophy. We will stick our discussion mainly to STGD1. The typical triad associated with STGD1 includes flecks, macular atrophy, and peripapillary sparing. Flecks are yellowish-white round- or pisciform- (fish-tail) shaped lesions of varying sizes located within the RPE. They tend to develop centrifugally from the macular region and may even progress beyond the vascular arcades till the mid-periphery but usually spare the far periphery.

The macula is involved early in the disease course because of the presence of high density of the rod cells. The highest density of rod cells (150,000 rods/mm) is present in a ring-like area located at a distance of 3-5mm from the foveola. This corresponds to the region of the BEM. The macular atrophy changes are usually progressive. However, its severity can be variable, ranging from a small region of central macular atrophy to atrophy beyond the vascular arcades. Peripapillary sparing is considered to be a diagnostic feature in STGD1. Studies have shown no abnormalities, even on fundus autofluorescence (FAF) and optical coherence tomography (OCT).

BEM may rarely be seen in STGD1. The differential diagnoses for BEM include hydroxychloroquine/ chloroquine retinopathy, STGD1, cone dystrophy, cone-rod dystrophy, advanced dry age-related macular degeneration, and central areolar choroidal dystrophy, benign concentric annular macular dystrophy, fenestrated sheen macular dystrophy, Juvenile Batten's disease, fucosidosis, ceroid lipofuscinosis, clofazimine maculopathy. Flecks tend to appear later in eyes with this phenotype.

Chorioretinal degeneration is the most severe phenotype related to ABCA4 gene mutation. It is characterized by chorioretinal degeneration, choriocapillaris atrophy, widespread nummular pigmentary deposits, and bony spicule. In addition, severe cases may be associated with a visible sclera, vascular attenuation, and peripapillary disease involvement.

# Evaluation

The various imaging modalities have provided great insights into the anatomical and functional status of the retina. They are precious in screening and early diagnosis of the disease. Lambertus et al. reported that almost a quarter of patients diagnosed with childhood-onset STGD1 did not have any clinically-identifiable retinal lesions at presentation.

i) Colour fundus photography (Figure 1) is helpful in the documentation and monitoring of the type of retinal changes and extent of the disease. The Fishman classification is based on color fundus photographs.

ii) Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA): The hallmark finding is the "dark choroid," which appears as a highlighted retinal blood vessel against a hypofluorescent choroid. It is considered a diagnostic feature and is present in at least 80 percent of patients. It occurs due to blockage of background choroidal fluorescence due to the presence of lipofuscin in the RPE cells. Flecks appear hypofluorescent due to the blocked transmission but may appear hyperfluorescent in the presence of atrophy. They can be seen on FFA before they become clinically visible. The regions of RPE atrophy appear hyperfluorescent due to transmission defects. In patients with severe or late-stage disease, a peripapillary dark choroid ring sign help establish the diagnosis.

iii) Infrared imaging: The flecks typically appear hyperreflective, while the resorbing flecks appear hyporeflective. The macular atrophy region appears hyperreflective, usually surrounded by a darker ring.

iv) OCT: OCT findings include thinning of the outer retinal layers and disruption of the EZ. The flecks appear as subretinal and intraretinal hyperreflective deposits.

Querques et al. categorized flecks into two types. have devised a newer classification describing five subtypes of flecks.

class C flecks breakthrough into the ONL. Class A to C represent the type 1 flecks per the previous classification. Class D flecks are present only within the ONL, while the deposits in the outer retinal layers disappear. They represent the type 2 flecks as per the previous classification. Class E flecks represent atypical drusen-like lesions.

The other OCT changes noted even before the fundoscopy changes are visible include a subfoveal optical gap and thickening of the ELM.et al. described the progression of this optical gap in three stages. Stage 1 represents the mild disruption of the EZ in the foveal region, stage 2 represents additional photoreceptor loss, and stage 3 represents the involvement of even the inner retinal layers.

Cai et al. demonstrated that the total area of EZ loss gradually expanded at around 0.31mm/year. proposed that it could signify a Muller cell response,et al. suggested that it could represent the migration and retraction of the inner segment of the photoreceptors.

Multiple studies have used enhanced depth imaging (EDI) OCT and swept-source (SS)-OCT to study the choroidal thickness in STGD1 patients. Many studies have revealed that the choroid thickness reduces, affecting mainly the small choroidal vessels. Similarly, the choroidal vascularity index is significantly reduced. Four patterns of choroidal morphology have been described. Pattern 1 is characterized by a normal-appearing choroid, pattern 2 by a reduction of the thickness of either Sattler or Haller layer, pattern 3 by a reduction of the thickness of both Sattler and Haller layers, and pattern 4 by a reduction of both Sattler and Haller layers with choroidal caverns. These patterns positively correlated with degenerative retinal changes on OCT and signs of progression.

Other than thickness, the presence of hyperreflective foci has also been noted in the choroid. Piri et al. demonstrated that the number of hyperreflective foci in the Bruch membrane/ RPE complex, choriocapillaris, and Sattler layer correlated with increasing disease severity in terms of central macular thickness, visual acuity, and duration of the disease.

v) OCT-Angiography (OCTA): Studies have demonstrated reduced superficial and deep vessel densities and attenuation of the choriocapillaris vessel density. It may also be useful for diagnosing choroidal neovascular membrane (CNVM), which is a rare and late complication

vi) FAF: Both short-wavelength FAF (SW-FAF) and near infrared-wavelength (NIR-FAF) are used for monitoring the disease progression. Flecks are seen on SW-FAF as hyper AF (Figure 2), while they appear hypo AF on NIR-FAF. Flecks can be seen on NIR-FAF before they appear on SW-FAF. The atrophic areas show decreased AF on both types of scans, with the area appearing larger on NIR-FAF than on SW-FAF. This may be because of the lipofuscin released by the degenerating photoreceptors, which may produce a falsely normal image despite the presence of multiple atrophic RPE lesions. HyperAF lesions on SW-FAF are usually the earliest features and may appear before flecks become visible. The RPE loss has been noted to expand at a rate of 0.28 to 1.58 mm/year.

Fujinami et al. classified the AF appearance on SW-AF images into three types. Type 1 is characterized by localized low foveal AF signal surrounded by a homogenous AF background. Type 2 appears as localized low macular AF surrounded by a homogenous AF background. Type 3 is identified as multiple areas of low AF signal at the posterior pole and a heterogenous AF.

The rate of atrophy enlargement (RAE) in each of the three types was estimated to be 0.06, 0.67, and 4.37 mm/year, respectively. Kuehlewein et al. have divided the lesions into definitely decreased AF (DDAF) and questionably decreased AF (QDAF). While DDAF is described as lesions with darkness ≥90% of the darkness of the optic nerve head (ONH), QDAF is defined as lesions with darkness level 50 to 90% of the ONH.

The ProgStart study report number 5 showed that around 50% of the eyes which did not present with DDAF developed the lesion in less than five years (median 4.93 years).et al. described a classification for the ultra-widefield (UWF) FAF.

Quantitative AF (qAF) was first described by Delori et al.

vii) AOSLO: Areas with increased spacing between the photoreceptor (both rods and cones) are observed. These findings suggest that photoreceptor degeneration is the primary pathology rather than an event secondary to RPE cell death. Song et al. demonstrated centrifugal progression of the disease.

viii) Visual field (VF): VF testing shows a progressive central scotoma. Loss of mid and peripheral VF fields is usually associated with more severe disease. Schroeder et al. classified the visual field severity into three groups. Group 1 has a central scotoma within 10°, group 2 has central scotomas within 10-35°, and group 3 has only 'temporal residues.'

ix) Microperimetry (MP): The ProgStar study showed that visual acuity is not a sensitive outcome measure for monitoring the disease in various treatment trials. Visual field testing also tends to miss small scotomas. Patients with STGD1 show varying degrees of reduced sensitivity on MP, depending on the stage of the disease. The macular sensitivity is reduced in the areas with flecks and abnormal AF.

The ProgStar study found that the mean sensitivity reduces by around 0.68 dB yearly.

# Treatment / Management

Currently, no treatment modality is approved to prevent or reverse visual loss in patients with STGD1. Patients are advised photoprotection to delay the disease progression and low-vision aids for those with visual field loss. Intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) injections are the preferred treatment modality for patients who develop CNVM. However, several ongoing clinical trials are investigating various novel therapeutic modalities.

- Pharmacological therapy: Several drugs that can reduce lipofuscin accumulation are being investigated. This can be achieved by either inhibiting the retinoid cycle by inhibiting the key enzymes (emixustat and isotretinoin) or disrupting the transporters like retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4) to decrease the toxic bisretinoids formation (fenretinide, A1120, BPN-14136, STG-001, LBS-008 or tinlarebant).

a) Emixustat hydrochloride (ACU-4429) inhibits the enzyme isomerase RPE65 (all-trans: 11-cis retinol isomerase) in a dose-dependent reversible manner. This prevents the isomerization of all-trans-retinyl ester to 11-cis-retinol, thus reducing the production of toxic by-products like A2E. A Phase 1a study demonstrated a dose-dependent reversible suppression (returned to the baseline by day 7) of the enzyme, which manifested as slow recovery of the rod b-wave amplitude after photobleaching on ERG.

- A Phase 1b study revealed that the drug was systematically safe but had few reversible ocular adverse effects like chromatopsia, blurring of vision, and reduction of visual acuity.

b) ALK-001 (deuterated vitamin A): It slows down the rate of vitamin A dimerization, subsequently decelerating the rate of A2E and lipofuscin formation. Studies evaluating its efficacy in murine models have shown promising results with no adverse effects on retinal functions.

- A Phase II clinical trial evaluated the drug's pharmacokinetics and one-year interim safety in 50 subjects with age ≥18 years who were suffering from ABCA4-related STGD1 and had a well-delineated area of atrophy. Results of the trial showed that it was well-tolerated, and there were no adverse reactions like night blindness, impaired dark adaptation, and clinically-significant derangement of liver function tests or serum vitamin A levels. An expanded study is currently being conducted to recruit new participants aged≥12 years.

c) Fenretinide (retinoid-based RBP4 antagonist): It is a synthetic derivative of vitamin A and is a competitive inhibitor of retinol as it prevents the binding of retinol to the retinal binding protein (RBP) in the eye. The RBP-fenretinide complex gets excreted in the urine, thus reducing the circulating RBP levels. This subsequently enhances the clearance of retinol from the eye and decreases the biosynthesis of A2E.

- A Phase 2 clinical trial demonstrated that 300 mg fenretinide significantly reduces the growth of geographic atrophy and the onset of CNVM in patients with dry age-related macular degeneration (ARMD). However, there are concerns regarding its long-term safety due to reports of teratogenicity and hemangiosarcomas formation in mice.

d) Role of vitamin A: As per the current recommendations, vitamin A dietary supplements are better avoided as excess vitamin A is thought to be detrimental. However, these recommendations have a theoretical basis only. To date, there is little evidence to support or exclude the role of vitamin A in deteriorating the disease.

- Gene therapy: The goal is to introduce a functional ABCA4 gene, which can produce an adequate amount of the standard, active transporter protein in the photoreceptor cells, thus preventing disease progression. Adeno-associated viruses (AAV) are classically used for the effective delivery of genes to the ocular tissues. However, the limited packaging capacity (4.7 kb) of the AAV vector renders it insufficient to pack the large ABCA4 gene (7 kb). This problem can be solved with the help of a "dual-vector strategy," i.e., large genes are split into two halves and packaged in two separate AAV vectors.

- Lentivirus-based vectors have recently been developed to deliver larger genes. One such lentivirus-based vector is delivered subretinally.

- Stem-cell therapy: It can treat the disease by regenerating the RPE cells.

# Differential Diagnosis

Several inherited macular dystrophies have a clinical appearance similar to STGD1. Distinguishing between these similar-appearing conditions is essential for prognostication, systemic associations, and genetic counseling.

**Pattern Dystrophy (PD)**

Marmor and Byers first proposed the term “pattern dystrophy” for a spectrum of characteristic fundus patterns (butterfly, reticular pigmentary). It is the most common masquerade for STGD1.

**Autosomal Dominant Stargardt-like Macular Dystrophies**

These include variants associated with the ELOVL4 and the PROM1 genes.

**Batten Disease/Juvenile Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis**

It is a rare metabolic disease caused by defects in the processing of lysosomal storage. This leads to apoptosis of both the photoreceptor (retina) and the neuronal (brain) cells. The life expectancy of these patients is usually 20-30 years. A large number of children present to the ophthalmologist with vision loss. These patients present with early-onset visual loss and severe color vision deficiency.

The disease progression is usually rapid. Ocular examination shows vascular attenuation and optic disc pallor. OCT reveals thinned retinal nerve fiber layer, while dark-adapted (DA) full-field ERG shows an absent or electronegative wave. High suspicion should be maintained in young patients diagnosed with severe STGD1 with rapid progression.

**Maternally Inherited Diabetes and Deafness (MIDD)**

These patients present in the third to seventh decade. Ocular examination shows pigmentary changes at the macula, areas of RPE atrophy, and fleck-like deposits. FAF shows hyperautofluorescent spots with corresponding subretinal deposits on OCT. The patients have distinguishing features like personal or family history of early-onset diabetes mellitus and hearing loss. Other distinguishing features include the absence of a dark choroid on FFA and the presence of outer retinal tubulations on OCT.

**Age-Related Macular Degeneration (ARMD)**

It can mimic the late-onset STGD1, as the flecks may be mistaken for drusens. A careful examination can help distinguish the two as drusens tend to become confluent toward the center of the macula. Flecks show intense hyper AF while drusens may be mild hyperautofluorescent or even hypoautofluorescent.

# Prognosis

Many patients progress to legal blindness due to the loss of central vision, although peripheral vision tends to remain preserved. However, the prognosis is widely variable and is highly dependent on the age of onset of the disease. The patients presenting with early onset have poor outcomes. Visual acuity in such patients declines rapidly along with the appearance of progressive retinal degeneration and may even lead to profound chorioretinal atrophy. Thus, patients with this phenotype have a severe disease with a poor prognosis.

Rapid-onset chorioretinopathy (ROC) is a distinct sub-phenotype characterized by rapid disease progression.

# Complications

There are not many complications associated with STGD1.

**Subretinal Fibrosis**

Minor ocular trauma can lead to subretinal fibrosis and RPE hypertrophy.et al. proposed that ocular trauma leads to the release of lipofuscin, which disrupts the RPE cells, leading to subretinal fibrosis and RPE hypertrophy. also.

Rossi et al. proposed that even microtrauma can lead to subretinal fibrosis as they found patients developing subretinal fibrosis without a distinct history of ocular trauma or contact sports.

**Choroidal Neo Vascular Membrane (CNVM)**

It is a late complication of STGD1. However, it is very rare.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education and counseling are critical for the management of such progressive diseases. The patients need to be explained that the disease is progressive and their vision may reduce to a level that their daily activities may be hampered. They need to be counseled about their mental state.

They need to be explained about the available low-vision aids which can help them perform their daily activities. Further, they should be subjected to genetic counseling and ophthalmological screening, which can help them understand the chances of their offspring(s) and siblings developing the same disease. The patients can be given a ray of hope about the possibility of developing a potential therapy that can halt or even reverse the disease.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Stargardt disease is one of the common causes of visual loss in young patients. It is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the ABCA 4 gene. Several patients initially seek the opinion of an optometrist for reduced vision. However, due to myriad presentations, the diagnosis may be delayed. As a result, the patients are unnecessarily subjected to multiple investigations like neuroimaging, lumbar punctures, and therapies like occlusion.

Pediatricians and other clinicians play a key role in appropriate referral and parent/ patient education. The treating personnel should know about performing and interpreting the various imaging modalities. This knowledge will help in establishing an early diagnosis. Currently, no treatment modalities are approved to prevent or reverse visual loss in these patients. However, several ongoing clinical trials are investigating various novel therapeutic modalities.

Multimodal imaging also helps monitor the disease progression and evaluate the efficacy of the treatment modalities. A multidisciplinary approach is required to manage these patients as few patients may have systemic associations.