LSD is a Schedule I drug in the United States. Its precursors, lysergic acid and lysergic acid amide are Schedule III drugs. It is illegal to administer, manufacture, buy, possess, process, or distribute LSD without a license from the DEA.

LSD is taken orally as a capsule or tablet. The moderate effect in most subjects is produced at 1 to 3 micrograms/kg body weight. The onset of effects usually begins within 30 to 60 minutes after taking the drug. The drug moves rapidly to the brain and is quickly distributed throughout the body, acting both on CNS and autonomics. The drug disappears from the brain in 20 minutes, but the effects are prolonged and may last many more hours after it disappears from the brain. LSD has a first-order elimination. LSD lasts up to 12 hours in the body with dose-proportional pharmacokinetics. The effects following administration are related to the time course of concentration in the plasma. The subjective response between patients with similar concentrations of LSD and similar doses is unpredictable. Each patient may have a completely different experience.

More recent studies used 75 micrograms of LSD intravenously. Reported subjective effects began within 5 to 15 minutes. Effects peaked 45 to 90 minutes after intravenous dosing. The researchers reported no further details.

In one study, the administration of 200 micrograms of LSD in a safe setting reportedly produced subjective positive effects for the user, further described as a long-lasting positive experience. There were significant reports of positive attitudes with self-esteem, mood, altruism, social skills, behavioral changes, and improved satisfaction in life. No reported negative changes in attitude, mood, social skills, or behavior were attributed to LSD.