The zygoma is a bone that provides vital contributions to both the structure and aesthetic of the midface and articulates with several bones of the craniofacial skeleton. The zygoma and its articulations comprise the zygomaticomaxillary complex (ZMC). Fractures of the zygomatic arch (ZA) or any of its bony articulations can cause significant functional and cosmetic morbidity. The management of the zygomatic arch and ZMC fractures should be patient-specific but range from simple observation to open reduction with internal fixation (ORIF).

**Anatomy**

The zygoma is the most anterolateral projection of the midface. It plays a key role structurally as it absorbs and dissipates forces away from the cranial base. The zygoma also comprises a significant portion of the inferior and lateral orbital walls; thus, fractures of the zygoma warrants investigation into fractures of the orbit.

The zygoma has four articulations, referred to as the ZMC complex:

- Zygomaticotemporal (ZT) suture - The temporal process of the zygoma articulates with the zygomatic process of the temporal bone to form the anterolaterally projected zygomatic arch (ZA)

- Zygomaticomaxillary (ZM) suture and the infraorbital rim (IOR)

- Zygomaticofrontal (ZF) suture

- Zygomaticosphenoidal (ZS) suture

NOTE: Fractures of the ZMC complex may be mistakenly referred to as "tripod fractured," though the correct terminology is, in fact, "tetrapod fracture," given the four articulations of the zygoma as stated above.

**Neuroanatomy**

Paresthesia of the face is a common sequela of a ZMC fracture given its proximity to sensory nerves such as the infraorbital nerve, the zygomaticofacial nerve, and the zygomaticotemporal nerve (all branches of cranial nerve V2).

- The infraorbital nerve exits the maxilla via the infraorbital foramen, medial to the articulation of the maxilla, and the zygoma. The infraorbital nerve detects sensory input from the cheek, upper lip, nose, and anterior maxillary dentition.

- The zygomaticofacial and zygomaticotemporal nerves transmit sensory input from the lateral cheek and anterior temporal area, respectively. They are branches of the zygomatic nerve, which arises in the pterygopalatine fossa and enters the orbit via the inferior orbital fissure, and travels along the lateral orbital wall. The zygomaticofacial and zygomaticotemporal branches then exit via identically named foramina in the zygoma.

Severe ZMC fractures may also result in ipsilateral facial palsy since the facial nerve is intimately associated with the zygomatic arch. The facial nerve's frontal branch emerges from the parotid gland within the parotid-masseteric fascia and crosses superficial to the zygomatic arch in the innominate fascia deep to the superficial muscular aponeurotic system (SMAS). The frontal branch then transitions to the undersurface of the temporoparietal fascia where it travels to innervate the frontalis muscle.

**Muscular Anatomy**

The temporalis originates along the temporal line of the parietal and frontal bones and travels medially to the zygomatic arch to insert on the coronoid process of the mandible. It also has attachments to the zygoma.

The masseter originates on the inferior aspect of the zygoma and zygomatic arch and inserts on the angle of the mandible.

The zygomaticus major and minor are muscles of facial expression that originate on the zygoma and insert near the corner of the mouth to assist with commissure elevation.

**Other landmarks**

Tubercle of Whitnall: The attachment site of the lateral canthal tendon located on the medial surface of the frontal process of the zygoma.