Health disparities for American Indians and Alaskan Natives have been attributed to limited access and availability of health services, education, and poverty.

**Access to Health Services**

One way to improve mental health outcomes amongst American Indians and Alaskan Natives is to increase access to available healthcare services and facilities. The Indian Health Service (IHS), a federal agency established in 1955, is one of the main health care systems created to serve a large proportion of the Native Americans.

Only federal hospitals that IHS funds may provide coverage for health services, and a large majority of these hospitals are located in areas that are geographically isolated. This makes it challenging for AI/AN seeking care in more urban areas and larger cities where there is a limited number of IHS-associated facilities.

**Cultural Differences**

It is important to recognize that there are cultural differences when it comes to health-related values and beliefs. There are various evidence-based treatments and western models of intervention that have been largely utilized by society in approaching the treatment of mental health disorders. However, even with these established treatment models, some AI/ANs prefer traditional healing and tribal traditions to address substance use and other mental health issues. There is the challenge of overcoming the distrust of formal services that may exist in Indigenous communities.

Recognizing the importance of cultural competence may help to reduce health care disparities among AI/ANs. Cultural competence in health care means understanding and respecting the various cultures of different patient groups then using the knowledge to tailor health care to provide more culturally and linguistically appropriate interventions for different patient groups.

**Research**

There is still a limited amount of available literature on mental health disorders and appropriate treatment, specifically regarding the American Indian and Alaska Native populations. While the amount of knowledge about AI/AN mental health problems is growing, little research specific to treatment efficacy and outcomes among AI/AN has been published. To put this into context, within a set of randomized control trials on major mental health disorders between 1986 through 2005, none of the 10,000 participants were identified as American Indian or Alaskan natives.

**Summary**

Improving the availability and quality of care for Native American populations will require the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team, both in terms of providing the care and also recognizing the unique challenges that confront this population. This team includes all personnel from every discipline, including clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, lab and other medical technicians, physical and occupation therapists, and even ancillary staff. It requires open communication, collaborative effort, and empathy regarding the challenges present in these patients so optimal care can be rendered and bring healthcare in the AI/AN population up to standard. [Level 5]