**Clinical Management of an HIV Exposure**

**Exposure**

If exposure occurs, a healthcare worker must get emergency care, and first aid should be started. The type of care depends on the route of exposure. If the nose, mouth, face, or skin is exposed, it should be flushed with water. If exposure occurs to the eyes, they should be irrigated with saline, sterile irrigation, or clean water. For needlestick or cut exposure, the site should be washed with soap and water, and wounds must be cleaned.

Healthcare workers should promptly report it to their supervisors upon exposure, and medical evaluation with management should follow.

**Evaluation and Treatment**

Medical evaluation and decision to treat should occur immediately, and a plan for postexposure prophylaxis should ensure. Follow-up evaluations should occur. The healthcare worker’s health information is kept confidential.

If possible, the CDC recommends testing the source patient with an FDA-approved rapid HIV test. Both third-generation chemiluminescent immunoassays and fourth-generation combination p24antigen-HIV antibody (Ag/Ab) tests allow for rapid and accurate results.

[See CDC Report, U.S. Public Health Service guidelines for managing occupational exposures to HIV and recommendations for postexposure prophylaxis.]

**Postexposure Prophylaxis (PEP)**

If possible, the source patient should be tested for HIV. Antiretroviral therapy (ART) must be started as soon as possible, preferably within seventy-two hours of the exposure, and it is continued for four weeks. PEP regimens typically consist of three drugs with low side effects and minimal risk of development of HIV resistance. Expert consultation is suggested.

**Care and Treatment of HIV/AIDS Patients**

**Identifying Risks and Behaviors Associated with HIV/AIDS**

HIV can be transmitted through bodily secretions through sexual contact, blood, and pregnancy.

- Injection and non-injection drug use

- Unprotected sex

- Multiple sexual partners

- Exchange of sex for money or drugs

- Use of alcohol or drugs before or during sexual intercourse

HIV cannot be transmitted through casual contact with saliva, such as kissing, spitting, or sharing drinks.

**Goals of HIV/AIDS Treatment**

Currently, there is no vaccine or cure for HIV, though clinical trials and studies continue to be performed. ART, when started early, has enabled people with HIV to live long lives with chronic infection.

**Antiretroviral Treatment (ART) for Patients Infected With HIV**

Individuals should be tested for drug resistance before beginning treatment with ART, allowing physicians to choose the most effective medications.

**Benefits of ART**

- Better clinical outcomes

- Decrease in viral load and transmission

- Delay in disease progression

- Reduced morbidity and mortality

- Prevention of immune system decline

**Limitations of ART**

- Daily adherence

- Long-term medication toxicity

- Cost of treatment

- Limited options for those with multiclass resistance

**Types of ART Medications**

Each medication targets a step in the HIV lifecycle. A combination of different classes is used to treat patients with HIV, including:

- Fusion inhibitors – enfuvirtide

- Entry inhibitors – maraviroc

- Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI) – zidovudine, lamivudine, abacavir, didanosine

- Nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NtRTI) – tenofovir

- Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI) – efavirenz, nevirapine

- Integrase inhibitors – raltegravir

- Protease inhibitors (PI) – ritonavir, darunavir, atazanavir

**Attitude and Stigma Associated with HIV/AIDS**

**Introduction to HIV/AIDS Stigma**

HIV/AIDS stigma remains a barrier to accessing medical care, prevention, and therapy. Manifestation of stigma varies between cultures, societal beliefs, and group norms. Structural violence (racism, sexism, poverty) coupled with a pre-existing stigma against high-risk groups (injection drug users, sex workers, men who have sex with men) enhances the power stigma has on the HIV/AIDS epidemic, ultimately leading to decreased diagnosis, treatment, and care. Stigma arises from a convergence of labeling, stereotyping, separating, and discriminating.

**Counteracting HIV/AIDS Stigma**

- Understand how HIV is transmitted and who can become infected

- Advocate for laws and policies to end the stigma against men who have sex with men, sex workers, injection drug users, and migrants.

- Support organizations rallying to end discrimination against people infected with HIV

- Assist families and communities of those infected or affected

- Learn about legal consequences and policy actions

- Support routine HIV testing