Hypertension (HTN) is considered one of the leading causes of increased cardiovascular disease.

The 2017 American College of Cardiology (ACC) and American Heart Association (AHA) definition of HTN stages is:

- Normal blood pressure (BP): systolic BP is less than 120, and diastolic BP is less than 80.

- Elevated BP: systolic BP is 120 to 130, and diastolic BP is less than 80.

- Stage 1 HTN: systolic BP 130 to 139 or diastolic BP 80 to 89.

- Stage 2 HTN: systolic BP at least 140 or diastolic at least 90.

- Hypertensive crises: systolic BP over 180 and/or diastolic BP over 120.

In the 2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease: all patients with elevated blood pressure are recommended to have lifestyle modifications as initial treatment, including weight loss, a healthy heart diet, increased physical activity, a low sodium diet, and limitation of alcohol consumption.

- In patients with stage 1 HTN, recommendations are to start antihypertensive medications if the patient has a 10-year ASCVD risk of 10% or higher with a target of BP less than 130/80 to prevent patients from cardiovascular events. The recommendation is for patients with stage 1 HTN and 10-year ASCVD risk of less than 10% to have lifestyle modification measures.

- Recommendations are for all patients with stage 2 HTN to start antihypertensive medications to lower BP to a target lower than 130/80 even if the 10-year ASCVD risk is less than 10%.

- In patients with chronic kidney disease, the target BP is 130/80

- For patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), it is recommended to start on antihypertensive medications if BP is more than 130/80 with a goal of BP lower than 130/80.

- Antihypertensive medication treatment usually starts as monotherapy after failure of conservative management with lifestyle modification. The use of combination therapy is common when patients fail the monotherapy approach.

- Lowering blood pressure does reduce cardiovascular risks; maintaining a systolic blood pressure of less than 130 mm Hg has shown to prevent complications in patients with heart failure, diabetes, coronary artery disease, stroke, and other cardiovascular diseases.

There are multiple classes of antihypertensive medications used for the treatment of HTN; the most recommended classes used as first-line for treatment are:

- Thiazide-type diuretics

- Calcium channel blockers

- Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs)

**Thiazide Diuretics**

Thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics are usually the first-line of treatment for hypertension; in JNC8 guidelines, the thiazide diuretics can be used as the first-line treatment for HTN (either alone or in combination with other antihypertensives) in all age groups regardless of race unless the patient has evidence of chronic kidney disease where angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor blocker is indicated.

The Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial ALLHAT study recommended thiazide diuretics as the first line of treatment for hypertension unless there are contraindications.

Treatment with hydrochlorothiazide as a single agent with a dose of 12.5 mg or 25 mg daily showed no evidence of decreasing morbidity or mortality.

Research shows that thiazide-type diuretics (chlorthalidone and indapamide) are superior in preventing cardiovascular disease at a lower cost. Recommendations are to start them as first-line treatment for hypertension. Multiple studies have shown that thiazide-like diuretics (chlorthalidone and indapamide) in hypertension treatment are more potent than hydrochlorothiazide. They are better at decreasing the risk of cardiovascular disease compared to hydrochlorothiazide.

Chlorthalidone is the drug of choice to start as monotherapy for hypertension. Studies show it to be the best diuretic to control blood pressure and prevent mortality and morbidity.

The Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT) showed that chlorthalidone at 12.5 to 25 mg/day caused fewer cardiovascular complications than amlodipine and lisinopril.

Chlorthalidone is the first choice for older patients with osteoporosis, as it was associated with a lower incidence of pelvic fractures when compared to amlodipine and lisinopril.

**Calcium Channel Blockers CCBs**

Same as thiazide-type diuretics, CCBs are recommended in JNC8 guidelines to be used as a first-line treatment alone or in combination with other antihypertensives in all patients with HTN regardless of age and race, except for patients with chronic kidney disease where ACE inhibitors or ARBs are the recommended first-line treatment.

CCBs have been shown to decrease all cardiovascular events other than heart failure, similar to thiazide diuretics. They can be used as the best alternative to thiazides when patients do not tolerate thiazides.

CCBs divide into two groups: dihydropyridines and non-dihydropyridines

Dihydropyridines are more potent as vasodilators and are used more for HTN treatment. They have less effect on heart contractility and conduction. For this, they are used more for the management of HTN. Nifedipine and amlodipine are the most used medications in this group.

Non-dihydropyridines are less potent as vasodilators and have a better effect on cardiac contractility and conduction. They are used more as antiarrhythmic medications and less for HTN treatment.

For African descent patients, initial treatment for hypertension (without evidence of heart failure or chronic kidney disease) should include CCB or a thiazide diuretic.

Long-acting nifedipine has greater antihypertensive action when compared to amlodipine.

Dihydropyridines should not be a primary treatment for congestive heart failure (CHF) but represent a safe additional treatment in these patients for better blood pressure control or angina pectoris.

Non-dihydropyridines are relatively contraindicated in patients with CHF with reduced ejection fraction, second and third-degree heart blocks, and in patients with sick sinus syndrome.

Compared to valsartan in a study, amlodipine was found to have better control of 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure. In the ASCOT trial, amlodipine was found to be better than atenolol in lowering the risk of cardiovascular disease and is associated with less risk of diabetes development.

**ACE Inhibitors and ARBs**

ACE inhibitors and ARBs are the antihypertensive of choice for patients with heart failure and chronic kidney disease. They are indicated as first-line treatment for patients with chronic kidney disease with evidence of proteinuria. JNC8 guidelines list these two classes of antihypertensive medications as first-line treatment for HTN for non-black patients, along with thiazides and CCBs.

Independent of their antihypertensive effect, they are proven to have a cardioprotective effect in patients with a high risk of cardiovascular disease.

Both classes have similar efficacy and share the same indications for treatment; they are both recommended as first-line treatment for patients with left ventricular dysfunction and ST-elevation MI or non-ST elevation MI with the presence of diabetes, systolic dysfunction, or anterior infarct.

Thiazide is better than ACE inhibitors in decreasing blood pressure and preventing stroke; CCBs are better than ACE inhibitors in lowering blood pressure and preventing stroke and heart failure.

Ramipril has been shown to decrease mortality, the incidence of stroke, and MIs when used in patients with symptomatic heart failure or asymptomatic patients with low ejection fraction. The research found perindopril decreases cardiovascular events when used in a patient with stable coronary artery disease and normal systolic dysfunction. Compared with atenolol, losartan was found to be better in reducing morbidity and mortality and better in lowering blood pressure.

Comparing ramipril with telmisartan, they were equivalent in effect in diabetic or heart failure patients, with telmisartan showing a correlation with less angioedema.

**Beta-Blockers**

Beta-blockers are not indicated as primary treatment for hypertension unless there is a specific indication of heart failure and myocardial infarction.

Beta-blockers are associated with decreased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality when used in younger patients but are less protective in patients older than 65 and were noted to be associated with an increased risk of strokes.

**Combination Therapy**

When a patient fails a monotherapy for HTN, a combination should merit consideration. Combining two antihypertensive medications should be a therapeutic option for patients with stage 2 hypertension.

A combination of ARB-diuretic or ACE inhibitor-CBB is superior to the beta-blocker-diuretic combination.

Combination formulations of CCB and diuretics are not as common; ARBs or ACE inhibitors-based combinations are preferred when a combination is required; these types of combinations (ACE inhibitors or ARB-based combinations) should be used in patients with CKD.

The combination of benazepril-amlodipine is superior to the benazepril-hydrochlorothiazide combination in decreasing the incidence of cardiovascular events in patients with high risk, and it decreases the progression of nephropathy.

The ACE inhibitor-ARB combination is not recommended; it showed a higher incidence of side effects with no added benefits.

When the combination of 2 medications does not achieve the treatment goal, a third agent should be added, usually done by adding a third agent of the first line group of drugs (thiazide-like diuretics, CCB, ACE inhibitors, and ARBs).

When the patient fails the three-drug regimen, the clinician should consider treatment for resistant HTN, adding a fourth antihypertensive agent from any other classes.

**Loop diuretics**are more effective than thiazides in patients with a low estimated glomerular filtration rate of less than 30 mL/min. They have been approved to treat peripheral edema associated with congestive heart failure and other noncardiac causes of edema, as in liver and kidney diseases.

**Potassium Sparing Diuretics: "Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists"**are not usually used as first-line treatment. Spironolactone and eplerenone are considered good in hypertension treatment when added to other antihypertensive medications in resistant HTN; this group of medications is effective when added to triple hypertension medications regimen but should be used cautiously when added to ACE inhibitors or ARBs due to the higher incidence of hyperkalemia.

**Hydralazine**can be added to a regimen to treat resistant hypertension, either alone or in combination with nitrates, in case of heart failure. Hydralazine is associated with increased sympathetic tone and increased sodium avidity; adding a beta-blocker and loop diuretics helps to decrease these effects.

**Clonidine**: is a central alpha-2 agonist; it is not first-line therapy but can be used as an additional agent when the patient fails combination therapy. The transdermal form is preferred.

**Minoxidil**is usually an option when the patient fails treatment with hydralazine. It usually provides good blood pressure control, but it is associated with fluid retention, for which adding a loop diuretic is helpful. It increases the sympathetic tone that may require adding a beta-blocker.

**Alpha-blockers**should not be used to treat hypertension as a first-line agent because they are not as effective in preventing cardiovascular disease compared with other first-line agents.