The initial diagnostic test would be a 12-lead electrocardiogram to look for ectopic ventricular beats. As PVCs are infrequent in most patients, the brief period of an electrocardiogram may fail to capture the ectopic beats. This also allows the differentiation of a PVC from ectopic atrial beats, which are termed premature atrial contractions (PACs). In patients with PVCs, the ECG may reveal other findings that include:

- Electrolyte abnormalities (peaked T waves, QT prolongation)

- Left ventricular hypertrophy

- With an old MI, one may see Q waves, loss of R waves, and/or a bundle branch block

- Acute ischemia may present with ST-segment elevation/depression and/or T wave inversion

To diagnose the palpitations, a 24 or 48-hour Holter monitor may be used to differentiate the PVCs from other potential arrhythmias. It is also imperative to quantify the PVCs over a set time span to assess the patient's risk for developing cardiomyopathy. Event monitors can be used for the same purpose, particularly if the patient's complaints are infrequent, as they are done up to 30 days.

Laboratory testing is also essential, particularly in identifying the potential etiology of the PVCs. A complete blood count, potassium, calcium, magnesium, and thyroid-stimulating hormone should be ordered.

Further diagnostic testing options include echocardiography and stress testing. The value of an echocardiogram for the evaluation of PVCs is to rule out structural heart disease, but only if there is clinical suspicion. Stress testing is another part of a thorough cardiac evaluation. It holds diagnostic value for those who experience PVCs during exercise or in the recovery phase following exercise.

The Lown Grading system for PVCs

- Grade 0: No evidence of premature beats

- Grade 1: Occasional PVCs (less than 30/hour)

- Grade 2: Frequent PVCs (more than 30/hour)

- Grade 3: Multiform

- Grade 4: Repetitive PVCs (A-couplets, B-salvos of more than 3)

- Grade 5: R on T pattern