While alternative modalities are rooted in thousands of years of tradition, there remain associated safety concerns. Implementing any alternative therapy can influence efficacy and dosing of many pharmaceutical agents, therefore knowledge of all ongoing medical treatments is imperative to safe care. Present-day practitioners are often open-minded about alternative techniques and can help incorporate appropriate methods into a comprehensive care plan.

**Specific issues of concern:**

**Acupuncture:**

Complications with acupuncture are relatively rare; however, always ensure patients are seeking care from a reputable, well-trained practitioner. Patients may be at higher risk for complications if they have a bleeding disorder or are taking blood thinners as these can increase the risk of bruising and/or blood loss. Additionally, electropuncture should be avoided in patients with a pacemaker. Pregnant patients should alert their practitioner as some puncture locations have been reported to stimulate labor. All patients should alert their acupuncture practitioner of any chronic illnesses and all prescribed medications.

**Herbal Medicine:**

In the United States, herbal products and supplements are not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Because of this, there is significant variation between batches regarding potency and additive amounts. Additionally, herbal products cannot advertise use for specific medical treatment which can cause confusion about their intended purpose amongst consumers. Finally, many supplements interact with enzymes in the body causing variation in the absorption and efficacy of other drugs. For example, St. John’s Wort is a Cytochrome P450 inducer

**Body Manipulation:**

Overall, yoga and tai chi are considered low-impact and safe exercise modalities. As with any physical activity, the risk of injury is present. To help mitigate this risk, proper technique should be ensured by a certified instructor, limitations should be outlined for each individual patient, and the practice should be implemented slowly to allow the body to accommodate any changes.

Extrinsic manipulation of any kind should be performed by a trained and licensed practitioner. High-Velocity Low-Amplitude (HVLA) manipulation places patients at highest risk for injury. Recommendations vary with each manipulation technique and location, but generally, patients with the following medical conditions should avoid manipulation: pregnant women, individuals with osteoporosis, severe arthritis, or active infection, those taking blood thinners, individuals with known bone fractures, breaks or spurs and anyone with a known connective tissue disorder. Risk of artery dissection, herniated disk, and worsening of pain should be conveyed to all individuals prior to manipulation of any kind.