Examination of the motor system of a limb includes checking for muscle bulk and fasciculation, muscle tone at joints, the power of muscle groups, deep tendon reflexes, clonus, plantar response, and coordination. In cases of a lower motor neuron type weakness, there is early muscle wasting, fasciculations, hypotonia, hyporeflexia, and a normal plantar response. On the other hand, the upper motor neuron type of weakness is characterized by normal muscle bulk, hypertonia, hyperreflexia, clonus, and an extensor plantar response (positive Babinski’s sign). Furthermore, the preservation of deep tendon reflexes distinguishes myopathy from neuropathy.

Lower motor neuron type weakness can result from any pathology of anterior horn cells, spinal nerve roots, plexus, or peripheral nerves. An upper motor neuron paraplegia can result from myelopathy involving the thoracic spinal cord, while cervical myelopathy would result in quadriplegia. The uppermost dermatomal level of accompanying sensory loss can further localize the lesion to the corresponding spinal segment. Myelopathy is further classified into compressive and non-compressive myelopathy. An example of non-compressive myelopathy is transverse myelitis that can be partial or complete. Compressive myelopathy can result from compression from the outside like a vertebral fracture, vertebral metastasis or subdural abscess or hematoma, or from the inside with conditions such as syringomyelia or hematomyelia.

Hemiplegia can result from a unilateral lesion of the brain stem, internal capsule, or cerebral cortex. Brain stem lesions result in crossed hemiplegia. For example, a left pontine lesion will result in left facial weakness of lower motor neuron type and right-sided hemiplegia. Similarly, a lesion in the left midbrain will result in left-sided oculomotor weakness with right hemiparesis and right facial weakness of upper motor neuron type. This constellation of signs is called Weber syndrome. Lesions above the level of the brainstem result in uncrossed hemiplegia. For example, a lesion in the left internal capsule would result in right hemiplegia and right facial weakness of the upper motor neuron type. A left cortical lesion may also result in cortical dysfunction in addition to right hemiparesis and facial weakness of upper motor neuron type.