Clinicians may rarely encounter anterior mediastinal masses in their daily practices. Many times anterior mediastinal masses will be incidental findings on radiographic studies. For this reason, clinicians must take the time to review radiologic images, rather than depend on radiologists’ reports. After diagnosing a patient with an anterior mediastinal mass, he or she will encounter various healthcare professionals along the treatment course. Patient care should involve an interprofessional team.

Depending on the diagnosis, patients may consult with endocrinologists, oncologists, pulmonologists, otolaryngologists, and cardiothoracic surgeons. Oncology-specialty pharmacists will play a role in chemotherapy dosing and can verify agent selection, as well as guarding against any potential drug-drug interactions. They will report any concerns to the managing clinician and the rest of the team. Specialty-trained oncology nurses are also crucial members of the interprofessional team, as they will have more ongoing and frequent contact with the patient, administer medications, and be in a position to monitor for adverse effects as well as treatment effectiveness, which they must communicate appropriately.

Speech and language pathologists may be involved in the care of patients with voice changes or difficulty swallowing. Ancillary staff should have training on typical signs and symptoms of the disease, as well as potential complications. Mediastinal masses, while rare, still require the collaboration of an interprofessional team approach to direct patient outcomes successfully. [Level V]