Bacterial vaginosis is an incredibly common cause of vaginal disorders in women of reproductive age.  Patients with these complaints often present with only a vague sign or symptom, such as vaginal discomfort.  The cause of vaginal discomfort poses a broad differential diagnosis, including abdominal, pelvic, or urinary tract causes.  It is imperative that this pathology is detected and treated to prevent future complications, particularly in pregnancy.

The family practitioner, nurse practitioner, or gynecologist is often the first line in dealing with cases of vaginal discomfort, yet it is crucial to include other members of the patient care team such as nursing, medical assistants, and obstetricians. An interprofessional approach is optimal in serving patients in this regard; obstetricians, gynecologists, pediatricians, and family practitioners should keep bacterial vaginosis in mind when patients complain of vaginal symptoms.  Patients sometimes find it easier to report symptoms to a familiar or "less intimidating" health professional.  Nurses and medical assistants are vital in this regard and should pay attention to the patient's list of concerns and report pertinent complaints to the provider.

Afflictions involving changes to vaginal secretions can be embarrassing, and should receive treatment quickly and with the minimum invasiveness required. The Amsel criteria should be employed to allow for efficient and straightforward diagnosis to decrease the prevalence of bacterial vaginosis and its numerous potentially more severe complications.  The USPTF does not at this time recommend screening for asymptomatic or low-risk women [Category D]; however, when suspicion is high, the Amsel criteria are recommended as the diagnostic tool of choice.  When detected and adequately treated, the cure rate can reach as high as 80%, preventing further serious complications.