Flutamide is indicated by the US-FDA for the adult population only to treat stage B2-C and stage D2 metastatic carcinoma of the prostate.

There has been some off-label use for the treatment of hair loss, hirsutism, polycystic ovarian syndrome, and acne. Flutamide has been shown to have fewer side effects in women but continues to have hepatotoxic effects in this population.

In the treatment of acne and seborrhea in women, low-dose flutamide has been shown to effectively decrease acne after six months of therapy with peak benefit at one year of use. Other agents have been used in the past for their antiandrogenic effects, such as spironolactone, but flutamide has shown to be the superior antiandrogenic treatment of acne in women, with up to 90% resolution of acne as compared to 40% with spironolactone.

Flutamide has been effective in treating female pattern hair loss. It can be taken alone or in conjunction with oral birth control in the treatment of hair loss, and this regiment has proven to be superior to cyproterone acetate and finasteride.

In the treatment of hirsutism, flutamide has been demonstrated to have equal or greater effectiveness at treating symptomatology, although it has a risk of hepatic injury compared to other agents such as finasteride, cyproterone acetate, and spironolactone.

First discovered in 1967, its initial formulation was for use as an antibiotic. The Schering Plough Corporation of Germany developed and later found it to have antiandrogenic properties. Clinical trials began in 1971, and the drug was finally released to the public in 1983 in Germany. In 1989, flutamide received approval from the United States Food and Drug Administration. Flutamide was the first nonsteroidal antiandrogen drug on the market. Other nonsteroidal antiandrogen pharmaceuticals include nilutamide, introduced in 1989, and bicalutamide, in 1995.