**Chemoprophylaxis of Invasive Meningococcal Disease**

As the meningococcal infection spreads with droplets, the disease is a serious threat for both the patient and close contacts. The risk of developing the disease for household contacts exposed to patients who have sporadic meningococcal disease was estimated to be 4:1000 exposed people, which is 500 to 800 times greater than the risk for the total population.

**Indications**

Following CDC recommendations, the strategy of meningococcal prophylaxis should be implemented within 24 hours after contact or identification of the pathogen. In cases of a delayed report of IMD, the realization of chemoprophylaxis is reasoned up to 14 days from the disease onset.

The indications for chemoprophylaxis implementation are as follows.

- Close contact with a patient within 7 days before the disease onset, regardless of vaccination status. "Close contact" applies to:

- Household members living with a sick person
- People who are in intimate contact with the patient
- People sleeping in the same bedroom with the patient (students, soldiers, officers)
- People who have been in direct contact with secretions from the patient's respiratory tract during medical procedures, including mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, suctioning, and endotracheal intubation, before or less than 24 hours after antimicrobial therapy was initiated
- People traveling with the patient in the same plane, ship, bus, or car for longer than 8 hours

- The patient himself before discharge from a hospital if they were not treated with ceftriaxone.

Drinking from the same bottle, using the same cutlery, or smoking the same cigarette, is not an indication of the implementation of prophylaxis unless there is an additional risk of close contact described above.

**Antibiotics**

Antibiotics effective in eliminating the carriage of N. meningitidis, therefore recommended in chemoprophylaxis of IMD are rifampicin, ciprofloxacin, and ceftriaxone.

Rifampicin

Rifampicin can be used in every age group. Contraindications to its use include pregnancy, jaundice, and hypersensitivity to the drug. Rifampicin is the most powerful known inducer of the hepatic cytochrome P450enzyme system, therefore increases the metabolism of many drugs. Patients undergoing long-term anticoagulation therapy with warfarin have to increase their dosage and have their clotting time frequently checked because failure to do so could lead to inadequate anticoagulation, resulting in serious consequences of thromboembolism. Rifampicin can reduce the efficacy of birth control pills or other hormonal contraception. Patients receiving rifampicin should be informed of the possibility of side effects such as urine, stool, sweat, or tears discolor in red or orange.

Ciprofloxacin

Ciprofloxacin is intended for use only in adults (older than 18 years of age). It is contraindicated in children, pregnant women, and nursing mothers.

Ceftriaxone

Ceftriaxone may be used in every age group, although the intramuscular route of administration makes it less convenient. Ceftriaxone is a first-line antibiotic recommended as chemoprophylaxis of IMD in pregnancy and nursing mothers.

Azithromycin

The effectiveness of azithromycin in eliminating the nasopharyngeal carriage of N. meningitidis has been proven in only one study in adults.

Some regions have documented resistance of N. meningitidis to ciprofloxacin or rifampicin.

**Post-Exposure Immunoprophylaxis**

A secondary case can occur several weeks after the index one; therefore, a meningococcal vaccine is a supporting strategy in meningococcal prophylaxis. In outbreaks caused by serogroups A, C, Y, and W, local authorities should decide on mass vaccination campaigns.