The thyroid originates between the first and second pharyngeal pouches near the base of the tongue. In the third week of gestation, around day 20-24, endodermal cells of the primitive pharynx proliferate, creating the thyroid diverticulum. Beginning in the fifth week of gestation, the thyroid diverticulum migrates caudally along the midline, crossing anteriorly to the hyoid bone and laryngeal cartilage. During migration, the thyroid remains attached to the tongue via the thyroglossal duct. In early descent, the thyroid is hollow but then solidifies during migration forming the follicular elements of the thyroid. Division of the thyroid into right and left lobes occurs in the fifth week of gestation.

Also, during the fifth week, the ultimobranchial bodies arise from the fourth/fifth pharyngeal pouches. The ultimobranchial bodies ultimately differentiate into the parafollicular C-cells, which play an essential role in calcium homeostasis. Traditionally, the parafollicular C-cells were thought to arise from neural crest cells, but recent works have disputed this by suggesting they arise from endoderm.

By the seventh week of gestation, the thyroid has reached its final destination in the neck. Normally, the thyroglossal duct degenerates by the tenth week of gestation with only the foramen cecum to indicate its former existence. In some instances, incomplete obliteration of the duct can lead to abnormalities, including thyroglossal duct cysts, lingual thyroid, or a pyramidal lobe. Cellular differentiation and maturation then continue until the thyroid is functionally mature by the twelfth gestational week.