**Various Drugs Affecting NMJ**

There are few drugs like nicotine and carbamylcholine that mimic acetylcholine's action because of their similar chemical structure. A direct agonist of ACh that directly binds to the ACh receptors includes bethanechol (which treats post-operative ileus, urinary retention), carbachol, and pilocarpine (both used to treat glaucoma by constriction of the pupillary muscle), and methacholine (challenge test to diagnose asthma in a patient who presents asymptomatically).

NMJ blockers are used to induce muscle relaxation and paralysis. These can be divided into depolarizing (succinylcholine) and non-depolarizing (tubocurarine, atracurium, mivacurium, pancuronium, vecuronium, rocuronium). Drugs such as d-tubocurarine compete with ACh and bind to the ACh receptor on the postsynaptic membrane, thus causing the skeletal muscle to relax instead of contraction after locally produced ACh. They are called competitive blocking agents.

Drugs like succinylcholine also paralyze the skeletal muscle but through continued depolarization that prevents repolarization of the motor endplate, resulting in ACh receptors becoming desensitized and inactivated. These drugs are used in general anesthesia to help avoid large doses of general anesthetics. Administration of neuromuscular blocking agents and drugs can also result in bulbar and respiratory muscle failure. ACh esterase inhibitors like physostigmine neostigmine, pyridostigmine, and edrophonium increase the levels of ACh in the synaptic cleft. Physostigmine and neostigmine are used for the treatment of Myasthenia Gravis (MG). Irreversible inhibitors of ACh esterase include the organophosphates commonly used as an insecticide, which include malathion and parathion. Exposure to these may cause organophosphate toxicity syndrome that includes diarrhea, urination, myosis, bronchospasm, excessive lacrimation, and salivation. The effects of irreversible inhibitors of ACh esterase can be reversed by using a competitive inhibitor such as atropine and/or pralidoxime, which regenerates ACh esterase if given early enough before enzyme aging occurs.