**Surveillance**

The United States Centers for Disease Control (CDC) published an updated surveillance framework in 2013 about ventilator-associated events (VAE). The rationale was to improve the objectivity of previous (2005) surveillance parameters for ventilator-associated complications. The framework was intended solely for surveillance purposes and not for clinical diagnosis and management.

Numerous pros and cons of the CDC surveillance framework (2013) have been outlined. Among the pros are greater objectivity of parameters; ease of electronic computation; ability to use surveillance parameters as a metric of quality of healthcare for ventilated patients; close association of the parameters to mortality rates and, an association with greater potential for multi-disciplinary collaboration in mitigation of VAE. These are based on findings from the surveillance framework. Limitations of the framework, however, include the fact that some VAEs may reflect the natural history of the critical illness rather than preventable, ventilator-induced complications; the low positive predictive value of VAE surveillance criteria for VAP and, the potential to miss cases of VAP. Additionally, VAP parameters were arguably non-specific to distinguish VAP from other forms of (potentially hospital-acquired) respiratory illness in critically ill patients.

The CDC (2013) has categorized VAE as (I) ventilator-associated conditions (VAC), (II) infection-related ventilator-associated complications (IVAC), and (III) possible ventilator-associated pneumonia (PVAP) or probable ventilator-associated pneumonia VAP.

**Ventilator-associated Conditions (VAC)**

VAC is defined as an increase in oxygen requirement, sustained for a minimum of 2 days in a mechanically ventilated patient. Day 1, in the context of VAE, is the day of intubation and commencement of mechanical ventilation. Sustained, increased oxygen requirement constitutes an increase in the daily, minimum baseline positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), equal to or greater than 3cm H2O or, an increase in the daily minimum fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) that is equal to or greater than 20 points for a minimum of 2 days. VAC may be defined only in those patients who have been mechanically ventilated for a minimum of 2 days and who have displayed pre-existing, stable, or improved oxygenation parameters before the period of increased oxygen requirement. Pre-existing improvement or stability is defined as two or more days of stable or decreasing FiO2 or PEEP, while on the mechanical ventilator. Baseline FiO2 and PEEP would be defined as the minimum daily FiO2 and PEEP measured during the period of improvement or stability.

**Infection-related Ventilator-associated Complications (IVAC)**

IVAC denotes clinical signs of infection in a patient with VAC. However, for the assessment of IVAC, the minimum duration of mechanical ventilation is three days, and patients must have displayed signs of infection in the two days preceding- or within two days after the assessment of VAC. The assessment of IVAC suggests infection as a cause of VAC. Mandatory clinical signs for an assessment of IVAC are low-grade pyrexia (>38C) or hypothermia (temperature <36C); leukocytosis (>12000 cells/mm3) or leukopenia (less than or equal to 4000 cells/mm3) and, there must have been the initiation of an antimicrobial agent with continuation for more than or equal to 4 days.

**Possible entilator-associated Pneumonia (PVAP) and Probable Ventilator-associated Pneumonia**

An assessment of VAC and IVAC should prompt suspicion of VAP. PVAP and probable VAP are respectively defined by the presence of IVAC and laboratory or microbiologic evidence of infection. The criteria for an assessment of PVAP include the presence of greater than or equal to 25 neutrophils and less than or equal to 10 squamous epithelial cells on sputum microscopy or a positive qualitative, semi-quantitative or quantitative culture on a specimen from the trachea, bronchi or lungs. Probable VAP is assessed based on a positive culture from endotracheal aspiration (greater than or equal to 10 to the power 5, colony-forming units [CFU]/mL) or a positive culture from bronchoalveolar lavage [BAL] (greater than or equal to 10 to the power 4, CFU/mL) or positive culture from protected brush sampling (greater than or equal to 10 to the power of 3, CFU/mL). These indicators may be superseded by a positive pleural fluid culture obtained on thoracocentesis, positive lung histopathology or, a positive culture of specific respiratory viruses (for example, respiratory syncytial virus) or Legionella, demonstrated in respiratory secretions.

**Epidemiology**

In a retrospective cohort study conducted at a tertiary, academic center in 2013, among 20 356 mechanically ventilated patients, 5.6% (n=1141) of patients had VAC, 2.1% (n=431) had IVAC, 0.7% (n=139) had PVAP and 0.6% (n=127) had probable VAP. The risk of VAC was noted to be highest among medical, surgical, and thoracic units. Cardiac and neuroscience units displayed the lowest risk. Forty-two percent (42%) of cases of VAC and IVAC were from surgical units, and 29% were from medical units. Among cases of IVAC and probable VAP, Staphylococcus aureus (29%), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (14%), and Enterobacter species (7.9%) were the most commonly implicated organisms. Overall, VAE was associated with a greater number of days to extubation, a longer length of stay in the hospital, and a higher risk of mortality.

These findings were similar to those of a single-center, retrospective cohort study conducted at the general ICU of an academic hospital in 2017 in Tokyo, Japan. Among 407 adult patients who were mechanically ventilated for at least four days, higher mortality was noted among patients with VAC and IVAC (but no VAP), compared to those patients without VAE or VAP. VAC and IVAC, respectively, were shown to be independently associated with higher mortality.

A multi-state survey conducted in the United States in 2014 revealed that hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) and VAP are 2 of the most common types of hospital-acquired infections (HAIs) and comprise 22% of all HAI cases.

A recent meta-analysis (2013) evaluated evidence from studies conducted only in the United States between 1986 and 2013. VAP was found to be the second leading contributor (31.6%) to the total annual costs for five major HAIs ($9.8 billion [95% CI, $8.3-$11.5 billion]), after surgical site infections which contributed 33.7% of the total figure.

There is a need for further research on the epidemiology of VAE globally and among groups of low-to-middle income countries and higher-income countries, respectively.