The management of NAFLD is an interprofessional; each healthcare professional who encounters these patients must encourage changes in lifestyle to lower the morbidity of the disorder. The mainstay of treatment is lifestyle modification with the goal to achieve at least 5% to 10% of weight loss. Both biochemical and histological improvement was seen in patients who had weight loss, which is accomplished via calorie reduction combined with exercise. Thiazolidinediones appear to be beneficial in improving adipocyte insulin sensitivity and preventing inappropriate lipolysis. Their side effect profile (weight gain, congestive heart failure exacerbation, and osteoporosis), however, limits their use. Antioxidants such as vitamin E are of modest benefit and likely safe in non-diabetic patients; Bariatric surgery is an effective treatment and may be considered in patients with morbid obesity who would otherwise meet the criteria for bariatric surgery. Statins should not be withheld in patients with NAFLD due to pre-existing abnormal liver biochemical tests. Liver transplantation is the last resort in patients with decompensated cirrhosis, with the caveat that NAFLD can recur after transplant.

The outlook for Patients with NAFLD especially NASH is guarded because many are at an increased risk of developing cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Up to 10% of patients with NASH will eventually develop cirrhosis, which is the third most common causes of death in NAFLD after cardiovascular disease and cancer.