# Continuing Education Activity

The term "muscular dystrophy" incorporates an assortment of hereditary disorders that lead to progressive, generalized disease of the muscle prompted by inadequate or missing glycoproteins in the muscle cell plasma membrane. This activity outlines the evaluation and treatment of muscular dystrophy and highlights the role of the healthcare team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiological related to muscular dystrophy.
- Review the evaluation and functional assessment of various muscular dystrophies.
- Outline the available management alternatives for muscle dystrophy.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to improve outcomes for patients affected by muscular dystrophy.

# Introduction

**General Information**

The term "muscular dystrophy" incorporates an assortment of hereditary disorders that lead to progressive, generalized disease of the muscle prompted by inadequate or missing glycoproteins in the muscle cell plasma membrane.

**Anatomy**

Research has established that the gracilis, semimembranosus, semitendinosus, and sartorius muscles can be affected in patients with muscular dystrophy.

**Natural History**

Onset usually occurs in the third to fourth decades.

Presentations may also incorporate asymptomatic elevation of serum creatine kinase (CK), exertion intolerance, dilated cardiomyopathy, malignant hyperthermia, quadriceps myopathy, language delay, and Turner syndrome (Duchenne in X chromosome monozygotic females).

Since the inheritance of muscular dystrophy can be X-linked, the overwhelming majority of patients are male.

**Patterns of Spread**

Muscular dystrophy can be caused by mutations in numerous genes and can be transferred in an X-linked, autosomal dominant, or autosomal recessive fashion.

Although the phenotypic characteristics of some of these disorders are definite, the phenotypic spectrum produced by mutations in various genes overlaps, whereby spanning to nonallelic heterogeneity.

Phenocopies are thus produced, which are incidents in which nongenetic diseases simulate a genetic disorder.

# Etiology

**Cause******

Muscular dystrophy most often results from defective or absent glycoproteins in the muscle membrane.

**Effect**

Modes of Inheritance
********

- **Autosomal Dominant, Autosomal Recessive, X-Linked:**Emery-Dreifuss (EDMD)

- **Autosomal Dominant, Autosomal Recessive:**Limb-Girdle (Dysferlinopathy, Erb), Pelvifemoral, Scapulohumeral

- **Autosomal Dominant:** Facioscapulohumeral (Landouzy-Dejerine), Late-Onset Distal (>40 Years old), Myotonic, Oculopharyngeal, Scapuloperoneal

- **Autosomal Recessive: **Congenital, Early Onset Distal (<40 years old)

- **X-Linked:** Becker (Benign Pseudohypertrophic), Duchenne (pseudohypertrophic)

**Autosomal Dominant, Autosomal Recessive, X-Linked Inheritance**

- Emery-Dreifuss (EDMD)

**Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy: **Caused by an X-linked recessive defect in nuclear protein emerin at the Xq27-28 position.

**Autosomal Dominant, Autosomal Recessive Inheritance**

- Limb-Girdle (Erb)

- 
Pelvifemoral *

- 
Scapulohumeral *

**Limb-Girdle (Erb) Muscular Dystrophy: **The majority are autosomal recessive but can be autosomal dominant.

LGMB 1B results from by lamin A/C gene deletion.

**Autosomal Dominant Inheritance**

- Facioscapulohumeral (Landouzy-Dejerine)

- 
Late-Onset Distal (>40 Years old) *

- Myotonic

- Oculopharyngeal

- 
Scapuloperoneal *

**Facioscapulohumeral (FSHD) Muscular Dystrophy: **Caused by an autosomal dominant deletion of 3.3 kb repeat on chromosome 4.

**Myotonic Muscular Dystrophy: **Myotonic muscular dystrophy (or simply Myotonic dystrophy) results from the impaired expression of the Dystrophia Myotonica Protein Kinase (DMPK).

Clinical severity increases as the number of nucleotide repeats increases; some cases can be in the thousands.

**Oculopharyngeal Muscular Dystrophy: **Age of onset is approximately 30 to 40 years of age. Distribution of involved muscles includes the extraocular and pharyngeal muscles. Caused by an autosomal dominant GCG trinucleotide repeat resulting in deficient mRNA transfer from the nucleus.

**Autosomal****Recessive Inheritance**

- Congenital

- 
Early Onset Distal (<40 years old) *

**Congenital Muscular Dystrophy: **Caused by a mutation of the sarcolemmal protein Merosin gene, deficiencies or mutations in laminin-alpha 2, collagen type VI, integrin-alpha 7, and glycosyltransferases.

**X-Linked Inheritance**

- Becker (benign pseudohypertrophic)

- Duchenne (pseudohypertrophic)

**Becker Muscular Dystrophy: **Caused by a mutation of muscle protein dystrophin gene, which codes for the protein dystrophin, with 79 exons, by far the largest gene known in humans.

**Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy: **Caused by a mutation of the dystrophin gene, located on the small arm (p) of the X chromosome at the Xp21 position.

Female Duchenne muscular dystrophy results from an error in female somatic cells whereby one X-chromosome becomes inactivated at an early stage, creating a mosaic representation of heterozygous X-linked genes. This condition generally is sufficient to protect female heterozygotes from X-linked disorders that affect males. However, X-inactivation in the female carrier of an X-autosome translocation can sometimes create a lethal genetic imbalance in half of the body's cells, causing those cells to die. The result is that the same X-chromosome expresses in every cell, and if that chromosome carries a disease allele, the individual can express the X-linked disease like a male, which explains some female cases of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

* A subtype or classification that is beyond the scope of the article but included for the sake of completeness.

# Epidemiology

- Most Common Childhood Muscular Dystrophy: Duchenne.[38]

- Most Common Adult Muscular Dystrophy: Myotonic.

- Prevalence Of Muscular Dystrophy (General Population): 16 to 25.1 per 100,000.

- Frequency Of Muscular Dystrophy (General Population): 1 per 3,000 to 8,000.

- Incidence Of Muscular Dystrophy (Male Births): 1 per 5,000 or 200 per 1,000,000.

**Becker Muscular Dystrophy**

- Prevalence (General Population): 4.78 per 100,000.

- Frequency (Live Male Births): 1 per 18,000.

- Incidence (Live Male Births): 1 per 5618.

**Congenital Muscular Dystrophy**

- Prevalence (General Population): 0.99 per 100,000.

- Prevalence (Children): 0.82 Per 100,000.

- Prevalence (General Population-Italy): 1 per 16,000.

- Incidence (General Population-Italy): 0.563 per 100,000.

**Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy**

- Prevalence (General Population): 4.78 per 100,000.

- Frequency (General Population): 13 to 33 per 100,000.

- Frequency (Males): 1 per 3,500.

- Incidence (Live Male Births): 1 per 5,136.

**Emerry-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy**

- Prevalence (General Population): 0.39 per 100,000.

- Prevalence (Children): 0.22 per 100,000.

**Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy**

- Prevalence (General Population): 3.95 per 100,000.

- Prevalence (Children): 0.29 per 100,000.

**Limb-Girdle (Erb) Muscular Dystrophy**

- Prevalence (General Population): 1.63 per 100,000.

- Prevalence (Children): 0.48 per 100,000.

**Myotonic Muscular Dystrophy**

- Prevalence (General Population): 8.26 per 100,000.

- Prevalence (Children): 1.41 per 100,000.

**Oculopharyngeal Muscular Dystrophy**

- Prevalence (General Population): 0.13 per 100,000.

*US, England, Australia, & Canada unless otherwise specified*

# Pathophysiology

**Description**

- Muscle contraction

- Dystrophin

- Dystrophin-glycoprotein complex

**Muscle Contraction: **It is essential first to understand the underlying physiology of muscle cell function. The sliding filament model represents muscle tension as a function that depends on the contraction of the muscle filaments; this is promoted by calcium, which, delivered from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, leads to muscle depolarization. Intracellular calcium binds to the anionic charge of troponin C, which leads to tropomyosin uprooting off of the G-actin site. Once exposed, a myosin head attaches to the presented G-actin site generating a pivot that requires energy in the form of ATP (adenosine triphosphate) to function. This pivot lets filaments made of actin to slide past filaments made of myosin, which achieves muscle shortening, which transfers to the muscle cell's glycoprotein rich cytoskeleton.

**Dystrophin: **Dystrophin is restricted to the cytoplasmic surface of the muscle fiber plasma membrane and connects the internal cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix via glycoproteins that traverse the plasma membrane.

**Dystrophin-Glycoprotein Complex: **This protein meshwork seems to strengthen the sarcolemma.

**Most Common Findings**

- Chronic respiratory infections precipitated by weakness in the smooth muscle of bronchioles.

- Impotence caused by gonadal atrophy, which is characteristically associated with myotonic dystrophy.

- It is common to possess dysphagia, which is esophageal muscle involvement.

- Myotonia is a term that describes the inability to relax muscles, which classically manifests as an inability to loosen one's grip or release a handshake.

- As a pediatric disease, parents will often complain that their child is clumsy or becomes extremely weak quickly.

- Gower sign is when subjects try to stand from a supine position, they "march" their hands and feet to each other).

- Weakness and stiffness of distal muscles are usually the presenting symptoms in adolescents with myotonic dystrophy.

# Toxicokinetics

**Malignant Hyperthermia: **This is a unique and life-threatening myopathy that can occur in genetically susceptive individuals following exposure to triggering factors, usually halogenated anesthetic gases like halothane, isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane.

Patients with dystrophinopathies produce rhabdomyolysis if exposed to those agents, and many scholars consider it reasonable to utilize non-triggering agents exclusively. Malignant hyperthermia happens because of the irregular calcium control correlated with dytrohpinopathies.

Dysregulated calcium release of the sarcoplasmic reticulum mixed with anesthetic-induced interference of calcium reuptake ends in constant muscle contraction, prolonged aerobic and anaerobic metabolism, driving up carbon dioxide production, elevated end-tidal carbon dioxide, and tachycardia in these individuals who are unable to raise their alveolar minute volume properly. This hypermetabolism generates an exponentially dangerous amount of heat. So much so that the amount of heat appearing overwhelms the body's capacity to dissipate this heat.

# History and Physical

**Cardiovascular****Findings**

- Arrhythmias

- Congestive heart failure

- Dilated cardiomyopathy

**Arrhythmias: **Cardiac arrhythmias are even more significant in patients with muscular dystrophy. The typical electrocardiogram (ECG) shows increased net RS in lead V1; deep, narrow Q waves from the precordial leads, with tall right precordial R waves in V1.

**Congestive Heart Failure: **Congestive heart failure seldom occurs except with severe stress, such as pneumonia.

**Dilated Cardiomyopathy: **Genetic dilated cardiomyopathies account for 30 to 40% of cases of nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathies.

**Musculoskeletal****Findings**

- Contractures

- Delayed motor milestones

- Expressionless Facies

- Fractures

- Gait instability

- Gower's sign

- Muscle wasting

- Myotonia

- Pseudohypertrophy

- Proximal muscle weakness

- Scoliosis

- Toe walking

**Contractures: **Most patients have joint contractures of varying degrees at elbows, hips, knees, and ankles. Contractures that present at birth are referred to as arthrogryposis. Contractures of both the heel cords and iliotibial bands manifest by age six years when toe walking is associated with a lordotic posture. joint contractures and limitations of hip flexion and extension of the knee, elbow, and wrist are made worse by prolonged sitting.

**Delayed Motor Milestones: **Duchenne muscular dystrophy is usually identified in children at approximately three years of age when the parents first notice slow motor development.

**Expressionless Facies: **The inability to close the eyes completely may be noted from early childhood. The face is expressionless, and the pouting of the lips makes whistling impossible. The muscular weakness and wasting produce a" drooping expression." In myotonic dystrophy, the face is hatchet-shaped due to the facial wasting and weakness, and there is bilateral partial ptosis. With bilateral facial palsy, although very rare, it is important to rule out all other possible diagnoses for facial weakness, including upper motor neuron and lower motor neuron disorders, with thorough diagnostic tests.

**Fractures: **Muscle weakness and inactivity, particularly once a person is in a wheelchair full time, lead to osteoporosis and pathologic fractures. If a fracture occurs, bisphosphonates may help to strengthen bone, although there are no long-term studies on safety in this population.

**Gait Instability: **The boys stumble repeatedly and have trouble keeping up with friends when playing. Running, jumping, and hopping is always abnormal.

**Gower's Sign: **This clinical sign can be evoked by asking the child to stand from a sitting position.

**Muscle Wasting: **Muscular weakness always begins in the pelvic girdle, causing a "waddling" gait.

**Myotonia: **TThe word myotonia applies to a prolonged unconscious muscle contraction demonstrated through not being able to loosen grasp. The patient may have a delay in releasing grip when shaking hands. A pause in opening and closing the fists is observable. Myotonia emerges typically at the age of 5 years and is demonstrable through percussion of the thenar eminence, jaw, and musculature of the forearm. Upon forced voluntary closures, myotonia triggers a sluggish relaxation. As muscle deterioration progresses, so does the difficulty of detecting myotonia. It is difficult for people with myotonic dystrophy to relax their grip, in particular whenever the subject is cold.

**Pseudohypertrophy:**Pseudohypertrophy of the muscle extends to the toes.

**Proximal Muscle Weakness: **Proximal muscle weakness may be remarkably apparent when contrasted to distal weakness in many of the conditions listed.

Between 8 and 10 years of age, walking may require the use of braces. Clinical instability originates in the pelvic girdle, first generating difficulty standing from the floor (Gower sign), climbing stairs, and a waddling gait as a result of the weakness in the lumbar and gluteal muscles.

Interestingly, contrary to the mechanism of weakness, proximal muscles continue to become more powerful throughout the course in myotonic dystrophy. There is, however, preferential atrophy and weakness of quadriceps muscles in myotonic dystrophy.

**Scoliosis: **Once scoliosis begins, it is relentlessly progressive. Curves of more than 20 degrees require surgical intervention to maintain pulmonary function.

**Toe Walking: **The foot assumes an equinovarus position, and the child tends to walk on the toes because of the weakness of the anterior tibial and peroneal muscles.

**Neurological Findings**

- Cognitive dysfunction

- Hypersomnia

- Seizures

- Visual disturbances

**Cognitive Dysfunction: **Mild to moderate cognitive problems are common but not universal.

**Hypersomnia: **The excessive urge to sleep and daytime somnolence is common.

**Seizures:**In merosin and FKRP deficiency, only a small number of patients have mental retardation and seizures.

**Visual Disturbances:**Ocular abnormalities due to eye muscle dysfunction lead to impaired vision.

**Other Findings**

- Bladder instability

- Cataracts

- Frontal baldness

- Generalized digestive complaints

- Gonadal atrophy and hypogonadism

- Insulin resistance

**Bladder Instability: **Bladder functions are often mildly affected with urinary urgency as a frequent symptom.

**Cataracts: **The affected individual may be referred from an ophthalmologist after a recent examination, which revealed the potential for an underlying disorder such as myotonic dystrophy (iridescent spots).

**Frontal Baldness: **This is characteristic of myotonic dystrophy, possibly due to gonadal atrophy and subsequent hypogonadism.

**Generalized Digestive Complaints: **Smooth muscle dysfunction may cause megacolon, volvulus, cramping pain, and malabsorption in the gastrointestinal tract.

**Gonadal Atrophy and Hypogonadism: **Small soft testes suggesting atrophy are associated with myotonic dystrophy leading to hypogonadism.

**Insulin Resistance: **Diabetes is commonly associated with muscular dystrophy.

**Respiratory Findings**

- Chest deformity

- Recurrent pulmonary infections

- Respiratory insufficiency

- Sleep apnea

**Chest Deformity: **The chest deformity with scoliosis impairs pulmonary function, which is already diminished by muscle weakness.

**Recurrent Pulmonary Infections: **By age 16 to 18 years, patients are predisposed to serious, sometimes fatal pulmonary infections.

**Respiratory Insufficiency: **Respiratory failure is the commonest cause of death.

**Sleep Apnea: **An increased need or desire for sleep is common, as is diminished motivation.

# Evaluation

**Laboratory Tests**

- Alanine aminotransferase (ALT, SGPT)

- Aldolase (serum)

- Arterial blood gases (ABG)

- Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)

- Creatine kinase (CK, CPK) and creatine kinase isoenzymes (CK-MB & CK-MM)

- Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)

- Urinalysis (UA)

**Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT, SGPT): **The normal range in males is 10 to 40 U/L. The normal range in females is 8 to 35 U/L; it is elevated in muscular dystrophy.

**Aldolase (Serum):**The normal range is 0 to 6 U/L. It is elevated in muscular dystrophy but decreases in later stages of muscular dystrophy.

**Arterial Blood Gases (ABG): **Normal ranges: PO2 is 75 to 100 mmHg; PCO2 is 35 to 45 mm Hg; HCO3- is 24 to 28 mEq/L; pH is 7.35 to 7.45. Respiratory acidosis can develop if there are defects in muscles involved in respiration.

**Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST):**Normal ranges from 0 to 35 U/L. Elevated in muscular dystrophy.

**Creatine Kinase (CK, CPK) and Creatine Kinase Isoenzymes (CK-MB and CK-MM): **Normal ranges from 0 to 130 U/L. Elevated in muscular dystrophy (hyperCKemia).

**Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH): **Normal ranges from 50 to 150 U/L. Elevated in muscular dystrophy. LDH 4: 3 to 10%, LDH 5: 2 to 9%.

**Urinalysis (UA): **Glucose in urine is commonly associated with muscular dystrophy due to the high incidence of diabetes mellitus within this population.

**Radiographic Tests******

- Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)

- Computerized Tomography (CT)

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI): **Coronal T1 weighted MRI may confirm the nonuniform fatty atrophy.

**Computerized Tomography (CT): **Axial CT shows denervation hypertrophy of the tensor fascia lata. The muscle becomes enlarged with an increase in intramuscular fat.

**Other Tests**

- Chromosomal analysis

- Electrocardiogram (ECG)

- Electromyography (EMG)

- Genetic testing

- Immunocytochemistry

- Muscle biopsy

- Polysomnogram

- Slit lamp

- Western blot analysis

**Chromosomal Analysis: **DNA testing for common mutations and chromosomal analysis can now rule out Down syndrome, myotonic dystrophy, and other disorders. In both Becker and Duchenne dystrophies, the DNA deletion size does not predict clinical severity.

**Electrocardiogram (ECG):**Often, patients will have annual echocardiograms to stay ahead of any developing cardiomyopathy. This study will demonstrate atrial and atrioventricular rhythm disturbances. The typical electrocardiogram shows an increased net RS in lead V1; deep, narrow Q waves in the precordial leads.

**Electromyography (EMG): **Allows assessment for denervation of muscle, myopathies, and myotonic dystrophy, motor neuron disease. EMG demonstrates features typical of myopathy.

**Genetic Testing: **A definitive diagnosis of muscular dystrophy can be established with mutation analysis on peripheral blood leukocytes.

**Immunocytochemistry: **A definitive diagnosis of muscular dystrophy can be established based on dystrophin deficiency in a biopsy of muscle tissue.

**Muscle Biopsy: **The muscle biopsy shows muscle fibers of varying sizes as well as small groups of necrotic and regenerating fibers. Connective tissue and fat replace lost muscle fibers.  Muscle biopsy usually shows nonspecific dystrophic features, although cases associated with FHL1 mutations have features of myofibrillar myopathy.

**Polysomnogram:**Excessive daytime somnolence with or without sleep apnea is not uncommon. Sleep studies, noninvasive respiratory support (biphasic positive airway pressure [BiPAP]), and treatment with modafinil may be beneficial.

**Slit Lamp: **An examination for cataracts that may be present in patients with muscular dystrophy.

**Western Blot: **A diagnosis of Duchenne dystrophy can also be made by Western blot analysis of muscle biopsy specimens, revealing abnormalities on the quantity and molecular weight of dystrophin protein. On Western blot, Becker muscular dystrophy individuals dystrophin levels will appear normal, although the protein itself is abnormal; this is in comparison to Duchenne muscular dystrophy affected individuals who have a significantly decreased dystrophin on Western blot.

# Treatment / Management

**Medical Interventions**

- Anti-arrhythmics

- Anti-epileptics

- Anti-myotonic drugs

- Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)

- Steroids

**Anti-Arrhythmics: **The pharmacological treatment of patients with a prevalent involvement of the cardiac tissue conduction relies on the use of ACE-inhibitors and appropriate antiarrhythmic drugs. In the case of atrial arrhythmias, the preference is for drugs such as antiarrhythmics (flecainide, propafenone) and beta-blockers. Amiodarone should be limited to patients who do not respond to the previous drugs, taking in mind that these are young patients, long-term therapy, and a high risk of adverse effects on the thyroid and pulmonary function.

**Anti-Epileptics: **Children need to be followed closely by neurologists. Management of epilepsy is necessary for some patients.

**Anti-Myotonics: **The pain associated with muscle rigidity is greatly alarming in the patient.

**Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs: **Treatment involves the administration of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs to decrease pain and inflammation.

**Steroids:**Glucocorticoids, administered as prednisone in a dose of 0.75 mg/kg per day, significantly slow progression of muscular dystrophy for up to 3 years.

**Golodirsen (SRP-4053):**This drug is an antisense therapy used for the treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Patients need to have a confirmed mutation of the dystrophin gene to facilitate exon 53 skipping. It is FDA approved, but the evidence to support its use is not yet well established.

**Surgical Interventions**

- Defibrillator or a cardiac pacemaker

- Contracture release

- Shoulder surgery

- Spinal correction

**Contracture Release:**Surgical release of contracture deformities is used to maintain normal function as long as possible.

**Defibrillator or Cardiac Pacemaker: **Cardiac function requires monitoring, and pacemaker placement may be a consideration if there is evidence of heart block.

**Shoulder Surgery:**Individuals with facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy may benefit from surgery to stabilize the shoulder.

**Spinal Correction:**Scoliotic surgery is an option when curves exceed 20 degrees to prolong respiratory function or walking ability or both.

**Other Interventions**

- Supportive physiotherapy

- Supportive bracing

- Supportive counseling

- Genetic counseling

In addition to pharmacologic intervention, general supportive care may be beneficial, including physical therapy, range of motion exercises, padding, skincare, orthotics, and safety awareness.

**Supportive Physiotherapy:** Treatment includes supportive physiotherapy to prevent contractures and prolong ambulation.

**Supportive Bracing: **This helps to maintain normal function as long as possible  Proper wheelchair seating is essential. Molded ankle-foot orthoses help stabilize gait in patients with foot drop.

**Supportive Counseling:
**Some forms of muscular dystrophy may be arrested for prolonged periods, and most patients remain active with a normal life expectancy.

**Genetic Counseling —**Genetic counseling is recommended.

# Differential Diagnosis

**Differential Diagnosis For Associated Signs And Symptoms**

Utilizing the following mnemonics will aid in the recall of the differential diagnoses associated with the weakness and ataxia of muscular dystrophy:

**Ataxia**(Can't Stand Very Well)

- **C**erebellar Ataxia

- **S**ensory Ataxia

- **V**estibular Ataxia

- **W**eakness

**Ataxia, Acute**(U.N.A.B.L.E. T.O. S.T.A.N.D.)

- **U**nderlying weakness (may mimic ataxia)

- **N**utritional neuropathy (vitamin B12 deficiency)

- **A**rteritis/vasculitis

- **B**asilar migraine

- **L**abyrinthitis/vestibular neuronitis

- **E**ncephalitis/infection

- **T**rauma (postconcussive)

- **O**ther (rare metabolic or genetic diseases)

- **S**troke (ischemia or hemorrhage)

- **T**oxins (drugs, toluene, mercury)

- **A**lcohol Intoxication

- **N**eoplasm/paraneoplastic syndromes

- **D**emyelination (Miller Fisher, Guillain Barre, MS)

**Ataxia, Chronic**(C.A.N.T. S.T.A.N.D.)

- **C**ongenital malformation/Chiari

- **A**utosomal recessive ataxias

- **N**utritional (vitamin B12 deficiency)

- **T**rauma (postconcussive)

- **S**troke (ischemia or hemorrhage)

- **T**oxins (drugs, toluene, mercury)

- **A**lcohol Intoxication/Autosomal dominant ataxia

- **N**eoplasm/paraneoplastic syndromes

- **D**emyelination (MS)

**Weakness, Acute**(M.I.S.S. G.I.M.P)

- **M**yelopathy (acute) / myopathy

- **I**nfection

- **S**troke

- **S**ystemic illness

- **G**uillain-Barre syndrome

- **I**atrogenic/drugs

- **M**yasthenia

- **P**aralytic toxins/periodic paralysis

**Weakness, Chronic**(G, I.' A.M. L.I.M.P, C.A.N.T. S.T.A.N.D.)

- **G**uillain-Barré syndrome

- **I**atrogenic (paralytic agents, aminoglycosides, steroids)

- **M**yopathy/myositis

- **L**ou Gehrig disease (ALS, motor neuron disease-usually gradual)

- **I**nfection (polio, botulism)

- **M**yelopathy (acute).

- **P**eriodic paralysis, porphyria, paraproteinemia

- 
**Cushing's**

- **A**rteritis/vasculitis/stroke

- **N**eoplastic (meningitis, paraneoplastic)

- **T**oxins (lead, arsenic, pufferfish, tick paralysis)

- * Acute/subacute, bilateral with minimal sensory involvement

- **S**ystemic illness (anemia)

- **T**hyroid

- 
**Addison's**

- **N**euromuscular junction disease (Myasthenia, Lambert-Eaton syndrome)

- **D**iabetic amyotrophy

**Diseases Or Conditions Potentially Mistaken For This Disease**

- Acid maltase deficiency

- Drug-induced myopathy

- Dermatomyositis sine dermatitis

- Endocrinopathy

- "Fatigue" syndromes

- Inclusion body myositis

- Late-onset spinal muscular atrophy

- McArdle's deficiency (myophosphorylase deficiency)

- Metabolic myopathies

- Motor neuron disease

- Neurogenic disorders

- Polymyositis

**Diseases Or Conditions That Must Be Ruled Out**

While muscular dystrophy is not a diagnosis of exclusion, it is often confused for several diseases due to their overlapping etiologies. The clinician must exclude the following diseases in a patient with a muscular disorder, which can otherwise cause significant morbidity and mortality:

- Adrenal insufficiency

- Electrolyte imbalance: sodium, potassium, and magnesium

- Hypercalcemia

- Porphyrias

- Rabies

- Complicated migraine

- Postictal (Todd's) paralysis

- Hypoglycemia

Acute spastic paraparesis is a medical emergency. The clinician should strongly suspect myasthenia gravis in any patient who reports excessive weakness at the end of the day. Consider Pancoast tumor of the lung in a patient presenting with upper limb weakness and painful neuropathy secondary to neoplastic infiltration of the lower trunk of the brachial plexus, particularly when Horner syndrome is present. Paraneoplastic syndromes must also merit consideration in the diagnosis. Rule out lesions of extrapyramidal tracts or cerebellar pathways which may also present as weakness, but without objective evidence of decreased muscle strength.

An acute onset gait disorder is likely to be due to acute systemic decompensation; a careful, systematic evaluation can exclude such catastrophic presentations. It is not advisable to attribute gait disorder to one single disease. An abnormal gait may be a risk factor for falls. Difficulty with getting out of a chair without arm support and initiate movement suggests limb-girdle dystrophy.

Gait abnormalities can indicate a serious medical emergency, especially when the problem is associated with any of these additional symptoms:

- Headache (raised intracranial pressure)

- Nausea or vomiting

- Decreased alertness

- Impaired coordination presenting on only one side of the body

- Recent viral illness/immunization (Guillain-Barré syndrome)

- Trauma.

**Discussion**

Muscular dystrophy may be mistaken for polymyositis, most often when the duration of symptoms appears to be short. The pattern of weakness may be very helpful in making a distinction. Secondary inflammatory infiltrates may cause pathological confusion, especially in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy and facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy.

**Are Reflexes Hypoactive? **The presence of hypoactive reflexes would suggest myotonic dystrophy, tabes dorsalis, and progressive muscular atrophy.

**Is There Any Pain Present? **The typical features of muscle disease are weakness, potentially relative to exercise, and, on occasions, muscle pain (myalgia). Conversely, a short history of painful weakness in adulthood, would suggest an inflammatory myositis.

**Is The Problem Acute Or Chronic? **The age and rate of progression are often helpful in determining the type of muscle disease. Progressive slow weakness absent pain from childhood would suggest degenerative muscular dystrophy. Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and Bethlem myopathy cause fixed contractors that occur early and represent distinctive features of these diseases.

**Is Weakness Primarily Distal Or Proximal? **The distribution of weakness is also of assistance in defining the likely type of muscle disease, proximal arm, and leg weakness present in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy.

**Is The Weakness Localized Or Diffuse? **Muscle weakness may be from a myopathy such as dermatomyositis, an inflammatory disease such as rheumatoid arthritis, a neurologic disorder such as Guillain-Barré syndrome, or an infection such as Lyme disease or trichinosis.

**Are There Any Focal Neurological Lesions?**Myotonic dystrophy, myasthenia gravis, and progressive muscular atrophy may present with partial ptosis.

# Prognosis

**Morbidity**

People with dystrophies having significant heart involvement may nonetheless have almost average life spans, provided that cardiac complications are monitored and aggressively treated.

**Mortality**

Duchenne muscular dystrophy can survive around 20 years, but the condition is fatal in 100% of cases.

# Complications

**Considerations**

- Anesthesia risk

- Bone demineralization

- Cardiopulmonary disease

- Disability

**Anesthesia Risk:**Patients with muscular dystrophy tend to do poorly after the administration of general anesthetic and will require intensive postoperative observation.

**Bone Demineralization:**Osteopenia and osteoporosis due to decreased mobilization and immobilization; this can give rise to fractures and scoliosis.

**Cardiopulmonary Disease:**Frequent follow-up to eliminate secondary complications such as cardiopulmonary disease or cardiac failure due to cardiomyopathy.

**Disability: **Disability and dependence on walking aids like wheelchairs due to muscular injuries and contractures.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

**Skills**

Adolescents with muscular dystrophy need an interprofessional plan of care, including consideration to heart and breathing difficulties, weight loss/gain, constipation, rehabilitative/developmental difficulties, psychosocial requirements, and neurologic and orthopedic problems.

**Strategy**

A regulated method for gathering and communicating data helps to support overall performance across programs, sites, and organizations.

**Ethics and****Responsibilities**

Primary care providers may serve as the arbiter of treatment for the various aspects of the disease as well as other problems. Therefore, all other team members now have one centralized point of contact to align with when making decisions on supportive and assistive measures. This point is important because proper implementation and monitoring is a crucial component of management.

**Interprofessional****Communication**

Another crucial aspect to the management of patients with muscular dystrophy, especially for those with chronic, progressive, and severe forms, relates to patients' need to be informed about research efforts for "their" disease. Because of Internet access and lay support groups, patients today are more familiarized with their disease than ever before. They want to know about current research and relevant ongoing clinical trials, the role of alternative therapies, and other issues and questions.

All members of the healthcare team must therefore always be ready to provide solid information about a patient's condition by keeping up with fellow team members about what each member's profession can offer in terms of information. This approach facilitates communication that centers around the patient and less around the disease of a given patient and may involve something as simple as providing patients with information on support groups or informative websites. Patients should be encouraged to participate as much as deemed feasible and practical. It is crucial to help patients and their families shift out of a passive mindset and realize that they have a role in their treatment too.

**Care Coordination**

Effective management will require an interprofessional approach that includes a diverse team of health care professionals.: Strength team members are those aimed at improving strength (e.g., prednisone, stretching). Supportive team members are those who focus on the problems resulting directly from muscle weakness such as respiratory distress. Symptomatic team members are those whose aim is to treat issues that are not directly related to muscle disease but are part of the condition. Examples include cardiac arrhythmias in myotonic dystrophy; and psychological team members whose goal is to improve the patient's mental outlook and provide up to date information about their diseases. An interprofessional team member approach offers a useful conceptual framework and allows for proper delegation of responsibilities.