Relevant clinical history and physical examination are the initial and most important steps in bone tumor evaluation. The patient may present with pain, mass or incidental radiographic finding in radiograph taken for some other purpose. Benign bone lesions are mostly asymptomatic. They are often incidentally diagnosed on imaging. They may present with pain. Pain may be initially activity-related or due to periostitis. Periostitis is the reaction of bone adjacent to the lesion; they are present in most of the bone tumors. Benign lytic bone lesions showing no periostitis or pain need separate mention: fibrous dysplasia, enchondroma, non-ossifying fibroma, and solitary bone cyst. In the case of malignant bone tumors like primary or metastasis pain may be persistent, unrelated to activity due to the involvement of neurovascular structures. Soft tissue tumors often present as a mass except for nerve sheath tumors which present as pain.

Although some bone tumors show a sex predilection like ABC and GCT are more common in females, this rarely makes any difference in the diagnosis and management of tumors.

Physical examination should include a general examination which includes the overall health of the patient, any other abnormality or findings other than the region of interest like cafe-au-lait spots in the skin must be noted. Specific examination of the region interest which includes inspection, palpation, change with mobility, inspection of adjacent structures, and other relevant examinations.