Cultural competence in a healthcare setting is as important as any other life-saving medical device or procedure, as it is the first brick of building compassion. It is important to remember that data is never representative of an individual; however, when a group of people reports certain trends about an issue, it becomes a duty for every individual involved to take united actions to resolve such issues.

- Racial minorities such as the AI/AN population are more likely to acquire chronic health conditions.

- Patients with chronic conditions visit healthcare facilities more than other people, increasing their interaction with physicians and healthcare providers.

- Patients will face deleterious health results if projects are not established to enhance culturally competent outcomes for physicians and providers

- Lack of cultural competency will deter communication quality between the patients and physicians, increasing the risk of misdiagnosis and loss of public trust.

- Ethnic minorities have previously reported less connection with physicians, minimal involvement in medical decisions, and low satisfaction.

The acceptance of diversity and multiculturalism enhances physician-patient interaction and improves physicians' image as caring professionals overall. Physicians learn as medical students that every case is presented first by age, then by gender, and then often by race. These details are crucial to represent what the individual stands for.

Every individual comes to the physician with a unique slate; the physician must design an individualized treatment plan based on those concrete details; this, however, is a textbook procedure. On a day-to-day basis, treatment protocols blur as all human beings belong to the same species, so the science is approximately the same for treating everyone; especially on a general caregiving level where the patient count is higher than other sectors, it can sometimes become tempting for physicians to focus on symptomatic treatment than consider the patient as a whole. This temptation, however, must be avoided.