As with ischemic strokes, lacunar infarcts usually present with sudden onset neurological deficits. However, a subset of lacunar infarctions may present in a stepwise pattern and are known to worsen even during admission. Lacunar infarcts are common in the deep brain nuclei, including the thalamus, basal ganglia, pons, and white matter of the internal capsule. Lacunar infarcts can be asymptomatic and are noted on imaging as incidental findings. Silent lacunar infarcts are more common than symptomatic lacunar infarcts.

Clinical presentation depends on the area of brain involvement. Lacunar infarcts in the centrum semiovale may present without symptoms and can be found incidentally on brain imaging for some other cause. However, certain lacunar infarcts, like in the posterior limb of the internal capsule or the pons, can present with severe hemiplegia. Often, cortical findings, such as neglect, visual disturbances, aphasia, and behavioral changes, are absent in the clinical presentation of lacunar stroke as they occur in subcortical areas of the brain.

Lacunar strokes seldom affect memory, language, and judgment. There are about 20 different types of lacunar syndromes described in the literature. The most common lacunar syndromes are described below:

- Pure motor hemiparesis involves the posterior limb of the internal capsule, corona radiata. This type presents with contralateral hemiparesis of the face, arm, and leg. Mild dysarthria may be present with the absence of sensory symptoms. These are the most common lacunar syndromes. They account for 45% of cases of lacunar strokes. Cortical signs like aphasia, cognitive deficit, or visual symptoms are always absent. Pure motor stroke can be a combination of weakness in the arm, leg, or face on one side or any of these parts alone.

- Ataxic hemiparesis comprises 10 to 18% of cases. It involves the internal capsule, pons, or corona radiata. It causes hemiparesis of the contralateral face and leg and ataxia of the contralateral limb. Ataxia is the prominent feature of this stroke.

- Pure sensory stroke involves the thalamus or corona radiata; it presents with the absent or abnormal sensation of the contralateral of the face, arm, and leg. It accounts for 7% of cases of lacunar strokes. The sensations affected are pain, temperature, touch, pressure, vision, hearing, and taste. A common form of thalamic lacunar stroke is known as Dejerine Roussy syndrome.

- Dysarthria: clumsy hand syndrome involves the pons or internal capsule and presents with dysarthria and problems pronouncing words due to voice box muscle weakness, including tongue, larynx, and other facial muscle weakness. Contralateral clumsiness of the upper extremity is present with preserved motor strength. There may be difficulty with subtle fine movements such as writing or tying a shoelace.

- A sensory: motor stroke involves the thalamus, internal capsule, or putamen-capsule-caudate and presents clinically with a combination of contralateral sensory and motor loss. Sensory-motor lacunar strokes are the second most common type of lacunar strokes. They account for 20% of cases.

Most penetrating branches arise from the middle cerebral artery; the intracranial non-stenotic atheroma in the large vessel may cause a lacunar stroke by blocking the penetrating branch artery at its takeoff point.

Neurological fluctuation and deterioration is a common feature of subcortical strokes. More than 40% with subcortical infarct deteriorate neurologically within the first week of onset of stroke symptoms. One-third of the deteriorated patients reverse spontaneously. The rest of them suffer a physical disability.