Histological visualization of blood vessels is most commonly with routine hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. The vessel specimen gets fixed with a formalin solution for 24 to 48 hours, which preserves tissue structure. It then gets embedded in paraffin wax for easier sectioning. This process first involves dehydrating the specimen with alcohol changes, and further removing the alcohol with xylene. After dehydration, the specimen gets placed in a paraffin mold with enough paraffin wax to anchor the section. Once the specimen gets anchored in the paraffin, a cassette top is placed over the mold and filled with paraffin, which rapidly cools. Next, the vessel specimen is processed by a rotary microtome sectioning of the vessel into very thin slices for visualization. The sectioning is crucial in allowing light from the microscope to pass through. After the specimen is fixed and sectioned, it is de-waxed by rinsing through progressive changes of alcohol. The specimen is then rinsed in water to hydrate the cells for penetration by reagents. The specimen then gets stained with hematoxylin combined with the mordant aluminum salt in solution. At this point, the nuclei of the tunics will be stained a red color. The specimen is then rinsed in water, a process known as “bluing.” By exposure to a weakly alkaline solution, the hematoxylin converts to a dark blue color. The specimen gets checked to see if the nuclei have taken up the proper stain and show contrast. The tissue is then de-stained with weak acid alcohol and again rinsed with water for further “bluing.” The specimen then gets counterstained with either aqueous or alcoholic eosin Y, which shades non-nuclear elements pink. The specimen passes through several changes of alcohol to dehydrate it. This alcohol must be removed again via rinsing in xylene in which it is miscible. After the xylene rinse, the result is a transparent slide ready for light microscopy.

Verhoeff stain is an option to visualize elastic tissue in the vessel wall. This process follows the same basic principles outlined above but differs as to which stains get used. Instead, the staining uses hematoxylin, iron (III) chloride, and iodine. The specimen is then counterstained with picric acid and fuschsin to stain collagen for contrast against the hematoxylin stained elastin.

To prepare a large section of the vessel, the alternative method of preparing vessels is the en face preparation allows for a wide area of blood vessel surface visualization. This process is to analyze large vessels like the aorta and to visualize the organization of the endothelial cells that line the lumen. Using en face preparation, one can pinpoint specific locations of lesions and commonly combines with immunofluorescent staining.