# Introduction

Exposing the gingiva when smiling up to some extent provides a youthful look and is cosmetically appealing.

The critical element in managing a gummy smile is identifying its etiology, which determines the treatment plan and outcomes. A gummy smile may result from various disorders, including a short or hypermobile upper lip, altered passive eruption, vertical maxillary excess (VME), dentoalveolar extrusion, and gingival hyperplasia, but VME is one of its most common causes.

# Etiology

A gummy smile is multifactorial in etiology, and more than one factor can present simultaneously. Professionals must accurately identify the cause of the condition since the treatment differs according to the etiology.

- Short upper lip length

- Hypermobile upper lip

- Altered passive eruption

- Gingival hyperplasia

- Vertical maxillary excess (VME)

- Dentoalveolar extrusion

**Vertical Maxillary Excess (VME)**

Vertical maxillary excess is the overgrowth of the maxillary bone in the vertical plane that gives an elongated appearance to the lower half of the face.

Excessive gingival display results from an occlusal plane that is lower than expected. The lower lip covering the incisal edges of the upper canines and premolars is almost a pathognomonic feature of the disorder. In VME, the anterior occlusal plane continues without interruption with the posterior occlusal plane, which differs from the overeruption of incisors.

**Altered Passive Eruption**

Teeth erupt in an active phase, where the tooth reaches its occlusal position, and a passive phase, where the gingival tissues migrate apically, exposing the crown.

Altered passive eruption is the gingival tissue's incapacity to migrate apically past stage 2.

Vital elements to diagnosing altered passive eruption include ruling out a hypermobile lip and checking the CEJ and alveolar crest location. The lips should be examined while resting and smiling. In a hyperactive lip, a translational movement from rest can be up to 10 mm, while in a normal lip activity, between 6 and 8 mm.

The alveolar crest level is the same as in a healthy condition: at the level of 1 to 2 mm apical to the CEJ.

**Anterior Dentoalveolar Extrusion**

Anterior dentoalveolar extrusion is the overeruption of the maxillary incisors, resulting in excessive gingival display due to a more coronal position of the gingival margins.

# Epidemiology

Around 10% of the population between 20 and 30 years of age present excessive gingival display, which is more prevalent in women.

# History and Physical

Pleasing smiles are found to show: at least the second premolars, little upper gingiva, no gingival recession with healthy interdental papillae filling all interdental areas;

Some authors define a gummy smile as more than 3 to 4 mm of exposed gingival tissue in a smile, whereas others consider more than 2 mm of gingival exposure as excessive.

Table 1. Etiology of excessive gingival display organized according to the affected tissue.

# Evaluation

**Medical History**

The patient’s age indicates the dentition’s eruptive stage, which helps to identify an altered passive eruption. Gingival hyperplasia may be seen in patients taking anticonvulsants, calcium channels blockers, or immunosuppressive drugs after organ transplant.

**Facial Analysis**

The face must be evaluated in the frontal and lateral plane to identify any anomalies or vertical maxillary excess.

**Lip Analysis (static and dynamic)**

When the cause of the gummy smile is in the lips, it can come from a short lip, a hypermobile lip, or both.

The upper lip length corresponds to the distance between the subnasale to the upper lip stomion (lower border of the upper lip). The average length is 20 to 24 mm in young adults and rises with age.

A hypermobile lip (also known as hyperactive lip) results from increased activity of the upper lip elevator muscles when smiling.

**Display of the Upper Central Incisors at Rest**

It must be 3 to 4 mm for young women and 2 mm for young men; however, it decreases with age.

**Interlabial Distance at Rest**

The normal interlabial distance at rest ranges from 0 to 4 mm.

**Smile Line**

The smile line is defined as the upper lip position concerning the upper incisors and gingiva during a natural full smile.

**Periodontal Examination**

The periodontal examination includes measuring the width and thickness of the attached gingiva, the clinical and attachment level, the crestal bone level concerning the CEJ, and probing depths.

# Treatment / Management

- Hyaluronic acid

- Botulin toxin

- Modified lip repositioning

- Gingivectomy

- Orthodontic treatment

- Orthognathic surgery

The treatment modalities vary according to the etiology of the gummy smile - the key is accurately recognizing the cause of the pathology. In some cases, the gummy smile results from more than one factor, e.g., vertical maxillary excess and hypermobile lip, and a combination of techniques can be implemented. Less invasive treatment options include botulin toxin injection and a newer alternative: hyaluronic acid injection; the surgical management ranges from gingivectomy, modified lip repositioning, and orthognathic surgery, which is reserved for severe VME as it carries high rates of morbidity and requires hospitalization.

**Gingivectomy**

Crown lengthening with or without bony resection, called gingivectomy, removes the excessive gingival tissue and reinsert the attachment apparatus.

The decision of performing only gingivectomy or gingivectomy with osseous resection depends on the amount of biological width. A gingivectomy is sufficient to resolve a gummy smile when there are adequate osseous levels and attached gingiva, and the gingival tissue from bone to gingival crest is more than 3 mm.

**Lip Repositioning Surgery**

Lip repositioning surgery aims at narrowing the vestibule and reducing the gingival display by restricting the muscle pull.

Lip repositioning surgery is indicated in mild VME and upper hypermobile lip.

**Hyaluronic Acid Infiltration**

In 2018, Diaspro et al.

The infiltration point corresponds to the most cranial part of the nasolabial fold, at around 3 mm lateral to the wing of the alar cartilage (the same anatomical site where it is commonly recommended to inject botulin toxin).

Hyaluronic acid infiltration is a valid technique that can be an alternative to botulin toxin injection, although it is not appropriate for all cases of excessive gingival display.

**Botulin Toxin A Injection**

Botulin toxin induces muscle paralysis by inhibiting the presynaptic release of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction.

The toxin infiltrates into the levator labii superioris alaque nasi (LLSAN) muscles and levator labii superioris on both sides of the face.

**Orthognathic Surgery**

Dentoalveolar or orthognathic surgery becomes the only alternative in some severe cases of vertical maxillary excess: LeFort osteotomy, or maxillo-mandibular reposition, combining LeFort and Obwegeser mandibular osteotomy and surgical orthodontic treatment.

# Differential Diagnosis

The excessive gingival display does not have a differential diagnosis; however, it is essential to differentiate between the conditions that cause the gingival overexposure.

# Prognosis

Most cases of gummy smiles can significantly improve with the available treatment alternatives, but the amount of reduction of the gingival excess will depend on its cause. Some cases will easily resolve with less invasive procedures – botulin toxin, hyaluronic acid – but with results only last for some months. Others will require surgery, achieving permanent results.

# Complications

An excessive gingival display is an aesthetic concern that interferes with patients’ self-esteem and psychological status.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

- Excessive gingival display is considered an aesthetic problem.

- The treatment is determined by the cause of the excessive display.

- It is important to manage patients' expectations regarding treatment results.

- Patients must be aware of possible complications of treatment and consent to it.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An attractive smile results from a harmonious relationship between the teeth, the extent of the gingival display, and the lip framing while smiling.