Causes of Achilles tendon rupture include sudden forced plantar flexion of the foot, direct trauma, and long-standing tendinopathy or intratendinous degenerative conditions. Sports often associated with Achilles tendon rupture include diving, tennis, basketball, and track. Risk factors for a rupture of the Achilles tendon include poor conditioning before exercise, prolonged use of corticosteroids, overexertion, and the use of quinolone antibiotics. The Achilles tendon rupture usually tends to occur about two to four cm above the calcaneal insertion of the tendon. In right-handed individuals, the left Achilles tendon is most likely to rupture and vice versa.

The exact cause of Achilles tendon injury appears to be multifactorial. The injury is most common in cyclists, runners, volleyball players, and gymnasts. When the ankle is subject to extreme pronation, it places enormous stress on the tendon, leading to injury. In cyclists, the combination of low saddle height and extreme dorsiflexion during pedaling may also be a factor in an overuse injury.

**Systemic Factors**

Systemic diseases that may be associated with Achilles tendon injuries include the following:

- Chronic renal failure

- Collagen deficiency

- Diabetes mellitus

- Gout

- Infections

- Lupus

- Parathyroid disorders

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Thyroid disorders

Foot problems that increase the risk of Achilles tendon injuries include the following:

- Cavus foot

- Insufficient gastroc-soleus flexibility and strength

- limited ability to perform ankle dorsiflexion

- Tibia vara

- Varus alignment with functional hyperpronation

Achilles tendon rupture is often more common in people with blood group O. Further, anyone with a family history of tendon rupture is also at a high risk of developing Achilles tendon rupture at some point in their life.