The most important contributing factor to the development of a Bezold's abscess is the presence of a well-aerated and pneumatized mastoid bone. At birth, the mastoid bone consists mainly of an antral cell. From this antral cell, air cells begin to develop until there is complete pneumatization of the mastoid bone around the age of five. As the process of pneumatization of the mastoid bone occurs, the surrounding walls of the mastoid bone thin, particularly at the tip of the mastoid bone on its medial surface along the incisura digastrica (digastric groove), where the digastric muscle attaches. If the infection is left unchecked, the outer walls of the mastoid tip become involved with the spread of the infection along the sternocleidomastoid muscle, the trapezius, and splenius capitis muscles. Secretions and bacteria can enter the middle ear through the eustachian tube and from the middle ear can pass directly into the mastoid bone through a small opening the aditus ad antrum. During an inflammatory process (suppurative otitis media), obstruction of the aditus ad antrum occurs. Purulent secretions cannot escape and will accumulate in the mastoid bone. The pressure created by this purulent material with its enzymatic activity within the mastoid bone causes osteitis and osteonecrosis of the fragile pneumatized air cells further thinning the walls of the mastoid bone. This stage is called coalescent mastoiditis. The inflammatory process can spread in many directions. If it spreads inferiorly towards the mastoid tip, the purulent material will eventually erode the very thin bone along the digastric ridge at the insertion of the digastric muscle. Consequently, a purulent material will spread into the neck between the digastric and sternocleidomastoid muscles.