Primary osteoporosis is related to the aging process in conjunction with decreasing sex hormones. The bones demonstrate deterioration in microarchitecture, leading to loss of bone mineral density and increased risk of a fracture. Other diseases or their treatments cause secondary osteoporosis. Men are much more likely than women to have secondary osteoporosis. Medications that can lead to secondary osteoporosis include glucocorticoids and anti-epileptics. Other medications such as chemotherapy agents, proton pump inhibitors, and thiazolidines are less well studied but suspected to also contribute to osteoporosis.

Disease states that can cause osteoporosis include hyperparathyroidism, anorexia, malabsorption, hyperthyroidism, or overtreatment of hypothyroidism, chronic renal failure, Cushing, and any disease that can lead to long-term immobilization. Secondary amenorrhea for more than one year from various causes, including non-estrogen hormonal therapy, low body weight, and excessive exercise, can also lead to rapid loss of bone mass.

Risk factors for osteoporosis include increasing age, bodyweight of under 128 pounds, smoking, family history of osteoporosis, white or Asian race, early menopause, low levels of physical activity, and a personal history of a fracture from a ground-level fall or minor trauma after the age of forty.

The risk of fracture is high in the following:

- Advanced age

- Prior history of a fracture

- Female gender

- Use of corticosteroids

- Low body mass index

- Smoker

- Secondary osteoporosis

- Intake of alcohol