**Acute Unilateral Vestibular Loss**

While the cause of acute vestibular dysfunction correlates with reactivation of a viral infection, it is unknown. However, unilateral loss of function of the vestibular nucleus is the most severe condition that occurs within the vestibular apparatus. The decrease in the firing rate of the compromised side causes a permanent rotation of the head to the healthy side, causing a slow-phase drift of the eyes toward the side of the lesion, with a rapid quick-phase eye movement back towards the healthy side.

Clinically, this leads to horizontal-torsional nystagmus, rotational vertigo, and postural imbalance. The direction of the quick-phase characterizes the direction of the nystagmus. For example, a leftward quick-phase would be left-beating nystagmus. The imbalance and characteristic spontaneous nystagmus resolve within days to weeks due to restoration of activity in the lesioned side.

**Wallenberg Syndrome**

Wallenberg syndrome, also known as the lateral medullary syndrome, is due to an occlusion of the vertebral artery or the PICA. The PICA supplies the medial portion of the posterior cerebellum and the posterolateral medulla, which includes the vestibular complex.

The involvement of the cerebellum leads to ipsilateral ataxia and falling toward the affected side. The involvement of other parts of the medulla leads to dysphagia, hoarseness, and ipsilateral Horner syndrome. On the contralateral side, the patient may present with spinothalamic sensory loss and mild hemiparesis.