**Brain Death**

Confirmation of brain death in nuclear cerebral perfusion imaging is most commonly performed with SPECT by using a brain-binding perfusion agent such as Tc99m-HMPAO or Tc99m-ECD. Most protocols involve obtaining dynamic planar images during radiopharmaceutical injection in the angiographic phase, followed by static planar images of the brain. Three-dimensional SPECT images are commonly obtained in addition to dynamic and planar images to determine if areas of apparently increased radiotracer activity on planar images are truly within the brain or in the adjacent scalp.

On dynamic images, patients who have undergone brain death will demonstrate blood flow in the internal carotids, which terminates at the skull base due to increased cerebral edema and tamponade of the intracerebral arterial system. On static planar images, patients with brain death will exhibit decreased radiotracer activity throughout the brain as there is significantly decreased or absent perfusion. Redistribution of blood flow into the external carotid arteries causes increased radiotracer distribution to the arteries of the face and nose, resulting in the characteristic "hot nose" sign (Figure 1).

PET could, in theory, be used for brain death examinations but has not gained widespread use due to the short half-lives of radiotracers and the degree of coordination required to perform PET examinations.

**Acute Stroke**

SPECT brain-binding perfusion agents such as Tc99m-HMPAO and Tc99m-ECD are commonly used in the setting of acute stroke. Tc99m-ECD has the added benefit of having higher gray-to-white matter differentiation. In PET cerebral perfusion, intravenous oxygen-15 labeled water is commonly used as a perfusion radiotracer, while inhaled C15O can be used for estimates of CBV.

Inhaled 15O can be used to measure rOEF and cMRO2. Because of the tight connection between cerebral perfusion and glucose metabolism, F-18 FDG PET examinations can also be used to identify ischemic brain tissue.

SPECT cerebral perfusion scans can help identify patients who will benefit from intravenous thrombolysis and patients who have a high risk of hemorrhagic conversion in response to intravenous thrombolysis. Generally speaking, areas of the brain with a CBF greater than 55% of the cerebellum tend to benefit from intravenous thrombolysis even if given outside of a 6-hour window. If under perfused brain tissue has a CBF that is 35 to 55% of that of the cerebellum, thrombolysis is generally effective within 6 hours of symptom onset. If under perfused brain tissue has a CBF that is less than 35% of that of the cerebellum, there is a significantly higher risk of intracerebral hemorrhage with intravenous thrombolysis regardless of the time of symptom onset.

PET cerebral perfusion imaging for acute stroke is limited to a few specialized medical centers. Regardless, research on cerebral hemodynamics using PET imaging was crucial for understanding the pathophysiology of stroke and creating definitions for ischemic penumbrae and core infarcts in various other modalities such as SPECT, MRI, and CT.

In Lee et al., a "four-compartment model" is proposed, one of the most widely accepted models describing the abnormal cerebral hemodynamics seen in stroke. In Lee et al., an ischemic penumbra is defined as an area with mild decreases in cMRO2, corresponding with an average CBF of approximately 35% of baseline and an elevated mean transit time of greater than 6-8 seconds. CBV may be elevated, normal, or decreased in ischemic penumbrae.

In comparison, an ischemic core infarct is defined as an area with moderate decreases in cMRO2, which correspond with an average CBF of less than 20% of baseline. CBV is decreased in an ischemic core infarct, and the mean transit time should be greater than 6-8 seconds. In both ischemic penumbra and core infarcts, rOEF is increased.

Using the principles described by Lee et al., it is possible to use relative measurements of cerebral blood flow, mean transit time, and cerebral blood volume to try and predict areas of ischemic penumbra and core infarct without obtaining measurements of cMRO2. This is done by comparing the cerebral hemodynamics in a region of interest with the cerebral hemodynamics of the corresponding opposite side of the brain.

**Chronic Cerebrovascular Disorders**

In patients with chronic cerebral artery or carotid artery occlusion, SPECT and PET can be used to assess the risk of subsequent stroke and the potential benefits of revascularization. In both SPECT and PET cerebral perfusion imaging, the examination can be augmented with intravenous acetazolamide, which causes vasodilation of the cerebral vasculature. Areas of the brain with normal cerebral perfusion pressure tend to have increases in CBF of approximately 30%.

In areas of the brain with decreased cerebral perfusion pressure, there is reflexive vasodilation through auto-regulation in an attempt to restore normal CBF. If the vasculature is already reflexively dilated due to reduced cerebral perfusion pressure, such as can be seen in ischemic tissue, it responds to a lesser degree to acetazolamide, and CBF will not increase as significantly in that region.

Areas that have a CBF that increases minimally or does not increase with the administration of acetazolamide are said to have decreased cerebral vascular reserve (Figures 2,3, and 4). Patients who benefit the most from revascularization procedures tend to have a pattern of cerebral hemodynamic parameters known as the intracerebral steal phenomenon. In intracerebral steal phenomenon, acetazolamide administration causes vasodilation in normal brain tissue but is unable to cause vasodilation in areas of decreased perfusion as it already has maximally dilated vasculature. Because of this, blood is shunted away from the area of ischemia and is directed toward healthy brain tissue, which causes further decreases in CBF to the ischemic area.

Balloon Occlusion Testing and Assessment of Stroke Risk after Carotid Artery Sacrifice

Carotid artery sacrifice is a procedure often performed to treat massive carotid artery aneurysms or neoplasms, which are inseparable from the carotid artery requiring excision.

SPECT perfusion radiotracers such as Tc99m-HMPAO or PET perfusion radiotracers such as oxygen-15 labeled water can be administered intravenously after occluding the carotid artery with a balloon catheter for approximately 5 minutes. If a decrease in CBF greater than 10% of the contralateral cerebral hemisphere is identified, there is a significantly higher risk of stroke and a higher risk of overall mortality in patients who undergo carotid artery sacrifice.

**Epilepsy**

SPECT cerebral perfusion has become one of the most useful imaging modalities to localize epileptogenic foci. Because SPECT radiopharmaceuticals such as Tc99m-HMPAO and Tc99m-ECD have prolonged retention rates in the brain, healthcare providers have more time to stabilize an ictal patient before transferring them to the SPECT scanner for imaging. PET has a lesser role in the evaluation of epilepsy due to the short half-lives of radiotracers used and is usually limited to examinations with F-18 FDG in the interictal period.

Epileptogenic foci tend to have increased perfusion and glucose metabolism in the ictal period while the patient is seizing and tend to have decreased perfusion and glucose metabolism in the interictal period when the patient is between seizure episodes. However, information obtained in the interictal period for PET and SPECT cerebral perfusion imaging tends to be less reliable in localizing epileptogenic foci than in the ictal period. Because of this, SPECT imaging during the ictal period has become the exam of choice in cerebral perfusion imaging to help identify epileptogenic foci.

**Crossed Cerebellar Diaschisis**

Crossed cerebellar diaschisis is a finding seen on PET and SPECT cerebral perfusion imaging where a supratentorial lesion, usually an infarct, results in decreased perfusion and metabolism in the contralateral cerebellar hemisphere. This can be assessed with brain-binding perfusion agents such as Tc99m-HMPAO or Tc99m-ECD in SPECT.

In PET, this can be seen either with perfusion agents such as oxygen-15 labeled water or with metabolic agents such as F-18 FDG.

**Dementia**

Patterns of cerebral perfusion abnormalities can help differentiate specific subtypes of dementia. Because cerebral perfusion and metabolism are closely linked due to the brain's inability to store glucose, evaluation can be performed with SPECT perfusion agents such as Tc99m-HMPAO or PET agents such as F-18 FDG.

Frontotemporal dementia, including Pick disease, tends to have decreased perfusion in the frontal lobes and anterior temporal lobes (Figure 5). In Alzheimer dementia, there tends to be decreased perfusion in the temporal and parietal lobes with characteristic sparing of the sensorimotor cortex, visual cortex, and basal ganglia (Figure 6). Patients with Lewy body dementia can also have decreased perfusion in the temporal and parietal lobes but differ in that there is often involvement of the sensorimotor strip or occipital lobes (Figure 7).

**Trauma**

SPECT perfusion imaging can be used to identify lesions in patients with a previous traumatic brain injury that are occult on CT or MRI and is especially useful in the presence of neurobehavioral symptoms. Similar to dementia, areas of decreased perfusion correlate with certain neuropsychiatric symptoms in patients with traumatic brain injury and can help guide treatment decisions.

When PET imaging is performed in the setting of traumatic brain injury, it is usually performed with F-18 FDG to look at areas of decreased metabolism. As stated before, cerebral perfusion and glucose metabolism are closely linked due to the brain's relative inability to store glucose.