In the kidney, the glomerulus represents the initial location of the renal filtration of blood. Blood enters the glomerulus through the afferent arteriole at the vascular pole, undergoes filtration in the glomerular capillaries, and exits the glomerulus through the efferent arteriole at the vascular pole.

Bowman’s capsule surrounds the glomerular capillary loops and participates in the filtration of blood from the glomerular capillaries. Bowman’s capsule also has a structural function and creates a urinary space through which filtrate can enter the nephron and pass to the proximal convoluted tubule. Liquid and solutes of the blood must pass through multiple layers to move from the glomerular capillaries into Bowman’s space to ultimately become filtrate within the nephron’s lumen.

The first step of filtration occurs through the endothelial layer of the capillaries, which is composed of fenestrated endothelial cells.

Filtrate next moves through the glomerular basement membrane (GBM). From the direction of the capillaries and moving towards Bowman’s capsule, three layers compose the GBM – the lamina rara interna, the lamina densa, and the lamina rara externa. Mesangial cells within the glomerulus play a role in creating and maintaining the GBM, as well as holding capillary loops together.

Following the GBM, filtrate must pass through the epithelial layer of Bowman’s capsule, which is composed of podocytes. The podocytes feature finger-like projections of cytoplasm referred to as “foot processes” or “pedicels.” These foot processes interdigitate with one another and create a further barrier through which filtrate must pass. Structures called “slit diaphragms” bridge nearby foot processes and provide structural support. The podocytes are the primary cells of the epithelium adjacent to the capillaries (the visceral epithelium) and play a role in filtration. The parietal epithelium of Bowman’s capsule is the outer layer and is composed of simple squamous epithelial cells called “parietal cells.” The parietal layer is not directly involved with filtration from the capillaries. Parietal cells play a structural role in maintaining Bowman’s capsule and are also speculated to have the ability to differentiate into podocytes to replace damaged or old podocytes.

In summary, filtrate entering Bowman’s space traverses through glomerular capillaries, the GBM, and the interdigitated foot processes of the podocytes and is filtered based on size and electric charge. The filtrate entering Bowman’s space has a very similar composition to that of the blood in the glomerular capillaries except for the protein, and cell content as these are the components largely prevented from entering Bowman’s space when glomerular filtration is functioning properly.