There is a limited clinical significance of diagnosis linitis plastica as a separate entity and difficulty in including it to the known classification systems, which encouraged some authors to abandon the term altogether. This is helped by the lack of consensus agreement on LP definition due to overlapping with other types of cancers that contain signet ring cells. This is not universally agreed, as others still think that this is a well determinant disease with known risk stratification that yields a benefit to the management of patients by predicting the prognosis of the cases.

Although there are numerous classification systems for gastric cancer, there is still no gold standard. Here is an overview of the most used classifications:

- WHO classification: it mainly depends on describing the microscopic appearance of cancer (which is considered its main limiting property) to the following; papillary, tubular, mucinous, mixed adenocarcinomas, and poorly cohesive (which contains the characteristic signet ring cells).

- Cancer stromal volume classification: this classification depends on the abundancy of stromal tissue and has medullary, intermediate, and scirrhous types, the last being the most abundant. It is a part of the Japanese classification that shares some of the characteristics of the Bormann type 3 and 4.

- Bormann classification: it is used mainly in Eastern Asian countries. In this classification, LP is similar to Bormann type 4 with its diffuse infiltrating characteristic and thickened gastric mucosa. It is most common in females and young age; the difference is mainly on the prevalence of infiltration in LP is more in the submucosa, which may cause hypertrophy and folding of the mucosa. It is positioned mainly in the upper gastric body with more than one-third infiltration of the stomach, while in Bormann type 4 it is equally distributed in the mucosa and submucosa and positioned in the antrum.

- Lauren classification: it is classified according to microscopic appearance and origin into; diffuse (which carries similarity to LP and Bormann type 4), intestinal (with glandular like structure), or mixed and indeterminate types.

As any cancerous tumor, TNM classification applies to know the extent of infiltration locally and systemically, according to AJCC Cancer staging.