Observation and conservative management is the mainstay for most forms of Brown syndrome. Spontaneous improvement is common for acquired cases, although less common in congenital ones. Non-surgical treatment includes eye exercises and treatment of underlying causes, e.g., oral or local injection of corticosteroids for inflammation. Improvements after daily eye exercises have been reported in case series and reports. Both oral and injection of corticosteroids have been effective in cases of acquired Brown syndrome due to juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Steroid-sparing immunosuppressants, e.g., adalimumab, have been used successfully in isolated cases of Brown syndrome refractory to steroids or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug therapy.

Surgical treatment is indicated if there is a hypotropia and/or symptomatic anomalous head posture in the primary position. If the patient finds the cosmetic appearance unacceptable, then this may be a relative indication for surgery. The goals of treatment are the improvement of binocular fusion in physiological fields of gaze and version normalization. Tenotomy of the superior oblique tendon has proved more effective than the removal of the tendon sheath. Severing the entire tendon can lead to unpredictable results, including causing a superior oblique palsy.

Medical grade silicone, e.g., retinal band, is inserted between cut ends of the superior oblique tendon and sutured in place without disruption of the floor of the tendon capsule. Another method of weakening the superior oblique is via a graduated recession, first proposed by Calderia in 1975 in treatment of A pattern strabismus with superior oblique overaction.