**Mechanism**

The actual mechanism is brought by the interaction of a multitude of proteins and enzymes and occurs during the S phase. The single DNA strand is separated into two complementary strands. DNA replication is a semiconservative process, meaning that for every new pair there is one original strand and one new strand.

**Initiation**

The origin of replication is a sequence of base pairs in the genome where DNA replication begins; these sequences tend to be high in AT content making for easier separation. AT bonds have the fewest hydrogen bonds, making them weaker. Eukaryotes have multiple origins of replication whereas prokaryotes have one. Replication begins when origin-binding proteins bind to the origin of replication on the DNA. Then the unwinding of the double helix proceeds by way of the enzyme, helicase, creating a replication fork. The replication fork is Y-shaped and is where the leading and lagging strands are formed. Helicase begins unwinding by breaking hydrogen bonds. Single-stranded binding proteins (SSBs) stabilize the unwound DNA, preventing it from forming into secondary structures; the secondary structures can prevent the continuation of the DNA polymerase.

**Elongation**

Meanwhile, topoisomerases reduce the pressure on the winded portions and continue to open the DNA downstream to allow for elongation. They work by changing the amount of DNA coiling by adding negative supercoils or by unlinking DNA circles for prokaryotic DNA. Topoisomerase I relaxes the supercoil, and topoisomerase II adds negative supercoils. Topoisomerase is known as DNA gyrase in prokaryotes. Once the DNA strand is open, there needs to be a base for the DNA polymerase to bind and begin replication; this is provided by the primase. Primase adds short strands of RNA primers (9 to 12 pairs) onto the template to allow for DNA polymerase III or DNA polymerase alpha to bind and add nucleotides. DNA polymerase III (in prokaryotes) has 5’ => 3’ synthesis and 3’ => 5’ proofreading exonuclease. DNA polymerase alpha (in eukaryotes) is a complex that has the DNA primase which creates the RNA primer, and then the polymerase alpha itself elongates around 20 nucleotides and passes off to DNA polymerase epsilon or delta. DNA polymerase epsilon elongates and proofreads on the leading strand. DNA polymerase delta elongates and proofreads on the lagging strand. Because the strands run antiparallel, the polymerization mechanism is slightly different for both strands. The DNA polymerase runs in the 3’ => 5’ direction (therefore creating DNA in the 5’ => 3’ orientation), but only one DNA template strand, known as the leading strand, is in the proper orientation. Replication of the leading strand is simple because it is already 3’ => 5’ direction, the polymerase continuously adds complementary nucleotides to the primer towards the replication fork. For the lagging strand, which is 5’ => 3’, the new strand is synthesized in segments and discontinuously because the DNA polymerase can only read in the 3’ => 5’ direction. A new primer is added as the replication fork is further opened and the DNA polymerase delta builds the new DNA strand away from the replication fork, creating Okazaki fragments. Afterwards, another DNA polymerase replaces the RNA primers with DNA; this is done by DNA polymerase I in prokaryotes and DNA polymerase delta in eukaryotes. DNA ligase connects the fragments.

**Termination**

In prokaryotes, replication ends when the forks meet. In eukaryotes replication ends at telomere regions. Telomeres are regions at the end of chromosomes with repetitive nucleotides such as TTAGGG sequences. Shortening telomeres have been associated with cell aging and death.

**DNA Proofreading**

The DNA replication is not perfect and has mechanisms to ensure there are corrections. DNA polymerases make mistakes in 1 in 10^5 base pairs. Considering the length of the human genome is around 3 x 10^9 that is about 30,000 to 50,000 mistakes. However, with the exonuclease activity of the polymerases, the error rates are reduced to a few hundred. These errors are further corrected in the G2 phase of the cell cycle, reducing the total number of errors to less than 10.