**Mechanism of Action of Monoclonal Antibodies Against SARS-CoV-2**

Pathophysiology of COVD-19 is described by the entry of SARS-CoV-2, the causative virus, into the hosts' cells by binding the SARS-CoV-2 spike or S protein (S1) to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors expressed abundantly on the respiratory epithelium, such as type II alveolar epithelial cells. This process is mediated by the receptor-binding domain (RBD) on the spike protein followed by priming of the spike protein (S2) by the host transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) that facilitates cell entry and subsequent viral replication.

**Effect of Different Monoclonal Antibodies Against SARS-CoV-2 with Clinical Trial Summaries**

- **Bebtelovimab (LY-CoV1404, 1404)**is a neutralizing monoclonal antibody that targets the RBD of the spike(S) protein of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Bebtelovimab has been shown to demonstrate broad neutralizing activity to all SARS-CoV-2 VOCs, including Omicron VOC and its sub-variants in vitro., available as a preprint(MedRxiv 2022). Based on results demonstrating its broad neutralizing activity against all SARS-CoV-2 VOCs, including the Omicron VOC, the US FDA issued a EUA authorizing the use of bebtelovimab for the treatment of mild to moderate COVID-19  in ambulatory patients (aged ≥12 years and weighing ≥40 kg) with laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection and mild to moderate COVID-19 who are at high risk for progressing to severe disease and/or hospitalization or death.

- **Tixagevimab and Cilgavimab(AZD7442)**are potent anti-spike neutralizing monoclonal antibodies obtained from antibodies isolated from B cells of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 that have demonstrated neutralizing activity against SARS-CoV-2 virus by binding to nonoverlapping epitopes of the viral spike-protein RBD.**preexposure prophylaxis of COVID-19 in adults and pediatric population**(12 years of age and older being at least 40 kg in weight) with no current evidence of SARS-CoV-2  infection and no recent exposure to SARS-CoV-2 positive individuals**AND**who have moderate or severe immunocompromised due to several types of conditions and treatments**OR**are on immunosuppressive medications and may not mount an adequate immune response to COVID-19 vaccination**OR**in individuals in whom COVID-19 vaccination is contraindicated due to history of severe adverse reaction to the vaccine or vaccine components.

- **CAS/IMDEV (formerly called REGN-COV2; casirivimab and imdevimab)**is an antibody cocktail containing two noncompeting IgG1 antibodies (casirivimab and imdevimab), which target SARS-CoV-2 spike RBD and have been shown to neutralize the viral load in vivo, preventing virus-induced pathological sequelae when administered prophylactically or therapeutically in non-human primates.

- **Bamlanivimab (LY-CoV555 or LY3819253)**is a potent neutralizing monoclonal antibody derived from convalescent plasma obtained from a patient with COVID-19. REGN-COV2 also targets the RBD of the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 or S protein and has been shown to potently neutralize SARS-CoV-2 and reduce viral replication in non-human primates.

- **Bamlanivimab and Etesevimab (LY-CoV555 or LY3819253 and LY-CoV016 or LY3832479; BAM/ETE)**are potent anti-spike combinations neutralizing monoclonal antibody treatments used to treat outpatients with a recent diagnosis of mild to moderate COVID-19 who have high-risk comorbidities for severe COVID-19 infection. In vitro experiments revealed that etesevimab binds to a different epitope than bamlanivimab and neutralizes resistant variants with mutations in the epitope bound by bamlanivimab.

- **Sotrovimab (VIR-7831)**is a potent anti-spike neutralizing monoclonal antibody that demonstrated in vitro activity against the following variants: Alpha (B.1.1.7), Beta, Gamma, and Delta. Results from a preplanned interim analysis (not yet peer-reviewed) of the multicenter, double-blind placebo-controlled Phase 3, COMET-ICE trial by Gupta et al. that evaluated the clinical efficacy and safety of sotrovimab demonstrated that one dose of sotrovimab (500 mg) reduced the risk of hospitalization or death by 85% in high-risk non-hospitalized patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 compared with those receiving placebo.

**FDA Issued Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) of Different Monoclonal Antibodies in the Management of COVID-19**

- **CAS/IMDEV**was granted emergency use authorization from FDA in November 2020 for clinical use in non-hospitalized patients (aged ≥12 years and weighing ≥40 kg) with laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection and mild to moderate COVID-19 who are at high risk for progressing to severe disease and/or hospitalization. This combination has since been granted EUA from the FDA for post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) for appropriate candidates.

- **BAM/ETE**has emergency use authorization from FDA for clinical use in non-hospitalized patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 who are at increased risk for developing severe disease and/or hospitalization, as well as for PEP for appropriate candidates.

- **Sotrovimab**monotherapy was granted emergency use authorization for clinical use in non-hospitalized patients (aged ≥12 years and weighing ≥40 kg) with laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection and mild to moderate COVID-19 who are at high risk for progressing to severe disease and/or hospitalization. Unlike CAS/IMDEV and BAM/ETE, the US government is not providing funding for the administration of sotrovimab.