- Ipsilateral cranial nerve deficits, contralateral hemiparesis, sensory impairment, coordination deficits, quadriparesis, nausea, dizziness, headache, vertigo, aphasia, dysarthria, dysphagia, loss of consciousness, coma, and cardiopulmonary compromise can be caused by a variable degree of BAO.

- Confusion, oculomotor abnormalities, bilateral central vision loss, and often seizures can result from basilar tip occlusion, also called the top of the basilar syndrome.

- Dysphagia, ataxia, and ipsilateral sensory impairment over the face, as well as Horner syndrome, are caused by occlusion of VA and PICA.

- Convulsion-like movement with rigidity and twitching can be an early symptom.

Several signs and symptoms can guide history and physical examination.

- Spinothalamic tracts, medial lemnisci, and thalamic nuclei involvement lead to anesthesia or hypesthesia.

- Corticospinal tracts in the cerebral peduncles and pons cause hemiplegia or quadriplegia and extensor plantar sign.

- Ascending reticular activating system with coma or impaired consciousness.

- Cerebellar peduncles, cerebellum, and proprioceptive tract involvement cause loss of coordination of limbs and posture (ataxia).

- Labyrinth, vestibulocerebellum, and vestibular nuclei involvement leads to loss of balance, vertigo, and directional nystagmus.

- Dorsal longitudinal fascicle (sympathetic fibers) dysfunction causes Horner syndrome.

- Trigeminal fibers' involvement causes head and neck pain.

- Efferent and afferent fibers and medullary autonomic nuclei cause cardiopulmonary signs and symptoms.

- Sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers and hypothalamic nuclei involvement lead to incontinence.

- Cranial nerve III nuclei, dorsal commissure, and rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fascicle (MLF) involvement lead to variable oculomotor palsy, bilateral ptosis, vertical gaze paresis, non-reactive pupils, anisocoria, and loss of vestibulocochlear reflex.

- MLF involvement causes internuclear ophthalmoplegia.

- CN VI nucleus and paramedian pontine reticular formation (PPRF) involvement cause horizontal oculocephalic reflex loss and horizontal gaze paresis.

- CN VII nuclei and corticobulbar tract involvement cause facial palsy.

- Cerebellar involvement causes gaze-evoked nystagmus.

- Brainstem oculomotor system, and CN II, III, IV and VI cause diplopia and strabismus.

- CN VII nuclei and lateral lemniscus involvement cause hearing loss, vertigo, and tinnitus.

- Cerebellum, corticobulbar tracts, and caudal cranial nerve nuclei (X, XI) involvement cause dysarthria and dysphagia.

- Occipital lobe involvement leads to vision loss or hemianopia.

- The medial temporal lobe and thalamic nuclei involvement cause memory disturbance, confusion, and disorientation.

- Pyramidal tract involvement causes jerking, shaking, convulsive seizures, and extension posturing or rigidity.

- Vertical one-and-a-half syndrome with pseudoabducens palsy and midbrain horizontal gaze paresis can occur due to an embolic infarct in the territory of the posterior thalamosubthalamic artery (artery of Percheron) arising at the basilar bifurcation.