Buspirone, an anxiolytic drug, shows some promise for chronic orchialgia but there are no published studies on it yet.

Sacral nerve stimulation has been used anecdotally for intractable, neuropathic testicular pain with some success. This may prove to be useful in selected patients prior to more invasive surgical options.

Pulsed radiofrequency therapy to denervate the spermatic cord has been tried with encouraging early results, although its final efficacy and duration is still uncertain.

Ultrasound-guided targeted micro-cryoablation of the peri-spermatic cord is an alternative therapy when MDSC has failed. Spermatic cord nerves, like other nerves, are sensitive to freezing injuries. When exposed to temperatures of -15 C to -20 C, the nerves become completely desensitized. Men who have failed MDSC might have some residual, functioning nerve fibers in the spermatic cord that could contribute to persistent pain. Freezing these nerves is a reasonable alternative to an orchiectomy. Early results suggest successful pain relief in up to 74% of patients.

Botulinum toxin injections can inhibit neurogenic inflammation and reduce chronic pain by blocking the release of neuropeptides. Neurogenic inflammation and Wallerian degeneration of nerve fibers in the spermatic cord are thought to be one possible etiology of idiopathic chronic orchialgia. As such, it is reasonable to expect an inhibitory effect from botulinum toxin on this process by providing an anti-nociceptive effect. Early results suggest significant relief of pain in 70% of patients when botulinum toxin is injected medial and lateral to the spermatic cord at the external ring.

AminoFix is an injectable, dehydrated amniotic/chorionic membrane allograft derived from human amniotic tissues. It has been shown to have a beneficial effect on slowing scar tissue formation, promoting healing and reducing inflammation. Experimentally, it has been injected similar to botulinum toxin with about 50% of patients indicating significant reductions in their pain after treatment.