The raphe nuclei divide into rostral and caudal groupings. The rostral group contains the majority of serotonergic neurons in the brain. Within this set is the caudal linear nucleus, which contains serotonergic, catecholaminergic, and substance P producing neurons. The dorsal raphe nucleus is situated between the oculomotor nucleus and mid-pons, extending from midline to the periaqueductal gray. The median raphe extends from the caudal edge of the superior cerebellar peduncles to the motor nucleus of V. Afferents for the dorsal raphe and median raphe come from the limbic system. Glutamatergic innervation comes from hypothalamic nuclei, ventral tegmental area, and the cingulate cortex, while GABAergic innervation is provided by the hypothalamus as well. The efferents of the rostral group project via two paths, one to the lateral cortex via the internal capsule, and the other to the hypothalamus, amygdala, hippocampus, and medial cortex by way of the medial forebrain bundle. Cortical innervation primarily concentrates in layer IV.

The caudal group contains raphe magnus, which is midline in the pons at the level of the nucleus of VII. Neurons from raphe magnus produce serotonin, thyrotropin-releasing hormone, and substance P. Raphe obscurus is midline in the dorsal medulla and primarily expresses substance P. Finally, raphe pallidus is between the pyramids. These nuclei receive catecholaminergic innervation from the periaqueductal gray, amygdala, and hypothalamic nuclei. The caudal group projects to the dorsal, intermediate, and ventral horns of the spinal cord by way of two parallels paths.

Serotonergic pathways originating from the raphe nuclei are implicated in a multitude of physiologic and behavioral functions. Corticolimbic projections from the rostral group to the amygdala, hippocampus, thalamus, and basal ganglia modulate emotion, mood, response to stress and cognition. Additional functions include regulation of appetite, sleep cycles, movement, sexual function, and movement.