A review of the complete arterial anatomy is beyond the scope of this article. However, there are several important anatomical considerations that the interventionalist must be aware of when performing fluoroscopy-guided angiography. Every fluoroscopy machine contains an x-ray source beneath the patient and an intensifier/receptor unit above the patient.

The utilization of oblique images is relevant to fluoroscopic anatomy. When the C-arm is positioned in a left anterior oblique (LAO) orientation, the receptor moves to the patient’s left. The interventionalist must learn how oblique orientation relates to the anterior-posterior anatomical relationship amongst structures. For a supine patient, an LAO projection will cause anterior structures to move to the left side of the display while posterior structures move to the right. Likewise, in a right anterior oblique projection (RAO), anterior structures move to the right side of the display while posterior structures move to the left. An example of this technique's importance is the determination of whether a wire and catheter placed by trans-radial access are pointing to the ascending or descending aorta.

Fluoroscopy-guided angiographic images are a two-dimensional representation of three-dimensional structures. This simplification leads to several difficulties for new interventionalists. The anterior-posterior orientation of a catheter inside the artery may be difficult to discern, especially for images taken in AP view. Via a femoral approach, movement of the catheter in a clockwise direction would result in the catheter moving from patient left to right if the catheter is pointing posteriorly.