**Therapeutic Effects of Propofol**

When administered as a bolus, propofol has a rapid and smooth onset that is extremely predictable in its duration. It has low organ toxicity and is very compatible with a wide range of other commonly used drugs in the setting of anesthesia.

**Central Nervous System Effects**

Propofol causes a dose-dependent decreased level of consciousness and can be used for moderate sedation to general anesthesia. This decreased sensorium may lead to loss of protective airway reflexes, and propofol should not be used in any patient unless they are appropriately fasting. The American Society of Anesthesiologists' (ASA) NPO guidelines should be used as a template for the duration of fast following varying oral intake.

In addition to depression of cognition, propofol will cause a decrease in cerebral blood flow, intracranial pressure, and cerebral oxygen consumption. Propofol causes increased latency and decreased amplitude during somatosensory evoked potential monitoring and, at higher doses, can lead to burst suppression and even an isoelectric EEG. In rat models, propofol has neuroprotective effects on the brain and will decrease oxidative damage and apoptosis.

It also has been shown to cause transient excitatory phenomena such as choreiform movements and opisthotonus (abnormal posturing caused by spasm of the muscles) after injection. Propofol has also been shown to suppress seizure activity in the brain and is seldom used off-label to treat refractory status epilepticus.

Propofol exerts antiemetic actions on the brain, which helps reduce postoperative nausea and vomiting. Although this mechanism is still unknown, it is believed to be due to a direct depressant effect on the chemoreceptor trigger zone and vagal nuclei.

**Cardiovascular Effects**

Propofol causes vasodilation by inhibiting sympathetic vasoconstrictor activity along with mild depression of myocardial contractility, which accounts for the hypotension often seen when administered. This effect can be substantial with a profound reduction in the mean arterial pressure, especially when propofol is administered as a bolus. Caution should be used in hypovolemic or in catecholamine-depleted patients.

**Respiratory Effects**

Propofol causes dose-dependent respiratory depression due to the inhibition of the hypercapnic ventilatory drive. This respiratory depression is potentiated by concurrent use of other sedative agents (benzodiazepines, opioids, central acting alpha two agonists, or other anesthetic medications). An induction dose of propofol will cause apnea.

Propofol has also been seen to cause a low incidence of bronchospasm in asthmatic patients.

**Additional Monitoring Requirements/Precautions**

Propofol can cause profound cardiovascular and respiratory depression and will ultimately end in general anesthesia if given in large enough doses. For this reason, any practitioner who administers propofol must be qualified to care for a patient who is at any level of sedation (ranging from moderate sedation to general anesthesia). Emergency equipment must be readily available and in good working order. At a minimum, the ASA recommends monitoring of oxygenation, circulation, ventilation, and temperature for all anesthetics. Appropriate anesthesia personnel must be continually present during all anesthetic cases requiring general anesthesia, monitored anesthesia care, or a regional anesthetic.

Rescue equipment should include a bag valve mask, two sources of oxygen (centrally supplied or cylinders), laryngoscopes, endotracheal tubes of differing sizes, laryngeal mask airways, a crash cart with appropriate ACLS medications, and a defibrillator. The ASA guidelines for NPO status should be followed for any patient receiving an anesthetic since the loss of protective airway reflexes carries the risk of gastric content aspiration.