Important points to be noted in history include the amount of ibuprofen ingested, the time of ingestion, and any co-ingestants. In children, caregivers should be asked explicitly about acetaminophen ingestion, as it is commonly mistaken for ibuprofen. Most patients report no or mild symptoms following ibuprofen overdose.

Ibuprofen toxicity can be discussed based on the organ system involved:

**Gastrointestinal (GI) Toxicity**

The COX-1 enzyme is found in the gastric mucosa and is instrumental in producing prostaglandins that regulate blood flow and bicarbonate production in the stomach. Ibuprofen, being a nonselective inhibitor of COX, can disrupt the mucosal integrity of the gastric mucosa. Intramucosal hemorrhages occur within a few hours of ingestion in all NSAIDs

GI hemorrhage has been described in multiple case reports, particularly after large ingestions.

**Renal Toxicity**

Renal impairment has been described in individuals who had consumed therapeutic as well as supratherapeutic doses of ibuprofen.

**Neurological**

Acute ibuprofen overdose causing central nervous system (CNS) toxicity is not uncommon, particularly when the ingestion is massive at more than 400 mg/kg. In a prospective population-based ibuprofen overdose study, CNS depression was the second most clinical finding after gastrointestinal disturbances at 30%, but symptoms were mild.

One case report describes a 50-year-old woman who presented comatose after ingesting 40 to 60 ibuprofen 600 mg tablets. The patient was unresponsive to verbal stimuli but responded to noxious stimuli. She was endotracheally intubated for airway protection. She developed renal failure and GI hemorrhage in the form of a guaiac positive stool test. After a day in the intensive care unit (ICU), she clinically improved and was extubated with no further complications.

Generalized seizures, depressed level of consciousness, and apnea have been reported in children by various authors after large ingestions.

**Biochemical**

High anion gap metabolic acidosis is the most common abnormality reported, which usually occurs after massive ingestions.

Life-threatening hypokalemia has been reported secondary to renal tubular acidosis after ibuprofen overdose.

**Hematological**

Thrombocytopenia is common following ibuprofen overdose.