**ALCAPA**

Without surgical correction, this anomaly is fatal. Simple ligation of the anomalous LCA was the first successful operation described for ALCAPA.  Ligation of the LMCA from the PA excluded the left-to-right shunt, thus allowing the collaterals from the RCA to perfuse the ventricle.  This procedure has since fallen out of favor due to the significant risk of sudden death.  Additional surgical corrections include bypass, reimplantation, and in situ conduit procedures, with the ultimate goal of developing a dual coronary artery system.  Bypass grafting has used the left subclavian artery, internal mammary artery, and saphenous vein graft, but the results have been disappointing.    Ultimately, reimplantation, if possible, is the ideal technique.  This approach depends on the left coronary artery to be sufficient length for mobilization to the left sinus of Valsalva. If arterial mobilization is an issue, an ostium can be created in another part of the aorta for reimplantation.  Takeuchi fashioned a conduit to direct flow from the aorta to the anomalous artery by creating an aortopulmonary window and intrapulmonary baffle with a flap of the pulmonary artery.

**ALCA-R**

Patients with an intraarterial course of the ALCA-R are typically managed surgically with a modified unroofing procedure.  This procedure removes the intra-arterial course of the vessel and prevents ischemia. The morbidity associated with the procedure is low, but peri-operative ischemia has been reported on multiple occasions. Another study found that exercise limitation may show equal benefit to surgical modification. Surgical management should merit consideration in extreme cases of myocardial ischemia found on a cardiopulmonary exercise test.