**Continuous-wave Doppler**

The result from continuous wave doppler is a sound, which corresponds to the velocity of blood flow within a vessel. A typical peripheral artery at rest will have a triphasic or biphasic quality of sound, which corresponds to forward flow in systole, a brief reversal of flow in early diastole, then forward flow in late diastole. With worsening arterial disease, flow is dampened, as is the resultant signal. In a diseased vessel, triphasic or biphasic signals give way to a monophasic pattern with a lower amplitude.

Of note, in low resistance vessels, such as the carotid artery, there is no reversal of flow; the resulting signal is monophasic, corresponding to constant forward flow.

**Plethysmography**

Plethysmography results in a waveform that measures the variation of blood volume.

The typical peripheral artery waveform will have a steep upslope, well-defined systolic peak, a dicrotic notch, and bowing downslope to return to baseline. The waveform is dampened within the diseased vessel, with widened upslope and loss of the dicrotic notch.

**Pulse volume recording**

A PVR is also a waveform that typically accompanies a segmental pressure taken at different levels of the bilateral lower extremities. Distal waveforms generally decrease in amplitude. An abrupt change in waveform morphology and/or amplitude indicates some level of stenosis proximal to the measurement. These changes are typically dose-dependent: the severity of waveform alteration correlates with the intra-arterial disease severity.

Patients with peripheral arterial disease will compensate for their reduced flow with baseline arterial dilation. Patients with significant disease will be maximally dilated and have a limited response to reactive hyperemia or temporary occlusion. For patients with PAD, following temporary occlusion, the return of expected waveforms is markedly delayed. For patients without PAD, the waveform returns rapidly and will increase to two times baseline.