**Structure**

The insular cortex is a distinct lobe of the cerebral cortex and forms the floor of the lateral sulcus (i.e., Sylvian fissure) bilaterally. It can be grossly observed deep to the insular operculum, which is formed by the parietal, frontal, and temporal lobes. On axial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, the insula can be observed lateral-adjacent to the extreme capsule, with the claustrum, external capsule, then putamen appearing evermore medially.

The insula is divided into distinct anterior and posterior areas by the insular central sulcus and demarcated by the surrounding peri-insular (circular) sulcus. The anterior insula is composed of the three short gyri (anterior, middle, and posterior) separated by two pre-central sulci, while the posterior insula is composed of two long gyri (anterior and posterior) separated by the singular post-central sulcus. The accessory gyrus is located on the anterior face of the insula, and the transverse gyrus connects the insula to the orbital surface of the frontal lobe. Finally, the limen insulae in the anteroinferior apex of the insula is the point where the mesial surface of the temporal lobe, anterior perforator substance, and inferior insular point come together. This is also where the middle cerebral artery (MCA) generally bifurcates.

**Function**

The insula is important for gustatory and sensorimotor processing, risk-reward behavior, autonomics, pain pathways, and auditory and vestibular functioning. Translational work in animals and humans has demonstrated a link between the insula and a number of structures, including the neocortex (i.e., frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes), limbic cortex (i.e., olfactory bulb, anterior cingulum, amygdala, hippocampus, and thalamus), and basal ganglia. Injuries or lesions of the insula can thus manifest with symptoms corresponding to any of these structures. Further, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has observed three major functional subdivisions with regard to neural circuitry (dorsal-anterior, ventral-anterior, and mid-posterior), although their specific connections are beyond the scope of this review. In general, the anterior part connects to more anterior structures related to emotional integration, and the posterior part connects to more posterior structures related to cognition.

Three cytoarchitectonic areas of the insula have been described in the literature: the central agranular zone, the transition dysgranular zone, and the surrounding granular zone. The dysgranular zone has been implicated in executive functioning such as attention and memory.