The histologic type of lupus nephritis that develops depends on numerous factors, including the antigen specificity and other properties of the autoantibodies and the type of inflammatory response that is determined by other host factors. In more severe forms of lupus nephritis, the proliferation of endothelial, mesangial, and epithelial cells and the production of matrix proteins lead to fibrosis.

Lupus nephritis may affect different compartments of the kidney, which are the glomeruli, interstitium, tubules, and capillary loops. Aside from anti-dsDNA immune complex deposits, immunoglobulin G (IgG), immunoglobulin A (IgA), immunoglobulin M (IgM), and complement (C1, C3, and properdin) are commonly found as mesangial, subendothelial, and subepithelial deposits. Leukocytes may also be present.

The current standardized classification system for lupus nephritis is derived from the World Health Organization (WHO) and the International Society of Nephrology/Renal Pathology Society's recommendations. The classification system is based on glomerular morphologic changes seen on microscopy, immune deposits seen on immunofluorescence, and also electronic microscopy.

- Class 1 is minimal mesangial lupus nephritis, in which glomeruli appear normal on light microscopy. Immunofluorescence shows immune complex deposits in the mesangial space.

- Class 2 is proliferative mesangial lupus nephritis since mesangial proliferation is seen on light microscopy unlike class 1. Similar to class 1, immunofluorescence also shows immune complex deposits in the mesangial space.

- Class 3 is focal lupus nephritis. Immune complex deposits may be visualized in the mesangial, subendothelial, and/or subepithelial space on immunofluorescence imaging.

- Class 4 is the diffuse type in which immune complex deposits may occur in the mesangial, subendothelial, and/or subepithelial space. Lesions may be segmental, involving less than 50% of the glomeruli, or global, which instead involves more than 50%.

- Class 5 is membranous LN, in which immune complex deposits are in the mesangial and subepithelial space. Capillary loops are thickened due to subepithelial immune complex deposits. In this class, nephrotic range proteinuria occurs. Class 5 may also include class 3 and 4 pathology.

- Class 6 is advanced sclerosing lupus nephritis in which most of the glomeruli are sclerosed. However, immune complex deposits are not visualized on immunofluorescence since more than 90% of the glomeruli are scarred.