Adenoid cystic carcinoma has multiple histological forms. The most common is the cribriform (Swiss cheese) pattern with nests of myoepithelial and ductal cells with cylindrical cystic structures filled with hyaline basal lamina or basophilic mucoid (glycosaminoglycan) material.

Carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma requires histology of both benign (pleomorphic adenoma precursor) and malignant components, with a transition zone between the two parts. The malignant component may appear as any of the other malignant epithelial lesions listed above (with adenocarcinoma NOS or MEC being the most common), or it may be undifferentiated.

Adenocarcinoma NOS exhibits cells with glandular or ductal differentiation but lacks distinctive features of other tumors and cannot be classified further.

Mucoepidermoid carcinoma has three cell types on examination: epidermoid-squamous cells, mucin-producing cells, and intermediate cells.

Ductal carcinoma resembles mammary ductal carcinoma and is composed of solid epithelial nests in an infiltrative, lobular, or cribriform arrangement and usually has a high mitotic rate and areas of necrosis.

EMZL reveals diffusely-infiltrating small cells with abundant cytoplasm and slightly indented nuclei without nucleoli. Follicular lymphoma displays a partially follicular growth pattern with closely packed neoplastic cells without mantle zones. DLBCL manifests as diffusely-growing large B cells with a nucleus twice that of a normal lymphocyte and has many morphologic variants. Mantle cell lymphoma exhibits a monotonous pattern of small to medium lymphocytes with scant cytoplasm, irregular nuclei, and no nucleoli.