Sensory-perceptual alteration can be defined as when there is a change in the pattern of sensory stimuli followed by an abnormal response to such stimuli. Such perceptions could be increased, decreased, or distorted with the patient's hearing, vision, touch sensation, smell, or kinesthetic responses to stimuli. Such changes in the pattern of responses to stimuli lead to changes in a patient’s behavior, sensory acuity, decision-making process, and problem-solving abilities. This can lead to irritability, restlessness, poor concentration, fluctuating mental status, changes in communication due to inattention, and lack of focus. Furthermore, sensory deprivation in isolated patients can lead to anxiety, depression, aggression, hallucinations, and psychotic reactions.

Any alteration in a patient's normal environment can result in stress especially if such alteration is involuntary. Sensory overload occurs when an individual experiences a stimulus that they are unable to manage and process. Usually, the second stimulus is filtered out by selective perception or coping behavior. However, in certain environmental conditions such as the emergency department, or due to specific underlying illnesses such as dementia, sensory overload can occur due to inadequate filtering of stimuli.

Sensory deprivation occurs when an individual receives a stimulus that is reduced or below the threshold of normal. Risk factors to such alterations can be broadly due to acute illnesses, patient factors related to chronic medical conditions, aging, or due to environmental or iatrogenic causes.