Specific prerequisites should be present before the determination of brain death.

Including:

- Evidence of an etiology of coma should be known. Confounding conditions should be excluded, including severe metabolic, endocrinologic, and acid-base derangements. If a drug intoxication is suspected, five half-lives of drug clearance should be waited, with adjustment to renal and hepatic functions.

- Core body temperature should be greater than 36 degrees celsius for 24 to 72 hours. Warming blankets are optional to help achieve normothermia.

- Achieve systolic blood pressure (SBP) of or greater than 100 mm Hg, often accomplished using vasopressors or vasopressin.

- Sodium 110-160 mEq/L, serum osmolarity < 350 mOsm/kg, calcium < 12 mg/dL, glucose 70 to 300 mg/dL, pH >7.2, alcohol < 80 mg/dL.

Physical examination, the apnea test, and ancillary tests can assess brain death.

**I. Physical Examination**

The physical examination includes the response to pain and assessment of brain stem reflexes. Loss of response to central pain occurs in brain death. Central pain assessment can be examined by applying noxious stimuli to certain areas, such as the supraorbital notch, the angle of the jaw, the upper trapezius, the anterior axillary fold, and the sternum. Neither eye response nor motor reflexes are detectable in brain death. It is important to note that some spinal reflexes can be present in patients with brain death. Saposnik et al. studied spinal reflexes in 107 patients with brain death and noted the following reflexes:

- Undulating toe flexion response, which is repetitive flexion and extension of toes triggered by plantar tactile stimulation

- Triple flexion reflex, which is flexion of the thigh, leg, and foot triggered by plantar tactile stimulation

- The plantar response, which is plantar flexion triggered by plantar stimulation

- Pronator extension reflex triggered by head-turning

- Quadriceps flexion triggered by local noxious stimuli

- Facial myokymia, which is repetitive twitching of facial muscles

- Lazarus sign, which is bilateral arm flexion, shoulder adduction, and hand raising to the chest/neck, triggered by head flexion and sternal stimulation

- Myoclonus of arm and leg

- Muscle fasciculations

Brain death confirmation requires loss of brain stem reflexes, including:

- CN II: Loss of pupillary reflex (light reflex): Pupils should be fixed in mid-size or dilated (4 to 9 mm) and not reactive to light; a magnifying glass or pupillometer can be used to evaluate further if results are equivocal.

- CN III, IV, VI: Loss of pupillary light reflex as mentioned above (CN III). For cranial nerves IV and VI, and VIII, the oculocephalic reflex can be tested by holding a patient's eyelids open and turning their head from side to side. A positive oculocephalic reflex is present when the eyes reflexively look in the position opposite to that of the direction the head is turning. When the oculocephalic reflex is absent, the eyes will turn in the same direction in which the head is turning (Doll's eyes). It is imperative to only perform this examination maneuver in patients with a stable cervical spine who are not in cervical spine precautions.

- CN V, VII: Loss of corneal reflex determined by using a cotton swab or drops of water/normal saline.

- CN VIII: Loss of oculovestibular reflex (Caloric test). Irrigation of each ear by 50 to 60 ml of ice water won't move the eyes towards the irrigated side within 1 minute of the test performed. Each ear should be irrigated after a pause of a couple of minutes.

- CN IX: Loss of gag reflex confirmed after stimulation of bilateral posterior pharyngeal membranes.

- CN X: Loss of cough reflex confirmed after tracheal suctioning.

**II. Apnea Test**

The apnea test is used to examine the brain's ability to drive pulmonary function in response to the rise of carbon dioxide (CO2). Before performing the apnea test, the mechanical ventilator should be adjusted to obtain PaCO2 within 35 to 45 mmHg and partial pressure of oxygen within arterial blood (PaO2) above 200 mmHg, using a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5 to 8 cm of water (H2O). During the test, oxygen (O2) should be supplemented using a cannula connected to the endotracheal tube at 6 L/min, a T-piece at 12 L/min, or using continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) of 5 to 10 cm H2O. In the case of the loss of respiratory drive, CO2 is expected to rise 5 mmHg every minute in the first 2 minutes, then by 2 mmHg every minute thereafter. Repeat arterial blood gas (ABG) after 8 to 10 minutes showing CO2 of 60 mmHg or the rise of CO2 by more than 20 mmHg above baseline is consistent with brain death. If the patient develops hypotension with SBP below 90 mmHg or cardiac arrhythmias, the test should be terminated, and arterial blood gases should be drawn. For patients on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) machines, oxygenation can be maintained while performing the apnea test by decreasing the gas sweep flow rate to 0.5 to 1.0 L/min and using an oxygenation source through the endotracheal (ET) tube.

**III. Ancillary Tests**

Ancillary tests can be used as adjuncts if there is any uncertainty of the diagnosis of brain death or if the apnea test cannot be performed (as in cases of chronic CO2 retainers).

*Ancillary tests used for detection of cessation of cerebral blood flow:

- Cerebral angiography: Four-vessel angiography is the gold standard for tests evaluating cerebral blood flow. It can confirm brain death when it shows cessation of blood flow to the brain. Limitations include the invasiveness of the test and transferring the patient to the radiology suite. Also, the contrast may induce nephrotoxicity affecting the donor's kidney. False-negative tests can occur when ICP becomes lowered by surgery, trauma, or ventricular shunts.

- Transcranial ultrasound (US): Can be used to assess pulsations of middle cerebral arteries, vertebral and basilar arteries bilaterally, also anterior cerebral arteries or ophthalmic arteries if possible. The transcranial US can confirm brain death by showing small peaked systolic pulsations or the absence of diastolic pulsations. Test limitations include the examiner's expertise, the presence of unsuitable windows due to thick temporal bones, as well as lowered ICP by surgery or ventricular shunts giving false-negative tests.

- Computed tomogram (CT) brain angiography and MR angiography show cessation of cerebral blood flow.

- Radionuclide brain imaging: This can be done using a 99mTc-labeled hexamethyl propylene amine oxime (HMPAO) isotope tracer and then imaging by single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) brain scintigraphy. The absence of a tracer in cerebral circulation (the hollow skull phenomenon) is consistent with brain death. The test may show false-positive results if imaging is done in one plane only instead of two planes (anterior and lateral).

*Ancillary tests used for detection of loss of bioelectrical activity of the brain:

- Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs): Patients with brain death show no somatosensory evoked potentials in response to bilateral median nerve stimulation and no brain stem evoked potentials in response to auditory stimuli.