Nurses have a unique role and responsibility in medication administration, in that they are frequently the final person to check to see that the medication is correctly prescribed and dispensed before administration.

The five traditional rights in the traditional sequence include:

**‘Right patient’**– ascertaining that a patient being treated is, in fact, the correct recipient for whom medication was prescribed. This is best practiced by nurses directly asking a patient to provide his or her full name aloud, checking medical wristbands if appropriate for matching name and ID number as on a chart. It is advisable not to address patients by first name or surname alone, in the event, there are two or more patients with identical or similar names in a unit. Depending on the unit that a patient may be in, some patients, such as psychiatric patients, may not wear wristbands or may have altered mentation to the point where they are unable to identify themselves correctly. In these instances, nurses are advised to confirm a patient’s identity through alternative means with appropriate due diligence.

**‘Right drug’**– ensuring that the medication to be administered is identical to the drug name that was prescribed. Some brand names or generic names may have very similar spelling or sound very similar due to prefix, suffix, or starting with the same first letter. For example, beta-blocker medications all end in ‘-lol’ to aid in suggesting their mechanism of action. It is important to discern between two similarly named medications since the two drugs in question may have drastically different mechanisms of action or indications for prescribing. Except for nurse practitioners who have the qualifications to prescribe some medications in limited situations, nurses cannot legally prescribe drugs. Recent evidence-based studies support the practice of prescribers writing out full generic names as opposed to brand names of medications along with the indication for prescribing when writing orders to help minimize confusion. Poor handwriting and abbreviations account for many medical errors due to misreading letters or numerals that appear differently to different individuals. For example, brand names, if written poorly, could easily confuse a recipient of an order leading to the administration of medication with a different indication than intended.

After affirming the name and expiratory date of the intended drug, nursing providers should also develop a routine habit of explicitly asking patients about known allergies or history of an allergic response to a drug they are about to administer. A potential barrier that nurses may face is a patient's misunderstanding of what qualifies as a hypersensitivity reaction, versus a negative symptom which they perceived as a negative experience. Patients may need the education to aid in discerning whether they have had an allergic response, ranging from a skin rash to anaphylaxis, versus an expected side effect, such as nausea or diarrhea.

**‘Right Route’**– Medications can be given to patients in many different ways, all of which vary in the time it takes to absorb the chemical, time it takes for the drug to act, and potential side-effects based on the mode of administration. Some common routes include oral, intramuscular, intravenous, topical, or subcutaneous injection. In modern medicine, medication administration has become more complex with the development of drugs that can be given via newer routes, including but not limited to central venous catheters, patient-controlled analgesia (PCA), epidural infusions, and intrathecal administration.

It is crucial that nurses remain educated and up to date on newer medications or less commonly administered medications to learn how they are safely delivered to patients before being asked to do so in clinical practice. Additionally, nurses must have at least a minimal basic understanding of the physiology influencing drug absorption rates and time of drug onset, as these principles relate to medication administration. For example, medications that are to be delivered intravenously will likely have a higher bioavailability and faster onset of action as they are introduced directly into venous circulation for distribution, as opposed to an oral medication that must first undergo digestion, absorption, and filtration through hepatic circulation.

**‘Right time’**– administering medications at a time that was intended by the prescriber. Often, certain drugs have specific intervals or window periods during which another dose should be given to maintain a therapeutic effect or level. A guiding principle of this ‘right’ is that medications should be prescribed as closely to the time as possible, and nurses should not deviate from this time by more than half an hour to avoid consequences such as altering bioavailability or other chemical mechanisms.

**‘Right dose’**– Incorrect dosage, conversion of units, and incorrect substance concentration are prevalent modalities of medication administration error. This error type stems from nurses giving a patient an incorrect dose of medications, even if it is the correct medication and the patient’s identity is verified, without first checking to ensure it is the correct strength for the patient. This may be due to misplaced decimals, errors in arithmetic, or incorrect conversion between two units. For example, a misplaced decimal point can impact the dose of medication by 10-fold, just as micrograms and milligrams may easily be mistaken with a quick, incorrect glance at unit abbreviations like mcg versus mg.