# Continuing Education Activity

Unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis is a condition caused when one side of the diaphragm becomes weak or paralyzed. Diaphragm paralysis can be unilateral or bilateral; however, unilateral paralysis is more common. Unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis is a condition in which either the right or left side of the diaphragm loses the ability to contract to allow proper inspiration. This can result from muscular issues in the diaphragm or loss of innervation from the phrenic nerve to the hemidiaphragm. There are many possible causes for this condition, and signs and symptoms can range from asymptomatic to respiratory failure. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis and explains the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, managing, and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the possible etiology of unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis based on a patient's history.
- Describe the typical imaging findings associated with unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis.
- Summarize the management options available for unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis.
- Describe the importance of collaboration and communication among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis.

# Introduction

Proper diaphragm function is essential for adequate ventilation and the function of the lungs. The diaphragm is considered the most important muscle for inhalation than the scalene, intercostal, and sternocleidomastoid muscles. It is also an important barrier that separates the abdominal and thoracic cavities. The diaphragm is innervated by the phrenic nerve separately on both the left and right sides. The phrenic nerve is composed of cervical nerve roots three through five. The diaphragm contracts downward to cause a negative intrathoracic pressure to allow lung expansion and passive airflow into the lungs for gas exchange.

Diaphragm paralysis can be unilateral or bilateral; however, unilateral paralysis is more common. Unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis is a condition in which either the right or left side of the diaphragm loses the ability to contract to allow proper inspiration. This can result from muscular issues in the diaphragm or loss of innervation from the phrenic nerve to the hemidiaphragm.

# Etiology

There are many possible causes for unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis, either due to issues in the musculature of the diaphragm or secondary to phrenic nerve pathology.

**Traumatic**

Trauma is considered the most common cause of diaphragm weakness. Direct trauma, either blunt trauma or during a surgical procedure, has the potential to injure the phrenic nerve leading to hemidiaphragm weakness or paralysis. The highest risk is during cardiac bypass cases, where up to 20 percent of cases result in temporary diaphragm weakness due to the cooling necessary for the procedure, which is more common on the left than the right side.

**Compression**

Compression of the phrenic nerve, whether in the form of cervical spondylosis or from an adjacent tumor or malformation, mediastinal chest tubes, or chronic sclerosing mediastinitis

**Neuropathic**

Disease states that often cause nerve damage or demyelination may lead to diaphragm paralysis or weakness by interfering with the conduction of the phrenic nerve. Diabetic neuropathy can cause damage to the phrenic nerve, especially if glucose is not tightly controlled. Multiple sclerosis could also diminish the function of the phrenic nerve, depending on the location of the lesions, along with other chronic demyelinating disorders.

**Inflammatory**

Viruses such as herpes zoster, Zika, poliovirus, and other viral infections have been linked to unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. A case series of congenital Zika syndrome reported four infants with diaphragm weakness that eventually died secondary to respiratory failure.

**Iatrogenic**

Patients often receive nerve blocks to assist with pain control in the preoperative or postoperative settings. Local spread of anesthetic can affect the phrenic nerve, block impulses sent to the diaphragm, and cause unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. This phenomenon has been reported with many blocks but is more commonly seen in interscalene, brachial plexus nerve blocks, and high thoracic paravertebral nerve blocks.

**Idiopathic**

There have been many cases of both unilateral and bilateral diaphragmatic paralysis and weakness for which the cause is considered unknown. Nearly 20% of the cases have been considered idiopathic.

# Epidemiology

Unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis is most commonly seen after a trauma or injury to the diaphragm or phrenic nerve. Diaphragm weakness is reported in up to 20 percent of cardiac bypass cases secondary to cooling procedures hence is more commonly seen in the left than the right.

# Pathophysiology

The diaphragm is a dome-shaped muscle that separates the abdominal cavity from the thoracic cavity. The diaphragm can contract and create a negative intrathoracic pressure to allow passive air movement into the lungs. This is to allow gas exchange and proper ventilation. Other accessory muscles assist with breathing, such as the scalenes, intercostals, and sternocleidomastoid muscle, but none are as important as a properly functioning diaphragm. In addition, each hemidiaphragm is innervated by the ipsilateral phrenic nerve, composed of cervical spinal nerves three through five, which is important for proper ventilation.

Unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis is a condition in which one hemidiaphragm is paralyzed or weakened secondary to some underlying condition. This paralysis can be due to any issue from the spinal cord to the phrenic nerve or the muscle itself, and there are varying degrees of paralysis. The severity of unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis is related to the underlying cause. Some causes are expected and are secondary to a procedure being done with full recovery expected in a given time frame, and other causes can be permanent.

When weakness or paralysis of a hemidiaphragm exists, a patient may be asymptomatic or experience dyspnea, which may be more pronounced if there are other comorbidities or lung conditions. Different studies have concluded that exercise tolerance is greatly diminished with unilateral diaphragm paralysis if obesity is a comorbidity.

Immediately after paralysis, the working hemidiaphragm may produce enough negative intrathoracic pressure to compensate for the paralyzed side. Over time, breathing gets easier as the paralyzed hemidiaphragm becomes less compliant, and less of a paradoxical movement is seen with inspiration, allowing for better gas exchange. Not all patients will require treatment, and some studies mention that surgery should be reserved for patients with mediastinal shifts and respiratory failure.

# History and Physical

In many instances, patients with unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis may be asymptomatic, with elevated hemidiaphragm found incidentally on chest imaging. Less commonly, patients can present with varying amounts of dyspnea depending on underlying comorbidities, specifically underlying cardiopulmonary disease. In many instances, unilateral diaphragm paralysis can present similar to various cardiorespiratory disorders and may be overlooked initially.

One-third of patients may experience exertional dyspnea, while others with more comorbidities report dyspnea at rest. These patients experience hypoventilation, which can lead to hypercapnia that worsens during sleep and lead to daytime fatigue.

It is essential to ask about medical history when a patient presents with unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis to identify the responsible cause for paralysis. There are many potential causes, and important details could be discovered from past medical history, surgeries, infections, recent trauma, vaccination history, or recent travel.

A physical exam may reveal non-specific findings for unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. The exam may seem benign in an otherwise healthy individual. Occasionally there may be dullness to percussion or diminished breath sounds at the lung base on the affected side. During sleep, paradoxical thoracoabdominal movement may be seen, along with the complaint of orthopnea in the supine position, which improves with lateral positioning with the healthy lung down. Sleep respiratory disorders are also commonly associated with unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis, specifically during REM sleep.

# Evaluation

When evaluating a patient with suspected diaphragmatic paralysis, it is important to consider the underlying cause. For example, if a patient underwent cardiac surgery, it is known that up to 20 percent of patients have residual weakness due to the cooling of the phrenic nerve that resolves with time. An extensive workup is not likely required urgently for these patients.

**Chest Radiographs**

As mentioned previously, many cases of unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis are asymptomatic, leading to some cases being found incidentally by chest radiographs. Chest X-ray alone can diagnose up to 90 percent of unilateral diaphragmatic palsy. A Chest x-ray is sensitive but not specific for diaphragm paralysis. Usually, frontal, inspiratory, upright, and lateral positions are required. The right hemidiaphragm is usually slightly elevated compared to the left side, and therefore if it is further elevated with a more acute costophrenic angle, one could suspect right diaphragm paralysis. The normal hemidiaphragm dome usually projects over the 5th or 6th rib anteriorly and over the 10th rib posteriorly, with the left hemidiaphragm dome being one interspace lower than the right. If the left hemidiaphragm was similar in height to the right, left hemidiaphragm paralysis is suspected.

**Fluoroscopic Evaluation (Snif test)**

If a patient is suspected of having unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis based on chest X-ray findings, the diagnosis can be confirmed through fluoroscopic examination "Snif test." In unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis, the paralyzed hemidiaphragm will either show no movement or have a paradoxical movement into the thoracic cavity with sniffing or deep inspiration (positive test in over 90% of cases).

**Pulmonary Function Tests**

The diaphragm is the most important muscle for inspiration, accounting for up to 80 percent of the power generated during respiration. With unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis, a 50 percent decline would be expected in the forced vital capacity. This is further decreased up to 25 percent more during supine positioning due to muscle weakness and cranially directed pressure from the abdominal cavity. Other pulmonary volumes may remain unchanged as long as the paralysis remains unilateral.

Positional (supine versus upright) spirometry measurements are very informative and significantly different in individuals with neurological diseases such as spinal cord injury and unilateral diaphragm paralysis.

**Electromyography (EMG)**

Electromyography has somewhat of a limited role in diagnosing unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. If the issue is localized to the phrenic nerve, stimulation of the nerve will not cause muscle contraction, and this can be detected. If the pathology is muscular in origin, the phrenic nerve will conduct the impulse as expected, but the diaphragm muscle will not contract.

**Transdiaphragmatic Pressure Measurements**

In unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis, trans-diaphragmatic pressures (Pdi) would be expected to be reduced as the diaphragm cannot contract properly. With left hemidiaphragm paralysis more than right, the gastric component of Pdi measurement is decreased. Pdi measurements correlate well with phrenic nerve conduction study (NCS), a non-invasive method that provides additional information that can identify the mechanism for unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis.

**Thorax Ultrasound**

Ultrasound of the thorax can be used to assist with the diagnosis of diaphragm paralysis. The B mode of ultrasound can show the diaphragm as a thick echogenic line.

**CT Scan**

Once patients have been diagnosed with unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis, a CT scan can be beneficial to determine the cause of the paralysis, along with ruling out any possible compression from tumors or other thoracic etiology. Another common finding is atelectasis at the base of the lung on the affected side.

**MRI**

An MRI may be considered if the patient presents with cervical spine pain or for a closer look at soft tissue after trauma to diagnose the etiology of the diaphragm weakness accurately. A case report of a patient who underwent foraminotomies after foraminal stenosis was seen on MRI and reported a resolution of hemidiaphragm paralysis.

**Sleep Study**

As mentioned earlier, with unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis, the ability to ventilate may diminish and lead to hypercapnia that worsens during sleep. Some studies recommend the use of sleep studies or continuous pulse oximetry. If there is evidence of sleep-disordered breathing,

**Laboratory Tests**

Lab testing is non-specific for unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. Testing can be done to assess underlying conditions that potentially cause diaphragm paralysis, such as thyroid tests or serology for Borrelia burgdorferi in suspected Lyme disease. Other tests, such as a complete blood count, may be considered part of the initial workup to rule out anemia as a potential cause for dyspnea.

# Treatment / Management

In many cases of unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis, the patient is asymptomatic, and the paralysis is found incidentally. No intervention is required in this case, as the condition is not impacting the patient’s quality of life. The prognosis in these patients is considered good as long as there are no underlying cardiopulmonary conditions. In other cases, it is satisfactory to wait and watch, for example, in the case of cooling from cardiac surgeries or after a nerve block suspected of causing weakness. The function of the phrenic nerve is expected to return to baseline function as time goes by without intervention. For symptomatic patients, or when the condition is more acute with correctable causes, other treatment options exist.

**Correct the Underlying Issue**

If an underlying cause for unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis can be determined, the treatment option should be targeted toward that pathology. For example, if an underlying viral etiology is suspected of causing muscle weakness because of inflammation of the phrenic nerve, the best option would be antivirals specific to that virus with or without the addition of steroids. If the underlying issue is due to compression of the phrenic nerve secondary to a cervical pathology, decompression would be the best option. Studies have shown that when a surgical option is present, such as decompression or grafting, it may result in substantial improvement in respiratory function.

**Ventilatory Support**

Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation or invasive ventilation can be a treatment option for unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis if needed.

**Surgical Plication**

In symptomatic patients, a surgical plication is an option for treatment. If possible, it is recommended to wait at least six months before proceeding with this surgical option, as most cases of symptomatic unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis improve with time. The concept of the procedure is to suture the diaphragm into a stable position, thereby eliminating the paradoxical movement with inspiration. This procedure can now be done robotically and minimally invasive.

**Phrenic Nerve Pacing**

Phrenic nerve pacing is an option for patients with diaphragmatic paralysis who do not suffer from denervation of the diaphragm. This pacemaker stimulates the phrenic nerve to cause the diaphragm to contract as it would physiologically. Studies are showing promising results for diaphragmatic pacing. One study of 27 patients resulted in improvement in 81 percent of patients, four of which were able to be weaned off a ventilator.

# Differential Diagnosis

As mentioned, unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis can appear similar to other cardiopulmonary diseases. A good history, physical exam, and imaging studies are required for a definitive diagnosis.

**Diaphragmatic Issues**

Unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis is an issue with the phrenic nerve or musculature of the diaphragm, as mentioned previously. In addition, other diaphragm pathologies may appear similar on radiographs and present with similar findings. Diaphragmatic hernia, for example, could appear similar on radiographs with an elevated hemidiaphragm and could cause trouble breathing.

**Pulmonary Disease**

Diseases such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), pleural effusion, or pneumonia can present with dyspnea, much like unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. A good physical exam and imaging can usually differentiate these disease states. Atelectasis may cause dyspnea and could also cause an elevation of the hemidiaphragm on the affected side. A hemidiaphragm may also be elevated after a surgical lobectomy. It is important to consider the possibility of diaphragm paralysis coexisting with conditions such as pneumonia or pleural effusion. Patients have had residual paralysis after cases of pneumonia or pleural effusion.

**Cardiac Disease**

Unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis can cause orthopnea, which can be misinterpreted as heart failure. A good physical exam would be able to differentiate the two by looking for signs such as peripheral edema or jugular venous distention.

**Neuromuscular Junction Disease**

Disease states such as cholinergic crisis, myasthenia gravis, or Lambert-Eaton syndrome could lead to diaphragm muscle weakness and dyspnea, similar in presentation to unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. This would be a later sign, and a thorough history or response to edrophonium would likely be able to differentiate the disease states.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

Surgeries to transfer a phrenic nerve are being considered. A Japanese study outlines the possibility of reconstructive surgery to regain the function of a damaged phrenic nerve. Animal models have shown promising results, and it is assumed the same technique can be used when compared to peripheral nerve reconstruction.

Animal studies in the translational model of unilateral diaphragm paralysis using cervical (C2) hemisection showed that a single dose of adenosine antagonist nano therapy induces long-term recovery and restores the function of the paralyzed diaphragm.

Another area of study is the use of daytime mouthpiece ventilation methods. It is proven that many patients have had an improvement in exercise tolerance with the use of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation. A study in 2017 was the first to show the improvement of exercise tolerance with mouthpiece ventilation devices, which could improve patient comfort and compliance with assisted ventilation.

Myofascial exercises have been shown in patients with obstructive sleep apnea who do not tolerate CPAP therapy to improve the severity of the disease and increase expiratory muscle forces (MEP).

# Prognosis

In general, the prognosis for unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis is good.

# Complications

Complications of unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis are often limited as long as other comorbidities are not present. Complications such as dyspnea, exercise intolerance, sleep-disordered breathing, sleep-onset hypoventilation (such as in chronic spinal cord injury), or hypercapnia may arise if left untreated, with respiratory failure being the most dreaded complication.

As mentioned earlier, as high as 20 percent of cardiac bypass surgery may have diaphragm weakness as a complication.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

There are many possible etiologies for postoperative dyspnea or respiratory compromise. Depending on the surgery, unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis may be on the differential, although other more common etiologies may be more realistic. One study considered acute myasthenic states, injury either to the phrenic nerve or diaphragm, or medication effects (such as persistent neuromuscular blockade) to be the essential clinical scenarios to be aware of when considering diaphragm paralysis.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The diaphragm is considered the most important muscle when it comes to respiration. Unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis is a condition when one-half of the diaphragm is paralyzed. Each side of the diaphragm is innervated or controlled by the ipsilateral phrenic originating from cervical nerve roots three through five. Diaphragm paralysis can occur because of any pathology that affects the diaphragm muscle or interferes with the phrenic nerve’s ability to properly send signals to the diaphragm muscle. There are many possible causes for diaphragm paralysis, although the most common etiology is trauma-related.

In most cases, unilateral paralysis is asymptomatic; if symptoms are present, it usually improves with time without treatment. Symptoms are more common with underlying heart or lung issues or obesity. When symptomatic, most patients experience trouble breathing, which is worse with exercise and lying flat on their back at night. There are imaging options to assist with diagnosing this condition, and the treatment is more specific to the underlying cause of diaphragm weakness. Treatments can range from conservative measures, watching and waiting, to surgery to correct the underlying issue.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis is an often overlooked disease process, as most patients are asymptomatic, and the condition is incidentally found. When compounded with lung conditions, such as pneumonia, COPD exacerbations, sleep-disordered breathing, or other neuromuscular disorders, unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis may also be present and overlooked.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

There are many potential causes of unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. When a patient is being worked up for an underlying cause of unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis, the interprofessional healthcare team may need a consultation to determine the proper diagnosis and treatment for a patient. An internal medicine team will often begin the workup or discover the diagnosis. Neurology may need to assist with neuromuscular disorders and to help determine the location of lesions and the underlying cause. Surgery teams can assist in treatments, or the condition may result from previous surgery. Pulmonary and cardiology teams may be consulted, as dyspnea and respiratory failure can ensue if the condition remains untreated, and it will often mimic cardiac disorders. If respiratory failure does occur, a critical care team should be on board for closer monitoring and ventilator management.

Once considered in a differential, an X-ray was traditionally used to screen, and fluoroscopy was then used to confirm the diagnosis. This process took time and caused patient radiation exposure. With ultrasound being so radially available and advanced, radiation has been replaced by bedside ultrasound with similar diagnostic outcomes in most instances.