The cornea protects internal structures of the eye and provides 40-44 D of refractive power, which is approximately 70% of total refraction. The layers of the cornea, from anterior to posterior, include the epithelium, Bowman layer, stroma, Descemet membrane, and endothelium (**Fig. 1**). The epithelium is a protective layer and provides a smooth surface for the tear film-cornea interface that contributes to refractive power. Bowman layer is the most anterior portion of the stroma and assists in maintaining corneal shape. The stroma is the primary refracting medium of the cornea and source of mechanical strength. The stromal collagen fibers are organized in parallel bundles called fibrils that are arranged in layers at right angles to one another called lamellae. The lamellae are highly interlaced anteriorly but become less so posteriorly. This puts the posterior stroma at risk of becoming swollen when hydrated. The cornea is highly innervated with subepithelial and stromal plexuses supplied by the ophthalmic nerve. Descemet membrane is secreted by endothelial cells and serves as an attachment for endothelium to the stroma via numerous hemidesmosomes.

The endothelium is a monolayer of hexagonal cells with extensive lateral interdigitations and incomplete belt of tight junctions. According to the pump-and-leak hypothesis, anterior chamber contents gradually leak into the corneal stroma supplying it with nutrients.

**Endothelial Diseases**

Diseases affecting the corneal endothelium leading to the surgical intervention will be briefly described.

Fuchs Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy (FECD)

FECD is the most common corneal dystrophy. It presents bilaterally in the second to third decade of life, but there is also a rare early-onset subtype. It displays autosomal dominant inheritance, but sporadic cases are most common. The characteristic features of FECD are the formation of excrescences from the Descemet membrane called guttae, loss of corneal endothelial cell density, and progressive corneal edema. The guttae are visible upon slit-lamp examination, and they develop centrally then coalesce and begin appearing peripherally over the years. Evaluating the distribution of guttae serves as the basis for clinical staging. The endothelial cells in FECD have less antioxidant gene expression and more apoptosis-related factors leading to decreased endothelial cell density. The chronic corneal edema that results causes progressive blurry vision and may lead to painful epithelial bullae.

Pseudophakic and Aphakic Bullous Keratopathy

This disease is a complication of cataract surgery after an artificial intraocular lens is placed (pseudophakic) or not (aphakic). Incidence is 1-2% of cataract surgeries, and risk factors include advanced age or concurrent endothelial disease. The loss of endothelial cells in this disease is a consequence of surgical trauma such as heat from phacoemulsification or high irrigation and aspiration rates, causing turbulence and rapidly moving lens particles. The loss of endothelial cells results in corneal stromal edema, subepithelial bullae, tearing, decreased vision, and pain.

Iridocorneal Endothelial Syndrome (ICE)

ICE is a rare syndrome made up of three clinical variants that include Chandler syndrome, progressive essential iris atrophy, and Cogan-Reese syndrome. Common to all variants is the pathologic proliferation of corneal endothelial cells that migrate to the iridocorneal angle and iris, possibly due to a viral trigger. Pathognomonic to ICE syndrome are endothelial "ICE cells" that have a dark-light reversed pattern on specular microscopy found in areas of the cornea with a hammered silver appearance. Hallmarks of the disease include irregular endothelium structure, blockage of the iridocorneal angle, and iris abnormalities (e.g., atrophy, corectopia, or polycoria). These changes lead to secondary glaucoma and corneal edema and decompensation.

Posterior Polymorphous Dystrophy (PPCD):

PPCD is a rare, autosomal-dominant, bilateral disease affecting the Descemet membrane and corneal endothelium. This disease has variable expressivity, and presentations range from asymptomatic irregularities of the endothelium to symptomatic corneal edema or glaucoma. It typically presents asymptomatically in the first decade of life then progresses at varying rates. Findings on specular microscopy include asymmetric patches of geographic gray hazy lesions, grouped vesicles, and broad bands with scalloped margins as well as stratified epithelium-like endothelium. Other common findings are anterior synechiae and glaucoma.

Congenital Hereditary Endothelial Dystrophy (CHED):

CHED is a rare inherited disease affecting the corneal endothelium characterized by ground glass-like corneal opacification due to endothelium failure and corneal edema as well as and nystagmus. It presents at or shortly after birth. Two genetic forms exist, namely, CHED1, which is autosomal dominant, and CHED2, which is autosomal recessive. CHED2 is more common than CHED1 and share similarities with PPCD, e.g., similar specular microscopy findings.