# Continuing Education Activity

Rickets is a condition characterized by a defect in mineralization of the epiphyseal plates. Rickets could be inherited or acquired. The acquired rickets (nutritional) is the most common cause of rickets worldwide. The spectrum of presentation varies from being asymptomatic to irritability, growth retardation, and sudden death. In order to avoid long term complications, rickets must be promptly diagnosed and aggressively treated. This activity reviews the causes, pathophysiology, and presentation of conditions causing rickets and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with rickets.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of rickets.
- Summarize the evaluation process for diagnosing rickets.
- Outline the management options available for rickets.

# Introduction

Vitamin-D, calcium, and phosphorus are the main factors that influence bone maturation and mineralization. Defective mineralization can lead to rickets and/or osteomalacia. Rickets is characterized by a defect in mineralization and the widening of the epiphyseal plates. Osteomalacia, however, is a defect in the mineralization of the bone matrix. Both rickets and osteomalacia usually occur together in children. Rickets occurs exclusively in children, whereas adults develop osteomalacia after the epiphyseal plate fusion.

# Etiology

**Vitamin D deficiency**is, by far, the most common cause of nutritional rickets.

Based on the biochemical profile, rickets can be classified into calcipenic, phosphopenic, and rickets due to inhibited mineralization.

- Deficiency of calcium results in **calcipenic rickets,**and vitamin D deficiency is the most common etiology for calcipenic rickets. Calcipenic rickets may result from inadequate dietary calcium intake, which is reported in a few developing countries.

- **Phosphopenic rickets**, on the other hand, is caused by conditions that cause chronic low serum phosphate levels, either from impaired intestinal absorption or, more commonly, from increased renal loss. Phosphate is abundant in our regular food, so phosphate deficiency does not usually occur from dietary insufficiency in healthy individuals. In premature children, dietary phosphate deficiency can result in osteopenia of prematurity. Low serum phosphate levels occur in (1) conditions that increase the production or decrease degradation of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), a hormone that reduces the reabsorption and increases the excretion of phosphate in the renal tubules. (2) increased urinary phosphate loss due to mutations that cause inactivation of sodium-dependent phosphate transporters in the kidneys. Both conditions increase the urinary phosphate loss resulting in chronic hypophosphatemia. Both calcipenic rickets and phosphopenic rickets are characterized by hypophosphatemia, which eventually causes the clinical and radiological bone changes characteristic of rickets (rachitic changes).

- **Inhibited mineralization rickets**occurs when there is a defect in growth plate mineralization in the presence of normal calcium and phosphate concentrations. It may result from several predisposing factors including, hereditary hypophosphatasia, medications (first-generation bisphosphonates), and toxicities from aluminum and fluoride.

**Genetic causes**of rickets may be classified broadly into two types: vitamin D-dependent rickets (calcipenic type), and congenital hypophosphatemic rickets (phosphopenic type).

****Vitamin D-dependent rickets:************This group is characterized by defects in either synthesis of the active form of vitamin D (1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D), or defect in vitamin D receptor (VDR), or vitamin D-VDR interactions.

- **Vitamin D-dependent rickets type I A (VDDR1A):**This type is previously known as hereditary pseudo-vitamin D deficiency. It is inherited by an autosomal recessive mutation in the CYP27B1. In this form of rickets, 25-hydroxyvitamin D cannot be converted to 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D due to a deficiency in the 1-alpha hydroxylase enzyme, which is required for vitamin D biosynthesis in the kidney.

- **Vitamin D-dependent rickets type I B (VDDR1B):**This type is also referred to as vitamin D hydroxylation-deficient rickets. It is a rare condition inherited by an autosomal recessive mutation in the CYP2R1 gene. In this form of rickets, vitamin D cannot be converted into 25-hydroxyvitamin D and later to 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D, due to a deficiency in the 25-hydroxylase enzyme, which is another enzyme that required for vitamin D biosynthesis present in the liver.

- **Vitamin D-dependent rickets type II A (VDDR2A):**This type of rickets is also known as hereditary vitamin D-resistant rickets. It is inherited as an autosomal recessive condition. It is characterized by end-organ resistance to the active form of vitamin D. VDDR2A is caused by VDR gene mutations, and these mutations alter the VDR, often preventing the receptor from interacting with 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D. As a result, VDR cannot regulate gene activity, even with normal amounts of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D in the body.

- **Vitamin D-dependent rickets type II B (VDDR2B):**This is an unusual form of vitamin D-dependent rickets. It is caused by overexpression of a nuclear protein that interferes with normal vitamin D function, and the exact pathogenesis is unclear.

****Congenital hypophosphatemic rickets:****

- **FGF-23-dependent hypophosphatemic rickets:**It is characterized by an abnormality in phosphatonin, which regulates phosphate homeostasis. It is further classified into three forms, X-linked dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (most common type), autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets, and autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets.

- **FGF-23-independent hypophosphatemic rickets:**This type of rickets is not phosphatonin-dependent. Yet, FGF-23 levels are fairly normal. It is characterized by a pathology in the renal tubules that causes phosphate transport defects.

The main causes of rickets worldwide in older infants and toddlers are due to vitamin D deficiency, either due to nutritional deficiency or due to insufficient sun exposure. A study revealed 89% of the patients with rickets had no or minimal sun exposure.

# Epidemiology

The prevalence of the disease has increased in both developed and developing countries.

The worldwide incidence has been estimated differently per 100,000 in various countries as follows: in Canada, 2.9; in New Zealand, 10.5 among children less than three years while it is 2.2 in the older age group (3-15 years); in Australia, 4.9; in Turkey, 3.8; and in the United Kingdom, 7.5.

# Pathophysiology

The osseous tissue in the growing long bones is created from the cartilage by a process called endochondral ossification. The chondrocytes in the cartilage grow to form the hypertrophic chondrocytes, which then start producing the cartilage matrix. This cartilage matrix is then calcified, which is reabsorbed and replaced with woven bone, which is later replaced by mature lamellar bone.

Calcium and phosphorus are required for the normal matrix mineralization. Reduction in these minerals causes abnormal mineralization.

**Vitamin D levels**are maintained either by endogenous synthesis or dietary intake.

- **Endogenous vitamin D synthesis:**Vitamin D is synthesized in the human skin after exposure to UVB irradiation (radiation with wavelength 290 to 320 nm).

- **Exogenous vitamin sources:**Vitamin D can be obtained from dietary sources such as fish olive oil, egg yolk, and fatty fish. However, regular dietary sources may not be adequate to meet the daily needs of vitamin D without extra supplementation or fortification.

Low serum calcium, either from its low intake or from vitamin D deficiency, causes a compensatory increase in the PTH, which subsequently causes hypophosphatemia. Low serum phosphate, in turn, inhibits the apoptosis of chondrocytes and thereby accumulation of hypertrophic chondrocytes. Eventually, abnormal growth of the cartilaginous epiphyseal plate occurs. This results in many of the clinical manifestations as well as the radiological changes (widening of epiphysis) of rickets.

# History and Physical

A detailed history and a thorough physical examination are essential to diagnose patients with rickets. History should include the gestational age of the child, details of sunlight exposure, dietary history including intake of supplements, developmental/growth history, and pertinent family history. Positive family history of skeletal abnormalities, stunted growth, alopecia, dental abnormalities, parental consanguinity may suggest a genetic cause of rickets. Physical examinations should include detailed skeletal examination (with attention to any tenderness, deformities, softening, asymmetry, and neurological abnormalities) as well as a detailed dental evaluation.

The clinical manifestations of rickets are variable based on the underlying etiology, severity, and duration of the disease.

- **Skull:**Craniotabes, which is softening of skull bone, seen in infants older than three months of age.

- **Chest:**Ricketic rosary due to the widening of the costochondral junction, pigeon chest, and Harrison’s groove (a depression at the lower side of the ribcage that occurs as the diaphragm pulls the soft ribcage at its insertion site).

- **Extremities:**The child, mainly during infancy, may present with deformities of the weight-bearing limbs, that mostly involve the rapidly growing bones. The crawling infants may present with upper limb deformities. However, when the child starts walking, the deformities are noticed in the lower limbs.

- **Spine:**Spinal column deformity and kyphosis.

- **Other musculoskeletal findings:**Gait disturbance, growth retardation, bone softening, bone pain (present as irritability), bone tenderness, a contracted pelvis that may obstruct the labor during adulthood, hypotonia, proximal myopathy, and limb fractures.

**Other manifestations**of rickets are as follows:

- Delayed dentition, and enamel hypoplasia which carries a high risk for dental caries.

- Additionally, infants with rickets may present with hypocalcemia-related signs and symptoms, including tingling, tetany, paresthesia, muscle spasms, and convulsions.

- Hydrocephalus (also referred to as rickets hydrocephalus), and benign intracranial hypertension may also be observed.

# Evaluation

If the rickets is clinically suspected, biochemical tests and radiological images are the next steps to confirm the diagnosis.

The most important laboratory marker to diagnose the rickets is serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP), which is typically high as this is a disease of abnormal mineralization and increased osteoblastic activity.

Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D level is another laboratory marker that helps to diagnose rickets, especially the nutritional deficiency of vitamin D. The active form of vitamin D (1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D) has a short half-life (5-10 hours).

Routine screening with serum 25 hydroxyvitamin D levels is not recommended for healthy children.

Serum calcium and phosphate levels could vary depending on the type of rickets - calcipenic or phosphopenic type. Serum calcium and PTH levels are usually normal in phosphopenic type. In calcipenic rickets, serum calcium levels are either low or normal (as a result of compensatory increases in PTH).

Measuring urine phosphate is helpful in evaluating the renal loss of phosphate in the genetic forms of hypophosphatemic rickets and other conditions such as Fanconi syndrome associated with phosphaturia.

Other biochemical investigations include blood urea nitrogen (BUN)/creatinine levels to screen for renal status, and liver enzymes to screen liver function.

The radiological images should include the distal ends of rapidly growing bones in upper and lower extremities

The combination of positive clinical signs, relevant laboratory findings (high ALP, and either hypocalcemia or hypophosphatemia), and typical radiological findings confirm the diagnosis of rickets. The diagnosis is still possible in the presence of normal serum calcium and phosphate levels. Similarly, clinical signs are not recognized in the early stages.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment strategies of rickets depend on the underlying etiology - nutritional vs. genetic rickets.

**Treatment of rickets due to nutritional deficiency of vitamin D:**

Treatment includes early intensive and late maintenance phase. There are several regimens utilized to treat rickets due to nutritional deficiency of vitamin D.

- **Single-dose therapy (stoss therapy):**Here, a single large dose of vitamin D is used, particularly in patients with low medication compliance.

- **Multiple doses of vitamin D:**Small daily doses of vitamin D are given in this regimen. The doses depend on the age of the patient. The daily dose for infants < 1 month, 1-12 months, > 12 months are 1000 IU, 1000 – 5000 IU, and 5000 IU, respectively, for 2-3 months.

In toddlers, bone pain improves within two weeks after treatment initiation.

Biochemically, serum calcium, and phosphate levels return to normal levels within six to ten days, whereas PTH normalizes in one to two months. ALP may normalize in three months or longer.

Once the treatment is started, careful monitoring of serum calcium, phosphate, ALP, and 25 hydroxyvitamin D is carried out.

**Prevention of rickets due to nutritional deficiency of vitamin D:**This is a preventable disease. The optimal way to prevent nutritional rickets is to educate the parents and pregnant women about the good dietary sources of calcium and vitamin D as well as about the importance of adequate sun exposure. However, the safe threshold limit for sunlight exposure for vitamin D synthesis without an increased risk for skin cancer is not known.

Additionally, rickets can be prevented by a universal oral vitamin D supplementation of 400 IU given daily to breastfed infants and infants who consume less than 500 mL of fortified formula per day in the first year of their life.

Vitamin D supplementation is an effective intervention in preventing vitamin D deficiency rickets. For example, a nationwide program in turkey was introduced in 2005 to propose a free vitamin D drops (400 IU/day) to children less than three years. The prevalence of rickets has dropped from 6% in 1998 to 0.1% in 2008.

**Treatments of rickets due to genetic causes:**

- The genetic conditions resulting in rickets are best treated by a pediatric endocrinologist and/or metabolic bone specialist.

- Both vitamin D-dependent rickets type I A (VDDR1A) and vitamin D-dependent rickets type I B (VDDR1B) are treated with calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D).

- Vitamin D-dependent rickets type II A (VDDR2A) and vitamin D-dependent rickets type II B (VDDR2B) are treated with high doses of calcitriol and calcium. The long term management includes a high dose of intravenous calcium administration.

- Familial hypophosphatemic rickets is treated with oral phosphate supplementation along with vitamin D as calcitriol or alfacalcidol (1α-hydroxycholecalciferol).

# Differential Diagnosis

Rickets should be differentiated from the following conditions that mimic based on either the biochemical abnormalities or radiological features:

- Renal insufficiency: Bone disease, also known as renal osteodystrophy, occurs due to many reasons such as the reduced formation of 1,25- dihydroxy vitamin D, metabolic acidosis, retention of phosphate, aluminum toxicity, and secondary hyperparathyroidism.

- Conditions increase ALP: Transient hyperphosphatasemia (a benign condition characterized by an increase in ALP mostly seen in children less than < 5 years of age, where both bone and liver fractions are elevated, however, liver enzymes and 25 hydroxyvitamin D levels will be normal

- Conditions which cause hypocalcemia: Primary hypoparathyroidism

- Other bone diseases such: Osteogenesis imperfecta, congenital syphilis

- Nonaccidental injury

- Normal variation: Bowlegs may be seen normally in children < 2 years.

- Skeletal dysplasia: Achondroplasia

- Blount disease: Pathological cox vara (bow legs) due to disruption and altered enchondral bone formation of the medial aspect of proximal metaphysis of the tibia

# Prognosis

The prognosis depends on the cause and severity of rickets. Nutritional rickets has a promising prognosis with prompt recognition and early institution of treatment. It can be cured completely within a few months from starting treatment. However, untreated patients may end with catastrophic complications. On the other hand, genetic causes of rickets mostly are not curable, and the treatment is symptomatic to improve the quality of life and management of complications.

# Complications

The potential complication of the untreated condition includes poor linear growth, osseous deformities, multiple pathological fractures, hydrocephalus, increased intracranial hypertension (ICH), abnormal dentition (dental caries, dental hypoplasia, delayed dentition). Persistent hypocalcemia can lead to complications such as skeletal and cardiac myopathy, seizures, and eventual death.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The parents should be educated about good dietary sources for vitamin D and calcium, fortified food consumption, and also about adequate sun exposure. Vitamin D supplementation to pregnant women and infants is crucial to prevent this condition. Additionally, this condition would get a great benefit from governmental nutritional assistant programs such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) in addressing nutritional deficiencies.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Ideally, rickets is treated with a multidisciplinary approach. The treated team ideally should consist of a primary care physician (pediatrician), registered dietitian, and pediatric endocrinologist. Radiologists help in the interpretation of rachitic radiographic features from other conditions. Referral to an orthopedic surgeon may be needed to treat the deformities. Additionally, in genetic cases of rickets, referral to a geneticist in providing genetic counseling for the family. Consultation with a pediatric nephrologist and/or metabolic bone specialist is helpful in genetic conditions. The role of pharmacists is indispensable in helping clinicians in administering medications.