**Laboratory Evaluation**

Laboratory testing is useful to rule out other disease entities included in the differential diagnosis, in addition to identifying certain complicating features such as anemia due to heavy menstruation. While some biomarkers do exist, none are specific for adenomyosis.

**Radiologic Evaluation**

Imaging is the primary means of making the diagnosis. Previously the preferred modality was MRI; however, recent data has shown the transvaginal ultrasound to match the sensitivity and specificity of MRI (89% sensitivity, 86% specificity).

**Ultrasound**

Transvaginal ultrasound is the preferred diagnostic imaging modality for adenomyosis. The characteristic findings reflect the histopathologic changes of the disease process and can be broken down into three categories**:**

- Endometrial infiltration: Echogenic striations and nodules, myometrial cysts, and “lollipop” diverticula (cystic striations)

- Smooth muscle proliferation: Focal or diffuse myometrial thickening with indistinct borders more commonly involving the posterior fundus and heterogenous echotexture manifesting as “venetian blind” appearance of thin linear shadows

- Vascularity: Color Doppler demonstrating an increased number of tortuous vessels throughout the involved myometrium as opposed to leiomyomas which displace vessels

A number of mimics can have similar findings on the ultrasound exam, including tamoxifen use, prior endometrial ablation, endometriosis, uterine contractions, vascular malformations, leiomyomas, and cancer. Certain techniques such as low-frequency, coronal reconstructions, 3-D ultrasound, cine-clips, color Doppler, and saline infusion sonohysterography (SIS) can be used to differentiate between these entities.

**MRI**

Characteristic findings on MRI parallel the same features seen on ultrasound:

- On T2-weighted imaging, uterine enlargement characterized by ill-defined, low-signal-intensity regions within the junctional zone is reflective of smooth muscle hyperplasia (junctional zone thicker than 12 mm is generally accepted as diagnostic)

- T2 hyperintense myometrial cysts reflecting regions of ectopic endometrial tissue (can also have increased intrinsic T1 signal or increased susceptibility in hemorrhagic foci)

- Contrast enhancement is generally not reliable for assessment of vascularity as compared to color Doppler ultrasound

Similar to ultrasound, a variety of mimics ranging from co-existing gynecologic pathologies to physiologic variants exist. Susceptibility weighted imaging, diffusion-weighted imaging, MR spectroscopy, cine MR imaging, and increased 3T field strength are all problem-solving strategies.

It is important to obtain the MRI in the late proliferative or secretory phase (days 7 to 28) due to the decreased signal of normal myometrium during the early proliferative phase (days 1 to 6).