Post-obstructive diuresis typically occurs after drainage of larger amounts of urine from the bladder, typically 1,500 cc or more.  While diuresis is the expected response to any relief of urinary obstruction, typically this is limited to the period necessary to normalize fluid volume and excess solutes that may have accumulated while obstructed. This temporary condition is known as physiological diuresis and is generally self-limited to 24 hours or less.

When the obligatory loss of salt and water continues long beyond a homeostatic state, the condition becomes pathologic post-obstructive diuresis which is far more dangerous and typically lasts 48 hours or longer.

There are very few clues to help identify which patients with physiological post-obstructive diuresis will progress to the more dangerous pathological variety. There does not appear to be a strict correlation with serum creatinine, electrolyte levels, creatinine clearance or the presence of hypertension and the eventual development of post-obstructive diuresis. However, there is some association with renal failure or insufficiency, congestive heart failure, and volume overload. The degree or volume of immediate drainage is a reasonable predictor of the likelihood of a period of post-obstructive diuresis with patients being at higher risk if the immediate residuals are 1,500 cc or more. This is a good reason to record the residuals, especially when they are expected to be more than 1,000 cc, as this can provide some warning regarding the potential for an extended post-obstructive diuresis.