Ultrasonography is the preferred method for direct visualization and localization of the targeted nerve. Recent research shows that using ultrasound as a standard of care has had beneficial and positive effects on patient satisfaction, surgeon satisfaction, duration and intensity of analgesia, overall procedure time, block time to onset, and reduced overall adverse outcomes. Direct visualization of the needle under ultrasound guidance can help experienced providers avoid intraneural injection and injury, intravascular anesthetic injection, and possibly local anesthetic toxicity. Studies thus far are on a smaller scale and encompass expert opinions; future studies should be done on a larger scale to confirm these opinions and reaffirm the findings from smaller studies.

In a team setting, closed-loop communication must exist. All consents should be signed after specific risks, benefits, and expectations have been explained in detail to the patient. All patients should have a proper procedural timeout performed. The patient's name, date of birth, pertinent allergies, and procedure should be confirmed by all providers and the patient. Site verification and laterality must be confirmed. Implementing guidelines and checklists has proven to reduce the occurrence of adverse outcomes such as surgeon-anesthesiologist miscommunications and wrong-site or wrong-side regional anesthesia procedures.

All team members must communicate their concerns, responsibilities, and activities with all other team members contemporaneously and as indicated throughout the perioperative period, based on their professional discretion. All team members should respect the free flow of information and concerns among team members without allowing or producing an environment of hostility. All interprofessional team members should consider it their duty to neither disrupt the work performed by other team members nor to, through their actions or inaction, create additional issues or increase the workload for other team members. [Level V]