Parenteral acyclovir is the treatment for neonatal HSV infections. Parenteral acyclovir should be administered to all neonates with HSV disease, regardless of manifestations and clinical findings.

The dosage of acyclovir is 60 mg/kg per day in 3 divided doses (20 mg/kg per dose)

- Given intravenously for 14 days in SEM disease

- Given intravenously for a minimum of 21 days in CNS disease or disseminated disease.

The best outcomes in terms of morbidity and mortality are observed among infants with SEM disease. Approximately 50% of infants surviving neonatal HSV experience cutaneous recurrences, with the first skin recurrence often occurring within 1 to 2 weeks of stopping parenteral acyclovir treatment.

All infants with neonatal HSV disease regardless of disease classification should have an ophthalmologic examination and neuroimaging to establish baseline brain anatomy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most sensitive neuroradiologic imaging modality but also may require sedation, so computed tomography (CT) or ultrasonography of the head are acceptable alternatives.

All infants with CNS involvement should have a repeat lumbar puncture performed near the end of therapy to document that the CSF is negative for HSV DNA on PCR assay. In the unlikely event that the PCR result remains positive near the end of a 21-day treatment course, intravenous acyclovir should be administered for another week, with repeat CSF PCR assay performed near the end of the extended treatment period and another week of parenteral therapy if it remains positive. Consultation with an infectious diseases specialist is warranted in these cases.

Oral acyclovir suppressive therapy for the 6 months following treatment of acute neonatal HSV disease improves neurodevelopmental outcomes in infants with HSV CNS disease and prevents skin recurrences in infants with any disease classification of neonatal HSV.

Infants surviving neonatal HSV infections of any classification of infection (disseminated, CNS, or SEM) should receive oral acyclovir suppression at 300 mg/m2 per dose, administered three times daily for six months; the dose should be adjusted each month to account for growth.

Absolute neutrophil counts should be assessed at 2 and 4 weeks after initiating suppressive therapy and then monthly during the treatment period. Longer durations or higher doses of antiviral suppression do not further improve neurodevelopmental outcomes. Valacyclovir has not been studied for longer than 5 days in young infants, so it should not be used routinely for antiviral suppression in this age group.

Infants with ocular involvement attributable to HSV infection should receive a topical ophthalmic drug (1% trifluridine, 0.1% iododeoxyuridine, or 0.15% ganciclovir) as well as parenteral antiviral therapy. An ophthalmologist should be involved in the management and treatment of acute neonatal ocular HSV disease.