As the small bowel is the longest section of the GI tract, responsible for significant absorption and digestion, one can infer that numerous conditions can arise should the small intestine not function properly. Broadly, these can include congenital deformities, growths and obstructions, chronic diseases, and infections. A non-exhaustive list below, with brief explanations, highlights a few important small bowel pathologies.

- **Small bowel obstruction (SBO)**
- Mechanical blockage of the small bowel with the greatest incidence occurring due to post-surgical adhesions: The second most common etiology of an SBO is a strangulated hernia, followed by malignancy, inflammatory bowel disease, foreign bodies, volvulus, and stool impaction.

- **Enteritis**
- Inflammation of the small intestine, most commonly caused by radiation exposure or viral/bacterial pathogens (e.g., Norovirus, C. diff, E. Coli)
- When the stomach is also affected, it is termed gastroenteritis. When the colon is also affected, it is termed enterocolitis.

- **Peptic ulcer disease (PUD)**
- Erosion of the inner lining of the GI tract due to increased gastric acid secretion
- Typically occurs in the stomach and proximal duodenum but may also involve the esophagus, distal duodenum, or jejunum.

- **Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)**
- Not to be mistaken for irritable bowel disease, IBS, also called spastic colon, is a poorly understood syndrome that results in abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea, and constipation. IBS is characterized by motility disturbances and visceral hypersensitivity.

- **Intestinal pseudo-obstruction**
- Signs and symptoms of bowel obstruction (e.g., dilated bowel with abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting) without an identified anatomic obstruction.

- **Celiac disease**
- Also called gluten-sensitive enteropathy, celiac disease is an autoimmune disease of the small intestine in which the body responds to gluten intake with an inappropriate immune response, leading to small intestine inflammation and damage.

- **Crohn disease**
- An autoimmune disease characterized by full-thickness inflammation of the GI tract that may lead to fistulas and strictures. Approximately one-third of Crohn disease patients have involvement of the small bowel, most typically within the terminal ileum.

- **Meckel diverticulum**
- Incomplete obliteration of the omphalomesenteric duct during embryological development of the GI tract leads to a diverticulum (outpouching) of the small intestine.
- Typically remembered by the 'rule of 2's'. It occurs in 2% of the population, typically in children under two years of age, usually located two feet proximal to the ileocecal valve, affects males 2x as often as females, and is two inches long or less.

- **Short bowel syndrome (SBS)**
- SBS may occur as a genetic defect at birth or following surgical resection of the small bowel. 
- As the small bowel is the site of most nutrient and water absorption, SBS is characterized by an inability to absorb fluids and vital nutrients.

- **Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO)**
- SIBO is characterized by an overall increase in bacteria of the small intestine and typically occurs following surgery, when the passage of food and waste slows through the GI tract, leading to optimal conditions for bacterial overgrowth.

- **Superior mesenteric artery (SMA) syndrome**
- As previously mentioned, the third (horizontal) part of the duodenum sits between the superior mesenteric artery and the aorta.
- SMA syndrome typically manifests in patients who have undergone substantial weight loss, as the mesenteric fat pad between the duodenum and the vasculature structures becomes smaller, and the duodenum is at an increased risk of compression by these structures.

- **Duodenal atresia**
- A congenital defect caused by failure of recanalization of a portion of the duodenum, leading to complete occlusion or absence of the duodenal lumen. 
- Presents with vomiting in the first 24 to 36 hours of life. Surgical repair via duodenoduodenostomy is necessary.

- **Necrotizing enterocolitis**
- Hemorrhagic necrotizing inflammation of the intestinal wall of premature neonates, most commonly occurring in the distal ileum and proximal colon. While the causes are not entirely understood, necrotizing enterocolitis is thought to occur due to an underdeveloped immune system.

- **Intussusception**
- It occurs when the proximal portion of the small bowel telescopes into the distal portion, leading to obstruction and bowel ischemia.

- **Enterocele (small bowel prolapse)**
- A type of pelvic organ prolapse in which a portion of the small bowel descends into the pelvic cavity, creating a bulge in the vagina. Those most likely to develop an enterocele include multiparous and post-menopausal women.

- **Carcinoma of the small intestine**
- Small bowel cancers comprise < 5% of all GI cancers and include adenocarcinoma, neuroendocrine tumors, lymphoma, GI stromal tumors, leiomyosarcoma, liposarcoma, and metastatic disease.