The main goals of treatment for GAS pharyngitis include reducing a patient’s duration and severity of symptoms, preventing acute and delayed complications, and preventing the spread of infection to others.

Those with GAS pharyngitis should be treated with either penicillin or amoxicillin, given their relatively low cost and low adverse effect profile. Penicillin can be prescribed as either 250 mg twice or three times daily for children and 250 mg 4 times daily for adults. If the clinician or patient prefers an intramuscular approach for penicillin treatment, then benzathine penicillin G can be given as a one-time dose of 600,000 units if the patient is less than 27 kg and 1.2 million U if the patient is greater than or equal to 27 kg. If amoxicillin is chosen by the prescriber, then the medication can be given 50 mg/kg, once daily with a maximum of 1000 mg per dose or 25 mg/kg twice a day with a maximum of 500 mg per dose. With either the penicillin or oral amoxicillin route, a total of 10 days of treatment should be completed.

For those with an allergy to penicillin, clindamycin (7 mg/kg/dose, 3 times daily; max = 300 mg/dose; 10 day duration), clarithromycin (7.5 mg/kg/dose. twice daily; max = 250mg/dose; 10 day duration) or azithromycin (12 mg/kg, once daily; max = 500mg/dose; 5 day duration) can be prescribed. A first-generation cephalosporin (cephalexin 20 mg/kg/dose, twice daily, max = 500mg/dose; duration 10 days) can also be used for those patients without an anaphylactoid reaction to penicillin.

As adjunctive therapy for the patient with GAS pharyngitis, the IDSA recommends acetaminophen or an NSAID to control pain associated with the disease or any fever that should develop. Currently, the ISDA does not recommend routine adjunctive therapy with corticosteroids for those with GAS pharyngitis.

Following antibiotic treatment, patients may see the resolution of symptoms within one to 3 days and may return to work or school after 24 hours of treatment. A test of cure is not recommended after a course of treatment unless a patient has a history of acute rheumatic fever or another GAS complication. Likewise, post-exposure prophylaxis is not recommended unless a patient has a history of acute rheumatic fever, during outbreaks of non-supportive complications, or when GAS infections are seen recurrently in households or close contacts. Prevention of the disease is through proper hand hygiene, and it also is key to halting disease progression within close quarters.