**Perforation**

Perforation of the pancreas results in the secretion of digestive enzymes such as amylase and lipase into the abdominal cavity and pancreatic self-digestion. While it is possible to remove the pancreas surgically, the individual will face a lifetime of blood glucose regulation and pancreatic enzyme supplements needed to aid digestion.

**Cancer**

Pancreatic cancers, particularly pancreatic adenocarcinoma, are very difficult to treat and are usually diagnosed at a stage too late for surgery. Pancreatic cancer is rare in younger patients; the median age of diagnosis is 71. Risk factors include smoking, obesity, diabetes, and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, and hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer.

**Diabetes Mellitus**

**Type 1**

Diabetes mellitus type 1 is an autoimmune disorder in which the immune system attacks insulin-secreting cells of the pancreas resulting in decreased insulin. Type 1 diabetes usually develops in childhood. Patients with type 1 diabetes require insulin injections for survival.

**Type 2**

Diabetes mellitus type 2 is the most common form of diabetes. The disease causes high blood sugar, usually due to a combination of insulin resistance and impaired insulin secretion. Treatment includes changes in diet and physical activity as well as biguanides such as metformin.

**Inflammation**

Pancreatic inflammation is known as pancreatitis. It is associated with recurrent gallstones, alcohol use, measles, mumps, medications, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, and scorpion stings.

Pancreatitis causes intense pain in the central abdomen that radiates to the back. It may be associated with jaundice. Pancreatitis often presents with pale stools and dark urine.