Surgical techniques involving the palate are rapidly evolving to improve the quality of life for patients further. Palate surgery is typically indicated for patients with severe obstructive sleep apnea, cleft palate repair, and cancer resection.

Cleft palate repair, termed palatoplasty, should be performed between six to twelve months of age to optimize feeding and speech development without interrupting normal maxillofacial growth. There are three types of palatoplasty techniques: one type is for soft palate repair, the second type is for hard palate repair, and the third involves the surgical schedule. Soft palate repair techniques are radical muscle dissection, intravelar veloplasty, primary pharyngeal flap, and double opposing Z-plasty techniques. The hard palate repair techniques consist of the von Langenbeck, Veau-Wardill-Kilner V-Y, vomer flap, and alveolar extension palatoplasty techniques. The surgical schedule/protocol based techniques are whole in one, Malek’s, and modified schedule with palatoplasty before lip repair. The goal of surgery is to reapproximate or realign the palatal muscles. Upon completion of the surgery, this can help expedite the development of normal speech and sound. Further, cleft palate repair with repositioning of muscles can also improve the functioning of the eustachian tube and hearing. When a surgeon repositions the palatal muscles correctly, this maneuver can improve middle ear ventilation and decrease episodes of otitis media and hearing defects.

The most common surgical procedure used to treat obstructive sleep apnea is called uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) and involves the repositioning and/or removal of tissue at the soft palate, uvula, and throat walls to increase airway size and decrease tissue collapse.

Soft palate implants, or the pillar procedure, is a minimally invasive procedure that has demonstrated to help with mild to moderate cases of sleep apnea. The pillar procedure requires the placement of three rods made of polyester into the soft palate. These polyester rods incite an inflammatory reaction within the surrounding soft tissue, which results in a stiffening of the soft palate. This inflammatory reaction results in a stiffer soft palate that is less apt to make contact with the posterior pharyngeal wall as the muscles relax during the deep stages of sleep.

Surgical resection is the treatment for cancer of the hard palate. Extension into surrounding bone is common, and frequently warrants removal of adjacent bone. If the tumor is small, the excision may be closed after surgery. If the tumor is large, a prosthetic device can serve to cover the opening in the palate as the excised area cannot be closed.