Steroids, specifically dexamethasone, are given, and the goal of treatment is the stabilization of neurological symptoms until possible neurosurgical biopsy or radiation therapy. Complications due to long term use should be avoided; thus, it should be weaned off as quickly as tolerated.

The most important step in management is obtaining a tissue diagnosis. First, it characterizes the lesion for classification and treatment, and second, it is used for research and development of more effective management strategies. Nevertheless, there has been a historical resistance to biopsy of these tumors, because of anatomical access. Fortunately, the technology has advanced, and stereotactic biopsy is a safe and minimally invasive procedure that has a very low complication rate. Based on the literature, a stereotactic biopsy of DIPG is as safe and diagnostic as a supratentorial biopsy, and the amount of tissue in the biopsy allows for analysis, including whole-genome sequencing.

Radiation oncologists are consulted immediately after diagnosis to plan further treatment. Even though there have been tremendous advancements in radiation and research in oncology, outcomes for survival for children with DIPGs have not changed significantly over the past 20 years.

Several clinical trials of various systemic therapies, including stem cell transplantation, temozolomide, gemcitabine, capecitabine, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been tested or are ongoing. Still, none have proved to increase the survival of children with DIPGs.