**Schwartz–Jampel Syndrome**

This is a rare condition caused by a loss of function mutation of the heparan sulfate proteoglycan 2 gene (HSPG2). Unlike DM, there is no warm-up phenomenon of the myotonia. Additionally, during nerve conduction studies, the myotonic discharges lack the waxing and waning in amplitude and frequency.

**Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis (HPP)**

HPP is an autosomal dominant muscle sodium channelopathy that is illustrated by episodic attacks of muscle weakness. It is due to a mutation of the SCN4A protein of skeletal muscle sodium channels located on chromosome 17q23. The attacks characteristically manifest during the first decade of life and typically last less than one hour.

**Paramyotonia Congenita (PC)**

PC presents with paradoxical myotonia, which is made worse by repetitive muscle contractions and exercise. It also demonstrates increased myotonia with decreased muscle temperature.

**Myotonia Congenita**

Myotonia congenita is an inheritable disorder of the chloride voltage-gated channel 1 gene (CLCN1) on chromosome 7q35, which encodes the chloride channel within human skeletal muscle. It has an autosomal recessive (Becker disease) and autosomal dominant (Thomsen disease) inheritance pattern. The autosomal form tends to be more severe.

**Conditions with Electrical Myotonia without Clinical Myotonia**

- Myotubular myopathy

- Acid maltase deficiency

- Debrancher deficiency

- Inflammatory myopathies

- Hypothyroid myopathy

- Chloroquine myopathy

- Statin myopathy

- Cyclosporine myopathy