Art and health have been a focus of human interest from the beginning of recorded history.

**Cancer**

Cancer patients invariably seek complementary therapies as adjuncts to their oncologic treatments. The average cancer patient reports up to a dozen symptoms, including fatigue, pain, anorexia, cachexia, dyspnea, and anxiety.

**Heart failure**

Major cardiology societies have recently recognized the integration of palliative care in chronic heart failure patients and made recommendations for early palliative care involvement in the disease trajectory appear in ACCF/AHA guidelines.

**HIV/AIDs**

Despite the advent of antiretroviral therapy, HIV/AIDS patients often seek alternative nonpharmacologic therapies to relieve debilitating symptoms associated with their chronic illness. Along with physical suffering, HIV/AIDs, patients can experience ample emotional suffering that accompanies the negative stigma associated with their disease. The AIDS Memorial Quilt served was one of the first objective forms of art therapy and emotional expression for those people living with HIV/AIDs.

**Dementia**

Dementia patients often suffer from debilitating neuropsychiatric symptoms that negatively impact their quality of life. Considering the limited efficacy in pharmacologic treatments for progressive dementia, non-pharmacologic alternatives are considered to be a valuable adjunctive approach, and there have been suggestions for an array of modalities.

**End-Stage Renal Disease**

End-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients who commit to the highly demanding lifestyle of long term hemodialysis exhibit a lower health-related quality of life and increased rates of anxiety and depression, subsequently increasing the risk of non-adherence, increased symptom burden, and increased mortality. Although few high-quality studies have examined the effects of art therapy interventions in the ESRD population, some literature looking at the impact of music and other art-based therapies in hemodialysis patients found improvements in the perception of bothersome symptoms, including pain and itching. Improved treatment compliance, health-related quality of life, and reductions in anxiety and depression have also been reported.