After ensuring that all the prerequisites for operative vaginal delivery have been met, the vacuum cup is applied to the fetal scalp. The cup is placed symmetrically astride the sagittal suture at the fetal pivot point. The fetal pivot point is located approximately two centimeters anterior to the posterior fontanelle or six centimeters posterior to the anterior fontanelle. It should not be placed directly over the fontanelle. Correct placement will assist with flexion, descent, and rotation of the vertex when traction is applied, minimizing the risk of injury to both the fetus and the maternal soft tissues. Before applying suction, it is important to sweep a finger around the cup to ensure no intervening vaginal or cervical tissues between the cup and the fetal scalp. Once an appropriate placement is confirmed, suction can then be applied. Vacuum pressures are then raised to the desired pressure, often indicated by a green zone on many devices. Downward traction is then applied along the pelvic curve using the dominant hand. The other hand monitors the progress of descent and prevents cup detachment by applying counter pressure to the cup. Traction is applied during contractions and maternal expulsive efforts. The suction is removed, and the cup is detached once the fetal head is crowning. The rest of the delivery is then carried out in the usual manner.

Should the device disengage during delivery attempts, additional attempts may be initiated. Manufacturers discourage more than two to three attempts (or pop-offs), and clinicians should proceed with cesarean section.