Amikacin can be administered parenterally or via nebulization. There is no oral formulation of the drug available because the drug is not absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Amikacin can be administered intramuscularly when intravenous access is not available. In some patients with meningitis, it can be administered intrathecally and reaches high concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid immediately.

**Dosing based on weight (Kg):**

- Underweight or nonobese: dose on ACTUAL body weight (ABW)

- Obese (ABW/IBW* > or = to 1.25): dose on DOSING body weight (DBW= IBW + 0.4(ABW - IBW)

**Adult Dosing:**

- **Conventional Dosing:**5mg/kg IV every 8 hours - the elderly often require only a 12 hr dosing interval

- 
**Adjustment for renal impairment (assuming every 8-hr dosing)**

Greater than 50 mL/min (CrCL): no adjustment

30 to 50 mL/min: every 12 to 18 hrs

10 to 29 mL/min: every 18 to 24 hr

Less than 10 mL/min: dose based on plasma concentrations or consult a pharmacist.

**Once Daily Dosing:**

Not to be used in patients with ascites, over 20% BSA burns, pregnant patients, or patients on dialysis. (Use conventional dosing or consult a pharmacist.)

15 mg/kg per dose once daily

**Adjustment for renal impairment:**

60 mL/min (CrCL) and above: every 24 hours

40 to 59 mL/min: every 36 hours

30 to 39 mL/min: every 48 hours

Less than 30mL/min: Use conventional dosing method

**Intravitreal:**0.4 mg/0.1 mL of normal saline (preservative-free formulation, OFF LABEL)

**Intrathecal/intraventricular:**5 to 50 mg/day, usual dose is 30 mg (preservative-free formulation, OFF LABEL)

*IBW: Ideal body weight, ABW: Actual body weight, DBW: Dosing body weight, CrCL: creatinine clearance (not eGFR)

There is also liposomal amikacin undergoing clinical trials to treat respiratory infections in patients with cystic fibrosis and bronchiectasis. In the trials, the liposomal dosage form is being used to treat nontuberculous bacteria and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Liposomal amikacin is FDA indicated for the treatment of Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC), which is inhaled using a nebulizer for 14 to 20 minutes.

Special Populations

Amikacin use requires great caution in the elderly population who tend to have decreased renal function. Also, young children do not have a fully developed renal system, and hence smaller doses are necessary.