**History and Presentation**

Biliary obstruction can have very varied presentations depending on the underlying etiology. It usually presents as jaundice with clay-colored or acholic stools and dark urine. Patients can have pruritis with chronic biliary obstruction. Patients depending on underlying etiology, can have right upper quadrant abdominal pain, fever, nausea and vomiting, and weight loss. The onset of these symptoms can be variable ranging from acute development of symptoms to over months.

A careful history of symptom duration, if gradual or acute onset, accompanying symptoms like weight loss, loss of appetite, nausea/vomiting is important. Similarly, any right-sided abdominal pain, along with severity and radiation, is important to know. History of diarrhea, hematochezia, and upper GI bleeding symptoms is also relevant to diagnosing the underlying process. It is imperative to know any pertinent personal and family history like bile duct or pancreatic malignancy, inflammatory bowel disease, or primary liver disease. A careful review of social history related to current and former smoking, alcohol use, and drug abuse is important. Similarly, travel history to parasitic endemic regions is of value in determining the etiology of biliary obstruction. A careful review of medication history can sometimes be of great significance in determining intrahepatic cholestasis vs. extrahepatic biliary obstruction.

**Physical Examination**

A detailed and thorough physical exam is of paramount importance. It is imperative to check baseline vital signs, especially checking for fever and elevated heart rate. A general physical exam to assess for any distress, pallor, skin jaundice, scleral icterus, palmer erythema, and signs of malnutrition is important. A detailed abdominal examination to assess for right upper quadrant tenderness (Murphy's sign), hepatomegaly and splenomegaly, presence of ascites, any palpable mass, and stigmata of cirrhosis (caput-medusae) is very crucial for diagnosis. A cardiac exam to assess for signs of congestive heart failure with jugular venous distension and displacement of heart sounds can be very important to determine underlying etiology. Similarly, a pulmonary exam to assess for pleural effusions, determining whether one-sided or bilateral, helps determine etiology. Assessment for lymphadenopathy in left supraclavicular lymph nodes and other neck lymph nodes can provide helpful information. Looking for lower extremity edema is also important.