Back pain is a broad topic with many potential etiologies that are broken mainly into five primary categories

- **Mechanical**: Most commonly this is due to injury to the spine, intervertebral discs, or soft tissues. Fractures such as spondylolisthesis can be both an acute or chronic process. Lumbago often is labeled as acute back pain or a strain to either the quadratus lumborum muscle or the paraspinal muscles. Disc herniation is a common type of traumatic back pain. Pregnancy is also a mechanical cause of back pain.

- **Degenerative**: Osteoarthritis of the spine includes facet joint osteoarthritis, sacroiliac joint osteoarthritis, spinal stenosis, and degenerative disc disease. Furthermore, osteoporotic compressive fractures are also a degenerative process.

- **Inflammatory**: This is caused primarily due to inflammatory (seronegative) spondyloarthropathies such as ankylosing spondylitis. Sacroiliitis is most commonly seen. The pathophysiology of back pain depends on the etiology. Most often, it may be a part of an acute inflammatory process.

- **Oncologic**: This is caused by lytic lesions to the spine, cancers of the marrow, or compressive nerve phenomena from adjacent space-occupying lesions. Often presenting as a pathological fracture.

- **Infectious**: Infections of the spine, discs, epidural abscesses, or muscular/soft tissue abscesses

It is important to note, however, that many non-back-related disorders may result in pain that patients perceive in the back, such as biliary colic, pneumonia, and obstructive or infectious renal disease. Therefore, it is prudent not to exclude these processes from your differential diagnosis while evaluating the patient.