A branchial cleft cyst is typically present as a non-tender, fluctuant, lateral neck mass. They may become inflamed, tender and possibly suppurate during an upper respiratory tract infection.

**Specific Features of Each Level of Cyst**

**First Branchial Cleft Cyst**

First branchial cleft cysts comprise 5% to 25% of all branchial cleft cysts. There are two different subtypes within the first branchial cleft category. A Work’s type I first branchial cleft cyst presents as a preauricular cyst. There is a duplication of the external auditory canal which is comprised of ectodermal elements only. The tract of the type I cleft passes lateral to cranial nerve VII, parallels the external auditory canal and ends in the mesotympanum. A Work’s type II branchial cleft cyst is found along the angle of the mandible, periauricular area or in the submandibular area. Type II first branchial clefts are more common and contain both ectoderm and mesoderm. Fifty-seven percent of type II first branchial cleft cysts pass laterally to cranial nerve VII, while 30% of them pass medially. These cysts end within or near the external auditory canal.

**Second Branchial Cleft Cyst**

Second branchial cleft cysts are the most common type and have been reported to comprise up to 95% of all branchial cleft cysts. Second branchial cleft cysts run between internal and external carotid arteries, pass deep to cranial nerve VII, superficial to cranial nerves XII and IX, and end internally in the tonsillar fossa if there is an associated sinus. They run deep to second arch derivatives such as the manubrium of the malleus, the long process of the incus and the stapes superstructure and superficial to third arch derivatives such as the greater cornu of the hyoid.

**Third Branchial Cleft Cyst**

A third branchial cleft cyst is more commonly found on the left side in the lower portion of the anterior neck. These cysts may present as an abscess, neck mass or thyroiditis. Third branchial cleft cysts run superficially to cranial nerve X and the common carotid artery, superficial to cranial nerve XII and deep to cranial nerve IX. The associated tract, if present, then passes through the thyrohyoid membrane above superior laryngeal nerve and opens into the upper piriform sinus.

**Fourth Branchial Cleft Cyst**

These branchial cleft cysts are rare. A fourth branchial cleft cyst typically presents as a low anterior neck mass, beneath the platysma and anterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The tract of a fourth branchial cleft cysts loops around cranial nerve XII then runs posterior to the common carotid artery and thyroid following the recurrent branch of cranial nerve X. It then runs through the cricothyroid membrane below superior laryngeal nerve with recurrent laryngeal nerve deep to its path and drains into the apex of the piriform sinus.