Various stains are useful for the study of the mammary glands. The hematoxylin and eosin combination is useful for the visualization of various structures. The hematoxylin component stains the nuclei in blue/purple, while the eosin gives a pinkish hue to eosinophilic structures (e.g., cytoplasm, collagen, and muscle fibers). Masson’s trichrome stains collagen fibers and is mostly used to evaluate tumor fibrosis. Moreover, immunostaining can be used to identify antigens that serve as important diagnostic markers. Some of the most relevant examples include antibodies against the estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). These markers help classify malignant tumors into molecular subtypes (luminal-A, luminal-B, HER-2 enriched, and triple-negative). Other antibodies used in immunohistochemistry include those against myoepithelial antigens (a-SMA, myosin, calponin, p63, CD10, S100) and luminal antigens (cytokeratins [CK] 7, 8, 18, and 19). Differentiation between cell types is generally done using CK5 for bipotent MaSCs, CK19 for ductal luminal cells, CK18 for alveolar luminal cells, and CK14 for myoepithelial cells. CK8 and E-cadherin are especially useful for distinguishing between ductal and lobular carcinomas. Although CK8 is positive for both, it usually stains the peripheral cytoplasm in ductal carcinoma, while it has a perinuclear staining pattern in lobular carcinoma. The E-cadherin antigen is mainly expressed in ductal carcinomas and absent in lobular ones.