Megaloblastic anemia occurs from deficiencies in folic acid and vitamin B12. Folate deficiency is due to diminished intake (alcohol abuse or malnutrition), increased consumption (hemolysis or pregnancy), malabsorption (familial, gastric bypass, or medications like cholestyramine or metformin). Vitamin B12 deficiency appears in diminished intake (malnutrition), malabsorptive states (atrophic gastritis either autoimmune or non-autoimmune from Helicobacter pylori or Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, Diphyllobothrium tapeworm infection, gastric bypass, ileal resection), or the presence of antagonists (nitrous oxide). Drugs that impair DNA synthesis are folic acid analogs (ex. methotrexate, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole), nucleic acid analogs (5-fluorouracil, zidovudine), and others (hydroxyurea, pentamidine, phenytoin, pyrimethamine, sulfasalazine, triamterene).

Non-megaloblastic anemia, the absence of hypersegmented neutrophils, occurs in a variety of settings. Benign conditions are alcohol consumption (RBC toxicity), hereditary spherocytosis (impaired volume regulation increases red cell size), hypothyroidism and liver disease (due to lipid deposition in the cell membrane), and marked reticulocytosis from states of excess RBC consumption such as hemolysis or turnover in pregnancy or primary bone marrow disease (reticulocytes are larger than the average RBCs).

Some cases of macrocytosis are normal variants associated with a genetic predisposition or found in infants, patients with Down syndrome, and pregnant women. Others are spurious findings include hyperglycemia concentrates the blood, and when diluted, the RBCs swell with volume, leukocytosis and paraproteinemia increase sample turbidity for overestimates of RBC size, or operator error from occlusion of microscope aperture or sample left out at room temperature too long.