Most data regarding outcomes for this group of tumors are related to ganglioglioma and DNET since they are the most common tumors within the group. Seizure outcomes after surgical intervention are of particular interest since seizures are the most common presenting symptom of these tumors. Mehrotra et al. reviewed seizure outcomes for a series of 26 patients with seizures related to neuronal/glioneuronal brain tumors.

Favorable prognostic factors for postoperative improvement included earlier diagnosis, younger patient age, and focal partial seizure semiology. Early operative intervention was associated with the best long-term seizure outcomes. The extent of resection may also play an essential role in creating seizure freedom with surgery. A comprehensive review of the literature, including 1181 patients undergoing tumor resection with the intent of seizure control, demonstrated that 79% of patients that underwent a gross total tumor resection were seizure-free compared to only 43% of patients that underwent subtotal resection.

Furthermore, patients with gross total resection plus resection of some surrounding tissue experienced 87% postoperative seizure freedom, which suggests that it may be important to resect surrounding dysplastic tissue during tumor resection. Similar findings have been demonstrated in children with epilepsy related to neuronal/glioneuronal brain tumors.

A specific outcome measure that is important for central neurocytoma is the need for long-term management of hydrocephalus with CSF shunting. The gross total resection of these tumors is related to lower ventricular shunting rates.

Anaplastic ganglioglioma carries the worst prognosis of any tumor within this group. An analysis of available cases in the literature suggested a poor overall survival with the median at 29 months despite maximal therapy.

Generating accurate prognoses for many of the other tumors in this group is somewhat difficult due to their rare nature. However, most appear relatively benign on histological and molecular characterization and are given low WHO grades, which suggests a favorable long-term survival, with the main concern being the ability to control symptoms related to the tumors, often via surgical intervention as discussed.