In the acute setting, the interventions for an MCA stroke are IV tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) and thrombectomy, if the patient qualifies. As mentioned above, the time of onset will determine if the patient qualifies for these interventions. For IV TPA, the last known normal has to be within 4.5 hours of the administration of the thrombolytic. For thrombectomy, the last known normal has to be within 24 hours of intervention.

Secondary stroke prevention is aimed at modifiable risk factors, which were briefly addressed in the section on etiology. Modifiable risk factors include diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and smoking. The first value that is addressed is glycosylated hemoglobin, which is used to measure the presence and severity of diabetes. In a stroke patient, the goal is less than 6.5%. This needs to be managed with appropriate diabetic medications, dietary modification, and close monitoring of blood glucose as well as frequent checks of glycosylated hemoglobin levels in those above or approaching this value. This should be checked approximately every three months.

Blood pressure is another important modifiable risk factor. In the first 24 hours after the last known well, there is a period of permissive hypertension to prevent further ischemic injury to tissue at risk in the setting of low cerebral perfusion pressure. If the patient does not receive IV TPA, the goal is less than 220/120 mmHg. If the patient does receive TPA, it is less than 185/105 mmHg in order to decrease the risk of hemorrhagic transformation. After these 24 hours, the goal drops to normotensive, less than 140/90 mmHg, for the patient’s lifetime. It is important to adjust blood pressure medications accordingly, and for the patient to closely monitor their blood pressure at home.

In order to manage hyperlipidemia, the patient needs their lipid profile checked, the target of which is the level of low-density lipoprotein (LDL). The goal LDL in a patient who has had a stroke is less than 70. If it is not at goal, they need a high-intensity statin medication, typically atorvastatin or rosuvastatin. If they are already on this medication before the stroke, the dosage needs to be increased if they are not at goal. If they are already at the maximum dose, this needs to be continued as such, regardless of whether they are at goal or not. LDL needs to be closely monitored every few months, particularly if the patient is newly started on a statin or their dosage is changed, in order to monitor whether their cholesterol levels are responding appropriately.

Another important modifiable risk factor is smoking. It is necessary to emphasize the importance of smoking cessation to a patient who is an active smoker and has had a stroke.

The final piece in secondary stroke prevention, and possibly the most important, is addressing the need for an antiplatelet or anticoagulant. The appropriate medication varies with the presentation, previous medication, and stroke etiology. If the patient does not receive TPA and has an NIHSS score of less than 4, it is recommended to use dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin, between 81 mg to 325 mg at the discretion of the physician, and clopidogrel 75 mg daily for 3 months. After these 3 months, the patient can be continued on monotherapy. If the NIHSS score is greater than 4, the recommendation is to load with aspirin. If they were already on aspirin 81 mg daily, their dosage might be increased to 325 mg, or they may be switched to clopidogrel 75mg daily.

If they are found to have an intracardiac thrombus or atrial fibrillation, or another reason for anticoagulation, such as a recent history of deep venous thrombosis (DVT), then they can be continued on anticoagulation, and there is no indication from a neurologic perspective for antiplatelets. Studies have indicated that there is no significant difference in stroke recurrence in the setting of holding anticoagulation versus resuming within 24 hours (48 if the patient receives IV TPA). However, some studies have indicated a slightly increased risk for hemorrhagic transformation if it is resumed in 48 hours up to 7 days. Typically, due to this difference in the risk of hemorrhagic transformation, it is recommended to hold anticoagulation in the immediate period following acute ischemic stroke.