The key functions of the colon include the following:

- Water and nutrient absorption

- Vitamin absorption

- Feces compaction

- Potassium and chloride secretion

- Moving waste material toward the rectum

The cecum is the proximal blind pouch of the ascending colon, lying at the level of the ileocecal junction. The terminal ileum opens into the cecum on the medial wall, and the ileocecal valve guards this opening. The appendix is a thin cylindrical organ with a blind attachment to the cecum. The base of the appendix lies on the posteromedial wall of the cecum about 1 to 2 centimeters below the ileocecal junction. The tip of the appendix frequently floats in the peritoneal cavity and is most commonly located in a retrocecal position. It has a short triangular mesentery called the mesoappendix.

The cecum is continuous with the second part of the large intestine: the ascending colon. The ascending colon runs superiorly on the right side of the abdomen from the right iliac fossa to the right lobe of the liver. At this point, it makes a left turn at the right colic flexure (hepatic flexure). Ascending colon is a retroperitoneal organ and has paracolic gutters on either side.  The transverse colon is the third, most mobile, and longest part of the large intestine. It is found between the right and left colic flexures. The left colic flexure is less mobile than the right and is attached to the diaphragm through the phrenocolic ligament. The transverse colon is attached to a mesentery, the transverse mesocolon, which has its root along the inferior border of the pancreas. The transverse colon continues as the descending colon. The two are demarcated at the splenic flexure.  The descending colon is a retroperitoneal organ and related to paracolic gutters on either side. It terminates into the sigmoid colon, which is the fifth part of the large intestine. The sigmoid colon links the descending colon to the rectum. The sigmoid colon is an S-shaped loop of varying length and becomes the rectum at the level of S3.

The rectum occupies the concavity of the sacrococcygeal curvature.  It is fixed, primarily retroperitoneal, and subperitoneal in location. It transitions to the anal canal at the level of the puborectal sling, which is formed by the fibers of the levator ani muscles. The rectum has an expanded middle segment called the ampulla.  The rectum is anteriorly related to the rectovesical pouch, prostate, bladder, urethra, and seminal vesicles in males. In females, the rectum has an anterior relationship to the recto-uterine pouch, cervix, uterus, and vagina.