Amyloid beta peptide is a 42-amino acid peptide and derives from the precursor protein, amyloid beta precursor protein (APP). The amyloid beta precursor protein is a transmembrane glycoprotein that spans the membrane once. The gene for amyloid beta precursor protein is on chromosome 21. Amyloid beta precursor protein is cleaved by beta-secretase, and gamma secretase to release amyloid beta peptide containing 40 or 42 amino acids, denoted as Ab 1-40 or Ab1-42, respectively. Beta secretase act on amyloid beta precursor proteins to produce the N terminal and gamma secretase produce the C terminal of the peptide. The peptide Ab 1-42, which is the main pathogenic peptide, is highly hydrophobic and tends to aggregate into oligomers and fibrils. The hydrophobic amino acids confer the hydrophobicity in the C terminal of the peptide. These fibrils then arrange in a beta-pleated sheet and form the amyloid plaques seen on conventional H and E staining or amyloid specific staining. Recent research suggests that the oligomers rather than the amyloid plaques are neurotoxic and may major play a role in pathogenesis.

Several clinical and genetic observations support the amyloid cascade hypothesis. One of the initial observations of early-onset Alzheimer disease identified a genetic link to the disease. Patients with Down syndrome have an extra copy of chromosome 21 and, by inference, have excess amyloid beta precursor protein production. Most patients with Down syndrome have amyloid plaques in their brains by age 30 and clinically develop Alzheimer disease dementia in their 40s, suggesting a role for excess amyloid beta precursor protein or its processing in Alzheimer disease. Mutations in the amyloid beta precursor protein gene itself, one of the first studied in familial Alzheimer disease, account for 10% to 15% of familial Alzheimer disease. Another mutation in the catalytic subunits of the gamma-secretase complex, the enzyme involved in processing amyloid beta precursor protein to an amyloid beta peptide, also causes familial Alzheimer disease. Presenilin 1 and 2 are the subunits of the enzyme gamma secretase complex. Mutation in Presenilin 1 gene is the commonest cause of familial Alzheimer disease. The gene for Presenilin 1 is located on chromosome 14 and accounts for up to 80% of cases of familial Alzheimer disease. Researchers think that this mutation causes excess production of Ab 1-42 as opposed to Ab 1-40. The gene for Presenilin 2 is on chromosome 1.

Another well-established and supporting genetic risk factor for the amyloid cascade hypothesis is Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) polymorphism. There are three isoforms of the protein in the population encoded by the gene for ApoE; these are ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4. Carriers with polymorphism ApoE4 have a higher risk of sporadic Alzheimer disease as compared to the general population. The risk is also higher in those with homozygous ApoE4 as compared to heterozygous ApoE4 suggesting a dose-dependent risk. Studies have shown a robust correlation with ApoE4 gene carrier status and amyloid plaque burden in both patients with Alzheimer disease and cognitively normal individuals. Among the many functions, ApoE acts as a chaperone involved in the clearance of amyloid plaques, and the ApoE4 isoform appears to be a poor chaperone promoting amyloid beta deposition.