**Cavernous sinus syndrome**

The cavernous sinus in the cranium contains five cranial nerves, with four of those nerves involved in innervation of the eyes. The cranial nerves that travel through the cavernous sinus are CN III, CN IV, CN V1, CN V2, and CN VI. The cavernous sinus is a collection of dural sinuses that happens to be on either side of the pituitary gland. The venous blood that drains into the cavernous sinus originates from the eyes and superficial cortex. Finally, the venous blood from the cavernous sinus will drain toward the internal jugular veins. The pathologies that could potentially affect the nerves in the cavernous sinus are due to the mass effect. The causes can be from thrombosis, pituitary tumors, carotid-cavernous fistula, or infections. All of these etiologies can cause increased pressure in the cavernous sinus and compression of the cranial nerves. The cranial nerve that is most commonly affected by the compression in the cavernous sinus is the trochlear nerve. The signs and symptoms from compression of the cavernous sinus are variable/multiple ophthalmoplegia, decrease sensation on the corneal, Horner syndrome, and decrease maxillary sensation.

****Horner syndrome****

In Horner syndrome, there is sympathetic denervation of the face due to the compromise of one of the sympathetic neurons that travels toward the eyes. This condition characteristically demonstrates by unilateral ptosis, anhidrosis, and miosis. Ptosis is drooping of the eyelid due to the lack of innervation in the superior tarsal muscle. Anhidrosis is a lack of sweating. The lack of sweating is due to denervation of the sweat glands in the face. Miosis is the constriction of the pupil. Miosis develops due to the denervation of the muscles that dilate the pupil and unopposed parasympathetic nervous system innervation. The etiologies of Horner syndrome that affect the first neuron can be from pontine hemorrhage, lateral medullary syndrome, and spinal cord lesions such as Brown-Sequard syndrome or syringomyelia. Etiologies that affect the second neuron are usually from a Pancoast tumor in the apex of the lungs compressing the stellate ganglion. Lastly, the third neuron can be affected by carotid dissection due to the sympathetic nerve fibers travel on the carotid arteries. Uniquely, the dissection of the carotid artery will present with pain in the neck and unilateral Horner syndrome.

**Internuclear ophthalmoplegia**

The horizontal eye movements are coordinated between CN III and CN VI via the medial longitudinal fasciculus. The action of horizontal eye movement is a result of CN VI triggering a contraction of the lateral rectus muscle. The lateral rectus muscle will pull the ipsilateral eye laterally; this will trigger an impulse from the abducens nucleus in the pons to send a signal through the medial longitudinal fasciculus to the oculomotor nucleus. Then the oculomotor nucleus will trigger CN III to contract the medial rectus to pull the contralateral eye medially. In multiple sclerosis, the medial longitudinal fasciculus is demyelinated leading to internuclear ophthalmoplegia, resulting in horizontal nystagmus. For example, right internuclear ophthalmoplegia presents with the inability to adduct the right eye and vice versa for the left eye.