The Spine Intervention Society (SIS, also formerly known as the International Spine Intervention Society or ISIS) has laid forth thoroughly researched practice guidelines.

PD is performed in a procedural suite with x-ray fluoroscopy.  The patient is positioned prone (except in the case of cervical discography where they are supine). A chlorohexidine-based prep and occlusive drapes should be utilized. Intravenous antibiotics should be administered before skin puncture, or intradiscal antibiotics may be used, or both. The performing physician should perform a surgical scrub and don a sterile gown and double gloves, and not touch the distal portion of the needle that will be entering the disc. Only light sedation, if any, is preferred. This procedure can be performed under local anesthetic or by the additional administration of oral valium to help ensure that the patient is relatively comfortable but not heavily sedated since real-time accurate patient feedback is essential. Under fluoroscopic guidance, the nucleus pulposus of each disc to be tested is entered with the smallest gauge needle possible, typically a 22 or 25 gauge spinal needle. The discs are then sequentially pressurized with contrast, and the patient’s response to pressurization of each disc is noted. If pain reproduced is of adequate severity and similar in quality to the patient’s usual spine pain, the test is deemed concordant; however, if the pain produced is dissimilar to the patient's usual spine pain, the test is discordant. PD results are valid if all of the following criteria are satisfied: the patient is alert enough to relate information reliably, manometry is utilized for each disc tested, and a radiographically normal control disc does not produce concordant pain when pressurized. Some authors have advocated adding local anesthetic after the provocation portion to improve diagnostic accuracy, but the literature is conflicting. At the conclusion of the test, the patient may be sent for a post-procedure non-contrast CT scan which allows the evaluating physician to better appreciate disc morphology as compared to fluoroscopy alone.