Genes are comprised of DNA, which encodes for distinct proteins that perform a specific function in the body. Through transcription, the DNA is converted into messenger RNA (mRNA) and then translated into a protein. HHT is an autosomal dominant disorder that can affect blood vessels within multiple organ systems. The condition is suspected to be haploinsufficiency, where one functional gene copy cannot produce the required protein to preserve function.

In 97% of patients with a definite clinical HHT diagnosis, a causative mutation is identified in one of three genes, described below.

**HHT Type I (HHT1)**

HHT1 stems from mutations in the gene ENG, which codes for endoglin on chromosome 9.

**HHT Type 2 (HHT2)**

HHT2 results from mutations in Activin A receptor-like type I (ACVRL1), which codes for the protein activin receptor-like kinase 1 (ALK1) on chromosome 12.

**HHT Associated with Juvenile Polyposis (JPHT or JP-HHT)**

JPHT is due to a mutation in the gene Mothers Against Decapentaplegic homolog 4 (MADH4) that codes for the transcription factor SMAD4, a critical downstream effector of TGF-B signaling.Smad4 and include several mutation types, including nonsense, missense, frameshift, and de novo.

The distribution in gene mutations among HHT patients is predominantly ENG (61%), followed by ACVRL1 (37%), and then MADH4 (2%). Additionally, more than 600 mutations, including deletions, missense, nonsense, and insertions, have been identified in either ENG or ACVR genes.