# Continuing Education Activity

Idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage is a rare condition caused by bleeding into the lower respiratory tract, usually the alveoli. Its classical presentation is a clinical triad of hemoptysis, iron-deficiency anemia, and pulmonary infiltrates on chest imaging in the absence of any other identifiable cause of pulmonary or systemic hemorrhage. Early diagnosis leads to prompt treatment and a reduction in mortality and complications. This activity describes the clinical course of the disease and discusses the evaluation and management of patients presenting with idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage.
- Describe the clinical presentation and examination findings of patients presenting with idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage.
- Review the management and treatment options for idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage.
- Summarize the interprofessional team strategies for enhancing care coordination of patients with idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage and improving outcomes.

# Introduction

Idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage is a rare condition that affects the lower respiratory tract. It can be divided into two clinical entities depending on whether the pathophysiology and presentation are acute or chronic. Acute idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage usually presents as diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH), while the more insidious or chronic pulmonary hemorrhage often presents as idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis (IPH) following repeated alveolar bleeding. The terms idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage, idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis, and diffuse alveolar hemorrhage are often used interchangeably.

Historically, idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage was first described by Virchow in 1864 as "brown lung induration." Ceelen in 1931 gave a more detailed description of the condition after autopsies revealed large amounts of hemosiderin in 2 children, while Waldenstrom, in 1944, made the first antemortem diagnosis.

Pulmonary hemorrhage is the extravasation of blood into the alveoli, that is, bleeding into the lower respiratory tract. It can be severe and life-threatening.

The clinical spectrum of IPH ranges from asymptomatic cases to life-threatening acute respiratory failure.

# Etiology

As the name implies, there is no known cause for IPH, and it is a diagnosis of exclusion. A diagnosis of IPH can only be made after thorough investigations have ruled out other known causes of pulmonary hemorrhages, such as vasculitis and bleeding disorders (e.g., von Willebrand disease). Other causes of systemic or visceral hemorrhages, such as gastrointestinal bleeding, should also be excluded. However, possible triggers in at-risk children include lower respiratory tract infections, celiac disease, and cow's milk protein allergy, although the evidence for these is not very strong, perhaps due to the rarity of the condition.Stachybotrys chartarum, was reported but has now been refuted. There is no substantial evidence linking it to tobacco smoking or any other known environmental factors.

# Epidemiology

IPH is a rare clinical condition that affects mainly the pediatric age group, especially in children aged below 10 years. 80% of cases are thought to occur in this age group.

The incidence of IPH is about 0.24-1.23 cases per million globally.

# Pathophysiology

The pathogenesis of the disease is unknown, although some consider it to be an autoimmune condition.Stachybotrys chartarum.

Recurrent episodes of intra-alveolar hemorrhage attract macrophages to the alveoli, which digest the hemosiderin (iron component) found in hemoglobin, leading to an abnormal accumulation of hemosiderin-laden macrophages. This attracts more pro-inflammatory cytokines and causes chronic inflammation and thickening of the alveolar basement membrane. Ultimately this causes interstitial lung fibrosis with a restrictive picture on spirometry.

# Histopathology

Histological findings in IPH include the presence of hemosiderin-laden macrophages, fibrin deposition, pneumocyte hyperplasia (type II), features of acute inflammation, and organizing pneumonia.

# History and Physical

The clinical features of idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage depend on whether it is acute or chronic. Acute pulmonary hemorrhage, as seen in DAH, presents as a sudden onset of severe dyspnea and hemoptysis, which, if not treated immediately, could be fatal.

In some cases of IPH, iron deficiency anemia precedes other symptoms by many months. In these patients, there is often the need for repeated blood transfusions despite iron supplementation.

Physical examination findings also vary depending on whether it is an acute or chronic presentation. In the acute phase, the physical examination may be completely normal or include respiratory signs such as tachypnea. In the chronic phase, there may be pallor, failure to thrive, weight loss, or hepatosplenomegaly. It may also be unremarkable. If pulmonary fibrosis has set in, there may be digital clubbing and other signs of chronic hypoxia.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of acute IPH is made clinically, after other known causes of pulmonary and systemic or visceral hemorrhage have been excluded.

IPH should be suspected in patients with recurrent chest infections and persistent, unexplained anemia despite iron supplementation, and bilateral lung infiltrates on chest radiographs, after exclusion of other possible causes of anemia.

Blood tests are non-specific and may show reduced hemoglobin counts and hematocrit, leucocytosis, and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate.

Lung biopsy is the gold standard for the diagnosis of IPH, where the hemosiderin-laden macrophages can be visualized. However, it is an invasive procedure and is often not practicable in children.

# Treatment / Management

There is no universal gold-standard treatment for IPH, however, high-dose steroids are frequently used to control symptoms, with good results.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnoses of IPH include other causes of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. These include vasculitides such as microscopic polyangiitis, pauci-immune glomerulonephritis, Wegener's granulomatosis, Churg Strauss syndrome, hypersensitivity vasculitis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis etcetera. Other examples are Goodpasture's syndrome, antiphospholipid syndrome, and lung transplant rejection. Other non-vasculitic differential diagnoses include coagulopathies (e.g., von Willebrand disease), thrombocytopenia, pulmonary embolism, lung cancers, pulmonary infarction, non-traumatic lung injury, pulmonary hemangiomas, etcetera.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of IPH depends on factors such as the time of diagnosis, how early treatment is commenced, and the presence of co-morbidities.

# Complications

The immediate complication of the condition is hypoxic respiratory failure, which can lead to death, especially in children. Long-term complications include anemia, pulmonary fibrosis, and other restrictive pulmonary lung diseases. Other possible complications are secondary to the side effects of long-term corticosteroid use.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As with other respiratory illnesses, patients and their caregivers are advised to present to the hospital early, at the first occurrence of symptoms. Being an idiopathic condition, there are no specific preventive measures to avoid the condition. It is not a contagious disease.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage, though primarily a respiratory condition, involves an interprofessional team approach in its diagnosis and management, especially as it is a diagnosis made after the exclusion of a long list of other differential diagnoses. Many patients with IPH may initially present to their primary care clinicians with symptoms of anemia. Though not a primary differential of anemia, IPH should be suspected in those with iron-deficiency anemia who do not respond to iron supplementation. Primary care clinicians should be mindful of this and liaise early with pulmonologists for further investigations. The gastroenterologist should also be involved to exclude a gastro-intestinal source of bleeding. The rheumatologist's opinion should be sought to eliminate autoimmune diseases such as vasculitides as a possible cause for IPH. The endocrinologist may also be involved during long-term treatment with corticosteroids. The intensivists may be engaged during a hyper-acute presentation with respiratory failure. The nursing needs of the patient, especially during the acute stage, are high, and these patients may require individualized care tailored to meet their care needs. Chest physiotherapy may be needed in the immediate recovery stage and in those who develop pulmonary fibrosis as a complication. Patients with recurrence of symptoms or complications of long-term steroid use may require a prolonged follow-up period spanning years. Channels of communication should be kept open to facilitate a seamless and efficient exchange of information between the different members of the interprofessional team caring for these patients. Referrals should be made early to improve outcomes.