FMF manifests as recurrent attacks of fever and serositis, leading to severe chest, abdominal, or joint pain. The first attack usually occurs by the age of 20 years. The symptoms develop over 2 to 4 hours and last for about 12 to 72 hours. Patients feel normal between attacks. The severity of attacks may vary each time, and the time between two attacks could be anywhere from one week to even several years. Many patients also complain of prodromal symptoms before the attack, such as irritability, nervousness, anxiety, nausea, or myalgia. Sometimes patients can correlate particular triggers with the appearance of attacks like severe stress, cold exposure, heavy exercise, recent infection, recent surgery, and menstruation. With time, as patients age, the frequency decreases, and the severity of attacks becomes less intense.

Fever

Fever is the most common and sometimes the only symptom (especially during childhood) to occur during FMF attacks. The temperature may vary from mild to 38 to 40 degrees C (100.4 to 104 degrees F). If the patient is on treatment, the fever may be absent during attacks.

Abdominal pain

An abdominal pain attack is the most common type of attack in FMF. Abdominal pain could be localized initially and then become generalized. On physical examination, abdominal distension, guarding, rebound tenderness, and decreased bowel sounds are appreciated due to inflammation of the peritoneum. The episode spontaneously resolves in 2 to 3 days.

Chest pain

The involvement of pleura leads to the development of chest pain, which is mostly unilateral and worse with deep inspiration or coughing. Sometimes pericarditis is also present manifesting as retrosternal chest pain along with pleuritic pain. Pleuritis is more common in patients from Armenia, Japan, and Italy. On physical examination, pleural and pericardial friction rubs can be auscultated. Although pleural effusion can also develop, it is mostly a mild effusion and seldom is large enough to appreciate decreased breath sounds on examination.

Joint pain

Arthralgia is common in non-Ashkenazi Jews. Large joints of lower extremities are mostly affected, including hip, knee, or ankle joints. The patient often presents with severe pain in one joint. Very rarely, multiple joints are affected simultaneously. On physical examination, a limited range of motion of the affected joint is observed. Swelling and redness are less common. Complete resolution of attack is common, but rarely chronic arthritis might develop.

Other symptoms

Erysipelas-like lesion

The erysipelas-like lesion is observed on lower extremities (leg, ankle, or foot) and resolves spontaneously. On exam, it feels like a slightly raised erythema that is tender to touch. This is more common in Jews but less common in Arabs.

Scrotal swelling

This presents as a unilateral scrotal swelling, which is tender to palpation on the exam. This is caused by transient inflammation of tunica vaginalis and resolves within 24 hours.

Myalgia

Myalgia is non-specific and could involve upper or lower extremities. Muscle tenderness is observed on physical examination. Prolonged febrile myalgia is very rare.

Aseptic meningitis and oral ulcers are very rarely reported.