ABR measures the synchronous neural fiber activity along the auditory pathway to determine hearing thresholds. Mechanical sound is transformed into electrical signals in the cochlea and transmitted to the brain through the auditory nerve or vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII).  Electrical information to the auditory cortex travels along an ascending path through a series of nuclei including the cochlear nuclei, superior olivary complex, lateral lemniscus, inferior colliculi, and medial geniculate nuclei.

The cochlear hair cells transform physical sound input into bioelectrical action potentials that are then transmitted to the spiral ganglion which comprise the main component of the auditory nerve. The cochlea has a unique tonotopic organization with high frequency sounds stimulating the basal component and low frequency sounds stimulating the apical component. Auditory nerve fibers from the low-frequency, apical portion of the cochlea and the high-frequency, basal portion travel along with the central and peripheral parts of the auditory nerve, respectively.

The cochlear nucleus is the first relay point of the brainstem along the auditory pathway. The cochlear nucleus is located at the posterolateral portion of the brainstem and is cochleo-topically divided with low-frequency fibers on its ventral region and high-frequency fibers on its dorsal region.

After the cochlear nucleus, the majority of neural fibers decussate across the midline into the contralateral superior olivary complex.