Patients, particularly those with obstructive jaundice or right upper quadrant pain, will require complete blood count, basic chemistry panel, and liver function tests. Results may reveal an initial, unspecific cholestatic pattern caused by bile obstruction that may lead to hepatocellular injury.

Ultrasonography (US) and CT are the usual initial imaging for jaundiced patients and provide information on the location and anatomy of the lesion. CT scans performed for intrahepatic lesions have limitations in discriminating benign from malignant lesions, but dynamic magnetic resonance (MR) and MR cholangiopancreatography can provide the disease extent more accurately and better distinguish intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma from hepatocellular carcinoma and biphenotypic carcinomas. Obtaining either intrahepatic or perihilar tissue for diagnosis may be challenging. Endoscopic ultrasound or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography are preferred modalities for extrahepatic obstruction because it allows direct bile duct visualization, diagnostic biopsy, and therapeutic interventions such as stent placement. Primary sclerosing cholangitis-associated cholangiocarcinoma can be challenging.

Tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen, alpha-fetoprotein, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 are frequently collected to differentiate suspicious intrahepatic lesions. Elevated alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) may support hepatocellular carcinoma particularly those with liver disease and CA 19-9 for cholangiocarcinoma in the appropriate clinical scenario. Biphenotypic carcinomas may show AFP elevation. Ca 19-9 greater than 129 unit/mL, CEA greater than 5.2 ng/mL, and low IgG4 can support a cholangiocarcinoma diagnosis, particularly in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis. A tumor markers baseline test is potentially useful for therapy monitoring and surveillance for recurrence of the disease. CA 19-9 on concentrations of hundreds of units/mL are consistent with advanced disease and poor prognosis.

Initial staging workup may include CT chest, abdomen, and pelvis if not previously obtained. If no metastatic disease is evident and the patient is being considered for surgical resection, occasionally positron emission tomography/CT can be ordered to evaluate for an occult disease which can prevent a morbid surgery. Surgical candidates will proceed with diagnostic laparoscopy before resection.

An American Joint Committee on Cancer and Union for International Cancer Control 2017 group separated the staging systems of cholangiocarcinoma depending on whether the location of the bile duct cancer is perihilar, distal, or intrahepatic. Each was differentiated on tumor size (T) designation and 5-year overall survival prognosis accordingly. On a multi-institutional analysis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, the 5-year survival rate was higher for those patients without multiple tumors or vascular invasion and nodal disease on surgical pathology specimen evaluation.