The ill-appearing neonate requires a full septic work and broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage with ampicillin and cefotaxime, the combination of which covers 100% of early neonatal infections and 93% of late-onset bacteremia. Gentamicin and penicillin can cover 94% of early infections.Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas, Enterococci, Acinetobacter, and Listeria monocytogenes. Use of Cefotaxime in the NICU can cause outbreaks of drug-resistant nosocomial infections, which is a serious concern in many centers. Pediatric Infectious diseases specialists consider empiric treatment of neonatal herpes with Intravenous Acyclovir if the CSF has an elevated red cell count or in any ill-looking neonate with suspected herpes.

Fluid resuscitation is different to treat septic shock. In term neonate, the fluid bolus is 20 ml/kg as rapidly as possible up to 60 ml/kg, whereas in the preterm neonate the fluid bolus comprises 10 ml/kg in 30-60 minutes and repeat if needed and then vasopressor support for the fluid refractory shock with dopamine and dobutamine. For catecholamine-resistant shock consider milrinone for a shock with poor LV function and normal blood pressure, nitrous oxide for low blood pressure and poor RV function,  vasopressin, or terlipressin and Inotropes for warm shock and low blood pressure and consider ECMO if the child develops persistent fetal circulation.

Based on the laboratory data, you can risk stratifying the well-looking febrile infants greater than 21 days of age with no risk factors and with no source of invasive infection into high risk, medium risk, and low risk.  You can safely observe low-risk infants at home or in the hospital without empiric treatment, meanwhile, high-risk infants are observed and treated in the hospital. You also can observe medium-risk infants in the hospital or at home before treating them empirically.