The development of the branchial arches relies on contributions from endoderm, mesoderm, ectoderm, and neural crest cells (NCC), which facilitate the development of individual structures. This section will describe the individual contributions from each germ cell layer.

**Endoderm**

The endoderm of the branchial arches develops into endocrine viscera of the neck, including the thymus, thyroid, and parathyroid glands.

**Mesoderm**

The mesoderm germ cell layer forms adult vasculature and musculature structures from endothelial cells and myoblasts, respectively, in the head, neck, and upper thorax. The importance of the vascular system to overall bodily function necessitates its early development in embryogenesis. The first major vessels to develop embryologically include the left and right dorsal aortae that connect the heart and umbilical arteries. While it is true that the scaffold of arterial tubes consisting of endothelial cells derives from mesoderm tissue, mural cells, including pericytes and smooth muscle cells of the arterial wall, arise from NCC derivatives. The vascular system initially forms symmetrically and eventually remodels through a series of apoptotic regressions to depict the mature vasculature seen in adult anatomy.

**Ectoderm**

Ectoderm derivatives can subdivide into the medial and lateral domains. The medial domain of neural ectoderm gives rise to nervous system derivatives, while the lateral domain of surface ectoderm gives rise to the skin. The neural ectoderm generates NCC that migrate to either the frontonasal prominence or branchial arches to give rise to the bones of the skull, jaw, ear, as well as cartilage found in the head and neck. The peripheral nervous system itself derives from a dual origin of surface ectoderm and NCC.