Imaging modalities most commonly used to evaluate any abnormal physical exam findings include mammography and breast ultrasound. The primary aim of such testing is to rule out any serious pathology (breast cancer) underlying a suspicious finding. Young females with cyclic mastalgia, which are bilateral and non-focal, having no family history of breast cancer, and a normal previous breast screen does not require further investigation with imaging. While a female with non-cyclic focal mastalgia and a strong suspicion of underlying grave pathology is a positive candidate for further investigation with an imaging modality.

**Breast Ultrasound**

Ultrasound uses sound waves to produce an image of the breast area being examined. Ultrasonography is being used in patients age less than 35 years because of dense breast tissue. However, if any suspicious finding is observed on USG, a mammogram is recommended for further evaluation.

**Mammogram**

It is an imaging modality that uses high amperage, low voltage X-rays. Female more than 35-year of age should undergo mammography if a physical exam detects a focal area of pain with an unusual thickening or a breast lump.

**Breast Biopsy**

If imaging modalities show any abnormal finding regarding a breast lump or a focal thickening with underlying breast pain in that region, further investigation is then carried out with the help of biopsy. During a biopsy[preferably core needle biopsy], a sample of breast tissue is taken from the area under question and send for further histopathologic evaluation.

Sometimes breast imaging is done to alleviate patient's anxiety, and once they are reassured with a negative imaging result, they stop seeking further medical assistance.