Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease (VKH) is a central nervous system condition that specifically affects vision and hearing. Descriptions of this disease date back to the 12 century, but the disease is named after three 20 century physicians who described the collective manifestations of this disease. Alfred Vogt initially described bilateral iridocyclitis and eyebrow depigmentation in 1906, followed by Yoshizo Koyanagi’s 1926 description of bilateral serous detachments in association with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis. Einosuke Harada identified the integumentary symptoms of the condition shortly thereafter. The disease presents with signs and symptoms of a loss of immune tolerance to melanocytes within the meninges, eyes, skin, hair, and ears.

This relatively rare condition has a distinct phenotypic picture in both its early and late manifestations. Despite identifiable clinical findings, the pathophysiologic mechanisms behind VKH have been challenging to identify. Over the last few years, some of the genetic and immunologic facets of VKH have been elucidated due to recent technological advances. Ophthalmic complications from this condition are numerous, and early identification and treatment can reduce morbidity.

VKH is primarily treated via medical therapy, but surgical options exist for complications of the disease, such as subretinal fibrosis, glaucoma, and cataracts. The prognosis is mainly dependent on what stage of the disease treatment is initiated but can range from quiescent with minimal symptoms to debilitating vision loss and pain.