It is important for a clinician to differentiate other pigmented disorders from cafe-au-lait macules. CALMs are mostly seen soon after birth or in early childhood, which may grow in size with time. CALMs may be solitary or multiple, and the margins may be regular or irregular. Solitary CALMs are common in the general population, while the presence of multiple spots requires a detailed evaluation of the patient. Multiple CALMs are often associated with genetic syndromes, most commonly NF1. Thus, a detailed history and physical examination findings in different genetic syndromes associated with multiple CALMs are listed below:

**Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1)/ von Recklinghausen’s disease**

The most frequent disorder seen in association with multiple CALMs is NF1. The estimated population frequency of NF1 is approximately 1 in 3,500. It occurs with equal frequency in males and females and has been identified in all ethnic groups. It occurs due to a mutation in the NF1 gene and follows an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. The patient presenting with hyperpigmented skin lesions, difficulty visualizing objects, weakness or neurological deficits, headaches, and pain or deformity in the involved bone require immediate evaluation for NF1.

Diagnostic Criteria: At least two of the following should be present for diagnosing NF1

- Six or more CALMs (greatest diameter>5mm in prepubertal and >15mm in postpubertal individuals)

- One plexiform neurofibroma or two or more neurofibromas of any type

- Axillary or inguinal region freckling (Crowe's sign): pathognomic for NF1

- Optic glioma

- Two or more Lisch nodules (iris hamartomas)

- A distinctive bony lesion, such as sphenoid dysplasia or thickening of the long bone cortex with or without pseudoarthrosis

- A first-degree relative (parent, sibling, or offspring) with NF1 based upon the above criteria

**Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2)**

NF2 is a different disorder from NF1, both clinically and genetically. It occurs due to a mutation in the NF2 gene located on chromosome 22, which produces merlin (tumor suppressor gene) and follows an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Its frequency is approximately 1 in 40,000 births. The clinical features of NF2 include bilateral acoustic schwannomas, cataracts, meningiomas, and ependymomas. The patient may present with a hearing problem, ringing in the ears (tinnitus), and dizziness.

**McCune Albright Syndrome**

It is a rare genetic condition resulting from a mutation in the GNAS gene affecting G-protein signaling. The classical presentation is a triad of CALMs, fibrous dysplasia of the bone, and precocious puberty. Other endocrinopathies may be present in some patients like hyperthyroidism, hypercortisolism, and hypophosphatemic rickets.

**Legius syndrome (NF1-like syndrome)**

It is characterized by multiple CALMs, macrocephaly, axillary freckling, lipomas, learning disabilities, and Noonan-like facies. Facial features suggesting Noonan-like facies include hypertelorism (wide-spaced eyes), flat nasal bridge, downward slant of palpebral fissures, thin lips, low-set posteriorly rotated ears, excess nuchal skin, webbed neck, and swollen hands and feet, etc. Patients with Legius syndrome lack neurofibromas and cranial nervous system tumors seen in NF1.

**Watson Syndrome**

It follows autosomal dominant inheritance and has similar characteristics to NF1. Watson syndrome is characterized by CALMs, pulmonic stenosis, intellectual disability, and short stature.

**Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines (LEOPARD syndrome)**

It is an autosomal dominant RASopathy. LEOPARD is an acronym referring to the clinical features which are essential for making a diagnosis. The clinical findings are lentigines, electrocardiogram conduction defects, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary stenosis, abnormal genitals, retardation of growth, and sensorineural deafness.