Informed consent should be obtained before the procedure. The patient should understand the risks, benefits, and alternatives to the procedure. It is important to manage the patient's expectations and address any questions about the procedure. Also, the potential need for future revision procedures must be discussed because a sizeable portion of patients may need augmentation in the future due to the resorption of some of the injected fat.

Pre-procedure evaluation and consultation with a physician are required to obtain clearance for the procedure. This is important because medical conditions like bleeding disorders, anemia, and certain medications like non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and anticoagulants may affect the outcome of the procedure. Patients on aspirin or NSAIDs may have to hold their medications two weeks before the surgery.

Pre-procedure photographs should be obtained. The selection of potential fat donor sites should be discussed beforehand. Also, the recipient site should be examined carefully to determine the amount of fat needed for the procedure.

Before the procedure, the necessary donor and recipient sites must be prepared. In men, facial hair may need to be shaved to improve visualization. Zones of adherence within the planned harvest region are areas of fibrosis that should be avoided, as liposuction to these regions increases the risk of trauma and/or contour irregularities. These areas should be marked in advance to avoid them.

Many of these procedures are performed under general anesthesia. When employing local anesthesia, nerve blocks are preferred over local infiltration because lidocaine can decrease the viability of the harvested fat and adds volume to the recipient site, making keeping track of the progress of the fat injections more challenging.