# Continuing Education Activity

Multivessel disease is defined as significant stenosis (>70%) in two or more major coronary arteries of 2.5 mm diameter or more. This activity helps in understanding the pathophysiology of multivessel coronary artery disease and indications for surgery versus percutaneous interventions. It highlights the role of the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of multivessel coronary artery disease.
- Outline the process of evaluation of a patient with multivessel disease.
- Review the studies that evaluate a surgical versus interventional approach to multivessel disease.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and outcomes in patients with multivessel disease.

# Introduction

A coronary artery is a well-developed trilaminar structure. The innermost layer is termed the tunica intima, which is lined with endothelial cells that make contact with the circulating arterial blood.

Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) has been primarily used for revascularization of complex coronary artery disease (CAD) since 1968.

# Etiology

Common risk factors for atherosclerosis and CAD include the following:

- Hypertension

- Hyperlipidemia

- Diabetes mellitus

- Cigarette smoking

- Age

- Menopause

- Hyperhomocysteinemia

- Family history of CAD

- Mutations in endothelial nitric oxide synthase

In the setting of myocardial infarction, coronary constriction plays a major role in addition to plaque rupture leading to platelet aggregation and thrombus formation.

# Epidemiology

In industrialized countries, CAD is the most common cause of mortality.

# Pathophysiology

The composition of atherosclerotic plaques has been studied in deceased patients after suffering from myocardial infarction. Plaques are composed of a thin fibrous cap, large necrotic core, smooth muscle cells, leukocytes, and foamy cells.

# History and Physical

Presentation of multivessel disease is variable and dependent on the severity of the underlying disease, presence of comorbid conditions which may alter the typical presentation, and acuity of disease. Patients with stable multivessel disease may present with exertional chest pain or shortness of breath with radiation to the left arm and neck. The chest pain is termed "typical" chest pain when three of the following are present and "atypical" when two of the following are present: chest pain worsened by emotional or physical stress, chest pain relieved by rest and nitroglycerin, substernal chest pain, pressure or discomfort. Patients may also have associated nausea, diaphoresis, and lightheadedness. Patients of older age, particularly women and those with diabetes, may present atypically with frequent complaints of epigastric discomfort and associated nausea and vomiting. Acute thrombosis will typically present with crushing substernal chest pain not relieved by rest and temporarily relieved by nitroglycerin. Acute myocardial infarction should be ruled out in all patients presenting with chest pain, considering that the diagnosis represents a time-sensitive, potentially life-saving medical emergency.

# Evaluation

The pretest probability of a patient having CAD is dependent on age, gender, and whether the patient has typical angina, atypical angina, or nonanginal chest pain.

**High pretest probability**is defined as over 75% or over 90% pretest probability of CAD. Medical therapy for CAD should be initiated. If there is no response to therapy, lifestyle limiting symptoms, or progression to unstable angina, then coronary angiography should be performed.

**Intermediate pretest probability**is defined as between 10% and 25% to 75% and 90%, respectively, pretest probability of CAD. It must be determined if the patient has baseline EKG abnormalities, which would preclude the interpretation of the EKG and whether the patient has the capacity to exercise. If able to exercise without baseline EKG changes, then the patient can undergo treadmill exercise stress testing. If unable to exercise and baseline EKG abnormalities are present, then they should undergo pharmacological stress echocardiography. If the patient has baseline EKG changes and is able to exercise, then stress nuclear or treadmill stress echocardiography can be performed. If any test returns markedly positive, then the next step would be to perform coronary angiography.

**Low pretest probability**is defined as a lower than 25% or 10% pretest probability of CAD. No additional testing is required.

The use of perfusion imaging modalities in women is challenging and has a high rate of false-positive and false-negative results, likely due to breast attenuation and partial volume effect due to relatively smaller ventricles.

# Treatment / Management

In cases of non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) or unstable angina, recent studies have failed to show any significant difference in treatment with revascularization versus optimal medical therapy.

The FAME1 trial found patients with multivessel disease who underwent routine measurement of fractional flow reserve (FFR) during PCI were found to have reduced primary endpoint rates of death, MI, and repeat revascularization at 1 year when compared to PCI guided by conventional angiography.

A pooled analysis of 7812 patients from ten randomized trials was performed where patients were assigned to one of two arms: PCI with balloon angioplasty and or bare-metal stent (BMS) placement versus CABG.

The SYNTAX trial compared patients who underwent CABG versus PCI  in patients with left main coronary disease or three-vessel disease.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis of typical and atypical chest pain is broad and consists of the following:

**Gastrointestinal**

- Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)

- Dyspepsia

- Dysphagia

- Pancreatitis

**Cardiac**

- Acute myocardial infarction (STEMI/NSTEMI)

- Unstable angina

- Stable angina

- Acute pericarditis

- Aortic dissection

- Prinzmetal angina

- Drug use (cocaine, amphetamines)

**Musculoskeletal**

- Rib fracture

- Chronic pain syndromes

- Costochondritis

- Trauma

**Pulmonary**

- Pleurisy

- Acute pulmonary embolism

- Pneumonia

- Pulmonary contusion

- Pneumothorax

# Prognosis

The SYNTAX trial compared patients who underwent CABG versus PCI with DES placement and followed up patients in 1 year, 3 years, 5 years, and 10-year intervals. At 10 years follow-up, patients with triple vessel disease who underwent PCI with DES placement had a hazard ratio for death of 1.41 (CI 95%: 1.1 - 1.8) compared to CABG.

# Complications

Complications of multivessel disease, including the following:

- Acute coronary syndrome (unstable angina, non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction, STEMI)

- In-stent restenosis

- In-stent thrombosis

- Stent embolization

- Side branch occlusion

- Stent fracture

- Graft failure

- Surgical complications (bleeding, wound dehiscence, infection, pulmonary complication, stroke, myocardial infarction, arrhythmia, acute kidney injury, transfusion-related reactions)

- PCI complications (bleeding, pseudoaneurysm, retroperitoneal hematoma, infection, arterial dissection, distal arterial embolization, coronary perforation, stroke, acute kidney injury, reperfusion injury)

# Deterrence and Patient Education

- Smoking cessation

- Medication and exercise therapy compliance

- Regular outpatient follow up

- Cholesterol management with diet and statin therapy

- Glycemic control with HbA1c goal less than 7% (or more for significant comorbid conditions or hypoglycemia)

- Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring with systolic blood pressure goal under 130 mmHg and diastolic pressure goal under 80 mmHg

- Weight reduction

- Interprofessional involvement

# Pearls and Other Issues

Multivessel coronary artery disease has a wide prevalence in the United States. About 40 to 50% of patients with STEMI have multivessel coronary artery disease.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Multivessel CAD carries significant morbidity and mortality risk and requires input from various medical and surgical specialists for individualized patient care. Internists and primary care physicians are valuable for primary disease prevention and identification of patients at risk of developing CAD. Risk factor modification through pharmacological and lifestyle modification has been shown to reduce the risk and progression of CAD significantly. Cardiologists and cardiothoracic surgeons should provide the patient with information regarding procedural risks, benefits, and need for further revascularization if needed. The decision for CABG versus PCI should account for multiple factors, including age, comorbidities, surgical risk, patient preference. This condition is best managed by an interprofessional team of primary care providers, emergency medicine, cardiology, cardiovascular surgery, specialty trained nurses, and pharmacists. [Level 5] Nurses are valuable for their familiarity with the patient and updates on how the patient's condition has progressed. Pharmacists are needed for patient and physician education on potential medication side effects and drug-to-drug interactions.

Currently, CABG remains the recommended treatment modality for patients with triple vessel disease due to reduced risk of mortality and repeat revascularization procedure. [Level 1] The increased risk of stroke with CABG does not outweigh the long-term benefit of the procedure.