Currently, the 30-day morbidity and mortality of laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy in the literature range from 0-17.5% and 0-1.2%, respectively.

As with many operations, complications can be divided into early and late.

**Early**

**Hemorrhage**

The reported incidence is between 1 and 6% postoperatively and can be intraluminal or intraabdominal.

There is some evidence to support reinforcement of the staple line to prevent bleeding. There have been more successful outcomes when comparing buttressing materials instead of staple line suture reinforcement.  There is still controversy in this area, and a definitive conclusion has not yet been made.

**Leak**

The incidence of a postoperative leak in laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy is between 2 and 3%.

Patients may be asymptomatic but frequently present with fever, tachycardia, and tachypnea with elevated heart rate being the first sign. The diagnostic test of choice is a CT scan with oral and IV contrast which demonstrates relatively high sensitivity and specificity. A UGI contrast series has a high specificity, but low sensitivity and thus is not recommended as first-line diagnostic imaging.

Leaks should be classified as either acute (<5 days postoperatively) or chronic (>4 weeks postoperatively). In the acute, unstable patient, exploration with drainage of the leak and placement of a distal feeding tube is the management of choice.  In chronic patients, operative management is less successful. If they are unstable, the patient will require an operation as described for an acute leak. For a chronic leak/fistula in a stable patient, treatment is conservative utilizing drainage of abscess if present, antibiotics, NPO, TPN, and endoluminal stenting.  Most chronic fistulae/leaks will close within the range of 4 weeks to 3 months.

**Late**

**Stricture**

This complication has an incidence of up to 4 percent and may present acutely secondary to edema or more often chronically. The common symptoms are dysphagia, nausea, and vomiting and the most common location is at the incisura angularis. In the acute setting, this is likely secondary to edema or kinking due to technical issues.  The diagnostic image of choice is a UGI contrast study.  Treatment of the acute stricture is conservative and only requires surgery in the setting of nonresolution.  Patients who present with chronic strictures should undergo endoscopic balloon dilations and may require multiple interventions for long-term improvement.  Failure of endoscopic management will require surgical intervention with either a laparoscopic seromyotomy or conversion to a gastric bypass procedure.

**Gastroesophageal Reflux**

Severe GERD is a relative contraindication to sleeve gastrectomy.  There have been conflicting results in the literature, but many have advocated the development or worsening of reflux symptoms.  First-line therapy is PPIs, but if the patient has severe symptoms and is refractory to medical treatment, they may require conversion to a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.

**Nutritional Deficiencies**

All bariatric procedures harbor nutrient deficiencies and are largely prevented by routine testing and daily supplementation. There is data to show a decreased incidence of nutrient deficiency when compared to gastric bypass patients with the exception of folate.

If a patient with post-sleeve gastrectomy status presents with the classic triad of Wernicke’s encephalopathy, thiamine deficiency should be evaluated. The triad includes encephalopathy, oculomotor findings (such as nystagmus, ophthalmoplegia), and signs of cerebellar impairment (such as ataxic gait and dysmetria). Patients also can have polyneuropathy. If psychosis and confabulation are present, it is referred to as Wernicke-korsakoff syndrome. The most common manifestation of Wernicke's encephalopathy is altered mental status. Clinicians should have a high index of suspicion. They should proceed with immediate treatment before the results of thiamine assessments are confirmed. After the thiamine administration, patients should be monitored and evaluated vigilantly for the improvement of clinical manifestations.