# Continuing Education Activity

Decorticate and decerebrate posturing are abnormal posturing responses typically to noxious stimuli. They involve stereotypical movements of the trunk and extremities. To avoid the high morbidity and mortality associated with these conditions, it must be promptly diagnosed and treated. This activity reviews the assessment and management of decorticate and decerebrate posturing and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the physical exam findings associated with decorticate and decerebrate posturing.
- Describe the pathophysiology of decorticate and decerebrate posturing.
- Outline the prognosis of patients with decorticate and decerebrate posturing.
- Review the etiology of decorticate and decerebrate posturing.

# Introduction

Decorticate and decerebrate posturing are both considered pathological posturing responses to usually noxious stimuli from an external or internal source. Both involve stereotypical movements of the trunk and extremities and are typically indicative of significant brain or spinal injury.

Synonymous terms for decorticate posturing include abnormal flexion, decorticate rigidity, flexor posturing, or decorticate response. Synonymous terms for decerebrate posturing include abnormal extension, decerebrate rigidity, extensor posturing, or decerebrate response.

There is a criticism within the literature of the use of the terms decorticate and decerebrate posturing in clinical contexts due to their association with discrete anatomical locations that, in reality, may not be so prescriptive.  Brain lesions of several anatomical regions may cause both postures, though they do usually involve some degree of brainstem injury.

# Etiology

There are numerous causes of abnormal posturing including supratentorial and infratentorial lesions, alongside more diffuse pathologies such as metabolic and infective causes:

**Supratentorial Lesions**

- Abscess

- Extra-axial hematoma: subdural and extradural

- Hydrocephalus

- Intracerebral hemorrhage

- Raised intracranial pressure

- Traumatic brain injury including diffuse axonal injury

- Tumor

**Infratentorial Lesion**

- Abscess

- Hydrocephalus

- Infarct: brainstem or bilateral diencephalic

- Intracerebral hemorrhage: cerebellar or brainstem

- Traumatic brain injury including diffuse axonal injury

- Tumor

**Diffuse and Metabolic**

- Cerebral malaria

- Electrolyte abnormalities: hyponatremia, hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia

- Encephalitis

- Hepatic encephalopathy

- Hypoxic brain injury

- Hypoglycemia

- Lead poisoning

- Meningitis

- Reye syndrome

In patients with preexisting structural lesions of the central nervous system, episodes of decerebrate posturing can occur in response to numerous physiological factors including, but not exclusive to, fever, hypoxia; metabolic disturbance; sensory irritation; hypoglycemia; and meningeal irritation.

# Epidemiology

Data on the incidence of abnormal posturing is not published. However, the incidence of pathologies that commonly cause decorticate and decerebrate posturing is available. The commonest cause of decorticate and decerebrate posturing is traumatic brain injury (TBI).

# Pathophysiology

Typically, the anatomical divide associated with decorticate and decerebrate posturing is the intercollicular line at the level of the red nucleus. However, this concept has been criticized as lesions in the supratentorial region can also cause both decorticate and decerebrate posturing, though the brainstem is typically involved.

Both posturing types are stereotypical; however, they can be present in varying degrees and even asymmetrically with decorticate on one side and decerebrate contralaterally. An inconsistent presentation of a given posture tends to suggest a lesser degree of injury.

**Decerebrate Posturing**

Decerebrate posturing has been demonstrated in monkeys with a transecting lesion at the level between the superior and inferior colliculi within the midbrain. This is also described as being at or below the level of the red nucleus. Sherrington performed live animal studies where anesthetized monkeys had their cerebral cortex removed from the intercollicular level upwards. The animals continued to breathe independently and developed stereotypical extension rigidity of the extremities.

Decerebrate posturing can be seen in patients with large bilateral forebrain lesions with progression caudally into the diencephalon and midbrain. It can also be caused by a posterior fossa lesion compressing the midbrain or rostral pons. Though decerebrate posturing implies a destructive structural lesion, it can also be caused by reversible metabolic disturbances such as hypoglycemia and hepatic encephalopathy.

Through animal models and human studies, it has been shown that the vestibulospinal tract plays a major role in decerebrate posturing. The vestibulospinal pathways have an excitatory effect on extensor motor neurons in the spine, while inhibition of flexor motor neurons.  The vestibular nuclei receive input from the vestibular apparatus and spinal somatosensory pathways while receiving modulatory signals from the cerebral cortex and the fastigial nucleus of the cerebellum. In isolation, the vestibular nucleus, via the vestibulospinal tract, causes activation of extensor motor neurons in the spinal cord and inhibition of flexor motor neurons. However, under normal physiology, the higher brain centers of the cortex and cerebellum inhibit the vestibular nuclei, thus preventing this reflex. Decerebrate posturing results from a disconnection between the modulatory higher centers and the vestibular nuclei, resulting in unsuppressed extensor posturing.

**Decorticate Posturing**

The mechanism for decorticate posturing is not as well studied as that of decerebrate. Phylogenetically, the region of the red nucleus within the midbrain plays a significant part in locomotion. In primates, the rubrospinal tract influences primitive grasp reflexes, particularly in infants and is, incidentally, responsible for crawling.

The red nucleus is anatomically at the intercollicular level, and thus lesions above the red nucleus tend to cause decortication and lesions below, decerebration.

# History and Physical

Teasdale et al., in their original paper on the Glasgow coma scale, suggested that distinguishing between normal and abnormal flexion requires an experienced observer, and thus, simply defining the response as either flexion or extension may be sufficient in the early stages following brain insult.

**Decorticate Posturing**

Decorticate posturing is described as abnormal flexion of the arms with the extension of the legs. Specifically, it involves slow flexion of the elbow, wrist, and fingers with adduction and internal rotation at the shoulder. The lower limbs show extension and internal rotation at the hip, with the extension of the knee and plantar flexion of the feet. Toes are typically abducted and hyperextended.

**Decerebrate Posturing**

Decerebrate posturing is described as adduction and internal rotation of the shoulder, extension at the elbows with pronation of the forearm, and flexion of the fingers. As with decorticate posturing, the lower limbs show extension and internal rotation at the hip, with the extension of the knee and plantar flexion of the feet. Toes are typically abducted and hyperextended.

**Stages of Brain Herniation**

In central herniation, the neurological status of a patient can be seen to progress through a series of stages. Starting with the diencephalic stage, phases proceed through: obeying commands, bilateral Babinski reflexes, paratonia, grasp reflex, decortication. Later as the midbrain and upper pons are involved, the patient becomes decerebrated. As the lower pons and upper medulla are involved, the patient becomes flaccid.

# Evaluation

Decorticate and decerebrate posturing are clinical diagnoses and should be considered a pathological sign of a neurological injury rather than a diagnosis unto themselves. Due to the variety of etiologies that can cause these findings, numerous investigations may be appropriate. As discussed above, compressive lesions may benefit from surgical intervention, best done in a timely manner; therefore, early intracranial imaging such as CT or MRI is warranted.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment is directed at the underlying cause, for instance, correcting, where possible, metabolic derangements, and treating infections.

# Differential Diagnosis

Normal flexion, also known as withdrawal to pain, can appear similar to decorticate posturing. However, normal flexion is a rapid and variable movement compared with the slow and stereotypical movements of abnormal flexion. In normal flexion, the shoulder abducts away from the body, the wrist is either neutral or extended, and importantly, there is no extension in the lower limbs. In abnormal flexion, the shoulder adducts, and internal rotates, the wrist flexes with forearm pronation. A key feature is the extension of the lower limbs.

Spinal reflexes may still be present following brain death. One study found motor spinal responses present in 22% of patients with confirmed brain death. These can be mistaken for abnormal posturing movements such as decerebration.

Opisthotonus is extra-pyramidal abnormal posturing seen in cerebral palsy, tetanus, drowning victims, TBI, and poisoning. It is abnormal posturing with a dramatically arched back and neck.

Lastly, patients with corticospinal tract injuries, such as ischaemic strokes, hemorrhages, or tumors, can develop spasticity. Usually in the upper limb flexor muscles dominate and extensor in the lower limb, similar to decorticate posturing. The most striking difference between spasticity and abnormal posturing is the preservation of consciousness in spastic patients.

# Prognosis

Abnormal posturing is an ominous sign, with only 37% of decorticate patients surviving following head injury and only 10% in decerebrate.

Outcomes in patients with abnormal posturing following hypoxic brain injury were reviewed in 210 patients. Abnormal posturing, or GCS motor score of less than 4, after 1-day post-insult, suggested virtually no chance of regaining independence.

# Complications

As discussed under prognosis, complications include death and poor functional neurological outcome. In the immediate period, patients with coma can also have problems maintaining their airway and controlling their cardiorespiratory system.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Given the most common cause of abnormal posturing is TBI, public health measures to reduce traumatic events such as road traffic collisions and workplace accidents are important.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Decorticate and decerebrate posturing are medical emergencies. Early diagnosis and intervention may improve survival and functional outcome.