**History**

The history and physical evaluation are similar to a distal radius fracture workup. Examples of pertinent history include age, hand dominance, the onset of injury, location, mechanism, previous surgeries, osteoporosis, drugs or alcohol use, motor or sensory deficits, decreased range of motion, and comorbidities. A detailed mechanism of injury is crucial, noting the force of impact, extremity position upon contact, and acute changes in the range of motion, strength, and sensation afterward.

**Physical Exam**

Begin with a comprehensive physical exam to rule out potential missed injuries that need further evaluation. Compare bilateral upper extremities to obtain baseline strength, sensation, and range of motion. The assessment then focuses on the injury itself. Notice compartment swelling, ecchymoses, abrasions, open wounds, and deformities which may indicate a need for urgent or emergent intervention. As detailed as possible, distinguish specific anatomical areas of point tenderness (i.e., ulnar styloid, fovea, Lister's tubercle).

Starting with a more generalized approach, it also recognizes confounding information; for example, discovering an ipsilateral weakness in a patient with a previous stroke or cold fingers from Raynaud disease. Grip strength, wrist flexion, extension, and pronosupination are evaluated and compared to the uninjured extremity.

A thorough neurovascular examination is needed as any acute deficits may warrant urgent surgical exploration by a hand surgeon. Key provocative maneuvers of the distal forearm include the "OK" sign (anterior interosseous nerve palsy), "thumbs up" sign (posterior interosseous nerve palsy, "crossing the fingers" maneuver (ulnar motor nerve palsy), and "wrist drop" (radial nerve palsy).

**Distal Ulna-Specific Assessments**

Careful inspection of the ulnar aspect of the wrist to localize tenderness is critical as the differential for ulnar-sided wrist pain is extensive in the absence of obvious injury.

Assess the DRUJ intraoperatively before and after repairing the concomitant distal radius fracture. This step determines if the distal radius repair improved DRUJ stability or if the distal ulna may require surgical intervention. Recent literature has questioned whether an assessment of the DRUJ is a reliable indicator for operative intervention on distal ulna fractures since what defines "unstable" is subject to interpretation. However, it remains a standard part of the intraoperative assessment.

An "unstable" DRUJ assessment has previously been described as the abnormal translation of the radius about the distal ulna in the neutral, pronated, and supinated positions of the forearm. The ulnocarpal stress test is another provocative maneuver that can examine for possible TFCC injury, ulnar styloid fractures, ulnocarpal abutment syndrome, ECU injury, or DRUJ subluxation.

**Fovea Sign**

- Position forearm in neutral rotation

- Palpate the ulnar styloid process

- Find the flexor carpi ulnaris tendon (FCU)

- The fovea is located between the ulnar styloid and FCU

- It is just proximal to the level of the pisiform and just distal to the ulnar head

- Positive test equates to tenderness with direct palpation on the ulnar fovea

**DRUJ Assessment**

- Flex the patient's elbow 90 degrees and position the forearm neutrally.

- The evaluator takes the distal radius with one hand and the distal ulna with the other.

- The evaluator moves the distal ulna dorsally and volarly while keeping the distal radius fixed.

- Repeat the above steps with the forearm in pronation and supination.

- The DRUJ is considered unstable if increased laxity is appreciated with translation, clunking, or lack of an endpoint is reached.

**Ulnocarpal Stress Test**

- Position patient's wrist in maximum ulnar deviation

- Passively supinate and pronate wrist while applying axial stress

- A positive test equates to ulnar-sided wrist pain