For a planned thrust where the practitioner is pulling on the patient's pelvis and pushing the thorax, the posterior transverse process is oriented down (closer to the table) with the patient in a lateral lying position. It may be helpful to imagine manipulation of the patient's upper body as manipulation of the superior vertebra (the vertebra diagnosed with dysfunction) and the patient's bottom half as manipulating the lower vertebra, with additional positioning to assist in directing forces to the area of concern.

Additional positioning continues with the practitioner taking hold of the patient's legs with their more inferiorly directed arm, while their other arm palpates the spinous process of the dysfunctional vertebral segment. While palpating for movement, adjust the flexion of the patient's hips with the goal being to detect initial flexion in the dysfunctional vertebral segment (or just below). This step helps to direct the eventual thrust forces to the segment in question. Once the desired flexion in the lumbar spine is achieved, the practitioner instructs the patient to straighten the leg closer to the table and hook the foot of the higher leg (with the leg still bent) over the posterior knee (in the popliteal fossa) of the straightened leg that is in contact with the table.

The end result should create a sort of hinge effect of the top leg over the straight bottom leg with the patient still on their side. Keeping the patient in the established positioning, the practitioner can take their superiorly oriented hand and place it on the patient's lateral rib cage (away from the table). The inferior arm now can come to the patient's hip as the patient is guided in a gentle twisting motion such that the patient's shoulder blades should both nearly touch the table and the patient's hips are rotated toward the practitioner (this motion should create a twisting motion to counter the dysfunctional segment). Continuing this motion, one should reach a limit of the rotation of the spine based on the new dysfunctional limit of rotation, colloquially known as "locking out the segment." "Locking out" demonstrates utilizing Fryette's principles to isolate the desired joint and to minimize movement in other joints that may hinder the manipulation. This position should occur before the physiologic limit of rotation, given the dysfunction's presence further limits spinal motion (the aim of the treatment is to improve this range of motion).

Once the segment is in this limited position, the patient is instructed to take a deep breath in and release. The goal of the practitioner is the thrust through this barrier of motion in a controlled manner when the patient is totally relaxed (at the end of expiration is a common method). The thrust is directed primarily with the hand/arm on the patient's hips toward the table, perpendicular to the axis of rotation. The thrust should be quick and only with sufficient force to move the segments without causing injury to the patient. Following the thrust, the patient may be returned to a neutral rotation and re-examined. Assessing for the degree of change in the segments following the adjustment is a crucial aspect of the treatment as it guides whether the technique should be repeated.

Performing the thrust with the opposite transverse process orientation is another option. The primary difference will be to push the hips of the patient away while the patient's upper body rotates toward the examiner (opposite of the above setup). Regardless of the choice of treatment options, the patient should still be re-assessed following completion of the adjustment.

It should be noted that the patient's torso can be further manipulated in either of these techniques to create elements of side-bending as well. These elements should counteract the direction of the dysfunction. Based on the dysfunction, the practitioner can direct the arm of the patient cephalad or caudad while initiating the locking step to induce side bending. For example, in a patient with the diagnosis of L4 flexed, rotated, and side-bent right, the side-bending component of the dysfunction is to the right; this would mean that while positioning the patient in the transverse process side down technique above (where the posterior transverse process is towards the table), the patient's table side arm can be directed cephalad (relative to the patient orientation) to induce leftward side-bending prior to the thrust.