Barbiturates cause postsynaptic enhancement of GABA, interacting with alpha and beta subunits of the GABA-A receptor.

**Structure-Activity Relationships:**The German chemist Adolf von Baeyer synthesized barbituric acid (malonylurea)in 1864.

Amylobarbitone became the first intravenous anesthetic used in 1928. The formulation of parenteral dosage forms came with the addition of sodium at the C2 position.

**Ultra Short-Acting Barbiturates**

- Methohexital

- Thiopental

**Short-Acting Barbiturates**

- Pentobarbital

- Secobarbital

**Intermediate-acting barbiturates**

- Amobarbital

- Butalbital

**Long-acting Barbiturates**

- Phenobarbital

- Primidone

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Phenobarbital is rapidly absorbed with a time-to-peak concentration in 2-4 hours. The bioavailability of phenobarbital is approximately 90% in adults and less in neonatal populations.

**Distribution:**Highly lipid-soluble barbiturates cross the blood-brain barrier rapidly, but there is rapid redistribution from the CNS to peripheral tissues.

**Metabolism:**The oxidation of barbiturates is the most important biotransformation that terminates biological activity. In addition, n-glycosylation is important for the metabolism of phenobarbital. Phenobarbital is metabolized extensively by the cytochrome P450, and the maturation of this enzyme family mainly occurs during the neonatal period.

**Excretion:**About 25% of phenobarbital is excreted unchanged in the urine. The renal excretion can be increased by osmotic diuresis or alkalinization of the urine. The metabolic elimination of barbiturates is more rapid in young people than in the elderly and infants. Age-related changes have been demonstrated in pharmacokinetics due to slower clearance in the elderly, resulting in higher serum concentrations with smaller drug doses.