The staff must be protected from contamination, and all patients with a history of contamination should be disrobed and bathed. You can decrease exposure by 80% just by removing any contaminated clothing. Those individuals with life-threatening injuries are decontaminated as well as possible but surgical, and trauma emergencies will have priority. Surgery should be done within the first 24 hours as significant changes in the patient's ability to fight infection can result from radiation exposure. Supportive care saves lives when it comes to acute radiation syndrome. Fluid management and early treatment of any signs of infection will be fundamental to a better outcome. Prevention of thyroid cancer must be a priority. All children and pregnant women must be offered potassium iodide to protect the thyroid from the uptake of radioactive iodine. Mothers who are breastfeeding should be encouraged to stop if possible.  The following potassium iodide doses should be used daily while in the area of exposure: adult 130 mg, child 65 mg, and infant one month to child three years old 32 mg.  This is especially important in the case of nuclear power plant accidents. Anti-emetics will be helpful to control nausea. Pain control for burns and other injuries should be a priority. In moderate exposures, it may be necessary to use cytokines and colony-stimulating-factors. Early use of antibiotics should be the rule. The use of bone-marrow transplant has been used for large dose exposures but remains controversial. Chelating agents are used in some exposures but should be started only after consultation with a nuclear specialist (see Resources). Keep in mind the psychological trauma that can result from radiation exposure. This trauma is more pronounced in children as they will be displaced from their homes and routines.