The emphasis should be on prevention. In certain circumstances(industrial exposures, for instance), total prevention is impossible, and minimization of contamination should be the goal. Workers at risk for exposure to HMs should take adequate precautions. Management should provide them without any hindrance. Health authorities should supervise the smooth conduct of these measures, and authorities should enforce the law strictly. With minimal exposure and early detection, the prognosis is good. Delayed diagnosis and serious toxicity translate to a bad prognosis. Care of the ill in specialized centers with facilities for testing and treatment may have an edge in managing difficult and serious cases.

The prognosis of HM toxicity at the community level depends on many factors and include:

1) Proper discharge of effluents from factories.

2) Periodic inspection of soil and groundwater and measures to remove excess HM like:

- Excavation and removal.

- In-situ fixation including amending the soil

- Phytoremediation(growing certain plants to contain HMs).

- Soil treatment using asymmetrical alternating current electrochemistry.

- Nanomediation as a method to remove toxic HMs from the soil and water.

- A novel method of HM removal from wastewater has been developed that is rapid, highly effective, and feasible. It involves a metal-organic framework/polydopamine composite and may offer solutions to vast areas of polluted waterways, including seawater.

3) Regular testing of seawater to prevent contamination of fishing areas with HMs, and inspection of seafood.

There are three official agencies involved in the regulation of HMs:

- The Food and Drug Administration(FDA) sets the HM limits in foods.

- The Centers for Disease Control(CDC) oversees Pb testing in at-risk children.

- The Environmental Protection Agency(EPA):

- Evaluates the effects of HM exposures
- Regulates industrial emissions
- Establishes maximum HM contaminant levels