Sacroiliitis commonly presents as lower back pain. The pain presentation varies greatly, and patients could describe pain in one or both buttocks, hip pain, thigh pain, or even pain more distal. Patients may report that their pain is worse after sitting for prolonged periods or with rotational movements. Characterization of pain also varies widely and is commonly described as sharp and stabbing but can also be described as dull and achy. It is very important to ascertain more than just the timing and descriptions of the pain. Ask about a history of inflammatory disorders as discussed previously. Also, obtain a thorough review of systems to evaluate for systemic symptoms such as fevers, chills, night sweats, and weight loss. These symptoms are indicative of a more serious process indicating likely systemic illness.

Although not always obvious, inspection can reveal pelvic asymmetry. Measurement of the limbs can rule out a leg-length discrepancy. Inspect the spine for any abnormal curvatures or rotational abnormalities. Typically the range of motion, neurologic, and strength testing are unremarkable although the patient may experience pain during some of these tests.

Special provocative tests can be very helpful in reproducing the patient’s pain:

- “**Fortin finger sign**”- reproduction of pain after applying a deep palpation with the four-hand fingers posteriorly at the patient's SI joint(s).

- **FABER test**- reproduction of pain after flexing the hip while also abducting and externally rotating the hip.

- **Sacral distraction test**- reproduction of pain after applying pressure to the anterior superior iliac spine.

- **Iliac compression test**- reproduction of pain after applying pressure downward on the superior aspect of the iliac crest.

- **Gaenslen test**- reproduction of pain after having the patient flex the hip on the unaffected side and then dangle the affected leg off the examining table. Pressure is then directed downward on the leg to extend further the hip, which causes stress on the SI joint.

- **Thigh thrust test**- reproduction of pain after flexing the hip and applying a posterior shearing force to the SI joint.

- **Sacral thrust test**- reproduction of pain with the patient prone and then applying an anterior pressure through the sacrum.

The likelihood of SI joint mediated pain increases as the number of positive-provocative tests increase.