The typical site of presentation is inferior and nasal to the medial canthus, with the majority being unilateral. The surrounding skin usually shows redness and tenderness, with mucous or purulent secretion. In the most frequent scenario, congenital lacrimal fistulae do not cause any symptoms, and they are frequently missed because of the very narrow orifice, whereas symptomatic cases may present with epiphora or mucous secretion from the fistula or the eye, especially with a concomitant nasolacrimal duct obstruction, with possible subsequent dacryocystitis.

Blepharitis may develop due to chronic inflammation, leading to redness and swelling of the eyelid. Most patients with epiphora have symptoms since birth, although a minor percentage of patients refer to late-onset symptomatology associated with intermittent nasolacrimal duct obstruction. The palpatory sensation of fullness might signify a concomitant mucocele developing within the lacrimal sac.

The clinical examination remains the main stage of the diagnostic approach, although it has the limit that many asymptomatic fistulae, especially if non communicating with the external skin, are sometimes not diagnosed. A useful finding in children is that continuous tearing may be observed from the abnormal site when the child cries. Irrigation of the lacrimal system using a salt solution with fluorescein can enhance the visualization of any skin ostium and is also used to check if the nasolacrimal duct is patent.

Another effective aid is provided by the Valsalva maneuver, which may emphasize the discharge of purulent secretion from the fistula orifice. Other abnormalities that every clinician should be aware of include complete or partial lacrimal agenesis, incomplete punctal canalization with a non-patent drainage system, duplication of canalicula, obstruction of nasolacrimal ducts, and accessory puncta. Several studies have reported a higher frequency of hypertelorism and strabismus in such patients, especially in syndromic cases.

It is interesting to note a peculiar diagnostic finding that can be found during the clinical examination. In cases with congenital lacrimal fistulae associated with craniofacial cleft syndromes, such as Goldenhar syndrome or CHARGE syndrome, congenital eye malformations or eyelid colobomas may coexist.