Retroperitoneal bleeding is a life-threatening condition. Diagnosis is made difficult even for the astute clinician as the presentation can be variable and nonspecific. Accurate diagnosis requires a high clinical index of suspicion as well as an accurate and focused history and physical examination. Rapid elucidation of recent trauma, known malignancy, recent surgical procedures, history of aneurysmal disease, current use of anticoagulation, and ongoing pancreatitis are keys to narrowing a wide differential diagnosis.

The most common presentation of bleeding into the retroperitoneal space is abdominal or flank pain.

Eponyms abound in the description of abdominal bleeding and are of use in a minority of cases. Grey-Turner’s sign occurs with the development of a hematoma along the lateral abdominal wall secondary to perirenal space bleeding tracking along with the quadratus lumborum. Cullen’s sign is a periumbilical ecchymosis that develops when retroperitoneal bleeding dissects along the falciform ligament anteriorly. Fox’s sign is ecchymosis of the anteromedial thigh from blood tracking along the psoas and iliacus muscles’ fascial planes. Bryant’s sign occurs when the scrotum fills with blood and becomes ecchymotic from abdominal bleeding tracking along the spermatic cord. Finally, Stabler’s sign is the development of a hematoma and bruising overlying the inguinal ligament.

In some cases, symptoms may be absent or overshadowed by other distracting injuries, particularly in trauma. Here, careful attention to the mechanism of injury and commonly associated injuries must be paid. Genitourinary involvement of bleeding may manifest as hematuria, while oliguria may develop from adjacent extrinsic compression by a developing hematomal mass. Additionally, pancreaticoduodenal involvement can present with gastric outlet obstruction.