The management of advanced heart failure, whether acute or chronic, is challenging and complex. With improved surgical and organ preservation strategies, a heart transplant is an option for eligible patients. To derive good outcomes, the goals and objectives of the heart transplantation have to be defined prior to taking the patient to surgery. In some cases, chronic infections, cirrhosis, and chronic kidney diseases, as well as psychosocial factors, may preclude cardiac transplants. Proper screening is thus required for proper patient selection. As with any other complex procedure, the preoperative workup must be thorough, and the patient should be seen by a pulmonologist and cardiologist to optimize lung and cardiac function. Due to the potential of complications from immunosuppression and the procedure itself, routine surveillance and biopsies are recommended.

To improve outcomes, the ISHLT working in collaboration with ACC/AHA/HFSA and ESC has issued indications for a heart transplant in both acute and chronic heart failure patients. For optimum results, patients with any contraindications to heart transplants should be excluded from the list and managed medically and on mechanical support.

In addition to complications of the surgery, both early and late complications can complicate heart transplants. Hence careful supervision is needed in the immediate post-operative period as well as years after transplant. An integrated interprofessional team with a cardiologist, cardiothoracic surgeon, trained nursing staff, and pharmacist well trained with titration and side effects of immunosuppressants can greatly improve heart transplantation outcomes. The role of a primary care physician in follow-up is also crucial; thus, further emphasizing the need for an interprofessional approach to the management of heart transplant patients. The need for meticulous planning and discussion with other professionals involved in the management of the patient is highly recommended to lower the morbidity and improve post-transplant outcomes.