Memory is the capability of the brain to encode, store, and retrieve information or data when they are needed. Without memory, it is impossible to perform daily activities or form relationships or learn and progress in our life. That is, memory represents our identity.

According to the multistore model of memory (also known as the modal model), proposed by Atkinson and Shiffrin in 1968, memory consists of three stores: a sensory register, short-term memory (STM), and long-term memory (LTM). STM is the capacity to store and manipulate information for a short time,

Based on cognitive psychology studies, since the late sixties of the last century, researchers proposed to divide LTM into two major two subsets of LTM, explicit memory and implicit memory.

On the other hand, implicit memory does not require conscious intervention to be retrieved. That is, its recovery is not in the form of memories, but through actions or automatisms, "knowing how." It represents, in turn, our abilities (e.g., swimming, cycling, driving the car) and is therefore referred to as procedural memory.

By summarizing LTM can be divided into two subsets:

- Explicit (or declarative) memory

- Episodic memory
- Semantic memory

- Implicit (or procedural) memory

Although the modal model represents an excellent basis for understanding the modalities of memory, it seems to operate an excessive simplification of matter and has been criticized for being a passive and linear model. Based on a wide range of studies conducted on the subject, several alternative memory models have been proposed. Most likely, a model that can explain memory functioning in detail has yet to be proposed. Therefore, it is reasonable to believe that the various models and theories should be integrated. In this context, the Working Model of Memory proposed by Baddeley and Hitch, in 1974, offers an explanation of how STM works.