The most feared complication is progressive airway compromise leading to death. Even seemingly mild symptoms can progress rapidly as a patient gradually tires with the increased work of breathing caused by airway obstruction. Once an obstructing airway is diagnoses or suspected, the astute clinician will have a very low threshhold to secure a definitive airway.

Endotracheal intubation (whether direct or fiberoptic) is usually the first planned intervention. Great care should be taken when intubating a potentially obstructed patient, and the physician with the most experience should perform the intubation. Supraglottic masses can be friable, leading to bleeding into the airway and potential inability to secure an airway. Foreign bodies may become dislodged and completely obstruct the airway. The safest place to perform such an intubation is in the Operating Room with a tracheostomy kit open and available, but the patient's impending airway may not always allow for transport to the OR.

If endotracheal intubation is deemed unsafe or impossible, a controlled awake tracheostomy is always preferred over an emergent surgical airway (cricothyrotomy or emergent tracheostomy). The patient can be taken to the OR and a controlled tracheostomy performed under local anesthesia. This can help to minimize the potential complications of tracheostomy, namely bleeding, pneumothorax, and failure to locate the airway (insertion of the tracheostomy tube into a false-passage).

The potential complications from an emergent surgical airway include failure of the procedure (failure to enter the airway lumen in time), bleeding, and pneumothorax.