Despite the optimization of surgical technique and post-operative care, it is still imperative for physicians and surgeons to monitor bariatric patients for both medical and surgical complications and treat them accordingly. Overall 30-day mortality among all bariatric surgery patients is less than one percent with restrictive procedures being 0.1%, RYGB 0.5%, and 1% for BPD/DS.

As VTE is a common cause of morbidity and mortality following bariatric surgery (0.3% at 7 days and 2% at 180 days), it is important to note modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors.

From a surgical perspective, anastomotic or staple line leaks and bleeding have been identified as having the greatest association with sepsis, reoperation, and intensive care unit (ICU) admission.

Internal hernias are identified in 1% to 3% of RYGB or BPD/DS patients and are more commonly seen after patients begin to lose weight.

Stenosis and marginal ulcers usually manifest at the gastroenteric anastomosis. Stenosis is seen greater than 30 days post-op, and patients will present with epigastric pain and regurgitation. Diagnosis and treatment include endoscopy with balloon dilation of the anastomotic site.

**Complications Based on Type of Bariatric Surgery**

Adjustable Gastric Band. Examining the adjustable gastric band, it has the lowest rate of post-op morbidity and mortality of all bariatric surgeries. Its thirty-day mortality is between 0% to 0.1%.

Band slippage and subsequent gastric outlet obstruction are diagnosed in patients who have developed food intolerance or new/worsening reflux.

Sleeve Gastrectomy. As discussed, the complications of sleeve gastrectomy are rare, with a global rate of 7.7%.

Roux-En-Y Gastric Bypass. Thirty-day post-op mortality for RYGB is 0.2% to 0.5%. Other early complications of RYGB include anastomotic leak (1%) and cardiac event in 0.2% to 1% of patients.

Biliopancreatic Diversion/Duodenal Switch. BPD and DS are accompanied by the most weight loss but also by the highest metabolic morbidity and mortality rates.