**Thiazides Side Effects**

Thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics are associated with multiple side effects. Most of these side effects are directly related to the diuretic dose; hypokalemia and hyponatremia are the most common metabolic effects, followed by hyperuricemia, hypomagnesemia, hyperlipidemia, and increased glucose levels.

Chlorthalidone was found in a study to have an increased risk of hospitalization due to severe hypokalemia in the elderly. Other non-dose-related side effects are sexual dysfunction and sleep disturbance.

**CCB Side Effects**

The treatment with dihydropyridine CCBs is often associated with peripheral edema. Long-acting nifedipine is associated with a higher incidence of edema when compared to amlodipine; the edema is related to the dose of the CCB. It is not related to sodium or fluid retention or developing heart failure.

Non-dihydropyridines are associated with bradycardia and can cause constipation in 25% of patients.

CCBs inhibit platelet aggregation and are associated with an increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding; caution is necessary when prescribing these agents to older patients and patients with a high risk of bleeding.

**ACE Is and ARBs Side Effects**

The most common side effects related to ACE inhibitors are cough, hypotension, fatigue, and azotemia; reversible renal impairment is a common side effect, especially if the patient develops volume depletion due to diarrhea or vomiting.

Cough can occur in up to 20% of patients on ACE inhibitors. It takes up to 14 to 28 days after discontinuation for the cough to resolve. The incidence of cough is less common with ARB treatment; comparing losartan with hydrochlorothiazide showed a similar incidence of cough in both medications. ARBs are safe to use in asthma patients; candesartan did not correlate with an increase in the incidence of cough in patients with asthma compared to CCBs. Ramipril demonstrated a higher rate of cough incidence compared to telmisartan.

ACE inhibitor treatment is commonly associated with mild hyperkalemia. Even in patients with normal renal function, the risk of hyperkalemia increases in patients with renal failure, diabetes, or CHF.

Angioedema is a rare side effect of ACE inhibitors; it appears in 0.3 % of patients on ramipril; ARBs are less associated with angioedema than ACE inhibitors.

In Black patients, ARBs correlated with less incidence of both cough and angioedema.

**Beta-blockers:**Common side effects of beta-blockers are bradycardia, constipation, depression, fatigue, and sexual dysfunction. Additionally, they are associated with bronchospasm and worsening symptoms of peripheral vascular disease. They can cause a flare-up of Raynaud syndrome.

**Loop diuretics:**are associated with electrolyte imbalance, mainly hypokalemia, hyponatremia, hypomagnesemia, and hypochloremia.

**Side effects of the Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists:**Hyperkalemia is the major side effect of this group of medications. They can cause metabolic acidosis due to decreased exertion of hydrogen ions. Erectile dysfunction and gynecomastia in men and irregular menstrual periods in women can also occur.

**Hydralazine:**can cause headaches, flushing, palpitations, dizziness, hypotension symptoms, and dizziness due to the sympathetic system stimulation.

**Clonidine's**common side effects are drowsiness, headache, dizziness, irritability, nausea and vomiting, constipation, upper abdominal pain, and bradycardia, but other serious side effects can occur as angioedema, atrioventricular block, and severe hypotension.

**Minoxidil**is associated with hirsutism.

**Alpha-blockers**are associated with tachycardia and orthostatic hypotension as a result of venous dilation.