As blood is oxygenated in the lungs and enters the left atrium, it traverses the mitral valves into the left ventricle where it is pushed out through the aortic valve into the ascending aorta. The first major branch of the aorta that blood will circulate through is the brachiocephalic artery, which then gives off the right common carotid as it turns into the right subclavian artery. As blood traverses the aortic arch, it reaches the second major branch of the aorta, the left common carotid artery. The common carotids then traverse up into the neck through the carotid sheath, where they finally bifurcate into the external and internal carotid arteries at the level of the carotid sinus and the fourth cervical vertebra (C4).

Just like all arteries in the human body, the internal carotids consist of three layers histologically. Going from inside to outside the vessel, they include the tunica intima, tunica media, and tunica adventitia. The tunica intima consists of endothelium supported by an elastic and collagenous layer. The tunica media consists of a relatively thick smooth muscle layer that is responsible for changing the diameter of the blood vessels to regulate blood flow.

After the bifurcation of the common carotid, the internal carotid continues through the carotid sheath to enter the carotid canal of the temporal bone. It does not have any branches in the neck. Within the cranial cavity, the two internal carotid arteries anastomose with the two vertebral arteries to form the circle of Willis, which supplies the brain with oxygenated blood. The internal carotid artery gives off its first branch, the ophthalmic artery, just distal to the cavernous sinus. The ophthalmic artery is the primary blood supply to the eye, extraocular muscles, lacrimal gland, upper nose, and parts of the forehead.

The internal carotid has been described by the Bouthillier classification to consist of seven distinct parts based on angiographic appearance. This classification includes the entire internal carotid artery using a numerical scale based on the direction of blood flow, and describes the segments anatomically and based on the compartments through which they travel. Each segment branches into different vessels; these branches are generally small, inconstant, and can often be not present.

- C1, Cervical: From the common carotid bifurcation to the entrance of the carotid canal

- C2, Petrous: From the entrance to the carotid canal to the posterior edge of the foramen lacerum.

- Branches include the caroticotympanic artery and the vidian artery.

- C3, Lacerum: From the posterior edge of the foramen lacerum to the superior margin of the petrolingual ligament

- C4, Cavernous: From the superior margin of the petrolingual ligament to the proximal dural ring (anterior clinoid process)

- Branches include the meningohypophyseal trunk and the inferolateral trunk.

- C5, Clinoid: From the proximal dural ring (anterior clinoid process) to the distal dural ring (cavernous sinus roof)

- C6, Ophthalmic: From the distal dural ring (cavernous sinus roof) to just proximal to the origin of the posterior communicating artery

- Branches include the ophthalmic artery and the superior hypophyseal trunk.

- C7, Communicating: From the proximal origin of the posterior communicating artery to the internal carotid bifurcation

- Branches include the posterior communicating artery, anterior choroidal artery, anterior cerebral artery, and the middle cerebral artery.