When a patient suffers from a disease, pain, or ailment, his entire personal sphere becomes involved. If the dysfunction is chronic, the psychic and emotional spheres will be involved. It may happen that, despite the osteopathic treatment, the results do not arrive; either the patient does not follow the clinician's directions, or the patient has an emotional wound deeper than the bodily disturbance. In both cases, the patient's involvement as the main actor in the treatment process is fundamental. We must understand not only the corporeal sphere but also the emotional and psychic one, making use of various health professionals, such as psychologists or psychiatrists, when necessary.

Turning to other health professionals is essential to obtain the maximum healing capacity of a patient, as the body is made up of different fields of scientific interest, not only osteopathy. Improving skills means interacting multidisciplinary level.

Not only do osteopathic outcomes improve with a multidisciplinary team, but results can be compared from different measurement sources.

Another fundamental concept, not just limited to osteopathic medicine, is that science cannot always solve the patient's problem or that medical specialty is not always suitable for that specific pathology or dysfunction. It is mandatory to involve the patient (if not a minor) in the clinical situation, while, in the second case, collaboration on the part of the clinician is mandatory by sending the patient to another specialist.