Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) are a group of hereditary disorders that disrupt lysosomal function, specifically, enzymes involved in cell metabolism, signaling, substrate processing, innate immunity, apoptosis, and other complex cell recycling processes. This process is extremely complex. The accumulation of undigested or partially processed molecules become toxic for the host cell. The onset tends to predominate in early infancy or childhood, with some disease onset in adulthood. LSDs tend to have a progressive neurodegenerative course and can cause multi-organ failure and, ultimately, death.

Leukodystrophies are inherited disorders that predominantly affect the central nervous system (CNS) white matter tracts, and it's cellular components. These may include glial cells, myelin sheath, and axons. Genetic leukodystrophies tend to combine features of leukodystrophies with development issues caused by inborn errors of metabolism, disorders of DNA transcription, translation, production of critical CNS proteins including myelin, and neuronal cytoskeletal dysfunction.

Metachromatic leukodystrophy is a demyelinating, autosomal recessive genetic leukodystrophy and LSD, caused by an inborn error of metabolism in the arylsulfatase A lysosomal enzyme. This leads to the accumulation of sulfatides, which result in the dysfunction and destruction of the CNS/PNS myelin sheaths. It also accumulates in other organs, including the kidneys, testes, and gallbladder. It can be classified based on the age of onset and clinical features of the disease. All forms of the disease involve a progressive deterioration of neurodevelopment and neurocognitive function.