- **Pediculosis capitis**: Black piedra is often mistaken for pediculosis capitis since lice eggs (nits) look similar to the black piedra nodules. Nits are oval in shape and white, light gray, tan, or yellowish in color. They firmly attach to the hair shaft and are difficult to remove. Nits carrying viable eggs are close to the scalp. Diagnostic confirmation is by the presence of viable eggs, nits in various stages (live and viable, open, empty/dead), or adult lice.

- **White piedra**: Unlike black piedra that most often occurs on the scalp hair and spares other parts of the nonglabrous skin, white piedra caused by Trichosporon spp. manifests as whitish, loose adherent material on the hair shafts that typically but not exclusively involves the scalp hair. Trichoscopy, DME under 10% KOH, and a fungal culture can easily distinguish the two conditions. The septate hyphae of Trichosporon causing white piedra are non-dematiaceous.

- **Trichorexix nodosa**: It is a disorder of the hair shaft characterized by easy breakability of hair and microscopically by nodes on the hair shaft. The microscopic examination of the node reveals a fractured hair. At the point of fracture, there is visible splaying out and release of individual cortical cells from the main body of the shaft of the hair.

- **Monilethrix**: It is a rare autosomal dominant hair disease that results in short, fragile, broken hair that appears beaded. Light microscopy, shows the hair shaft has regular elliptical, fusiform, or spindle-shaped swellings that are separated by constricted internodes.