The differential diagnosis for chest pain should include angina from stable ischemic heart disease, or acute coronary syndrome, subendocardial ischemia associated with aortic stenosis or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, aortic dissection, myocarditis, pleurisy secondary to pulmonary embolism or pneumonia, costochondritis, esophageal spasm, peptic ulcer disease or referred pain from another organ such as acute cholecystitis. In the acute setting, it is critical to rule out life-threatening causes before entertaining the diagnosis of acute pericarditis, especially when there is uncertainly.

Auscultation classically reveals a left parasternal pericardial friction rub; which consists of a rasping, scratchy triphasic sound corresponding to friction between the pericardial layers during atrial systole, ventricular systole and early ventricular diastole. This is reported in the literature to be present at some point during the illness in 35-85% of cases.

When present, and particularly when triphasic, a pericardial friction rub is highly specific for the diagnosis. Not uncommonly however, one component may be missing producing a biphasic component instead. It should also not be confused with a pleural rub, which may produce a similar sound, but is related to respiration as opposed to the cardiac cycle.

More than half of patients develop typical ECG changes that evolve through 4 stages over a period of weeks, with significant temporal variability.

The initial ST elevation should not be confused with an acute injury pattern, where ST elevation occurs within a localized distribution, and is concave down as opposed to concave up in pericarditis. These changes are also typically associated with reciprocal ST depressions in the other leads (as opposed to AVR only in acute pericarditis), and Q waves are also frequently present within the same distribution - or develop shortly thereafter - as part of the natural evolutionary changes of acute/subacute myocardial infarction. The differential of ST elevations would also include early repolarization abnormalities, which are seen frequently in healthy individuals, and demonstrate an elevated J-point (commonly seen as an initial slur at the beginning of the ST segment), and may occur in several leads but are not usually diffuse.

Clinically, acute pericarditis is suggested by a characteristic chest pain description and the presence of a pericardial friction rub on auscultation. However, laboratory studies, electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiography are still often needed to confirm the diagnosis. The European Society of Cardiology 2015 guidelines require (2) out of (4) criteria to be me in order to diagnose acute pericarditis. (9) They include (1) pericardial chest pain, (2) pericardial rubs, (3) new widespread ST-elevation or PR depression on ECG, and (4) pericardial effusion (new or worsening). Supporting findings also include elevated inflammatory biomarkers (ESR, CRP, leukocytosis), and evidence of pericardial inflammation on advanced imaging, such as cardiac computed tomography (CT) and cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR). Pericardial effusion, though often present, is not required to make a definitive diagnosis of acute pericarditis.

Certain clues may suggest the inciting cause. Viral pericarditis may be associated with a “flu-like” prodrome (such as fever or upper respiratory symptoms), while autoimmune and inflammatory etiologies may have associated systemic findings. This may be evidenced by polyarthritis in Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) patients, skin and kidney manifestations in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) or asterixis and encephalopathy in Uremia for example.