# Continuing Education Activity

Cyclic neutropenia is a very rare hematological condition characterized by regular fluctuations in blood neutrophil counts, leading to periodic neutropenia with a 21-day turnover frequency. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of cyclic neutropenia and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of cyclic neutropenia medical conditions and emergencies.
- Outline and explain the appropriate history, physical, and evaluation of cyclic neutropenia.
- Review the treatment and management options available for cyclic neutropenia.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the management of cyclic neutropenia and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Neutrophils play a vital role in our immune defenses by ingesting, killing, and digesting invading microorganisms. Failure to carry out this role results in immunodeficiency, which manifests itself in the form of recurrent infections.

# Etiology

Recent research in the field of molecular biology has permitted the discovery of the underlying genetic basis for many inherited diseases.

# Epidemiology

Cyclic neutropenia is an autosomal dominant disease, so it affects males and females in equal proportions and is familial in some.

# Pathophysiology

Neutrophils play a pivotal role in the immune defense of the body. Once the neutrophil count is below 1 x 10^9/L, the patient becomes susceptible to recurrent infections.

# Histopathology

Cyclic neutropenia presents with a periodically decreased number of neutrophils in the bone marrow and circulation during an attack.

# History and Physical

Patients with cyclic neutropenia usually have a periodic decrease in absolute neutrophil count (often <.2 x10^9/L), and present with a clinical syndrome characterized by recurrent fever, oral mucosal ulcers, and respiratory infections.

# Evaluation

Diagnosis and evaluation of cyclic neutropenia are based on clinical symptoms, duration, history of hereditary inheritance, white cell counts, immune function, bone marrow alterations, and weekly differential leukocyte count (DLC). Investigations such as complete blood count, bone marrow biopsy, histopathological studies, tumoral markers, levels of cytokines (granulocyte-colony stimulating factor), chest x-ray, diagnostic ultrasound, and computerized tomography (CT) scan should be done to rule out other immunodeficiency disorders. DNA studies can be carried out as a confirmatory test for most genetic disorders, including cyclic neutropenia.

# Treatment / Management

The mainstay of treatment and management includes regular monitoring of blood counts, prevention and control of infections through judicious use of antibiotics, oral and dental care, and patient education. Alternate-day corticosteroid regimes have been used successfully to treat recurrent signs and symptoms.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Cyclic neutropenia may have a similar presentation to several causes of recurrent fever, such as recurrent tonsillitis, infectious diseases, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, Behçet's disease, and familial Mediterranean fever syndrome.

Rare disorders with a presentation similar to cyclic neutropenia are as follows:

- Marshall syndrome (MS) is a recurrent fever syndrome characterized by fever at 3-8 weeks intervals, cervical adenopathy, pharyngitis, and aphthous ulcers. MS is a diagnosis of exclusion.

- PFAPA syndrome (periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and adenitis) is a non-hereditary autoinflammatory disease, presenting with recurrent fevers lasting for 3 to 6 days duration, accompanied by aphthous ulcers, pharyngitis, tonsillitis, and cervical lymphadenitis.

# Prognosis

The clinical course of cyclic neutropenia is usually benign compared with other conditions with neutropenia.

# Complications

Studies show that serious long-term complications such as septicemia, spontaneous peritonitis, and segmental bowel necrosis may occur in some patients suffering from cyclic neutropenia.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education about careful oral and dental care and the judicious use of antibiotics are the mainstays of management for cyclic neutropenia. The importance of oral hygiene and regular monthly dental visits should be explained to the patient.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Cyclic neutropenia is a distinctive disorder of unknown etiology, characterized by regularly cycling episodes of neutropenia, which occur about every three weeks.