The management of hypoalphalipoproteinemia requires care coordination and management from the interprofessional team consisting of a primary care clinician, cardiologist, nurse, pharmacist, and mid-level providers. Hypoalphalipoproteinemia is typically discovered during routine visits by a primary care provider in an outpatient setting. The diagnostics involve regular blood work, mainly the lipid panel, which shows reduced levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Per the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), lipid panel screening should be done at baseline for females between the ages of 20-45 and males between the ages of 20 to 35. In addition, routine follow-up visits should be scheduled for patients at risk for HA, other lipid disorders, and coronary artery disease.

The primary care provider should discuss methods on how to raise HDL levels. Counseling should be provided on preventative strategies for risk factors, such as smoking prevention, alcohol reduction, dietary modifications, and increased physical activity and exercise. Patients who smoke may be referred to licensed therapists for behavior modification therapy. Licensed dieticians can help with diet and weight loss strategies. Patients with severe cardiovascular events should be directed to cardiovascular rehabilitation and routinely follow up with a cardiologist.

Patients should initially be guided on lifestyle preventative changes before initiating pharmacological therapy, depending on their lipid panel results and underlying history of comorbidities. Management with statins should be initiated promptly as they can be life-saving and significantly decrease the risk of cardiovascular disease.

In most cases, care in the inpatient setting is not required unless treating severe sequelae of HA such as a myocardial infarction or stroke. Therefore, most patients with hypoalphalipoproteinemia can be managed in an outpatient setting. Patients with HA may have underlying comorbidities such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, and obesity, which may serve as risk factors for complications such as myocardial infarction or stroke. In such cases, input from subspecialists such as cardiology may be warranted.

Interprofessional care coordination and communication among the healthcare team will lead to timely management of patients with HA and can decrease its associated adverse events and complications such as CAD, MI, and stroke and further improve patient outcomes.