Once the diagnosis has been established, Muir-Torre syndrome patients should undergo annual surveillance for visceral and cutaneous malignancy. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy should be performed. Colonoscopy may begin as early as 18 years while upper endoscopy is recommended around 25 to 30 years. Men should undergo annual testicular and prostate exams, and women should have annual breast and pelvic exams along with transvaginal ultrasound and endometrial sampling for suspicious findings. Other potentially beneficial tests would include chest x-ray, cervical and urine cytology, carcinoembryonic antigen levels, fecal occult blood testing, liver function tests, and complete blood counts.

The cutaneous manifestations of Muir-Torre syndrome can be difficult to treat due to the potential number and disfigurement that numerous sebaceous neoplasms can cause. Reassurance should be offered for benign lesions. Local excision and cryotherapy may be performed for patients desiring removal of benign lesions. Keratoacanthomas should also be managed conservatively with local excision. Sebaceous carcinomas have the potential for local and distant metastasis and should be managed more aggressively with wide local excision with 5 to 6 millimeter margins or Mohs micrographic surgery. Radiation may also be employed but only as adjuvant therapy after excision of a recurrent sebaceous carcinoma, or regional metastasis. Radiation as monotherapy for primary cutaneous sebaceous carcinoma has been associated with higher rates of mortality and recurrence. Additionally, interferon-alpha in conjunction with oral isotretinoin has been reported to decrease the development of cutaneous and visceral malignancies.