**Preoperative Embolization**

Preoperative embolization is controversial in the surgical community. However, embolization aids in the gross total tumor removal, minimize bleeding intraoperatively, and decrease the incidence risk of paralysis of the cranial nerves.

**Carotid Body Resection**

Surgical manipulation of the neck can pose a risk to many vital structures, including resection of the carotid body. As the carotid body is an essential component of the reflexive ventilatory response during hypoxia, researchers have conducted studies to understand the response of the human body to carotid body resection. Bilateral local anesthesia or resection of the carotid bodies results in the absence of a reflexive respiratory response to hypoxia. Over time, however, extra-carotid chemoreceptors may begin to adapt, and the body once again regains the ventilatory reflex in response to hypoxia. This reflex can return in as little as 6 to 10 weeks after resection. The regained reflex is, however, reduced in comparison to that seen prior to resection.

- Intraoperative Risks - In a carotid body, paraganglioma resection, cranial nerve paralysis, carotid artery disruption, and exsanguination are the risks that merit consideration.

- Surgical Planning - The first-line treatment for neck paragangliomas is surgical removal due to their 6 to 12% malignant potential.
- Surgical Approaches 

- Transcervical approach (TCA) - used for tumors of the lower parapharyngeal space (PPS) 
- Transcervical-transparotid approach (TC-TPA)- used for tumors in the middle of the PPS
- Transcervical-transmastoid approach (TC-TMA)- used for tumors in the upper PPS that also have a posterior extension, with the removal of the mastoid tip 
- Infratemporal fossa approach-type A (ITFA-A) - used for tumors in parts of the upper PPS that also have an extension to a vertical tract to the internal carotid artery; this includes a transposition of the facial nerve.