Commercially available antidepressants are currently available for administration in various dosage forms, including oral tablets, oral extended-release tablets, oral suspensions, topical creams, and transdermal patches. Studies examine alternative administration routes via inhalation, intranasal, sublingual, and rectal forms, and success was obtained in intranasal esketamine.

**SSRIs**

Citalopram

- The starting dose is 20 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 20 to 40 mg daily.

Escitalopram

- The starting dose is 5-10 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 10 to 20 mg daily.

Paroxetine

- The starting dose is 20 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 20 to 40 mg daily.

Sertraline

- The starting dose is 50 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 100 to 200 mg daily.

Fluoxetine

- The starting dose is 20 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 20 to 60 mg daily.

Fluvoxamine

- The starting dose is 50 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 50 to 200 mg daily.

**SNRIs**

Venlafaxine

- The starting dose is 75 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 225 to 375 mg daily.

Desvenlafaxine

- The starting dose is 25 to 50 mg daily; the usual maintenance dose is 50 mg daily.

Duloxetine

- The starting dose is 30 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 60 mg daily.

Milnacipran

- The starting dose is 12.5 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 100 mg daily.

Levomilnacipran

- The starting dose is 20 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 40 to 120 mg daily.

**Atypical Antidepressants**

Bupropion

- The starting dose is 150 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 300 mg daily.

Mirtazapine

- The starting dose is 15 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 15 to 45 mg daily.

**Serotonin Modulators**

Nefazodone

- The starting dose is 200 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 200 to 600 mg daily.

Trazodone

- The starting dose is 150 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 200 to 400 mg daily.

Vortioxetine

- The starting dose is 10 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 20 mg daily.

**Tricyclic Antidepressants (TCAs)**

Amitriptyline

- The starting dose is 50 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 100 to 200 mg daily.

Nortriptyline

- The starting dose is 25 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 50 to 150 mg daily.

Imipramine

- The starting dose is 75 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 150 mg daily.

Clomipramine(off-label use)

- The starting dose is 25 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 100 to 250 mg daily.

Desipramine

- The starting dose is 100 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 100 to 300 mg daily.

**Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)**

Isocarboxazid

- The starting dose is 20 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 20 to 60 mg daily.

Phenelzine

- The starting dose is 45 mg daily, and the usual maintenance dose is 60 to 90 mg daily.

Selegiline transdermal patch

- The starting dose is 6 mg/24 hours; the usual maintenance dose is 6 to 12 mg/24 hours.

**NMDA antagonists**

Esketamine (nasal spray)

- The induction phase(week 1 to 4) dose is 56 mg/84 mg twice weekly, maintenance phase(week 5 to 8) dose is 56 mg/84 mg once a week. Dosing should be individualized( least frequent dosing) according to the clinical response.

Dextromethorphan/bupropion(extended-release tablets)

- The starting dose is 45 mg dextromethorphan/105 mg bupropion once daily in the morning. After three days, increase the dose to the maximum recommended dosage of one tablet twice daily, separated by at least 8 hours. It is not recommended to exceed two doses within the same day.

**Switching Antidepressants**

- A washout period of 2–5 half-lives (most frequently 2–5 days) between cessation of the previous drug and the introduction of a new drug is the safest switching strategy from the point of view of drug interactions.

**Treatment-Resistant Depression**

- According to the FDA and EMA, patients are considered to have treatment-resistant depression (TRD) when their major depressive disorder fails to respond sufficiently to ≥2 consecutive antidepressants in a single episode.

**Psychotherapy**

- The combination of pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy is more effective than pharmacotherapy alone.