A thorough understanding of the anatomy, vascular supply, and lymphatic drainage of the stomach is paramount to successful gastric resection.

**Stomach Anatomy**

- The stomach can be divided into four parts: the cardia, body, antrum, and pylorus.

- **Gastrocolic Ligament:**a portion of the greater omentum that connects, the greater curvature of the stomach to the transverse colon, and forms part of the anterior wall of the lesser sac.

- **Gastrosplenic ligament:**a portion of the greater omentum that connects, the greater curvature of the stomach to the hilum of the spleen, contains the left gastroepiploic and short gastric arteries.

- **Gastrohepatic ligament:**a peritoneal attachment that connects the liver to the lesser curvature of the stomach and forms part of the anterior wall of the lesser sac; contains the right and left gastric arteries.

- **Gastrophrenic ligament:**a peritoneal attachment that connects the diaphragm to the superior portion of the stomach.

**Vascular Supply**

- **Celiac Trunk:**originates from the abdominal aorta and gives off three major branches: the left gastric, common hepatic, and splenic arteries.

- **Left Gastric Artery:**arises from the celiac trunk, runs along the superior portion of the lesser curvature of the stomach, and anastomoses with the right gastric artery.

- **Right Gastric Artery:**arises from the proper hepatic artery, runs along the inferior portion of the lesser curvature of the stomach, and anastomoses with the left gastric artery.

- **Left Gastroepiploic Artery:**arises from the splenic artery, runs along the superior portion of the greater curvature of the stomach, and anastomoses with the right gastroepiploic artery.

- **Right Gastroepiploic Artery:**arises from the gastroduodenal artery, runs along the inferior portion of the greater curvature of the stomach, and anastomoses with the left gastroepiploic artery.

- **Short Gastric Arteries:**a group of short arteries that originate from the splenic artery and left gastroepiploic artery to supply the greater curvature of the stomach.

**Lymphatic Drainage**

- Lymphatic drainage of the stomach is anatomically elaborate and includes 16 regional lymphatic stations.

- Lymph node stations are categorized as N1, N2, or N3 groups with respect to their location to the primary tumor
- **N1 Nodes**- perigastric lymph nodes (stations 1-6)
- **N2 Nodes**- lymph nodes along the main vessels originating from the celiac trunk, including the left gastric, common hepatic, and splenic artery (stations 7-11)
- **N3 Nodes**- lymph nodes of the hepatoduodenal ligament (station 12), retropancreatic region (station 13), and root of the mesentery (station 14)
- **N4 Nodes**- lymph nodes along the middle colic vein (station 15) as well as the para-aortic lymph nodes (station 16)

- Lymph node dissection is characterized by the lymph node stations removed. A D1 lymphadenectomy includes stations 1-6, and a D2 lymphadenectomy includes stations 1-6 as well as stations 7-11.