Under microscopy electron observation of Sertoli cells, one can observe that the nucleus is indented, which is often the identifying factor when scanning the basolateral aspect of the seminiferous tubules. Sertoli cells are the biggest and most asymmetrically shaped cells in the basolateral aspect. They can be further identified by their prominent larger nucleus, in comparison to the large volume of the cytoplasm of the Sertoli cell. The nucleus is oval-shaped and basal, with a prominent nucleolus. The developing spermatogenic cells in different stages indent all over the Sertoli cells. Up to 40 germ cells in different stages of differentiation are in contact with each Sertoli cell.

The most primitive cells, like spermatogonia and spermatocytes, indent near the basement membrane. The more mature cells like spermatids indent near the apex of the Sertoli cells, towards the center of the lumen of the seminiferous tubules. Researchers have noted that Sertoli cells provide a phagocytic function to help remove cytoplasmic waste and debris from the seminiferous tubules and would be in vacuoles of the Sertoli cell. There are also often many layers of smooth endoplasmic reticulum surrounding the nucleus of the Sertoli cell, where the SER functions in lipid removal and processing. There can be many mitochondria observed as well, as the Sertoli cell needs ATP to be able to secrete and synthesize compounds such as Inhibin B, ABP, and Activin. There are two prominent DNA chromocenter satellites present as well, as they form connections with primitive spermatids and drawing the spermatids closer to the basolateral crypts of the Sertoli cell.