**Laryngitis**

Laryngitis is the inflammation of the larynx. Chronic (over 3 weeks) laryngitis is more common than acute (less than 3 weeks) laryngitis. Symptoms usually are hoarse voice, pain, and coughing; sometimes, depending on the cause, often accompanied by fever.

Most acute cases of laryngitis occur as part of a viral upper respiratory tract infection although in some cases it may be due to bacterial infection. Fungal laryngitis is usually underdiagnosed and may account for up to 10% of cases. Excessive use of the vocal folds (e.g., singers, teachers, and other professions) can cause laryngitis/laryngeal trauma.

Most common causes of chronic laryngitis are smoking, allergies and reflux.

**Vocal Fold Paralysis**

Vocal fold paralysis (VFP) is a consequence of a recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis, this nerve, as told before, innervates all the intrinsic larynx muscles but the cricothyroid muscle. The etiology of recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis includes a wide variety of diseases or disorders/causes.

Congenital VFP may result from an array of diseases such as hydrocephalus, Goldenhar syndrome, and anatomical abnormalities such as tracheoesophageal fistula producing VFP. Though infection is a rare cause of VFP, it is usually owing to viral infection. Trauma, including iatrogenic damage to the nerve, is a common cause of VFP. Thyroid, lung or esophagus tumors can also produce VFP. Additionally, several systemic neurologic diseases such as multiple sclerosis or myasthenia gravis can produce VFP.

**Laryngeal Cancer**

Usually, laryngeal cancer is a squamous cell carcinoma and originates in the glottis. Signs and symptoms include hoarseness or any voice change (including VFP), lump in the neck, cough, stridor or difficulty swallowing.