The effects of the stigmatization of obesity on the health of those with the disease have been well documented. Patients with obesity who have felt stigmatized have an increased risk of binge eating disorder, increased food consumption, decreased physical activity, and increased physiologic stress response.

The stigma and, in turn, discrimination impairs the care provided to the patient and the frequency at which a patient seeks care. Being aware of the impact that the stigmatization of obesity has on patients' health may help reframe clinicians' attitudes toward patients with obesity, allowing them to focus less on the weight and more on the diseases with which it is associated. Along with other tools to destigmatize obesity, this reframing may provide better health care.

The stigmatization of obesity is a proven problem for people with obesity and providing optimal health care to those patients. The Joint International Consensus Statement for Ending Stigma of Obesity recognizes that individuals affected by overweight and obesity face a social stigma. The statement aims to condemn the use of language, attitudes, and policies that stigmatize overweight and obesity and pledge to support initiatives to prevent discrimination based on their weight in the workplace, education, and healthcare settings. Reducing stigmatization can be done through concrete policies and some not-so-tangible changes. There are validated tools, such as the antifat attitudes test (AFAT), that can help to assess a health care provider's attitude towards people with obesity. The goal of these tools is to bring awareness and discussion that will lead to positive change in the care of this patient population.

In addition to the previously documented stigma around weight and its impact on the health of those with obesity, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic present a new area for discussion. Early during the pandemic, the CDC identified obesity as a risk factor for severe COVID-19. The implication of this fact is that people with obesity are vulnerable to biology during the pandemic, and the weight stigma is already acknowledged as a barrier to equitable healthcare. While healthcare workers may acknowledge those with COVID-19 and obesity as being at high risk for severe infection, prompting swift evaluation and treatment, those efforts can only be practical if patients seek treatment. As discussed above, patients with increased BMI are more likely to underutilize or delay healthcare.

This delay in care may negatively impact the individual and potentially have deleterious effects on public health when limiting the spread of cases is paramount. "The Quarantine-15 or the Covid-15" is a term d "scribing the weight gain thought "o inevitably come with the pandemic that has gained widespread popularity with little evidence to support it. What this term does, however, is emphasize body image, focusing on the importance of self-control when it comes to diet and exercise. Messages from recognized organizations have put the responsibility on the individual to reduce their risk of severe COVID-19 infection by losing weight. The UK National Health Service's Better Health initiative aims to reduService'srden to healthcare workers by "tackling obesity" so that it may "free up their" time to treat "her sick and vulnerable patients."

**Strategies to Reduce Stigmatization**

**Zero Tolerance Policies**

One strategy discussed by both the Joint International Consensus and other literature is a zero-tolerance policy for using stereotypical language, images, or humor that inaccurately depicts patients with overweight and obesity as being lazy or lacking self-discipline. Verbalizing a zero-tolerance policy to the health care team will help bring awareness to the issue and improve the culture around treating patients with overweight and obesity.

**Perspective Exercises and Emotion Regulation**

A potential strategy to reduce stigmatization of obesity is increasing provider empathy through perspective-taking exercises. Use obesity simulation suits (OSS) has been used in multiple clinical settings. The OSS has been used as a teaching tool during standardized patient (SP) encounters. SPs at a German medical school were asked to wear an OSS during an encounter. Students, teachers, and the SPs were then given questionnaires about the experience. The study concluded that the use of the OSS contributed to the realistic perception of a patient with obesity. The AFAT was used and showed that students demonstrated a more substantial antifat prejudice compared to teachers and SPs.

Utilizing tools such as the OSS in educational, simulated settings gives learners more opportunities to discuss topics they may otherwise be uncomfortable with, such as weight. A small qualitative study had seven healthcare professionals wear an OSS for 2 hours in public. Surveys after the experience showed that attitudes were more empathetic and less judgmental towards those with obesity.

A similarly designed study utilized a bariatric empathy suit. Nursing students wore the suit, and when surveyed after the experience to examine the nurses' attitudes towards obesity and obese patients, they reported more positive attitudes toward obese patients.

The hope is for better care by increasing empathy and decreasing bias. Additionally, utilizing the questionnaires and surveys previously mentioned, it is crucial to identify when a bias is present and recognize how this may make providers feel. As discussed above, providers may harbor negative attitudes towards patients they feel to be difficult or noncompliant. A strategy implementing practice in emotion regulation may manage those feelings to deliver better care. This may be in the form of meditation or deep breathing prior to an encounter.

**Obesity as a Disease**

Another measure is ensuring proper education of the healthcare team on the contributors to patients' weight that are outside of the patient's control.

**Obesity as a Risk Factor**

Discussing overweight and obesity as a risk factor for other diseases allows the patient and provider to focus on weight as being modifiable and treatable, taking the onus off the patient. The hope is this reframing will encourage patients to continue to seek medical care, even when there are setbacks, rather than avoid the doctor because of disappointment they may feel. Discussing the below conditions associated with overweight and obesity may be more appropriate topics for the visit rather than focusing on weight itself.

Body Mass Index (BMI) and central adiposity can predict type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) development. Furthermore, the duration of increased body weight is a risk factor for future T2DM. Discussing the screening for T2DM and its management may serve as reasons for frequent follow-up rather than follow-up for weight alone. The risk of certain forms of cancer is increased in people with obesity, such as colorectal, prostate, and breast cancer. Discussing guideline-directed screening for these conditions may be another opportunity to address weight.

The effects that weight has on the cardiovascular system may be addressed regarding hypertension, stroke, and myocardial infarction, especially in those patients who present wanting to talk about risk reduction. Other conditions that may present an opening for a discussion on weight reduction are precisely those that impair one's quality of life, such as gout, polycystic ovarian syndrome, obstructive sleep apnea, and osteoarthritis, all of which are associated with overweight and obesity.

**The Weight-Friendly Clinic Space**

As mentioned above, clinicians and staff should be trained to avoid hurtful comments, jokes, or being otherwise disrespectful towards patients with obesity. Using "patient-first" language, such as "patient" with overweight or "obesity," is preferred over "obese patient." Encouraging terms such as "healthy weight," "overweight," and "body mass index" are preferred to terms such as morbidly obese, fat, and large size. Using motivational interviewing rather than providing unsolicited advice may serve as a strategy to implement patient-centered communication, which may be less threatening for patients.

A study published in the journal of Obesity Surgery showed that while primary care providers were supportive in treating co-morbid conditions and attempts at dieting, many did not have appropriate equipment in their offices. Creating a positive office space includes having chairs, sofas, and exam tables that can handle high body weights without tipping or breaking. Having the following tools available in the clinic will also help the patient feel welcomed and avoid embarrassment: extra-large patient gowns, large blood pressure cuffs, extra-long needles to draw blood, large vaginal speculums, weight scales that can measure patients who weigh more than 400lbs and are preferably located in a private area.