# Continuing Education Activity

Gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina is a rare autosomal recessive condition characterized by elevation of plasma ornithine levels due to deficiency of the mitochondrial enzyme ornithine aminotransferase. It is characterized mainly by the presence of specific ophthalmic manifestations; however, neurological and muscular features may also be present. This activity describes the evaluation and management of gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina.
- Outline the classic presentation of a patient with gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina.
- Describe the evaluation of a patient with gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina.
- Summarize the treatment of a patient with gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina.

# Introduction

Gyrate atrophy (GA) of the choroid and retina is a rare genetic disease of autosomal recessive inheritance. It primarily affects the ocular tissues and occurs due to deficiency of the enzyme ornithine aminotransferase (OAT) that leads to a 10 to 20 times increase in the plasma level of the amino acid ornithine, compared to the normal plasma levels, which is thought to result in the ocular manifestations associated with the condition.

# Etiology

Gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina is a rare genetic condition of autosomal recessive inheritance that results from mutations affecting the OAT gene on chromosome 10q26, leading to deficiency of the pyridoxal-dependant mitochondrial enzyme OAT which normally metabolizes the amino acid ornithine into pyrroline-5-carboxylic acid.

# Epidemiology

Gyrate atrophy is a rare condition that, for unknown reasons, is reported to be particularly prevalent in Finland but has been reported in many other countries of the world including the USA, Japan, Germany, UK, India, China, Australia, France, Tunisia, Egypt, Korea, Brazil, Nepal, and Turkey.

# Pathophysiology

Deficiency of the pyridoxal-dependant mitochondrial enzyme OAT, which normally metabolizes the amino acid ornithine into pyrroline-5-carboxylic acid, leads to accumulation of ornithine in the plasma, urine, cerebrospinal fluid, and aqueous humor of patients with GA which is thought to result in the manifestations of the condition possibly due to the toxic effects of hyperornithinemia, especially on the retinal pigment epithelial cells, leading to progressive chorioretinal atrophy.

Other biochemical findings associated with GA include excessive excretion of lysine and cystine in the urine with a decrease in the plasma levels of lysine, ammonia, glutamine, and creatine.

# Histopathology

Histopathologic studies of GA are rare. In a postmortem study of a patient with pyridoxine-responsive GA, the retina showed focal areas of atrophy of the photoreceptors with hyperplasia of the adjacent RPE. An abrupt transition from the almost-normal retina to the zone of the almost totally atrophic retina, RPE, and choroid was present in the retinal mid-periphery. Examination by electron microscopy revealed abnormalities in the mitochondria of the corneal endothelium and the non-pigmented epithelium of the ciliary body. There were also similar, albeit less severe, mitochondrial abnormalities affecting the photoreceptors.

In an adult domestic cat with a condition analogous to GA characterized by OAT deficiency and plasma hyperornithinemia, a postmortem study revealed atrophy of the RPE and photoreceptors throughout the fundus with an abnormal and discontinuous choriocapillaris layer.

In a study of OAT-deficient GA mouse models developed by gene targeting, there was marked swelling of the RPE cells with irregular shape and engorgement in mice on a standard diet. There was also an absence of the outer segments of photoreceptors, while the inner segments were disorganized and shortened. The outer nuclear layer was also markedly reduced in thickness. These changes were not apparent in mice on an arginine-restricted diet. The findings were also confirmed by electron microscopy.

Muscle biopsy of patients with GA typically shows gross fatty changes with type 2 muscle fiber atrophy and tubular aggregates.

# History and Physical

Patients with gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina usually present with night blindness and progressive visual field constriction in their first decade of life that occurs due to progressive peripheral chorioretinal degeneration.

On ophthalmoscopy, the peripheral chorioretinal degeneration appears as discrete scalloped areas of chorioretinal atrophy that progressively coalesce together and have pigmented edges with visible large choroidal vessels underneath.

Although ophthalmic features are the main manifestations of GA, several central nervous system manifestations may also be associated with the condition, including aggressive behavior, mental retardation, and epilepsy.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina depends on the presence of the characteristic clinical features of the condition and the presence of elevated plasma ornithine level, which is essential for the diagnosis of the condition and is usually 10 to 20 times higher than the normal plasma ornithine level.

Regarding the **ophthalmic evaluation of the condition**, fluorescein angiography of patients with GA shows prominent retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) transmission window defects which start in the peripheral retina and correspond to the areas of RPE and choriocapillaris atrophy that characterize the disease with a hyperfluorescent lining along the borders of these defects. Large choroidal vessels are clearly seen through these defects. These defects gradually enlarge in size on follow-up and progress to coalesce together.

GA can also be evaluated and followed up using ultra-widefield imaging, which allows superior imaging of the retinal periphery simultaneously with the posterior pole.

Visual field testing is useful in follow-up using both static and kinetic perimetry and shows progressive visual field constriction and loss of sensitivity with age, which can be slowed with appropriate treatment.

Fundus autofluorescence, which is an indicator of RPE structure, may help demonstrate and follow up areas of chorioretinal atrophy as characteristic hypoautofluorescent areas.

Optical coherence tomography is useful in the evaluation of the macular area and can show variable features including intraretinal cystic spaces.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of gyrate atrophy consists mainly of dietary modifications to help lower the elevated systemic ornithine levels. The restriction of arginine in the diet, the precursor amino acid for ornithine, has been found to effectively lower plasma ornithine levels and to retard the progression of chorioretinal degeneration in both human and GA mouse models.

Some patients may also benefit from vitamin B6 supplementation in lowering their plasma ornithine levels, which acts by increasing the activity of the pyridoxine-dependant OAT enzyme, while other patients do not.

Creatine supplementation may also have a role in retarding the chorioretinal degeneration and in improving neurological and muscular manifestations.

Examination of the fundus of the family members is very crucial to detect the disease in an early stage and to start intervention early so that the methods to reduce progression can be tried.

Refraction and low vision aid form an important part of management and may improve the quality of life of the patient.

Treatment of cystoid macular edema and intraretinal cystic spaces associated with GA includes restriction of arginine in diet, vitamin B6 supplementation,

Treatment of ocular complications of GA includes cataract surgery for visually significant cataract which may also be associated with zonular weakness,

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of gyrate atrophy includes the following conditions:

- Choroideremia

- Retinitis pigmentosa

- Congenital stationary night blindness

- X-linked retinoschisis

- Bietti crystalline dystrophy

- Pigmented paravenous retinochoroidal atrophy

- Bifocal chorioretinal atrophy

- Pathological myopia

- Choroidal sclerosis

- Gyrate atrophy-like phenotypes with normal plasma ornithine

- Extensive paving stone (cobblestone) degeneration, which however is peripheral

These conditions can be differentiated from GA on the basis of the patient's history, inheritance pattern, clinical picture, laboratory findings, genetic analysis, electrophysiology, and multimodal imaging analysis.

# Toxicity and Adverse Effect Management

Patients with Gyrate atrophy, especially children, who are undergoing arginine restriction in their diet with low total protein intake should receive enough calories in their diet supplemented by essential amino acids, vitamins, and minerals to avoid malnutrition and excessive break down of their endogenous proteins.

# Staging

Four stages of gyrate atrophy have been described according to the disease progression

- Stage I is characterized by sharply defined and separate areas of peripheral chorioretinal atrophy with a normal disc, macula, and retinal vasculature, and concentric visual field limitation.

- Stage II is characterized by sharp areas of chorioretinal atrophy that become more fused and spread towards the posterior pole with narrower vessels, peripapillary degeneration, and similar concentric field limitation as stage I.

- Stage III is characterized by a large area of peripapillary degeneration, with an annular zone of a functioning retina between it and the peripheral degeneration, and a pale optic disc with narrower vessels. The macula is still spared with fine pigmentation, but the visual field is more deteriorated.

- Stage IV is characterized by a posterior pole that is completely atrophic with only a small functioning macular area and an extremely narrow retinal vasculature. Some patients also developed pigmentation with peripheral crystals.

# Prognosis

Patients with GA usually present with progressive night blindness and visual field constriction that starts in the first decade due to progressive chorioretinal degeneration, which can usually be slowed down by arginine restriction in their diet and vitamin B6 supplementation occasionally leading to a picture similar to early retinitis pigmentosa.

# Complications

- Macular complications

- Cystoid macular edema 
- Foveal thinning
- Epiretinal membrane
- Intraretinal cystic spaces 
- Foveoschisis 
- Macular hole 
- Choroidal neovascularization

- Vitreoretinal complications

- Vitreous hemorrhage 
- Intraocular lens dislocation 
- Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment

- Neurological complications

- Mental retardation 
- Speech defects 
- Epilepsy 
- Peripheral neuropathy 
- Muscular weakness

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients and their parents must be educated about the condition and the importance of long-term compliance with dietary modifications, including the restriction of arginine in their diet since this has been shown to influence the visual function of the patients greatly. Screening of family members of patients is also very important to allow dietary measures to be implemented at an early age since this was also shown to influence the visual outcome greatly.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The proper management of gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina requires the combined efforts of pediatricians, ophthalmologists, neurologists, geneticists, dieticians, and other health professionals. Only effective interprofessional communication between these health care providers across a wide range of disciplines, and with patients and their parents, can ensure that proper care is delivered to these patients. The currently most effective approach in the management of GA is the early diagnosis of the condition followed by dietary modifications, specifically the restriction of arginine in the diet, and treatment of complications.