# Continuing Education Activity

This activity provides a comprehensive review of spinal cord infarction. It discusses the vascular anatomy of the spinal cord, including both the arterial and venous networks. Knowledge regarding the anatomy of the spinal cord and its respective functions is paramount when diagnosing and managing spinal cord infarction (SCI). Also, it describes the risk factors and etiologies that can lead to SCI. This activity reviews studies that analyzed the prevalence of SCI relative to specific etiologies. This activity provides a review of the clinical phenotypes associated with SCI, emphasizes that examination is crucial in providing prompt diagnosis, and proper interprofessional management modalities in achieving a better outcome for the patient.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the epidemiology and characteristics of spinal cord infarction patients, including the age of onset, and common anatomical locations of infarction.
- Describe commonly encountered clinical features during the physical evaluation of spinal cord infarction.
- Review the surgical management warranted in cases of vascular compression and an acute aortic event.
- Outline the significance of joint efforts and full participation from patients and interprofessional teams in improving overall outcomes.

# Introduction

Comprehension of the anatomy of the spinal cord and their respective functions is paramount when diagnosing and managing spinal cord infarction (SCI). The spinal cord has 31 pairs of dorsal and ventral roots emanating from the cervical (n=8), thoracic (n=12), lumbar (n=5), and coccygeal (n=1) segments. The anterior two-thirds of the spinal cord contains motor and spinothalamic modalities, and the posterior one third houses the proprioceptive tracts**.**

The spinal cord receives its vascular support from one anterior spinal artery (ASA) and two posterior spinal arteries (PSA) that span the length of the cord longitudinally. They originate from the vertebral arteries at the level of the craniocervical junction, they anastomose via the vasocorona and transverse radicular branches forming the pial plexus, then give rise to small perforating branches that enter the spinal cord and supply the different tracts.

The ASA gives rise to the sulcocommissural artery, which is also responsible for providing blood supply to the anterior of the spinal cord.

The spinal cord bears a high level of collateral circulation thus decreasing its susceptibility to vascular injury;

The anterior spinal and medial posterior veins are responsible for providing venous drainage to the spinal cord; together they form a venous network surrounding the cord, similar to the arterial system radicular veins are present in high quantity and channel through to the intervertebral and paravertebral plexi which direct blood flow to the azygos and pelvic venous systems.

# Etiology

The age of onset ranges between the first and tenth decade of life. The median age lies between the sixth and seventh decades with the majority (65%) occurring at the thoracolumbar level and others at mid-cervical with the latter carrying a more severe phenotype of autonomic dysfunction and upper extremity involvement.

# Epidemiology

Spinal cord infarction (SCI) is relatively uncommon; this is largely due to its extensive collateral vascular network.

A retrospective analysis assessing the rate of occurrence among 164 patients with acute SCI identified 9 (5.5%) patients with fibrocartilaginous embolism.

# Pathophysiology

The determination of clinical phenotype is by location and the degree of occlusion. SCI has a wide spectrum of severity; symptoms can range from minor weakness to paraparesis. Symptoms can be abrupt in onset and progress rapidly over minutes to hours.

ASA involvement can manifest abruptly as symmetric motor dysfunction, bilateral spinothalamic sensory deficit below the level of the lesion, autonomic sphincter dysfunction including sphincter flaccidity, atonic bladder, and paralytic ileus, flaccid weakness associated with areflexia, and sudden back pain,

Brown-Sequard syndrome

Symptoms include unilateral flaccid weakness ipsilateral to and below the lesion, along with a contralateral absence of spinothalamic sensation with sparing of the posterior column sensory modalities (sulcocommissural artery occlusion).

# History and Physical

A thorough history and physical evaluation are crucial in providing rapid detection of SCI. This, together with neuroimaging, can aid in expedited detection of SCI. Suspected patients are managed with hemodynamic support to maximize blood pressure, lumbar drainage to lower the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure is often indicated to increase spinal perfusion and halt the progression of the injury.

# Evaluation

A review of 49 patients undergoing endovascular repair of descending thoracic aneurysm and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms facilitated by continuous intraoperative motor/somatosensory-evoked potential (MEP/SEP), cerebrospinal fluid drainage, and use of iliofemoral conduits allowed for early prediction and management of SCI.

Laboratory Evaluation

Laboratory examinations are can differ depending on the clinical presentation they can include copper, zinc, vitamin B12, Lyme disease serology, varicella-zoster viral serology, HIV serology, syphilis serology, human T-lymphotropic virus 1 serology, antinuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, angiotensin-converting enzyme, aquaporin-4-IgG, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein, hypercoagulable profile, and paraneoplastic autoantibody assessment.

CSF Analysis

Lumbar punctures are performed in certain SCI cases. CSF analysis includes red blood cell count, white blood cell count and differential, protein, and glucose. Further analysis may be comprised of IgG index, cytology, flow cytometry, gram stain, oligoclonal bands, bacterial culture, Lyme disease serology and polymerase chain reaction (PCR), cryptococcal antigen, paraneoplastic autoantibodies, venereal diseases, varicella-zoster virus PCR, Epstein-Barr virus PCR, enterovirus PCR, cytomegalovirus PCR, mycobacterium tuberculosis PCR, and cultures.

Neuroimaging

While radiography can be equivocal in certain cases, it remains to be a fundamental aspect of SCI diagnosis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 1.5 Tesla (T) including sagittal and axial T1 and T2-weighted sequences and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) with contrast are often employed to identify and localize SCI.

Additional Diagnostic Evaluations

Additional examinations that can confirm SCI and rule out other etiologies include magnetic resonance angiography, computed tomography angiography, full spinal magnetic resonance angiography, thoracoabdominal computed tomography angiography, digital subtraction angiography and electromyography (EMG).

# Treatment / Management

Prompt surgical management is necessary in cases of vascular compression and acute aortic event in addition to maintaining hemostatic equilibrium.

# Differential Diagnosis

Neoplastic transformation, disk herniation, epidural abscesses, and epidural hematoma share a similar phenotype with SCI.

# Prognosis

Timely diagnosis and management are essential for improving the outcome and prognosis of SCI. SCI is reversible, and a good functional outcome is attainable with prompt recognition and adequate management; the severity of neurological deficits generally determines the prognosis.

# Complications

Loss of motor and sensory modalities, including paresthesias and paralysis, may persist in some instances, increasing the risk for cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases. Some SCI patients continue to suffer from chronic pain,**.**

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) provides a wide variety of educational material and information for patients with spinal cord injuries. Patients are encouraged to explore all the resources available, including clinical trials, patient organizations, and publications in this regard. Facilitation of community support and outreach for patients and caregivers come from organizations such as Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation, Paralyzed Veterans of America, and the United Spinal Association.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Improving overall outcomes and achieving high-quality results requires joint efforts and full participation from patients and healthcare teams. Health care professionals must exercise concerted efforts in early detection of symptoms, triaging, and providing an expedited workup for patients with suspected spinal cord injuries. Proper and effective communication must take place between the interprofessional team, including emergency physicians, neurologists, neuroradiologists, neurosurgeons, other specialists, physiatrists, and specialized nursing staff to achieve higher quality care. Nurses who manage patients with spinal cord infarction should be aware of the potential complications like urinary retention, pressure sores, DVT, and contractures. The dietitian should be involved in the management of nutrition.

Pharmacist involvement comes with the initiation of antiplatelet or anticoagulation therapy. The pharmacist can verify dosing, check for drug interactions, and help change agents where any contraindications exist. They can also assist nursing in the monitoring of pharmaceutical therapy. These activities will be reported to the managing physician, especially in the event of any issues encountered.

The rehabilitation phase involves direct medical care from physiatrists and nursing staff. The nursing staff has a crucial role in monitoring ventilation and lung function, monitor cardiovascular function, stable blood pressure, and prevent infections and other complications from occurring. The patients’ effort during the rehabilitation period has a considerable impact on the recovery process. Only through such an interprofessional team approach can the morbidity of spinal cord infarction be lowered and patient outcomes optimized. [Level 5]