Pons is a potential anatomical site for tumor, infarction, and demyelinating disorders and commonly manifested and cranial nerves and tract dysfunction. A stroke affecting the pons results from a large-vessel stroke small-vessel disease within the posterior circulation, composed of the paired vertebral arteries, basilar artery, and paired posterior cerebral arteries (PCAs). At the level pontomedullary junction, vertebral arteries unite to the basilar artery, split into two PCAs in the interpeduncular fossa. In 75% of instances, PCAs arise from the basilar artery; in 20%, one PCA originates ipsilaterally from the internal carotid artery (ICA) via the posterior communicating artery; and in 5%, both arise from the respective internal carotid arteries.

The common causes of posterior circulation ischemia affecting pons, as well as brainstem infarctions, are following:

- In situ thrombosis from atherosclerosis plaque rupture (most common cause)

- Embolism: thromboembolism from the cardiac chambers or large arteries proximal to the posterior circulation of the brain

- Vasculitis: Takayasu arteritis, giant cell arteritis

- Hypercoagulability: Inherited or acquired form of hypercoagulability including factor V Leiden, protein C, S, and anti-thrombin-III deficiency, polycythemia, cryoglobulinemia, Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia

- Vertebral artery dissection. Extracranial and intracranial either segments of vertebral arteries are frequently affected by dissection, thus resulting in the posterior circulation, including brainstem ischemia

Several syndromes describe the specific anatomical lesson of the pons that can result from tumors or infarction.

**1. Medial superior pontine syndrome:**occurs secondary to compressing tumor to the upper and medial portion of the pons or stoke affecting paramedian branches of the upper basilar artery. Clinical findings are the following:

- Ipsilateral****to the lesion: ataxia (probably) due to superior and/or middle cerebellar peduncle involvement, internuclear ophthalmoplegia due to the lesson of medial longitudinal fasciculus

- Contralateral to the lesion: Paralysis of face, arm, and leg from corticobulbar and corticospinal tract lesson Rarely touch, vibration, and position are affected due to loss of medial lemniscus function

**2.****Lateral superior pontine syndrome or syndrome of the superior cerebellar artery:**

- Ipsilaterally: ataxia of limbs and gait. Dizziness, nausea, vomiting, horizontal nystagmus due to vestibular nucleus dysfunction, paresis of conjugate gaze or pontine contralateral gaze, Horner syndrome) due to the descending sympathetic tract lessons

- Contralaterally: impaired pain and thermal sensation on the face, limbs, trunk from spinothalamic tract lesson. Touch, vibration, and position sense may also be impaired more prominently in the leg than the arm. There is a tendency to the incongruity of pain and touch due to the lesson to the lateral portion of the medial lemniscus.

**3.****Medial mid-pontine syndrome due to the paramedian branch of the mid-basilar artery stroke:**

- Ipsilaterally: ataxia due to pontine nuclei lesson

- Contralaterally: face, arm, leg paralysis, and variable loss of touch and proprioception in the cases where the lesion extends posteriorly

**4.****Lateral mid-pontine syndrome (short circumferential artery):**

- Ipsilateral to the lesion, ataxia of limbs due to the middle cerebellar peduncle involvement. Paralysis of muscles of mastication resulting from the lesson to the Motor fibers or nucleus of the trigeminal nerve. Diminished sensation over the side of the face due to the lesion of sensory fibers or the nucleus of the trigeminal nerve.

- Contralateral to the lesion: Impaired pain and temperature sensation on limbs and trunk due to the spinothalamic tract lesson.

**5. Medial inferior pontine syndrome, secondary to occlusion of a paramedian branch of the basilar artery:**

- Ipsilaterally: paralysis of conjugate gaze to the affecting side (preservation of convergence), nystagmus: ataxia of limbs and gait, diplopia due to abducens nerve lesson.

- Contralaterally: presents with face, arm, and leg paralysis, impaired tactile and proprioceptive sensation over one-half of the body due to lesson to the medial lemniscus.

**6. Lateral inferior pontine syndrome from occlusion of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery:**

- Ipsilaterally: vertigo, nausea, vomiting, horizontal and vertical nystagmus, oscillopsia, facial paralysis (seventh nerve), paralysis of conjugate gaze to the affecting side (preservation of convergence), deafness, tinnitus (cochlear nucleus), ataxia, impaired sensation over face (descending tract and nucleus of the trigeminal nerve.

- Contralateral to the lesion: impaired pain, thermal sensation over one-half the body (spinothalamic tract).