Most patients with symptoms suggestive of ocular infection will present to their primary care physician or emergency department. Thus, these clinicians must know about acanthamoeba keratitis and its presentation. Direct referral to a cornea specialist rather than other ophthalmologists is associated with 3.2 times lower odds of treatment failure.Acanthamoeba. The primary care clinicians, including the nurse and pharmacist, should educate the patient on contact lens hygiene maintenance. The patients should remove contact lenses during water-related activities, and the storing solution should be fresh. Also, handwashing before touching the contacts cannot be over-emphasized. At any time, a patient with contact lenses develops eye redness, pain or photophobia, urgent consultation with the eye specialist is a strong recommendation. Pharmacists should also coordinate with the treating clinician regarding medical management, including appropriate agent selection, dosing, and checking for drug interactions. Nursing ophthalmology specialty trained nurses can also verify compliance, monitor therapeutic progress, and be vigilant for adverse events. Pharmacists and nurses need an open communication channel to the prescriber so they can bring any issues to the fore immediately. Only with this type of interprofessional collaboration can acanthamoeba keratitis have optimal results. [Level V]

Close follow-up by the entire interprofessional team is necessary to monitor clinical improvement following initiation of treatment. [Level 3]