After hemodynamic stabilization of the patient, the level, pattern, grade, associated bony ligamentous and vascular injuries, and the pattern of cervical cord injuries require evaluation through a series of radiological imaging. The algorithmic approach to be taken for the radiological assessment of the injury is as follows:

- Plain-film X-ray of the spine: this helps in diagnosing, localizing the level of injury, and also to ruling out other traumatic associated bony lesions such as chance fracture, vertebral body, and spinous process fractures. It is of prime help in managing patients in rural areas to correctly manage and transfer them to the tertiary spine center for the needful management of such patients. The dynamic X-ray is of prime importance to rule out subtle instability, particularly in grade 1 subluxation, that a clinician can easily overlook on standard X-rays.

- Computed tomogram (CT) spine- provides bony anatomic details. It is also helpful in diagnosing unilateral or locked facets, concurrent injury to the foramen transversarium (risk of vertebral artery injury), validating the integrity of the lateral mass, and the lamina (for screw fixation of appropriate length from the posterior approach). The Meyerding scoring system applies for grading the subluxation (Grade I -translation up to 25%, grade II up to 50%, grade III up to 75%, grade IV up to 100%, and grade V complete ptosis of one vertebral body over another).

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine- provides details on the pattern of soft tissue injury (ligaments) and damage to the spinal cord (compression, transection, central cord syndrome). The use of tractography can also be applied to assess the integrity of the nerve for tracts to predict the neurological recovery in the patients. A traumatic syrinx may develop in a few patients with initially missed grade 1 traumatic subluxations.

- Vertebral artery angiography: this modality is of prime importance, especially in patients with the extension of the fracture to the foramen transversarium and in patients with high grades of subluxation at C2-C6 levels. There may sometimes be concurrent dissection or occlusion of the vertebral artery as well.

The locked facets will show specific findings in radio imaging. The overlap of more than 50% between the articulating surface of the facet joints is considered unstable.

Various scoring systems have been developed to classify patients with cervical spine injuries. The subaxial cervical spine injury classification system encompasses the following:

- Injury morphology - compression, distraction, and translational patterns

- Status of the disco-ligamentous complex

- Neurological status of the patient

The AO Spine subaxial cervical spine injury classification system, on the other hand, categorizes injury depending on the following:

- Injury morphology- compression injury (A), posterior tension band injury (B), translational injury (C), which further subdivide into four subtypes

- Facet injury - divided into four subtypes

- Neurological status of the patient

- Case-specific modifiers - constituting the central disc, metabolic bone diseases, and vertebral artery injury.

The AO Spine classification system seems to be of paramount importance in managing patients with traumatic subluxations owing to its importance to the status of the facet joints, the pivotal factor determining spinal stability. Damage to the facet joints, therefore, provides a strong rationale for undertaking global fixation of the traumatic spine in neurologically preserved patients.