Many pathophysiological steps are involved in the development of protein malnutrition from starvation. In the past, it was argued that hypoalbuminemia was not the cause of edema in kwashiorkor disease. Scientists performing experiments at that time concluded this because the edema went away with dietary treatment, even before the albumin concentration rose when albumin was given. However, re-analysis of this work has revealed a big error in this conclusion, and indeed, profound hypoalbuminemia was proven to be linked to the development of co-existing edema in the hypovolemic child.

The following are ten primary principles used universally for the treatment of patients who are admitted for kwashiorkor. These principles are done in different phases from the time the child arrives requiring emergency stabilization through eventual rehabilitation.

- Treating/preventing hypocalcemia

- Treating/preventing hypothermia

- Treating/preventing dehydration

- Correcting electrolyte imbalance

- Treating/preventing infection

- Correcting micronutrient deficiencies

- Starting cautious feeding

- Achieving catch-up growth

- Providing sensory stimulation and emotional support and

- Preparing for follow-up after recovery.

It is important to highlight how critical it is to address the fluid imbalance in kwashiorkor. In the past, there was concern about aggressive rehydration causing acute heart failure. However, this was proven to be exaggerated. At the same time, severe hypovolemia could cause hypovolemic shock and death. So, the medical staff had to proceed cautiously. The standard normal saline solution contains too much sodium and too little potassium.