**FAE:**It is achieved with the help of a vitrectomy machine. The air enters through the infusion cannula, initially used for fluid infusion. The air infusion pressure is kept at 30 to 35 mmHg, and the air infusion is switched on. The fluid in the vitreous cavity is allowed to egress with the help of a flute needle and vented externally through an opening in the instrument's body. Multiple bubbles enter the eye and coalesce into a single large bubble. The needle is then gradually moved toward the retinal break/ posterior retinotomy to drain the subretinal fluid in case of an RRD or toward the optic disc in case of MH surgery. The air bubble slowly enlarges to occupy the vitreous cavity completely.

Multiple bothersome reflections may appear while performing FAE and can be reduced by keeping the light pipe inside the fluid until the FAE is complete. The image can become blurred after FAE, especially in pseudophakic eyes, as air has a different refractive index. This may require refocussing the viewing system. If the posterior capsule is absent, fogging may be noted behind the posterior chamber intraocular lens after FAE.

**Gas**: It should always be obtained only from a disposable or a reusable cylinder with a regulatory valve. The cylinders are maintained under sterile conditions and contain gas of the highest purity. Before usage, the cylinders should be inspected for any gas leakage as it can potentially affect the gas concentration. A 0.22μm millipore filter is used to obtain gas from a cylinder. The pure gas is drawn from the cylinder, and the syringe is flushed 2-3 times to remove the air trapped within the syringe and filters. Then the desired volume of the pure gas is drawn into the syringe.

**i) After vitrectomy:**Gas can be used either in its expansile or non-expansile form.

If pure expansile gas is used, the syringe must be disconnected from the system and attached to a needle or an infusion system. The two superior sclerostomies are removed, and a 30-gauge needle is inserted into the vitreous cavity through the superior pars plana. The infusion system is then opened, 2 ml pure SF6 is injected, and the infusion line is clamped immediately. The air-infusion line serves as a vent as the air flushes out of the vitreous cavity.

If a non-expansile air-gas mixture is used, sterile air is then drawn into the syringe to achieve the desired concentration. To prepare 14% C3F8, 7 ml of pure C3F8 is taken in a 50 ml syringe, and sterile air is drawn via the filter to make the mixture 50 ml. This 14% C3F8 is now injected after connecting the 50 ml syringe to the infusion cannula.

**ii) Without vitrectomy:**The needle is inserted through the pars plana (3.5 mm behind the limbus in pseudophakic and 4 mm behind the limbus in the phakic eye). Then, the gas is injected constantly yet swiftly to create a single bubble. In the case of "fish eggs" formation, the sclera can be gently tapped a few times to promote the fusion of the small bubbles. Usually, 0.3 mL of pure C3F8 or 0.5 mL of pure SF6 is injected in pneumatic retinopexy or to manage massive subretinal bleed. The expanded volume of the gas should not be more than 1ml (25 % of vitreous volume, 4 ml) to avoid a severe rise in intraocular pressure.

**PFCL Injection**: It can be injected with the help of a cannula directed towards the optic disc. The infusion should be switched off. PFCL should be injected slowly while keeping the tip of the cannula just within the meniscus of the expanding bubble; else, it can break into small bubbles ('fish eggs'). Such small bubbles can enter the subretinal space through retinal breaks. However, small bubbles may form beside the larger bubble. Usually, they automatically merge within a few seconds; else can be gently stroked with an instrument.

Forceful injection should be avoided as it can lead to creating a retinal hole and subretinal migration of PFCL. PFCL injection can lead to a rise in intraocular pressure (IOP). Hence, the optic disc color should always be monitored during the injection. If it becomes pale, some saline should be removed (by removing one instrument from the sclerostomy) before injecting more PFCL. It should be filled until the posterior margin of the posterior-most retinal break. All the posterior tractions should be removed before injection to prevent the subretinal migration of PFCL.

In eyes with PVR changes, the subretinal membrane should be removed anterior to the PFCL bubble. The increase in IOP may be prevented by using a 23 gauge port for the 25 gauge PFCL injection cannula, which helps in the egress of the excess fluid through the sides of the injection cannula due to the larger port.

**PFCL Removal:**PFCL should be completely removed after its function has been served. Depending on the indication, PFCL-fluid, PFCL-air, or PFCL–SO exchange must be performed. A flute needle is used to aspirate the PFCL while fluid, air, or SO is infused inside the vitreous cavity. The tip of the aspirating needle is always kept at the edge of the PFCL bubble.

**SO Injection:**The infusion can be done after performing a complete FAE through either of the two open sclerotomies. An automated infusion pump, which can be controlled by the surgeon through a foot pedal, is used for injection. The initial injection should be done under illumination while looking for any subretinal SO migration. The illumination may then be withdrawn so that the air inside the eye can escape through the vacant sclerostomy.

The vacant sclerostomy can then be maneuvered to remove the trapped air bubbles. The injection is stopped when the oil either starts filling the infusion tube or is seen coming out of the vacant sclerostomy. Another reasonable endpoint is when the oil meniscus crosses the center of the pupil. However, the amount of SO injection should be guided by the IOP, which can be monitored digitally.

**SO Removal (SOR):**The timing of SOR is debatable. The Silicone Study allowed SOR between 2-6 months. The procedure can be completed using a two- or three-port system. First, the infusion is secured so that saline can replace the vitreous volume after the oil is removed. Then, SO can be removed either actively or passively. The cannula used for removing the oil should always stay within the main bubble to prevent residual oil. If such a residual oil bubble forms, the cannula has to be manipulated such that the residual bubble is again caught in its mouth.

Just before the procedure is complete, a meniscus of the oil bubble can be seen in the pupillary axis. It can also be removed through a corneal wound in aphakic eyes. Multiple FAEs have been recommended to ensure maximum oil removal, especially in eyes with SO emulsification.

Flushing the anterior chamber (AC) and the angle has been recommended in the presence of oil emulsification. However, a complete removal is seldom complete. Emulsified oil droplets often remain adhered to the ciliary processes, zonules, and posterior surface of the iris. These bubbles are responsible for causing floaters in the post-operative period. It is recommended to make a posterior capsulotomy in the pseudophakic eyes and examine the periphery for any treatable lesions. The surgical time for SOR is higher for SO with higher viscosity. Suprachoroidal hemorrhage can develop in case of sudden hypotony, which can occur if the infusion cannula is blocked by SO or saline is aspirated instead of the oil.