Careful patient history is very important in cases of suspected agnosia. Clues to diagnosis and etiology often involve a detailed interview with the patient, family members, and caregivers. It is harder to diagnose when the patient lacks insight into their deficits. History will reveal clues pointing to the type of agnosia. For example, a patient with visual agnosia will specify problems in day-to-day life, for example, getting dressed or the inability to differentiate a fork and a knife because of an inability to recognize certain types of objects visually. Patients with topographical agnosia will present with getting often lost, findings directions. Patients with akinetopsia often bump in things, get confused about how things got moved around, have difficulty in crossing roads and driving, and are accident-prone. Patients with simultagnosia will often have trouble reading and writing and interpreting multiple things at a time.

Other important points to elicit in history can confirm that other sensory modalities, memory, and cognition are not affected.

Initial assessment involves asking patients to identify common objects through sight, touch, and smell. A thorough physical examination is done to detect for any primary deficits in individual senses (visual fields, acuity, reading, drawing, hearing tests, among others) or in the ability to communicate that may interfere with identifying the objects (memory, cognition, attention, aphasia).

An important aspect of diagnosing agnosia is ruling out alternative explanations. Recognition disturbance can occur in many other neurological conditions, but agnosia can be diagnosed only in the absence of aphasia, generalized dementia, delirium, or any deficit that may impair some or all of the information-processing steps involved in object recognition.

It is very important to rule out genuine unfamiliarity with stimuli. It is important to consider cultural and life experiences and other factors that may lead to unfamiliarity. Testing of common objects and constructing a balanced set of items that are determined individually should be done.

For example, to assess for visual agnosia, show the patient several familiar items like keys, a pen, and a banana and ask to name them. Differentiating visual agnosia and aphasia is important. For prosopagnosia, show the patient pictures of famous people, their family members, and themselves. For color agnosia, show solid color cards and ask them to name the colors. For simultagnosia, present pictures with several objects or people and ask them to identify what they see. For tactile agnosia, make sure the patient is unable to see, then put common things in each hand one by one and ask the patient to identify by touch alone. Inability to correctly identify at least 50% of stimuli tested will suggest the diagnosis of agnosia.