Oxygen transport into a clean, moist wound occurs by diffusion, similar to the pulmonary process of diffusion. In diffusion, gases and liquids move from an area of high partial pressure to areas of low partial pressure. If there is a mixture of gases in a container, the partial pressure of each gas is equal to the pressure that each gas would produce if it occupied the container alone. This applies equally well to the concentration of a gas in a liquid. Thus, if a gas such as oxygen is present above a liquid like the presentation as an open moist wound, the gas will diffuse into the liquid until it reaches equilibrium in concentration (partial pressure) in the liquid in proportion to that present in the gas above it.

Henry's law states that at a constant temperature, the amount of a gas that dissolves in a liquid is directly proportional to the partial pressure of that gas in equilibrium with that liquid. So the solubility of oxygen in the air (pO=KO?xO) is proportional to the partial pressure of oxygen (p0 in Torr), where xO is the mole fraction of oxygen in oxygen-saturated water, and KO is Henry's law constant for oxygen in water (about 3.30×107 K/Torr at 298 K).

Oxygen levels in human tissue contain about 50 mmHg pO at 3 to 4 mm below the wound for wounds exposed to air (21% oxygen (pO = 159 mmHg).  By applying topical oxygen wound, the oxygen concentration increases from 21% (pO = 159 mmHg) to 100% (pO = 760 mmHg), to  250 mmHg pO without any additional pressure. These levels have been found experimentally to be optimal for many of the enzymatic pathways involved in the molecular level of the proliferative phase of wound healing.

Topical oxygen increases oxygen levels in the wound bed when pure oxygen is applied directly to the surface of a moist wound at normobaric pressures (slightly above atmospheric, not hyperbaric). Preclinically, pure oxygen applied topically to an open wound has been shown to rapidly and significantly increase the pO of the superficial wound tissue.