The spinal cord undergoes its inception during the third week of the embryonic period. Gastrulation is the process of specializing in a multi-layered structure from a single-layered blastula. This trilaminar structure has three germ layers known as the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. The ectoderm gives rise to the epidermis, the nervous system, and the neural crest cells. The endoderm gives rise to the epithelium of the digestive system and the respiratory system while the mesoderm gives rise to muscle, bone, and connective tissues. The ectoderm is the focus of the embryological origins of the nervous system, more commonly known as the neuroectoderm. It results in the formation of the notochord that induces the formation of the neural plate. The process of neurulation begins after it forms the neural plate. The plate invaginates to form the neural tube which pinches off completely from the neuroectoderm. This takes place during the third week of development. From the neural tube, it forms the brain and differentiates into three sections, the hindbrain, the midbrain, and the forebrain. The neural crest cells also arise from the embryonic ectoderm cell layer which specializes in the pigment cells in the skin, ganglia of the autonomic nervous system, dorsal root ganglia, cells of the adrenal medulla, and parafollicular cells in the thyroid.

There is additional signaling by the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) ligand and the translation of the homeotic genes (HOX). These are directors in the subsequent development of the vertebral column and the segmentation of the body. Primarily, these specify the 2 major axes of the nervous system. One axis is the dorsal-ventral (D-V), and the other is anterior-posterior. In this way, the embryo forms a 3-dimensional form.