When administered orally, one must consider that food can affect oral absorption. Moreover, the absorption of some molecules such as cefuroxime and cefpodoxime becomes decreased by H2 blockers or nonabsorbable antacids. The administration of these agents can be through different routes.

- Penicillin V is preferable for oral administration, given 30 min before the meal or 2 hours after.

- Penicillin G is available in 2 parenteral preparations: benzathine and procaine.

- Penicillin G benzathine dosing is once monthly as it has a longer half-life.

- Penicillin G procaine is given once daily due to a shorter half-life.

- Neither should be administered intravenously to avoid serious toxicity.

- Penicillinase-resistant penicillins (oxacillin, cloxacillin, and dicloxacillin) are available in oral and parenteral preparations.

- Aminopenicillins: ampicillin and amoxicillin are available in both oral and parenteral preparations, though amoxicillin is preferred orally.

- Antipseudomonal penicillins: piperacillin is only available for parenteral administration.

- Most cephalosporins are absorbed readily after oral administration; the administration of others can be intramuscularly or intravenously.

Because beta-lactam antibiotics demonstrate a time-dependent effect on bacterial eradication (the duration that the pathogen is exposed to the antibiotic is crucial for bacterial eradication), their continuous infusions may have advantages over standard intermittent bolus dosing. This therapeutic approach is particularly effective, especially when pathogens present higher minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC).