The prognosis of urge incontinence differs from person to person, and hence treatment plans should ideally be individualized after discussion with the patient. While behavioral therapy and medications have promising results in the younger patient population, the options of neuromodulation should be considered early in the algorithm for the elderly population. According to the American Urological Association, the efficacy of treatment guidelines and prognosis of urge urinary incontinence depends on many factors related to the patient's age and co-morbid conditions. Frailty, functional and cognitive impairment, family/caregiver support, co-morbid conditions play pivotal roles in a patient's participation in behavioral therapies. Comparatively, younger individuals have a higher success rate and increased quality of life with behavioral therapies alone or combined with medications.

The use of antimuscarinic agents in elderly patients with cognitive impairment and dementia might lead to further worsening of dementia/Alzheimers disease. Coexisting medications with anticholinergic properties such as medications for parkinsonism, donepezil, anti-nausea medications, and sedatives will lead to poor prognosis. Thus third-line treatment options such as PTNS might need to be included in treatment and prognosis discussion earlier in the disease process for the elderly/affected population. A baseline mini-mental status exam score can prove vital while assessing the quality of life improvement. Beer's criteria for risk assessment or antimuscarinic risk scale can be considered essential for the elderly population, whereas, in the younger community, side effect management can lead to better disease prognosis and treatment success.

Again, while considering the third-line treatment options, cognitive assessment is essential to predict the outcome. Despite all these considerations, when left untreated or unattended, the prognosis of urge urinary incontinence is abysmal. It is socially burdensome and leads to significant morbidity.