The primary measurement used to evaluate the partial pressure of oxygen is arterial blood gas. This provides a direct measurement of the partial pressure of oxygen, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide, acidity (pH), oxyhemoglobin saturation, and bicarbonate concentration in arterial blood. All of these are useful for the evaluation and treatment of various disease states.

The partial pressure of oxygen is decreased through several disease processes. The primary processes include decreased inhaled oxygen, hypoventilation, diffusion limitations, and ventilation/perfusion mismatching (V/Q mismatch).

Changes in environmental pressure cause a difference in the available oxygen for diffusion into the body. At sea level, the atmospheric pressure is 760 mmHg. However, as elevation increases, atmospheric pressure decreases. For example, at the summit of Mt. Everest, the atmospheric pressure is as low as 260 mmHg. When this pressure is used to calculate the alveolar partial pressure of oxygen in the environment, approximately 54.6 mmHg of oxygen is available for diffusion. This is almost half of what is available at sea level.

Essentially, any pathology that decreases ventilation of the alveoli will lead to a hypoventilation defect. These can include:

- Central nervous system (CNS) depression or malformation from a neurologic deficit, Guillain-Barre, ALS, or drug overdose where the respiratory drive is decreased

- Obesity hypoventilation, where the excess weight of the chest does not allow for proper inflation

- Muscular weakness

- Poor chest elasticity secondary to rib fracture or kyphoscoliosis

The result of hypoventilation on oxygenation is that air exchange between the alveolar space and the environment does not effectively occur. This decreases the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveolar space, resulting in a lessened diffusion gradient, reducing the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood.

As the name states, a ventilation-perfusion mismatch is an imbalance between available ventilation and arteriolar perfusion for oxygen to diffuse into circulation. Within a normal lung, there is variation throughout the tissue in response to oxygen and capillary demand. In the base of the lung, both perfusions are relatively greater than ventilation leading to a V/Q, which is lesser than in the apices. Bronchoconstriction in lung tissue normally occurs to reduce ventilation to poorly perfused lung regions, and likewise, vasoconstriction in capillary arterioles normally occurs in poorly ventilated regions of the lung. Combined, these mechanisms work to balance the V/Q ratio so that the net effect is heterogeneous ventilation and perfusion with minimal pathological dead space or shunting. In disease states such as pulmonary vascular diseases, interstitial disease, or obstructive lung disease, the ratio of available lung ventilation to capillary perfusion is skewed. This results in inefficient oxygen transfer into the capillary space, resulting in decreased partial pressure of oxygen in the blood.

A right-to-left shunt is an alternate pathological pathway of circulation that allows deoxygenated blood to bypass the lungs from the right side of the heart to the left side of the heart. Subsequently, oxygenation does not occur. Shunting is an example of extreme V/Q mismatching.

Diffusion limitation exists when the movement of oxygen from alveoli to pulmonary vasculature is impaired. This etiology is characterized by fibrosis of the lung and parenchymal destruction of alveoli leading to a decreased surface area of alveolar tissue. Often diffusion abnormalities coexist with V/Q mismatching and are most prevalent under exercise conditions. During rest, blood flow through the lung arterioles is slow enough to allow proper diffusion regardless of an increased A-a gradient. However, under exercise conditions, cardiac output increases. When this occurs, there is less time for oxygenation to occur in the lung, which leads to transient hypoxia. Examples of limited diffusion disease include lung fibrosis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The result is a normal partial pressure of oxygen in the alveolar space but a low partial pressure of oxygen in the arterial space.

The significance of understanding the partial pressure of oxygen and its gradient among healthcare providers is immense. Understanding the functioning of the gradient of pressure and how an adequate amount of oxygen is delivered to tissues is associated with a whole spectrum of clinical uses. Some very important results are observed from athletes' performance, forecasting mortality due to prevalent diseases, treatment effectiveness in ulcers, wound healing evaluation, burns, cancer, or cerebral and cardiovascular diseases.

In this sense, this activity has discussed the physiological mechanisms, the techniques for measuring, and the pressure values observed in different organ systems from the atmosphere to the mitochondrial pathways. Tissue partial pressure of oxygen shows a balance between tissue oxygen consumption rate and arterial blood flow. As a result of technical restrictions and confounding factors such as inflammation, anesthesia, restraint, and hypoxia, an evaluation of partial pressure of oxygen amidst normal conditions is excessively difficult. However, clinical and in vivo data help us understand the mechanisms regulating the partial pressure of oxygen within the human body.