The early lesions of mycosis fungoides mimic psoriasis, chronic eczema, atopic dermatitis, leprosy or lichenoid pityriasis. The typical skin involvement is thin erythematous plaques or flat patches. They present either as single or multiple lesions in the gluteal region or thighs. The lesions can be pruritic and can remain stable for many years, go into remission, or grow slowly.

Sezary syndrome is an erythrodermic cutaneous T-cell lymphoma with the leukemic component. Erythroderma is an intense, widespread, pruritic, exfoliative rash representing new lesions or progression of the prior patches or plaques.

It is characterized by erythroderma, lymphadenopathy, Sezary, or Lutzner cells which are atypical circulating lymphocytes and cutaneous and systemic dissemination of CD4+ T cells in the blood and the lymph nodes. Mycosis fungoides is like a patch or a plaque, whereas Sezary syndrome presents as a diffuse skin rash. During the disease, it tends to involve about 80% of the total body surface area. Sezary syndrome can be considered as a leukemic phase of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma without any bone marrow compromise. Involvement of the bone marrow can be seen in advanced disease. The other skin lesions associated with Sezary syndrome include alopecia, keratoderma, hypertrophied nails, lichenification, and ectropion (outward turning of the lower eyelid). Very rarely, it could also involve the visceral organs. Pruritus is intense and can be debilitating. Even high doses of antihistamines cannot provide relief. Treatment of underlying cancer with steroids have shown to be effective in controlling the pruritus. Due to suppressed immunity, affected people are at higher risk for secondary infections (bacterial and viral) and secondary cancers including Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas.