It is essential to understand that not all SLAP tears are created equal. Clinicians should focus on the potential relevance of the SLAP lesion as it attributes to the specific patient’s pain and dysfunction. Asymptomatic tears should be observed. Those potentially contributing to patient-reported symptoms may require surgery, and depending on the particular SLAP tear pattern and the presence (or absence) of other associated shoulder pathologies, the recommended surgical technique(s) may vary. Moreover, for the vast majority of SLAP injuries, the initial management is nonoperative.

**Nonoperative Management Modalities**

**Anti-inflammatory medications, cryotherapy/cooling/ice application, rest and activity modification**

An initial period of rest following the acute (or acute-on-chronic) injury should be implemented in all patients. In the appropriate patient, NSAIDs and cryotherapy device/ice pack application can be beneficial for pain control. Athletes and overhead laborers should also be placed on a restricted sport-specific timeline protocol, and manual laborers should receive appropriate occupational modifications.

**Physical Therapy**

The goal of physical therapy (PT) modalities should be to treat any underlying pathologic shoulder biomechanics that may have been present at baseline before the acute injury. Also, shoulder girdle proprioceptive training is beneficial to help prevent re-injury.

Scapulothoracic dyskinesia may result from any degree of imbalance of the shoulder girdle muscles and static/dynamic glenohumeral joint stabilizers. Also, posterior shoulder joint capsular contractures should be addressed with various stretching and strengthening programs.  Utilizing dedicated formal PT regimens can help ensure each “SLAP tear” diagnosis is most appropriately managed to help mitigate the risks of inferior patient outcomes.

Multiple reports on high-level (i.e., professional) overhead throwers have demonstrated equivalent outcomes regarding return to play and return to play performance in athletes managed with operative versus nonoperative modalities alone. Nonoperative PT regimens focused on correcting for scapular dyskinesia and glenohumeral internal rotation deficit (GIRD).

If the non-operative therapy fails and symptoms persist that prevent sports activities or activities of daily living, then this would indicate the need for operative treatment.

**Surgical Management**

After exhausting non-operative treatment modalities, operative management is considered in tandem while keeping in mind each patient’s age, concomitant pathologies, functional requirements, occupational demands, and sport-specific goals.

Several authors have proposed surgical treatment algorithms depending on the specific type of SLAP lesion identified on advanced imaging, clinical exam, and intraoperative arthroscopy.

- **Type I SLAP tear**
- Surgical treatment: arthroscopic debridement

- **Type II SLAP tear**
- Surgical treatment: SLAP repair versus biceps tenotomy/tenodesis
- The arthroscopic criterion for a type II SLAP lesion includes the ability to demonstrate (usually with an arthroscopic probe) the definitive separation of the superior labrum from the supraglenoid cartilage rim.
- Burkhart previously described demonstrating a ‘‘peel-back’’ sign during arthroscopy.
- The arm is released from traction and brought into an abducted/externally rotated position. The authors noted that in cases of a positive peel-back sign (i.e., not present in normal shoulders during an arthroscopic examination), the biceps anchor assumes a more vertical and posterior angle that is dynamically visible.

- 
**Type III SLAP tear**

- 
              
- Surgical treatment: SLAP repair versus resection
              
              
- The bucket-handle tear of the superior labrum is resected, additionally with the repair of the SLAP complex (rare) if needed.

- **Type IV SLAP tear**
- Surgical treatment:

- IF < 50% of the biceps tendon is affected, consider SLAP repair/resection.
- IF > 50% of the biceps tendon is affected, perform tenotomy/tenodesis

- 
**Type V Slap tear**

- 
              
- Surgical treatment: Bankart repair plus SLAP repair

- **Type VI Slap tear**
- Surgical treatment: SLAP repair versus resection

- **Type VII Slap tear**
- Surgical treatment: Suture/anchor fixation of anterosuperior labrum plus SLAP repair

- **Type VIII Slap tear**
- Surgical treatment: SLAP repair versus biceps tenotomy/tenodesis; gentle debridement of any cartilage/chondral unstable flap

**SLAP Repair Technique**

Multiple SLAP repair techniques have been previously described. Also, a wide array of implant options are available depending on surgeon preference. Previous authors have advocated for the use of simple versus mattress sutures and the option for knotless fixation devices to minimize the risk of having a bulky knot create symptoms postoperatively.

After probing to confirm the diagnosis of a SLAP tear, a shaver can be used to resect unstable flaps of tissue that are deemed irreparable. Glenoid neck preparation is with a tissue elevator, rasp, and/or shaver instrument. The Neviaser portal is often utilized and established under direct visualization once confirming the appropriate trajectory are achieved. The determination of appropriate anchor placement depends on the predominant region of instability regarding the superior labral-biceps tendon complex.