From a clinical standpoint, female urinary retention is divided into acute/postoperative and chronic.

**Acute****female urinary retention**will typically present immediately after a precipitating event such as trauma, childbirth, botulinum toxin detrusor injections for overactivity, or surgery in a patient who previously had no urinary issues. Symptoms are usually significant lower abdominal pain, inability to void, a strong urge to urinate, and lower abdominal or suprapubic swelling.

Urodynamics testing with pressure-flow studies is not generally necessary or recommended for patients with acute urinary retention unless prolonged or intractable, but it may be helpful in cases of chronic retention or in patients with prior incontinence procedures to help identify an obstructed urethra.

Numerous risk factors for acute and postoperative female urinary retention exist.

- Age over 50 years

- Administration of anticholinergic drugs during a surgical procedure

- Creation of a cystotomy possibly unrecognized during GYN surgery

- Diabetes

- Duration of anesthesia of more than 2 hours

- Higher IV fluid administration while under an anesthetic (>750 mL)

- Hypertension

- Joint replacement surgery

- Neurological disease or injury

- Pharmacological effects (anticholinergic, alpha agonists, etc.)

- Pelvic trauma

- Preexisting voiding dysfunction or high post-void residual urine volumes

- Previous episodes of urinary retention

- Prior pelvic or incontinence surgery

- Regional anesthesia (23% vs. 17% with a general anesthetic)

- Surgery: radical hysterectomy - 20% rate of postop acute urinary retention

- Surgery: low anterior resection - 68% rate of postop acute urinary retention

**Chronic****female urinary retention**generally has milder but more varied symptoms such as dysfunctional voiding, slow or intermittent urinary stream, hesitancy, straining, or incontinence from overflow. There is usually no abdominal or suprapubic pain and typically no immediate precipitating event. Symptoms have usually been present for an extended time, or patients may even be asymptomatic, with the urinary retention discovered only incidentally. Interestingly, a sensation of incomplete bladder emptying is not a reliable indicator of a high post-void residual volume.

The American Urological Association has defined chronic urinary retention as "an elevated post-void residual (PVR) urine volume of greater than 300 mL that persisted for at least six months documented on two or more separate occasions."

Risk factors for high-risk chronic urinary retention include:

- Bladder stones

- Hydronephrosis

- Hydroureter

- Recurrent or symptomatic UTIs

- Renal failure (GFR of <60 mL/min)

- Urinary incontinence associated with perineal skin changes or sacral decubitus ulcers

- Urosepsis

A urinalysis and culture are necessary for all female patients with urinary retention. This urine may have to be obtained via catheterization if the patient is unable to void voluntarily. The diagnosis of urinary retention is commonly made via obtaining a post-void residual urine volume. If the patient can void on her own, a bladder scan is utilized after the patient urinates to evaluate the amount of urine still in the bladder. More than 300 mL of urine in the bladder after voiding suggests urinary retention, although most clinicians use 200 mL as the maximal, acceptable post-void volume.

If the patient is unable to urinate, catheter placement may be necessary. If more than 400 mL of urine passes after catheterization in the first 15 minutes, this suggests urinary retention, and the catheter should remain in place unless the patient is willing and able to perform clean intermittent self-catheterization at regular intervals. Between volumes of 200 mL and 400 mL, the catheter may be removed immediately or left in place, depending on the clinical scenario. Under 200 mL, the catheter can generally be removed, and urinary retention is unlikely.

**Urodynamic testing**is extremely helpful in differentiating detrusor underactivity from bladder outlet obstruction in women with chronic, unexplained urinary retention. With detrusor underactivity, detrusor pressure will be reduced or possibly even absent.

**Bladder outlet obstruction**in women is far less common than in men. Typically, this disorder demonstrates elevated detrusor pressure with either prolonged voiding time and/or a reduced urinary flow rate.

Pressure-flow studies should be evaluated cautiously as women typically have much lower normal voluntary voiding pressures than men, and the correlation between urinary retention severity and pressure-flow results is somewhat inconsistent.

Cystoscopy can sometimes help detect anatomical disorders that may be contributing to urinary retention, such as strictures, masses, stones, or urethral erosions from surgical material used in prior pelvic surgeries.

**Evaluation Summary:**

- Acute urinary retention usually immediately follows a precipitating event such as surgery, botulinum toxin detrusor injections, injury, or childbirth.

- Immediate symptoms of suprapubic pain, inability to void, urgency, and incomplete bladder emptying are typical of acute retention.

- Retention is more likely after regional anesthetic blocks, older patients, diabetics, use of anticholinergics, and a history of prior pelvic surgeries.

- Post-void residual urine volumes will be >200 mL in patients with urinary retention.

- Postoperatively, patients should be closely monitored for bladder function and residual.

- Postoperative patients with residuals over 400 mL should be given an opportunity to void and catheterized if they fail.

- Immediate treatment is urethral catheterization, either with a Foley or intermittent self-catheterization.

- All patients with acute postoperative urinary retention should have their catheter irrigated. An inability to extract the injected fluid suggests a possible unrecognized cystotomy, and a cystogram should be performed.

- Continuous Foley drainage is suggested for volumes >1,500 mL, at least for a short time.

- If the urinary voiding disorder lasts >6 months, it is chronic retention.

- Urodynamics and video urodynamics are not necessary for acute retention but may be helpful in chronic patients.

- Cystoscopy can be helpful in chronic retention to identify obstructive causes that are potentially treatable.

- Patients with prior pelvic surgeries can develop pelvic organ prolapse or mesh erosions.