Lactose intolerance is evaluated by getting a careful history, performing a physical exam, and medical tests.

**History**

It is essential to take a past medical, family, and dietary history to determine the cause of lactose intolerance and exclude secondary causes.

**Physical Exam**

Assess for the presence of abdominal bloating, tenderness, and pain.

**Medical Tests**

- Hydrogen breath test: This test measures the hydrogen content of breath after lactose ingestion. The test is positive for lactose malabsorption if the post-lactose breath hydrogen value rises >20 ppm compared with the baseline.

- Stool acidity test: Unabsorbed lactose is fermented by colonic bacteria into lactic acid, which lowers the stool pH.

- Dietary elimination: One way to assess the underlying illness is to eliminate lactose-containing food products, which would result in the resolution of symptoms. Resumption of symptoms with the reintroduction of these products will indicate lactose intolerance.

- Milk tolerance test: Administer 500 mL of milk and obtain the blood glucose level. A rise in blood sugar of less than 9 mg/dL shows lactose malabsorption.

- Lactose tolerance test: This test determines lactose absorption after ingestion of a lactose-containing liquid. Measure serial blood glucose levels after giving an oral lactose load. After obtaining a fasting serum glucose level, 50 g of lactose is administered.

- Small bowel biopsy: This test is rarely performed as it is invasive. It is only indicated to rule out secondary causes of lactose intolerance.

- Genotyping: It is an emerging test with higher sensitivity and specificity. It has been used in Germany and the Nordic states, but it is yet not widely available or practiced elsewhere.