Before considering pulmonary artery banding as a potential palliation strategy, several anatomic features need to be considered. It is important to consider the length of the main pulmonary artery (MPA) to allow placement of a band in the mid-portion of MPA without impinging pulmonary valve in the proximal segment and branch pulmonary arteries (PA) distally. The inferior aspect of the right PA typically arises slightly more proximally on the MPA than the left PA and also arises in a more acute angle. Therefore right PA tends to be at a higher risk of impingement when the band is placed, as any migration of the band distally may result in distortion of the RPA, although this can occur with the left pulmonary artery as well. Given the higher pulmonary to systemic blood flow ratio, MPA tends to be larger than aorta with a more thin-walled vessel, thereby increasing the risk of vessel wall rupture at the time of surgery.

Patients with a large ventricular septal defect and low pulmonary vascular resistance will ultimately develop pulmonary over-circulation. This will manifest clinically with signs of congestive heart failure, including tachypnea, poor feeding, and pulmonary edema. In the short term, these symptoms may be managed with diuretics, systemic afterload reduction, and potentially nasogastric feeding supplementation. However, long term pulmonary over-circulation may lead to irreversible vascular changes, with progressive vascular medial hypertrophy and the development of pulmonary hypertension from increased vascular resistance. This is particularly true with conditions of high pressure and high volume flow (i.e., large VSD), as opposed to low-pressure but high-volume flow (i.e., large ASD).

A PAB creates narrowing in the mid-segment of MPA, increases subpulmonic ventricular afterload, thereby reducing left to right shunting and decrease in pulmonary blood flow via physical restriction of flow. This protects pulmonary vasculature from being exposed to high pressures and thus attenuates deleterious remodeling. The reduction in shunt volume will consequently increase systemic cardiac output and blood pressure. In cardiac defects that require adequate mixing of pulmonary and systemic blood to maintain reasonable systemic oxygen saturation (i.e., transposition of the great arteries), PAB might not be tolerated, especially in the presence of a restricted atrial septal defect. Therefore surgical septectomy or balloon septostomy might need to be performed before attempting PAB.