Water constitutes about 60% of the average adult body weight and is responsible for many physiological processes in the human body. Thus, fluid and electrolyte homeostasis is critical for human survival, as exemplified by the potentially devastating consequences of fluid imbalance. The balance of total body fluid is an extremely well-regulated process that ensures the maintenance of a balance between fluid gain and loss through different physiological mechanisms such as neural regulation of thirst, hormonal regulation (vasopressin and natriuretic peptides), management through the skin, hemodynamic changes, and renal control of salt and water excretion. In particular, renal excretion of urine also ensures the elimination of products of metabolic activity and excess electrolytes in addition to water, thus maintaining fluid homeostasis. Fluid balance so inextricably links with electrolyte balance both in the intracellular (rich in K+ ions) and extracellular (rich in Na+ & Cl- ions) compartments, that unsurprisingly, trading of electrolytes is the core strategy of renal fluid regulation. Drugs that affect renal regulation of electrolyte excretion have the greatest effect in terms of the quantity of fluid control and thus water homeostasis.

Diuretics are drugs that pharmacologically tilt the renal fluid regulation in favor of the excretion of water and electrolytes. Thus, diuretics are substances that increase the production and volume of urine. This class of drugs achieves this objective primarily by suppressing receptors that aid in the reabsorption of Na+, the most abundant extracellular cation, from the renal tubules, thereby increasing the osmolality of the renal tubules and consequently suppressing water reabsorption. Osmotic diuretics cause a direct increase in luminal hyperosmolarity in the renal tubules without affecting electrolyte balance, whereas aquaretics are substances that act directly by only affecting the excretion of water.

This comprehensive review addresses all the relevant aspects of diuretic therapy, emphasizing the understanding of the basic pharmacophysiological mechanisms of drug action and that of adverse effects but also to more pragmatic aspects of dosing. Diuretics fall into several classes and subcategories depending on their mechanism and site of their action along the nephron. The classification is presented in Table 1, which lists all the available individual drugs in all the different classes, their peculiarities, chemical nature, their major site of action along the nephron, diuretic target molecule, and the percentage of Na+ reabsorption blocked.

**Indications**

Diuresis is necessary for a variety of non-edematous and edematous conditions, which require clearing out excess water when the body abnormally sequesters fluid in the third space in the form of edema. Indications for each individual drug are given below in tables 2 through 5. The quintessential of edematous conditions is heart failure (HF), where the inefficiency of the heart’s pumping ability results in:

1. Decreased renal perfusion leading to activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-system (RAAS) and

2. Long-standing venous stasis leading to extravasation of fluid into the interstitial space, both of which lead to intravascular volume expansion and result in signs of congestion such as weight gain, dyspnea, and generalized edema.

Pulmonary edema, most commonly resulting from HF, is also an indication for diuretic use. Loop diuretics (due to their greater effectiveness) are the cornerstone of diuretic therapy in symptomatic HF, with furosemide being the most widely used loop diuretic (albeit Torsemide with better pharmacological properties remains underexploited and a comparison trial, TRANSFORM-HF, is currently underway) according to both New York Heart Association (NYHA) and European Society of Cardiology (ESC). These agents are started at lower doses, titrated upwards, and monitored through urine output and body weight measurements. The addition of thiazide diuretics (metolazone, hydrochlorothiazide) to loop diuretics can help relieve symptoms when loop diuretics are not sufficient in HF, as detailed below in the administration section. Aldosterone receptor antagonists (ARA) reduce the mortality and morbidity of advanced systolic HF and patients with ejection fraction less than 35% falling into NYHA-HF classification categories II-IV. This effect is because aldosterone escapes suppression on chronic use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), whereas the addition of ARAs can protect from the effects of aldosterone in such patients.

Diuretics, along with salt restriction, are also recommended as the first-line therapy in ascites due to liver cirrhosis.

Thiazides are the best first choice for hypertension, as concluded in a recent Cochrane review, and chlorthalidone is the best first-line agent among all the anti-hypertensive compared according to the 2017 American college of cardiology (ACC) hypertension guidelines.

Thiazide-related reabsorption of calcium might be advantageous in nephrolithiasis and hypercalciuria, whereas loop diuretics cause calciuresis and therefore are suitable for use in symptomatic hypercalcemia patients.

Osmotherapy is the mainstay of medical therapy for raised intracranial pressure (ICP) after traumatic brain injury and cerebral edema. Hyperosmolar therapy with mannitol reduces elevated ICP rapidly in less than an hour though a rebound (an initial increase of ICP) is possible. Mannitol also promotes diuresis in acute renal failure and excretion of toxic metabolites and substances. Though hypertonic saline similarly is used to treat high ICP and sometimes has demonstrated greater efficiency than mannitol is not considered a diuretic.

Diuretics can also be employed less commonly in the active elimination of toxic substances by forced diuresis, which increases urine volume per unit time. Clinicians employ loop diuretics along with alkalinization of the urine in forced alkaline diuresis in the treatment of salicylate, phenobarbital, and lithium poisoning.