Vitamin B12 plays a vital role in DNA synthesis and odd chain fatty acid metabolism, which are required to maintain the integrity of neuronal myelin. It acts as a cofactor for the following enzymes:

- **Homocysteine methyltransferase:**This enzyme carries out the conversion of homocysteine to methionine. Methionine is a precursor for S-adenosyl methionine, which is a methyl donor and is required to maintain the integrity of the neuron sheath. A deficiency of vitamin B12 disrupts this reaction, which leads to reduced formation of S- adenosyl methionine. This impairs methylation of myelin basic protein and lipids and leads to damage to the myelin sheath. Homocysteine methyltransferase also catalyzes the conversion of 5-methyl-tetrahydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate, which acts as a one-carbon donor for DNA synthesis. A deficiency of vitamin B12 causes folate to be trapped in its methylated form of 5-methyl-tetrahydrofolate.

- **Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase:**This enzyme is responsible for converting methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA, which is required for myelin synthesis. Interruption of this step leads to the accumulation of methylmalonyl-CoA and propionyl-CoA. This, in turn, disrupts the process of normal myelin synthesis and leads to the accumulation of abnormal fatty acids.

Although the neurological manifestations of vitamin B12 deficiency are caused by demyelination, the mechanism by which cobalamin deficiency leads to demyelination is not entirely clear. Earlier experimental studies conducted on animals suggest that methyl group deficiency due to dysfunction of homocysteine methyltransferase was the primary pathophysiological mechanism.

Other studies point towards the abnormal accumulation of methylmalonyl-CoA, propionyl-CoA, and abnormal fatty acids as the cause for the demyelination of tracts in the spinal cord. Recent studies have shed light on another mechanism of demyelination, which involves an imbalance between the levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and epidermal growth factor (EGF) and interleukin-6. Experiments conducted on gastrectomized rats that had developed subacute combined degeneration were observed to have high levels of TNF and low levels of EGF and IL-6. This finding has also been observed in the cerebrospinal fluid of human subjects with subacute combined degeneration.