Healthcare professionals such as specialists, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and physicians who plan to prescribe cilostazol should possess full knowledge regarding the indications and contraindications of the drug. Cilostazol's primary use is treating intermittent claudication, which typically correlates with early-stage peripheral artery disease.

Prescribing clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) should know that the drug is usually administered twice daily as a 100 mg oral dose shortly before or after meals. Consider possible adverse side effects when using cilostazol in patients with supraventricular arrhythmias or a history of heart disease. Additionally, exercise caution when co-administering cilostazol with any other pharmacologic agent that may reduce blood pressure due to an additive hypotensive effect and subsequent reflex tachycardia; therefore, pharmacists should watch for these potential drug interactions and report back to the prescribing clinicians. Both pharmacists and nurses can counsel patients on optimal dosing and possible adverse reactions.

Patients receiving cilostazol should be closely monitored for tachyarrythmias, hypotension, and signs of blood dyscrasia, which will primarily be a function of nurses and report these findings to the prescribing clinician. The interprofessional health care team should work collaboratively to ensure patients taking cilostazol obtain regular follow-ups. The specialty medical professionals should weigh in as needed in the care of these patients for optimal healthcare outcomes. [Level 5]