B2 adrenergic receptors are coded on chromosome 5 and expressed predominantly in the smooth muscle cells of the airways. The receptor is composed of 8 alpha helices; three are extracellular, and five are intracellular. It is bound to and transmits its signals inside the cell through heterotrimeric G protein, specifically Gs protein. Gs protein consists of alpha, beta, and gamma subunits. B2 receptors are present in two forms; activated and inactivated, and there is an equilibrium between both forms in the body.

The activity of the B2 receptor is dependent on the alpha subunit of the Gs protein; it becomes activated when bound to GTP and inactivated when bound to GDP. Presumably, agonistic ligands of B2 receptors achieve their effects by stabilizing the Gs-GTP form so it would retain its intracellular activity, whereas B2 blockers arrest the receptor in Gs-GDP low-energy form hence preventing the reactivation of the receptor.

The pathway of B2 receptor action begins when an agonist activates the receptor, causing the alpha subunit of the Gs protein to detach and reattach to adenylate cyclase, stimulating it to catalyze the conversion of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) into cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which acts as a second messenger within the cell. In turn, cAMP initiates two routes leading to smooth muscle relaxation, the first is through freeing the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A enzyme, whose function is to phosphorylate various enzymes contributing to the relaxation of airway smooth muscles, and the second is by reducing calcium concentration inside the cell by preventing its extracellular influx, inhibiting its outflow from intracellular storage, and initiating sequestration of calcium ions in the cytoplasm, thus preventing muscle contraction. The same mechanism is responsible for uterine relaxation and is responsible for using B2 agonists in tocolysis.

B2 adrenergic antagonists cause their effect by blocking the activation of B2 receptors, so all the processes mentioned above cease to continue. Theoretically, beta-blockers can cause exacerbation of symptoms in patients with asthma because they restrict the protective bronchodilatory effect of the natural epinephrine.