All patients undergoing eyelid procedures should be questioned regarding ophthalmologic pathology and should receive a full eye exam, complete with the retinal examination. Specifically, patients should be questioned regarding preoperative visual acuity, symptoms of dry eyes, and visual obstruction. Furthermore, the full medical history should include pathology related to systemic disease with ophthalmologic manifestations, including thyroid disease, diabetes, hypertension, or inflammatory diseases treated with steroids. A history of bleeding or clotting disorders should also be elicited. The following tests are useful in the workup of patients undergoing blepharoplasty to identify contraindications based on specific complaints.

**Shirmer’s Test**

Measures basal tear secretion and identifies patients that are at risk for dry eyes postoperatively. Absorptive paper strips are placed inside the lower lid for 5 minutes, and the amount of moisture on the paper is measured. Greater than or equal to 15 mm is considered normal, while less than 5 mm is indicative of deficient tear production.

**Visual Field Testing**

Identifies any areas of visual fields that may be obstructed by ptosis or dermatochalasis. The test is typically performed once with the lids in the normal position, and then with tape securing excess skin above the level of the lid margin. Goldman perimetry and Humphrey visual fields can be used to assess for visual deficits.

**Jones Test**

The Jones I and Jones II tests are used to evaluate the patency of lacrimal ducts. During the Jones I test, fluorescein dye is injected into the lacrimal sac and given 5 minutes to flow from the lacrimal sac into the opening at the inferior meatus. If the dye is present after 5 minutes, the test is positive, and the ducts are open. If no dye flows through, the Jones II test is performed in which a lacrimal syringe is used to irrigate the lacrimal ducts, and flow to the intranasal opening is again evaluated. If a positive test is identified in which the dye flows through, this confirms a functional problem with the lacrimal drainage system. If no dye flows through with lacrimal irrigation, a mechanical obstruction is identified.