The diagnosis and management of Conn syndrome is best done with an interprofessional team. The disorder can be difficult to diagnose because of the lack of standardized tests. In addition, the ARR may be falsely elevated in patients with chronic kidney disease, patients on potassium supplements or beta-blockers. Diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and angiotensin receptor blockers may cause false-negative results. If the clinical suspicion is high, ARR should be repeated after holding these agents for two weeks.

Unilateral adrenalectomy in patients with a unilateral adenoma (Conn syndrome) cures hypertension in 30% to 60% of cases, but the mean cure rate is only 19% after unilateral or bilateral adrenalectomy in patients with idiopathic hyperaldosteronism whose treatment mainly is medical. This treatment includes aldosterone antagonists such as spironolactone or eplerenone or other potassium-sparing diuretics like amiloride.

Due to the challenges of managing this disease, the pharmacist should be involved in diuretic selection and dosing. The pharmacist should check for drug-drug interaction and report back to the clinical interprofessional team concerns. The nurses monitoring the patient should be familiar with the pathophysiology and expected abnormalities in laboratory testing. Due to the precarious challenges of abnormal potassium, the nurse should be prepared to report to the clinical team quickly any untoward abnormalities as daily lab screens are reported. Only through interprofessional team involvement and close monitoring can the best results be achieved. [Level 5]