Diltiazem is a non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (CCB). Therapeutic effects occur through various mechanisms. Primarily, diltiazem inhibits the inflow of calcium ions into the cardiac muscle during depolarization. Reduced intracellular calcium concentrations increase smooth muscle relaxation, resulting in arterial vasodilation and decreased blood pressure.

**Hypertension**

- Diltiazem primarily produces its antihypertensive effect by relaxing the vascular smooth muscle and decreasing peripheral vascular resistance. The magnitude of blood pressure reduction is related to hypertension; thus, hypertensive individuals experience an antihypertensive effect, whereas there is only a modest fall in blood pressure in normotensives.

**Atrial Arrhythmia/Paroxysmal Supraventricular Tachycardia**

- Diltiazem is a negative inotrope (decreased force) and negative chronotrope (reduced rate). Along with coronary artery vasodilation, the combination decreases myocardial oxygen demand resulting in decreased heart rate.

**Angina**

- Diltiazem has been shown to increase exercise tolerance, probably due to its ability to reduce myocardial oxygen demand. This is accomplished via reductions in heart rate and blood pressure at submaximal and maximal workloads. Diltiazem is a potent dilator of coronary arteries, both epicardial and subendocardial.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Diltiazem is well absorbed from the GIT and undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism; resultant bioavailability is approximately 40%. The immediate-release diltiazem tablet has an onset of action of 30 to 60 minutes.

**Distribution:**Diltiazem is 70% to 80% bound to plasma proteins.

**Metabolism:**Diltiazem is metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system and is an inhibitor of CYP3A4, which can lead to drug-drug interactions. Desacetyl diltiazem, the metabolite of diltiazem, also contributes to coronary vasodilatation.

**Excretion:**The plasma elimination half-life following drug administration is about 3.0 to 4.5 hours. Diltiazem undergoes extensive metabolism in which 2% to 4% of the unchanged drug appears in the urine.