**Calcification**

Calcification of the pineal gland is quite common. So much so that a calcified pineal gland is commonly used as a landmark on X-rays. Calcium and phosphate deposits have a direct correlation with age. Corpora arenacea can be associated with calcification of the pineal gland. Some studies have demonstrated that the degree of calcification of the pineal gland is higher in those affected by Alzheimer disease compared to conditions demonstrating other types of dementia. There is a loose correlation between the calcification of the pineal gland and some migraine and cluster headaches.

**Tumors**

Several different tumors can arise from the pineal gland. Diagnosis of the type of tumor is crucial for treatment. The primary symptom of the tumor would be hydrocephalus. If the pineal gland invades the thalamus, it can cause weakness and loss of sensation in half of the body. Invasion of the hypothalamus would disrupt sleep, impede temperature and water regulation, and cause weight gain. An MRI is important when trying to see the location and size of the tumor. A biopsy is required when trying to determine the type of tumor. Usually, a biopsy is done via a stereotactic or endoscopic procedure. Sometimes biomarkers are used to detect the presence of the tumor, and if these are found in the CSF and blood, then a biopsy might not be needed. Some of these chemicals are beta-human chorionic gonadotropin, carcinoembryonic antigen, and a-fetoprotein.

**Multi-Step Treatment Plan for Pineal Tumors**

- Surgical removal of the tumor is quite difficult because of its location and relation to various structures that surround the gland. The surgeon always tries to opt for a minimally invasive technique before considering other options.

- Management of hydrocephalus is also undertaken. The blockage of CSF flow due to the enlarged gland makes the third ventriculostomy via endoscopic approach a consideration. If this fails, then a shunt might be necessary.

- Radiation therapy is shown to be effective as a majority of pineal gland tumor is sensitive.

- Chemotherapy is only used when required for the type of tumor.

**Dysfunction of Pineal Gland Secretions**

- Pineal gland damage in children has been shown to accelerate skeletal and sexual organ development.

- Low melatonin levels in elderly persons have shown sleep pattern disturbances. There has been a modest benefit with melatonin therapy.

**Jet Lag**

Disturbance of the sleep-wake cycle is seen when traveling across multiple time zones. It takes several days for melatonin to adjust to a new light-dark pattern.

**Retinal Degeneration**

Degeneration of the retina would not allow for light appreciation. In this case, the retina would not be able to appreciate or pick up changes in light. The low levels of light would cause an increased level of melatonin secretion.

**Circadian Rhythm Disorders**

During the daytime, light stimulates the retinohypothalamic pineal pathway. The retinal ganglion cells activate the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) through the optic nerve. SCN via a complex network inhibits the superior cervical ganglion, causing sympathetic nervous system inhibition, preventing melatonin release from the pituitary into the circulation. However, at night, lack of activation of SCN causes sympathetic nervous system stimulation, causing melatonin release by the pineal gland, inducing sleepiness.

**Neuropsychiatric Disorders**

Hydroxyindole-O-methyltransferase (also known as Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase) is an enzyme involved in the final step of melatonin synthesis. It is present predominantly in the pineal gland. However, low amounts of mRNA have been detected in the retina.

**Parinaud syndrome**

Pineal gland tumors (pinealoma) can cause Parinaud syndrome by compressing centers in the dorsal midbrain due to progressive gland enlargement.  Pineal gland tumor is one of the most common causes of Parinaud syndrome in young adults. Most patients present with complaints of progressive blurring of vision and diplopia. It is associated with a classic triad of upgaze palsy, convergence retraction nystagmus, and light-near dissociation.