Contraindications to raloxifene include past medical history of deep venous thrombosis, renal vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, malignancy, active smoking, or any thrombophilia (factor V Leiden deficiency, prothrombin gene mutation G20210A, antiphospholipid syndrome, deficiency of antithrombin, protein c and s deficiency).

Death due to stroke: Postmenopausal women with coronary heart disease or at increased risk for coronary events are at increased risk of death due to stroke when treated with raloxifene. Perform risk-benefit analysis in women with a risk of strokes, such as women with a history of transient ischemic attack (TIA) or stroke, cigarette smoking habit, hypertension, and atrial fibrillation.

Careful administration is recommended in hospitalized, immobilized, unable to walk, or post-surgical recovery patients, given the high risk of developing deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.

The safety of raloxifene in premenopausal women is not established, and its use in premenopausal women is not recommended.

**Drug Interactions**

- There are reports of an ospemifene and raloxifene interaction; it increases the effect of the other by synergism. Therefore, monitor the following drugs (for interaction with raloxifene) closely: apalutamide, cholestyramine, famciclovir, levothyroxine.

- There is a reported minor interaction of raloxifene with warfarin; it increases the effect of warfarin by plasma protein binding competition.

- Concomitant administration of raloxifene with amoxicillin,  ampicillin, digoxin, corticosteroids, antacids, cholestyramine, other anion exchange resins, or systemic estrogens is not recommended.

- It should be used with caution with highly protein-bound drugs such as diazepam, diazoxide, and lidocaine, as it might affect the protein binding of other drugs.