Pleuritis is characterized by sharp and localized thoracic or shoulder pain. It is exacerbated by respiratory movements, coughing, sneezing, or chest wall/trunk movement. Pain characteristics can be dull aching, burning, or simply as a “catch.” Duration and recurrence of symptoms may be helpful in determining the cause. As in the other causes of chest pain, diagnosis of the cause of pleurisy relies heavily on the history and physical exam.

The acuity of the onset (e.g., hyperacute - pulmonary embolism, primary spontaneous pneumothorax, and traumatic pleural inflammation/traumatic pneumothorax), duration, and progression of symptoms are useful in establishing a differential diagnosis. A comprehensive medical history may help to uncover underlying systemic illness such as systemic lupus erythematosus, human immunodeficiency virus infection, tuberculosis infection.

Social history, including travel history, tobacco/electronic cigarette use, alcohol use history, illicit (specifically intravenous) drug use history may provide clues to the underlying cause of pleurisy. Dullness to percussion and diminished breath sounds and vocal/tactile resonance in the affected hemithorax differentiates effusion from a pneumothorax (resonant to percussion). A pleural rub can be heard in auscultation during inspiration and may also be palpable, and is differentiated from a pericardial friction rub that is audible in both inspiration and expiration and can still be heard with the cessation of respiratory movements.