Colonoscopy can be performed for multiple reasons. It can be divided into diagnostic and therapeutic indications. Diagnostic indications can further be classified as screening vs. elective. Screening colonoscopies are performed to assess for colorectal cancers based upon a patient's risk (average vs. high). Average risk screening starts at the age of 50 and is performed at least every 10 years, as long as the colonoscopy results were unremarkable or no pathology identified that would place the patient at a higher risk. Patients will receive a repeat colonoscopy at 10-year intervals to continue to screen for colorectal cancer or pre-malignant lesions. The subsequent colonoscopies are called surveillance colonoscopies. Earlier surveillance is performed depending on the results of the first (index) procedure.

Patients with a high risk of developing colorectal cancer receive the screening procedure before the age of 50 years, and it is repeated every 1, 2, or 5 years based upon the primary risk and findings during the procedure. Examples of high-risk populations include a history of inflammatory bowel disease, a family history of colorectal cancer at age <60 years, hereditary polyposis (Such as Peutz Jegher syndrome and Familial Adenomatous Polyposis, caused by an APC gene mutation) and non-polyposis syndromes (LYNCH I and II), and surveillance after resection of colorectal cancer. Individuals with first degree relatives diagnosed with colon cancer are encouraged to undergo their first colonoscopy at age 40, or 10 years prior to the age the relative was diagnosed, whichever comes first. Elective colonoscopy is performed for reasons such as known or occult gastrointestinal bleeding or stool positive for occult blood, unexplained changes in bowel habits, patterns, iron deficiency anemia or weight loss in elderly patients, persistent abdominal pain, suspected inflammatory or infectious colitis and barium enema showing radiographic structural abnormalities.

Therapeutic indications for colonoscopy include, but are not limited to, excision and ablation of lesions, treatment of bleeding lesions, dilation of stenosis or strictures, foreign body removal, decompression of colonic volvulus or megacolon and palliative management of known neoplasms.

The United States Preventative Services Task Force (USPSTF) is an organization that provides recommendations for medical therapies and procedures. According to recommendations, patients ages 50-75 years at average risk for colorectal cancer should undergo colonoscopy every 10 years (Grade A recommendation).

While colonoscopy is very useful in the diagnosis of colorectal cancer, it is also used for the diagnosis, treatment, and planning for surgical interventions of certain inflammatory, mechanical, and anatomic diseases. Some examples include Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis, Ogilvie syndrome, diverticulitis, and sigmoid volvulus.