When a patient presents with a suspected maxillary fracture, immediate assessment of the patient is key, as there may be concurrent life-threatening injuries. A primary survey of the patient is needed, including an advanced trauma life support (ATLS) assessment. The resuscitation team may be required in the immediate management of the patient. Once the patient is in a stable condition, a thorough history of the trauma is needed. It is important to ascertain if the patient lost consciousness or has any other signs of head injury, as neurological care would be a priority. Care must be taken to note the time the patient last ate, and their medications, in case surgery is indicated.

A secondary survey of the patient should be carried out to assess the trauma and for other concurrent injuries.

- The extra-oral examination should include recording of pain, swelling, bleeding, bruising, and epistaxis.

- The head and neck portion of the secondary survey includes examining, palpating, inspecting, and auscultating. Lacerations should also be recorded for debridement and closure as necessary, and exploration considered, and objects or debris may be present.

- Paraesthesia and anesthesia should be noted, particularly as a baseline prior to any surgery, to assess for nerve damage or bruising.

- Midface trauma will commonly present with a maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve (V2) paresthesia.

- Step deformities or depressions when the patient is assessed from all planes can indicate a displaced fracture.

- Assessment of the eye should include any uni-ocular and bi-ocular diplopia, subconjunctival hematoma, visual acuity, and restricted eye movement, with any concerns consequently escalated to ophthalmology.

- Mouth opening can be restricted either due to hematoma causing trismus or due to impinging of the depressed zygoma onto the condyle

Of particular concern are orbital fractures concurrent with fractures of the maxilla. Generally, when paired together, the inferior orbital floor will be fractured, as this bone is particularly thin and weak, and this will create an area of drainage into the maxillary sinus. In cases where this is not present, blood and fluid can collect posterior to the globe and cause a retrobulbar hematoma, which warrants immediate surgical intervention with a lateral canthotomy and inferior cantholysis. It is worth noting that the diagnosis of a retrobulbar hematoma is a clinical diagnosis of a frozen globe. Pressure from tonometry often is between 50-70.

Patients who have sustained a Lefort I fracture classically present with mobility of the tooth-bearing segment of the maxilla, altered occlusion, or damage to the teeth

An expert tip in conducting this assessment is to really use your fingers and hands to wiggle and manipulate bony segments. It may be slightly uncomfortable for the patient, but it is the best way, combined with a CT scan, to diagnosis facial fractures, particularly of the maxilla and mandible.