Organizational culture (OC) is composed of beliefs and expectations shared by members of an organization.

Culture can be framed through various lenses. For example, one framework is Hofstede’s cultural dimensions, which contends that culture is based on the dimensions of masculinity, power distance index, uncertainty avoidance, and pluralism.

The CVF is made of two axes or dimensions which serve as a foundation for four types of ideal culture.**Figure 1**and discussed below: clan, adhocracy, hierarchy, and market.

**Clan**

Clan culture, also referred to as group culture in some literature, is built on cooperation. It places a lot of emphasis on building and creating solid and stronger teams with high morale. It is committed to developing and mentoring people in the organization and listening to their input.

**Market**

The market culture emphasizes competition and is driven to achieve a market advantage. It prioritizes achieving goals of high productivity and profitability.

**Adhocracy**

In an adhocracy culture, creativity is a prime characteristic built on an entrepreneurial and innovative spirit. This culture thrives in an environment that is agile and transformative.

**Hierarchy**

A hierarchical culture’s focus is control, which is achieved by monitoring, structure, and organization. Repeatability, dependability, and standardization are the usual aims and descriptors associated with this culture.

The CVF can be very useful when applied to the organizational culture of a healthcare organization.  Every organization has elements of each ideal culture type. The CVF can be applied to assess the degree to which each ideal culture is represented in an organization relative to the other types - this can be valuable in the formulation of hypotheses regarding how organizational culture will influence factors like the successful implementation of quality improvement initiatives or achieving certain organizational outcomes.

**Organizational Culture Assessment Instrument**

The organizational culture assessment instrument (OCAI) is a commonly used tool and is related to the Competing Values Framework and attributed to Kim S. Cameron and Robert E. Quinn at the University of Michigan.