Treatment options vary from no therapy and control to surgical treatment depending on symptoms and atlantoaxial instability, assessed by radiological images.

For asymptomatic patients, there is an ongoing debate between conservative therapies with imaging follow-up versus prophylactic spinal fusion.

Meanwhile, asymptomatic patients with radiographic evidence of atlantoaxial instability need to consider surgery, although there is a controversy regarding whether C1–C2 fusion can significantly influence neck rotation and daily activities of patients. Although the procedure could induce the loss of normal neck rotation by as much as 50%, the remaining joints could compensate for most of the function of C1–C2. The benefits of avoiding neurological compromise secondary to cord compression outweigh the loss of neck rotation associated with this procedure.

All symptomatic patients are candidates to undergo surgical treatment.

Surgery is usually indicated in patients who had one of the following conditions: neurological involvement (even if this is transient), radiological signs of instability (more than 5 mm of translation in flexion and extension X-rays), progressive instability, persistent neck pain associated with atlantoaxial instability.

The principles of treatment are to prevent sudden death from neurological compromise, improve the neurological status, stabilize the cervical spine, and improve the quality of life.

The treatment strategies for this condition can be resume in four steps:

- Determine the main pathology causing the symptoms of myelopathy (i.e., odontoid peg, posterior arch of C1).

- Define whether the atlantoaxial subluxation is reducible or not.

- Decide whether the lesion requires decompression or not.

- Select the surgical option for stabilization and fusion.

Surgical options include atlantoaxial fusion, occiput-C2 fusion, and occiput-C3 fusion.

Occipito-cervical fusion is indicated in occipito-cervical instability or failed attempt of atlantoaxial fusion, also suggested in cases of poor bone quality due to the increased risk of screw pull-out.

**Summary of Treatment Options**

- Clinically asymptomatic os odontoideum - Clinical and radiographic surveillance or posterior C1-C2 internal fixation and fusion

- Symptomatic os odontoideum or C1-C2 instability - Posterior C1-C2 internal fixation and fusion

- If rigid C1-C2 fixation is  not achievable - Postoperative halo immobilization

- Os odontoideum with irreducible dorsal cervico-medullary compression with or without occipito-atlantal instability - Occipital-cervical fixation and fusion with or without C1 laminectomy

- Irreducible ventral cervico-medullary compression - Ventral decompression