Healthcare workers, including nurse practitioners who prescribe aliskiren for hypertension in adults, should know the contraindications and precautions. Patients taking aliskiren requires monitoring for hyperkalemia and impaired renal function. Serum potassium also requires periodic observation. Patients at risk include those with renal insufficiency, diabetes mellitus, combination use with ARBs or ACEs, and patients using potassium supplements or potassium-sparing diuretics. Renal function is also something clinicians should watch. Individual patients will be at higher risk of developing acute renal failure while taking aliskiren. These patients include those taking ARBs, ACEIs, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and patients with renal artery stenosis, severe heart failure, post-myocardial infarction, or volume depletion.

ALiskiren therapy, as part of a patient's overall hypertensive control regimen, requires an interprofessional healthcare team. When initiating aliskiren, the clinician should consult a pharmacist, who can look over the entire medication regimen and assist with deciding the appropriateness of adding aliskiren, and what other changes might be necessary for the patient's regimen. Nurses can provide administration counseling, monitor the patient as described above, and assess pharmacotherapy adherence. If the nurse or pharmacist notes any issues, they should be able to communicate these to the prescriber promptly, giving their clinical opinion regarding the patient's condition. With this type of interprofessional team coordination, aliskiren therapy can achieve optimal outcomes with minimal adverse events. [Level 5]