Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome is caused by surfactant deficiency, especially in the context of immature lungs. The deficiency of surfactant increases the surface tension within the small airways and alveoli, thereby reducing the compliance of the immature lung. The delicate balance of pressures at the air-fluid interface is essential to prevent the collapse of the alveolus or the filling of the alveolus with fluid. The pathophysiology of RDS can be described using LaPlace law, denoted as:

P=2T/R

where P is pressure, T is surface tension, and R is the radius. Laplace law describes the relationship between the pressure difference across the interface of two static fluids to the shape of the surface. As the surface tension increases at the alveolar level, the amount of pressure required to maintain alveolar shape increases. With reduced surfactant production, atelectasis occurs throughout the lung, causing reduced gas exchange. Widespread and repeated atelectasis eventually damages the respiratory epithelium, causing a cytokine-mediated inflammatory response. As pulmonary edema develops as a result of the inflammatory response, increasing amounts of protein-rich fluid from the vascular space to leak into the alveoli, which further inactivate surfactant.

Overdistension of the alveoli during positive pressure ventilation leads to further damage and inflammation. Besides, oxidative stress generated both by high oxygen tensions from mechanical ventilation and inflammatory processes within the lung also promotes the conversion of surfactant into an inactive form through protein oxidant damage and lipid peroxidation.