The initial evaluation of a patient suspected of DCS should include a detailed history and physical exam. For a conscious patient, get the details of exposure, including onset, duration, and progression of symptoms. For a diver with DCS, it is vital to determine the patient's dive profile and gas mix.

DCS occurs most frequently in the shoulders, elbows, knees, and ankles. Joint pain ("the bends") accounts for most cases, with the shoulder being the most prevalent site. Neurological symptoms present in 10% to 15% of DCS cases with a headache and visual disturbances being the most common symptoms. Skin manifestations are a feature in about 10% to 15% of DCS cases. Pulmonary DCS ("the chokes") is quite rare in divers and much less frequently seen in aviators because of oxygen pre-breathing protocols. Bubbles in the skin or joints result in mild symptoms, larger numbers of bubbles in the venous blood may cause lung damage, and bubbles involving spinal cord function may lead to paralysis, sensory dysfunction, or death. If there is a cardiac right-to-left shunt, (e.g., a patent foramen ovale), venous bubbles could potentially enter the arterial circulation, resulting in an arterial gas embolism.

DCS should be suspected if related symptoms occur following a drop in pressure within 24 hours of diving. The diagnostic confirmation is if the symptoms are relieved by recompression. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) can occasionally identify bubbles in DCS, but they are not good at determining the diagnosis and certainly cannot be used to rule out DCS.