Sebaceous glands are skin appendages found in all parts of the body except on the soles and palms. The areas where there is the highest concentration of sebaceous glands are the face, back, upper arms, and chest. Sebaceous glands are composed of holocrine acini attached to a common excretory duct and a follicle, and together they comprise the pilosebaceous unit. Special types of sebaceous glands are not linked to the pilosebaceous unit and open directly towards the epithelial surface: in lips and buccal mucosa (Fordyce spots), glans penis or clitoris (Tyson glands), areolae (Montgomery's glands), and eyelids (Meibomian glands).

The cells that form the sebaceous gland are called sebocytes and are organized in layers inside the acini. In the basal layer, there are reservoir cells (germinative cells) with basophilic nuclei: that's the mitotically active part of the gland. As sebocytes differentiate, they accumulate increasing amounts of lipids inside the cytoplasm and migrate toward the central excretory duct. The mature sebocytes have vacuolated cytoplasms and small central nuclei with a scalloping effect due to compression by their lipid content. They are present near the central duct, and they disintegrate at the end of their life cycle, releasing their content (lipid and cellular debris) as sebum. The turnover time from sebocyte production to disintegration is approximately 1 month.

Sebocytes arise in the fetus at 13 weeks from the outer root sheath of hair follicles. In the fetus at term, the effect of transplacental maternal androgens results in highly active sebaceous glands, responsible for the production of a protective layer called vernix caseosa. Their activity and size regress in the newborn due to the withdrawal of maternal hormones. Sebaceous production is minimal throughout infancy and childhood. At puberty, as androgen production increases, sebaceous glands enlarge and become increasingly active, peaking during the third decade of life. In older adults, androgen levels decrease, and the sebum production slows down.

In SGH, the sebaceous glands are normal in structure but increased in number. The acini are attached to the central duct, which may become dilated. The presence of four or more sebaceous lobules around a hair follicle has been suggested as a diagnostic clue. Sebaceous lobules show increasing numbers and slightly in size, are located in a more superficial position in the dermis, and have only two layers of germinative cells.

The differential diagnosis primarily includes sebaceous adenoma. Adenoma has an increased number of germinative cells (more than two layers) and the presence of immature eosinophilic sebocytes. There are architectural abnormalities, including the displacement of normal epithelial structures replaced by sebaceous elements. Mature sebocytes comprise more than 50% of the lesion.

Sebaceoma is another entity that can cause clinical confusion with sebaceous hyperplasia. It is a circumscribed and symmetrical lesion composed of solid nodules of immature sebocytes and germinative cells, duct-like spaces, and cystic changes. The germinative cells form the main part of the lesion, representing more than 50% of the cells. The overlying epidermis can appear keratotic, crusted, or ulcerated.

Superficial epithelioma with sebaceous differentiation or reticulated acanthoma with sebaceous differentiation (RASD) is a rare entity initially proposed by Steffen and Ackerman.

Nevus sebaceous (spelling is correct without the "o" normally found in the word sebaceous) is a common hamartoma typically present at birth or appear during early childhood in the head and neck region. Histology shows papillomatosis and hyperkeratosis, prominent sebaceous hyperplasia with the absence of hair follicles. Apocrine glands are often present. Sebaceous glands are abnormal in morphology and distribution: the localization is high within the dermis, and the ducts communicate directly with the epidermal surface.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) can be clinically similar to sebaceous hyperplasia, particularly in solitary lesions of sun-exposed areas of the face. BCC shows basaloid proliferation of neoplastic cells with peripheral palisading, tumor stromal-clefting, and extracellular mucin features not present in sebaceous neoplasms.

Although sebaceous differentiation is evident in most cases of benign sebaceous neoplasms, special stains may be required. Epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) expresses in the cytoplasm in up to 100% of cases.

Given the association of sebaceous adenomas (and only rarely sebaceous hyperplasias) with Muir-Torre syndrome, stains to detect a clinically-undiagnosed microsatellite instability are options. Diagnosis of this syndrome could potentially help to help detect visceral neoplasms (especially colon cancer) at their pre-clinical stage, improving survival, but this is not something to consider with the usual example of sebaceous gland hyperplasia.