The management of HCM includes strategies directed at blocking the metabolic and clinical effects of HCM strategies directed at the specific causes of the HCM state (which include medical and surgical interventions) as well as strategies directed at the management and modulation of the complications and co-morbidities associated with HCM.

In the setting where HCM is due to exogenous glucocorticoid use, the central management strategy is a carefully monitored reduction in glucocorticoid use with the ultimate aim of total withdrawal of their use. Depending on the initial indication/reason for their use, the duration, and dose of the glucocorticoids and evidence of secondary cortical atrophy, this may or may not be possible. Exogenous HCM can present the managing clinician with the conundrum of a patient with evidence of HCM who concomitantly has secondary adrenal insufficiency from cortical atrophy, which can become clinically apparent following the withdrawal of glucocorticoid therapy is entirely withdrawn. Serial monitoring of serum DHEA-S and ACTH levels, as well as serial ACTH (cosyntropin) stimulation tests, may be required in these sorts of patients over time while reducing the glucocorticoid dose to the closet dose to physiologic replacement doses required to prevent symptoms and signs of adrenal insufficiency. For some such patients, the secondary adrenocortical atrophy may be permanent, and such patients may require long term/life term physiologic adrenocortical replacement therapy with hydrocortisone (or other equivalent glucocorticoids) with adjunctive mineralocorticoid repletion (typically with fludrocortisone). For other patients, the medical indication for their glucocorticoid use such as rheumatologic or pulmonary inflammatory states may prevent weaning off these medications, and the strategy in those cases becomes weaning to the lowest required dose of glucocorticoids to maintain therapeutic effect with concurrent management of any consequent associated metabolic and clinical effects of the long term persistent HCM.

The general principles of proper management of HCM are to reverse the clinical and metabolic consequences of HCM by bringing endogenous cortisol production back to normal, removing any neoplastic source of the cortisol excess state, avoiding permanent dependence on medications and avoiding long term secondary hormone deficiency. These goals are not always all attainable in individual patients for various unique patient-specific reasons.

In patients where there are delays in making a definitive diagnosis of the underlying etiology of HCM modulation of the HCM, and its complications (such as management of hyperglycemia, diabetes, hypertension, osteoporosis, hypercoagulopathy, etc.) may have to take center stage until achieving definitive diagnosis to enable more permanent and curative treatment. This approach is central to the prevention and reduction of the comorbidities and complications associated with HCM.

Medical therapy strategies: While surgical treatment strategies offer the best potential for permanent metabolic resolution and cure many times, this is either delayed or unsuccessful in achieving cure. Among the interventional strategies to include here are the glucocorticoid (and progesterone) receptor antagonist mifepristone (RU-486) and adrenal synthetic enzymes inhibitors like ketoconazole, metyrapone, and mitotane, which is generally restricted for use in adrenocortical carcinoma because of its significant toxicity profile.

Further studies are ongoing for the potential utility of other medications in the management of resistant HCM, including fluconazole, levoketoconazole, osilodrostat, and the novel glucocorticoid receptor modulators; CORT-108297 and CORT-125134.

For pituitary adenomas causing HCM (Cushing disease), the vast majority (approximately 60 to 70%) are local microadenomas, but close to 30% may be locally invasive, and 0.2 to 0.2% are due to carcinomas that may be associated with CNS and/or systemic metastases. In such patients, surgical treatment is rarely curative, and the prognosis is often poor with the need for consideration of systemic adjunctive chemotherapy.

In some scenarios where all other efforts ate achieving control of the HCM fails, bilateral adrenalectomy with subsequent lifelong glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid repletion therapy may be the last management option to offer. Subsequent follow up of such patients to avoid the development of Nelson syndrome is important.

The management of patients with EcCS depends on the localization of the etiologic lesion(s). Surgical resection again offers the best option for optimal therapy and potential cure. Concomitant medical therapy, as detailed above to control the HCM, is often required until the etiologic lesion is identified and may be required thereafter if curative surgical resection is not feasible.

For patients with adrenal based HCM due to identified unilateral adrenal adenomas, unilateral adrenalectomy is the best strategy for a cure, and the laparoscopic approach is the preferred management method as long as the adenoma is less than 6 cm in diameter. The role and place of adrenocortical sparing surgery in this setting is still in evolution and is not the standard of care at this time.

While HCM is typically associated with subfertility/infertility, the uncommon scenario of HCM in pregnancy occasionally arises. Medical therapy in such settings is often not feasible because of the potential teratogenic effects of most of the available medical treatment options. Metyrapone is the best medical adjunctive treatment option in this setting, but ideally, surgical intervention generally best timed for the second trimester of pregnancy is the preferred therapeutic intervention strategy.