In-vivo and in-vitro methods are useful in diagnostic evaluation, in addition to history and physical examination. Skin tests are quick to perform and considered relatively safe.

**In-vivo test**

In-vivo tests are most common for the diagnosis of CU.  Clinical supervision with the provision to handle an impending anaphylactic shock is necessary. Both ICU and NICU reactions occur within 15 to 20 minutes or can be delayed. If testing on intact skin is negative, then previously affected skin sites are used. Positive test results require careful correlation with clinical symptoms. Medications like antihistamines, NSAIDs, and exposure to ultra-violet light can cause false-negative results. The patient should be off antihistamines for 48 hours before testing. See figure 1 for the diagnostic algorithm to test for immediate contact reactions.

- **Prick test:**It is considered the test of choice for the diagnosis of ICU. The inner aspect of the forearm is the preferred site, and multiple allergens can undergo testing simultaneously, using positive control with histamine and negative control with normal saline with results interpreted in 30 minutes. False-positive results occur due to a positive reaction from one test site spreading to the neighboring site or irritant reaction. PCD is diagnosable with the prick test. If skin prick tests and serum allergen-specific IgE tests are negative, a provocation or direct challenge test may be needed.

- **Open test/ skin provocation test:**The open test is used for the diagnosis of NICU. The test consists of gently rubbing 0.1ml of the test substance over a 3 cm x 3 cm area of intact skin on the volar aspect of the forearm. The site requires an examination at 20, 40, and 60 minutes. The best vehicle for testing the agents is an alcohol-water or alcohol propylene glycol mixture.

- **Use test:**The test agent in the same vehicle of delivery is used to observe for the reaction. The serial incremental dosing of the agent is. The usual sites of skin testing are the upper back, flexor aspect of the upper arm, and forearm.

- **Chamber/ patch test:**The test substance is applied to small aluminum containers for 15 minutes and attached to the skin via porous tape. The results are recorded at 20, 40, and 60 minutes for an immediate reaction. A delayed-type response gets assessed at 48 to 96 hours after patch application to the back. The sensitivity of this test is higher due to increased absorption by the skin. A smaller area of skin is used than the open test. A false-positive response called 'angry back' due to active dermatitis is noted in some. A patch test is not routinely recommended because many common allergens may cause a false positive response (ex. balsam of Peru, paraben, sorbic acid, formaldehyde, cinnamaldehyde, etc.).

- **Scratch test:**A deep dermal scratch with the test substance is performed using the blunt bottom of a lancet after the allergen is applied to the skin; this is useful for diagnosing CU to non-standard allergens.

- **Intradermal testing**: The test uncommon due to the risk of anaphylaxis. When testing with non-standardized substances, the test controls should be assessed on at least 20 people to rule out false-positive results.

- **Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) test:**The test is fast, reliable, and used to test the integrity of the skin barrier function. A wheal response occurs on the application of DMSO to the skin in susceptible individuals. A clinical grading is available to quantify the response (0-no reaction, 1-follicular wheal, 2-slight elevated solid wheal, 3- elevated solid, tense wheal).

**In-vitro test**

For the diagnosis of ICU, the presence of IgE-specific antibodies against the causative agent is used