# Continuing Education Activity

Oral melanoma is a very rare malignancy that progresses rapidly and proves to be particularly aggressive. The clinical aspect of oral melanoma is varied. Still, it usually presents as a black-brown patch, macule, or nodular lesion with different shades of grey, red, purple, or areas of depigmentation. This activity reviews the etiology, pathophysiology, epidemiology, history and physical evaluation, and diagnosis of oral melanoma, with its differential diagnosis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Review the current knowledge regarding the etiology and pathophysiology of oral melanoma.
- Describe the history and physical evaluation, and histopathology of oral melanoma.
- Outline the differential diagnosis of oral melanoma.
- Summarize the management options for oral melanoma.

# Introduction

Oral melanoma is a very rare malignancy that progresses rapidly and proves to be particularly aggressive. This lesion accounts for 0.2% to 8% of all melanomas

# Etiology

The etiology, risk factors, and pathogenesis of oral melanoma remain poorly understood. Unlike its skin counterpart, it is not related to sun exposure as the oral mucosa is protected from ultraviolet light.

# Epidemiology

Oral melanoma is a very rare and aggressive carcinoma that accounts for 0.2% to 8% of all melanomas

Oral melanoma prevalence increases with age.

# Pathophysiology

Melanoma develops from a malignant transformation of melanocytes. Even though the exact pathophysiology of mucosal melanomas is yet to be determined, some pathways have been identified.

**Mutations in c-KIT**

Recent data indicates that c-KIT (CD117) is overexpressed in many mucosal melanoma cases. This pathway is important and common in acral and mucosal melanoma, melanomas unrelated to sun exposure.

**Mutations in BRAF**

Bioinformatics Resources and Applications Facility (BRAF) protein mutations are uncommon in mucosal melanoma and found in less than 10% of cases. However, in cutaneous melanoma, BRAF mutations are found in up to 80% of cases. Dabrafenib and vemurafenib are used for patients exhibiting BRAF mutation-positive melanoma.

# Histopathology

The anatomy of the mouth differs from the skin. Due to the lack of histological landmarks analogous to the papillary, reticular dermis, and muscle bundles, a pathological leveling system, and description cannot be appropriately applied for mucosal melanomas. Therefore, Clark’s levels, commonly used in cutaneous melanoma, cannot be implemented. Many melanomas in the mouth have a histologic similarity with lentigo maligna melanoma in a radial growth phase.

Mucosal melanomas can show three principal patterns. An in situ melanoma is in the epithelium and does not cross the epithelial-connective tissue interface.

The characteristic histopathological features of mucosal melanomas include atypical melanocytes (hyperchromatism and nuclear pleomorphism) in the epithelium and connective tissue junction. This, combined with positive S-100 and HMB-45 markers, is confirmatory of mucosal melanoma.

Approximately 15% of cases of oral melanoma are in situ mucosal lesions, 30% of cases are invasive lesions, and 55% of cases have a combined pattern of invasive with in situ components. Most advanced lesions have a combination pattern of invasive melanoma with an in situ component.

**Immunohistochemistry**

Although not specific, S-100 and HMB-45 are helpful markers that are positive in almost all oral melanomas (94%).

# History and Physical

Oral melanomas show an aggressive nature and worse prognosis than cutaneous melanoma. Almost a third of patients already have signs of lymph node metastasis at the moment of diagnosis,

Primary oral melanomas have a strong preference for the maxilla, mainly developing in the hard palate, gingiva, or alveolar ridge.****Secondary oral melanomas (even rarer than primary tumors) commonly occur in the tongue.

The clinical aspect of oral melanomas is indeed diverse. They can present as macules, patches, or nodules, showing various colors: brown, black, grey, red, or purple shades and even depigmentation.

The most typical presentation comprises three particular features: a) a brown-black pigmented plaque that is flat or slightly raised, b) a light brown macular feature, and c) a central area of nodular aspect.

Amelanotic melanomas are not uncommon, accounting for around a third of oral melanomas.

# Evaluation

Early diagnosis is essential since oral melanomas show a very aggressive evolution with a poor prognosis. However, there are still no criteria to aid the diagnosis in the oral cavity. Clinical examination can be supported by dermoscopy, but the complex oral mucosa anatomy and irregular surface represent a technical limitation.

**Dermoscopy**

The most common dermoscopic features include diffuse and irregular pigmentation with pseudo-network, regression structures, and a blue-white veil.

# Treatment / Management

Surgery is the mainstay of treatment in oral malignant melanoma.

Even though melanoma is classically non-radiosensitive,

Chemotherapy with platinum analog, nitrosoureas, dacarbazine, and immunotherapy with IL-2 have shown low response.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of oral melanoma is extensive; it needs to be differentiated from focal and diffuse oral pigmentations. Amalgam tattoos most commonly mimic oral melanomas, and dermoscopy may aid in differentiating them.

The following are included in the differential diagnosis of an oral melanoma:

**Focal Oral Pigmentations**

- Amalgam tattoo (exogenous pigment)

- Melanoacanthoma

- Melanotic macules

- Melanocytic nevi

**Diffuse Oral Pigmentations**

- Physiological/racial pigmentations

- Smoker’s melanosis

- Drug-induced hyperpigmentation

- Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation

**Systemic Diseases**

- Peutz–Jeghers syndrome

- Laugier–Hunzikerdisease

- Leopard syndrome

- Carney complex syndrome

- McCune-Albright syndrome

- Adrenal gland diseases

# Staging

**Tumor, T**

There is no T1 or T2 in mucosal melanoma.

- T3: Tumors limited to the mucosa and immediately underlying soft tissue, regardless of thickness or greatest dimension; for example, polypoid nasal disease, pigmented or non-pigmented lesions of the oral cavity, pharynx, or larynx

- T4: Moderately advanced or very advanced

- T4a: Moderately advanced disease. Tumor involving deep soft tissue, cartilage, bone, or overlying skin

- T4b: Very advanced disease. Tumor involving the brain, dura, skull base, lower cranial nerves (IX, X, XI, XII), masticator space, carotid artery, prevertebral space, or mediastinal structures

**Lymph Nodes, N**

- NX: Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed

- N0: No regional lymph node metastases

- N1: Regional lymph node metastases present

**Distant Metastases, M**

- M0: No distance metastasis

- M1: Distant metastasis

# Prognosis

Patients with oral melanomas are often diagnosed at an advanced stage of the disease and have a very poor prognosis.

After complete surgical excision, relapse rates have been reported to be about 20%.

# Complications

The complications are related to the surgical excision of the melanoma, including loss of tissue, prolonged healing, grafting, and prothesis need. Also, xerostomia, candidiasis, and hypernasal speech are side effects of the surgery.

# Consultations

Depending on complications and distant metastases, consultations with otolaryngology (head and neck surgery), surgical oncology, oral and maxillofacial surgery, oral pathology, speech therapy, and other specialties are warranted.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Early recognition and treatment of oral mucosal melanomas significantly improve the prognosis. Preventive strategies are unknown, but some experts suggest educating patients on regular oral self-examination to help identify early suspicious pigmented or non-pigmented lesions.

An appropriate self-examination requires a mouth mirror, standard mirror, and good lightning. Patients should also be instructed to grab their tongue with the help of gauze for a better view of the oral tissues.

Due to the high risk of recurrence, patients with a history of oral melanoma require lifelong follow-up.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Primary mucosal melanomas are aggressive tumors that are exceedingly rare but rapidly lethal. This disease is particularly hard to treat because it is usually discovered at an advanced stage. Dentists have a unique opportunity to diagnose this lesion promptly and improve the patient’s prognosis. Other healthcare professionals, including dermatologists and general practitioners, should add an oral examination to their regular appointments and be familiar with the aspect of this carcinoma. Asymptomatic irregular melanotic lesions should raise concern and be further investigated,

Patients need should be instructed to implement self-examinations for early detection. Trained primary care nurses can educate the patient in this regard. They also need to inform the patient on what constitutes a high-risk lesion and communicate these findings to the clinician as soon as they arise. Despite the low incidence of oral melanoma, a collaborative interprofessional team can help reduce morbidity and mortality associated with it. [Level 5]