**Trichiasis**

Trauma and inflammation distort the tissue around the lash root, causing the lash to grow in an abnormal direction, in this case inwards towards the eye. The eyelid position is normal although some of the cicatrizing diseases may cause an inward turn of the eyelid margin before going on to frank cicatricial entropion.

**Distichiasis**

Metaplasia of the Meibomian glands results in the formation of lashes instead of the sebum-producing glands and may be seen congenitally or following eyelid inflammation.

**Madarosis**

Trauma, inflammation or ischemia by malignancy are involved in madarosis. The exact mechanism in conditions such as hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism are not known.

**Trichomegaly**

When caused by drugs such as latanoprost and bimatoprost, the anagen phase of the lash cycle is prolonged, resulting in longer, thicker lashes. The same mechanism may be involved when trichomegaly is seen with other drugs.

**Cilia incarnata internum and externum**

In both these conditions, it is thought that the natural growth path of a lash is impeded as the condition is almost always seen affecting a solitary lash. With the resistance, the may take the path of least resistance and grow outwards under the skin (externum) or through the tarsal plate and tarsal conjunctiva (internum).

**Eyelash Ptosis**

An abnormality in any of the structures that are responsible for the proper orientation of the lash follicle and shaft can result in eyelash ptosis. These structures are the pre-tarsal orbicularis oculi, Riolan’s muscle (which is the inferior part of the orbicularis oculi), the tarsal plate and the elastin. All of these are affected in conditions like the floppy eyelid syndrome and facial paralysis, giving rise to lash ptosis.

**Poliosis**

Abnormalities of hair melanin in the follicles or hair melanocytes can cause poliosis.

**Demodex**

An increase in the number of the normal parasites Demodex folliculorum and Demodex brevis occurs with age so that by the age of 70 years, almost everyone will have these parasites. As their numbers increase, they cause increased symptoms of irritation, itching, and discomfort.