The navicular bone possesses a dual blood supply. A branch of dorsalis pedis artery supplies the dorsal aspect of the bone, while the plantar blood supply arises from the medial plantar branch of the posterior tibial artery. Both the dorsal and plantar blood supplies enter the navicular and branch to supply the medial and lateral thirds of the bone. This creates an avascular zone in the central one-third of the bone. Vascular foramina help to supply this avascular area and are found on the dorsal, plantar, medial, and lateral surfaces of the navicular bone. However, in a study of 100 cadaveric navicular bones, 97% of vascular foramina were smaller than 1 millimeter in adults. In theory, any compression of these small vascular foramina could result in decreased blood flow and put the navicular bone at risk for avascular necrosis.

Kohler disease is thought to be due to an abnormal strain on the navicular. In children, the navicular bone is the last of the tarsal bones to ossify. In girls, it ossifies between 18 to 24 months and in boys 30 to 36 months old. This theory points out that given the navicular bone’s slow ossification, it is weaker than the other tarsal bones. As the child grows and becomes heavier, the navicular can be compressed between the already ossified talus and cuneiform bones. The compression of the non-ossified navicular results in the squeezing of the perforating vessels in the central spongy bone, which could lead to ischemia and later avascular necrosis.