Airborne precautions should be used for the following infections and conditions for the minimum duration listed:

- Aspergillosis if there is “massive soft tissue infection with copious drainage and repeated irrigations required.”

- Herpes zoster that is disseminated or in immunocompromised patients (duration of illness).

- Measles (duration of 4 days after onset of rash in an immunocompetent host; duration of illness in immunocompromised).

- Monkeypox (duration is until the diagnosis is confirmed and smallpox has been excluded).

- Severe acute respiratory syndrome (duration of illness plus 10 days after a fever and respiratory symptoms have resolved or improved).

- Smallpox (duration of illness).

- Tuberculosis: pulmonary or laryngeal (duration until improving clinically on effective therapy with three negative sputum smears on consecutive days).

- Tuberculosis: extrapulmonary, draining lesions (duration until clinically improving and drainage has stopped or consecutively three negative cultures).

- Varicella Zoster (duration until the lesions crust and dry).

Droplet precautions should be used for the following infections and conditions for the duration listed:

- Adenovirus: pneumonia (duration of illness).

- Diphtheria: pharyngeal (duration is until completion and antibiotics and 2 negative cultures 24 hours apart).

- Haemophilus influenzae type b: epiglottitis or meningitis (duration is until 24 hours after initiating effective therapy).

- Influenza, pandemic

- Neisseria meningitidis: meningitis, sepsis, or pneumonia (duration is until 24 hours after initiating effective therapy).

- Mumps (duration is 5 days after onset).

- Mycoplasma pneumonia (duration of illness).

- Parvovirus B19 (duration is 7 days in acute disease, duration of hospitalization in chronic disease of an immunocompromised host).

- Pertussis (duration is 5 days).

- Yersinia pestis: pneumonic plague (duration is 48 hours).

- Group A Streptococcus: pneumonia, pharyngitis, scarlet fever, serious invasive disease (duration is until 24 hours after initiating effective therapy).

- Rhinovirus (duration of illness).

- Rubella (duration is until 7 days after rash onset).

- Severe acute respiratory syndrome (duration of illness plus 10 days after any fever and respiratory symptoms have resolved or improved).

- Ebola, Marburg, Crimean-Congo, and Lassa fever viruses: viral hemorrhagic fevers (duration of illness).

Contact precautions should be used for the following infections and conditions for the duration listed:

- Abscess, major draining (duration of illness, until the cessation of drainage).

- Adenovirus: pneumonia (duration of illness).

- Burkholderia cepacia in cystic fibrosis patients.

- Bronchiolitis (duration of illness).

- Clostridium difficile (duration of illness).

- Congenital rubella (duration is until 1 year of age, or urine and nasopharyngeal cultures consistently negative after 3 months of age).

- Conjunctivitis, viral (duration of illness).

- Diphtheria: cutaneous (duration is until completion and antibiotics and 2 negative cultures 24 hours apart).

- Staphylococcal furunculosis (duration of illness).

- Rotavirus (duration of illness).

- Hepatitis A (duration is age-specific in incontinent patients: children < 3 years old is for the duration of hospitalization; 3 to 14 years old is 2 weeks after onset; > 14 years old is 1 week after onset).

- Herpes simplex: neonatal, disseminated, severe, or mucocutaneous (duration is until lesions dry and crust).

- Herpes zoster: disseminated (duration of illness).

- Human metapneumovirus (duration of illness).

- Impetigo (duration is until 24 hours after initiating effective therapy).

- Lice: head (duration is until 24 hours after initiating effective therapy).

- Monkeypox (duration is until lesions crust).

- Multidrug-resistant organisms infection or colonization (duration is evidence of ongoing or increased risk of transmission, or while there are wounds that cannot be covered).

- Parainfluenza virus (duration of illness).

- Poliomyelitis (duration of illness).

- Pressure ulcer, major infected (duration of illness).

- Respiratory syncytial virus: infants, young children, and immunocompromised adults (duration of illness).

- Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, Ritter’s disease (duration of illness).

- Scabies.

- Severe acute respiratory syndrome (duration of illness plus 10 days after any fever and respiratory symptoms have resolved or improved).

- Smallpox (duration of illness).

- Staphylococcus aureus skin infection, major (duration of illness).

- Group A streptococcus skin infection, major (duration is until 24 hours after initiating effective therapy).

- Tuberculosis: extrapulmonary, draining lesions (duration is until clinically improving and drainage has stopped or three consecutive negative cultures).

- Vaccinia (duration is until lesions crust and dry).

- Varicella-zoster (duration is until lesions crust and dry).

- Ebola, Marburg, Crimean-Congo, and Lassa fever viruses: viral hemorrhagic fevers (duration of illness).

- Wound infections, major (duration of illness).