The body has been designed to balance energy homeostasis for survival. To maintain energy homeostasis, various body organs interact with each other. Brain, gut, and adipocytes play an essential role in supporting the efficient and controlled supply of energy to the body and maintaining this energy homeostasis. The diaphony among these organs is responsible for maintaining body fat. The dysregulation in the communication of these brain, gut, and adipocytes, can lead to the accumulation of excess body weight relative to height. If the body weight leads to a BMI of 30kg/m^2 or above, a person is called obese. This article provides an overview of the brain, gut, and adipocyte interaction and imbalance or miscommunication between these organs. Understanding this interaction will help the clinician to diagnose and counsel patients on controlling their diet and prescribing appropriate treatment measures to patients.

**Role of brain in energy homeostasis:**

The brain plays a pivotal role in maintaining energy homeostasis. To ensure energy balance, the brain adjusts the behavior of the body based on continuous monitoring of systemic metabolic state. If the body is deficient in energy, the brain sends signals to alter food intake as well as adjusts physiological functions such as adiposity, thermogenesis, and hepatic glucose production. Arcuate nucleus and ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) in forebrain and nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS)-dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV) complex in the hindbrain, are responsible for metabolic feedback from the gastrointestinal tract and adipose tissues. These brain areas express receptors for gut hormones and adipokines.

The primary center in the brain which is responsible for controlling appetite is the hypothalamus. Feeding centers are located in the lateral hypothalamus, whereas satiety centers in the ventromedial hypothalamus. Hypothalamus monitors appetite and metabolism by detecting circulation hormones from the gut and adipose tissue. These hormones interact with hypothalamic nuclei through circumventricular organs (CVO), which lack blood-brain barriers.

The brain stem also participates in the regulation of appetite centers. With gut distension, gut hormones and chemical stimuli are produced and stimulate the vagal nerve. The vagus nerve transmits information to the brain stem.

The central nervous system produces orexigenic (appetite-stimulating) and anorectic (appetite suppressing) neuropeptide. Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is an orexigenic neuropeptide, and Proopiomelanocortin (POMC), cocaine, and amphetamine-regulated transcripts  (CART) are anorectic neuropeptides.

In the nervous system, NPY is the most abundant peptide. It causes increased food intake, preferably carbohydrate-rich food, and reduce energy expenditure and thermogenesis. NPY expression increase with fasting and decrease with food consumption.

POMC converts to alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH), which stimulates melanocortin receptors, MC3R, and MC4R. MC3R and MC4R are called neural melanocortin receptors that control satiety and energy expenditure. MC4R mutation has been studied to be associated with polygenic obesity.

The role of the hypothalamus in controlling appetite is not fully understood. Some scientist believes that cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, and limbic system are reward pathway that may be responsible for over-riding the weight regulation system, causing obesity and overweight.

**Role of the gut in energy homeostasis:**

The gut is responsible for energy intake. It communicates with the brain through hormonal and neural pathways. With food consumption, the gut secretes several peptides of which peptide YY (PYY), cholecystokinin (CCK), and glucagon-like peptides-1(GLP-1) provide feedback to the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) via stimulating the vagal nerve. The arcuate nucleus in the forebrain and nucleus tractus solitarius of the hindbrain are two areas of the brain which are targeted by gut hormones. These brain areas relay the information to the paraventricular nucleus (PVH) of the hypothalamus and suprachiasmatic nuclei, which are critical regulatory areas of metabolic homeostasis. Paraventricular nucleus modulates autonomic output, and neuroendocrine hormones and supraventricular nuclei balance sympathetic and parasympathetic output to synchronize behavior and physiology of the whole body.

Autonomic control of the gut is also responsible for tuning energy production and expenditure. The parasympathetic outflow is the connection between hypothalamic insulin and liver glucose production, as well as brain glucose and circulating triglyceride. Sympathetic nervous system activation inhibits the sensitivity of peripheral insulin, stimulates glucose production via glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. Neuroendocrine hormones (e.g., epinephrine, glucocorticosteroids, growth hormones, and thyroid hormones), which hinders insulin action on the liver, are also influenced by feedback from gut hormones to hypothalamic autonomic control.

The gut interacts with adipose tissue via hormones and gastrointestinal related factors, e.g., bile acids. Anorexigenic gut hormones activate brown adipose tissue, whereas orexigenic hormones prevent brown adipose tissue activity. Change in gut hormones with food intake affects brown adipose tissue.

**Role of the adipose tissue in energy homeostasis:**

Adipose tissues balance energy and regulate long term body weight. They communicate with the brain through adipokine, which includes leptin, adiponectin, apelin, and resistin and neuronal inputs. Brown adipose tissue is involved in energy balance.

Leptin is the hormone that is secreted by adipocytes. Leptin secretion from adipocyte is in proportion to body fat and used as sensing signals for energy production and consumption by CNS. Leptin suppresses food intake. In the absence of leptin or leptin deficiency or its resistance, the hypothalamus perceives decrease body fat stores and stimulates appetite centers, which cause hyperphagia and hyperglycemia. Therefore, the lack of leptin or defective leptin receptors can lead to obesity.

Gut interacts with adipocytes via the microbiota-fat-signaling axis. Microbes in the gut participate in adipogenesis. Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) produced by gut microbiota inhibits lipolysis and promotes differentiation of adipocytes. Lipopolysaccharides (LPS), which are the component of gut microbiota, cause inflammation, and immune-cell infiltration in adipose tissue. Disruption of gut microbiota accelerates adipogenesis leading to obesity.

The sympathetic nervous system stimulates lipolysis and mobilizes lipids from white adipose tissues by releasing epinephrine. These sympathetic neurons become stimulated by higher autonomic centers in the PVH or the lower centers in the hindbrain or the spinal cord.