There is no specific test for the diagnosis of tarsal tunnel syndrome, and diagnosis is made with a detailed history and clinical examination.

The predominant complaint is pain directly over the tarsal tunnel that radiates to the arch and plantar foot. Patients with tarsal tunnel syndrome will frequently report a sharp shooting pain in the foot, numbness on the plantar surface, radiation of pain and paresthesias along the distribution of the posterior tibial nerve, pain with extremes of dorsiflexion and eversion, and a tingling or burning sensation. These symptoms may localize to the medial ankle or plantar surface of the foot or be vaguer, making diagnosis difficult. Their symptoms will vary depending on whether the entire posterior tibial nerve is compressed or if it is the lateral or medial plantar branches. The symptoms may worsen at night, with walking or standing, or after physical activity, and typically get better with rest. Dysesthesias may worsen at night, disturbing sleep. The patient may note weakness in the muscles of the foot.

On exam, the provider may observe pes planus, pronated foot, or talipes equinovarus. In chronic cases, atrophy, weakness of the intrinsic foot muscles, and contractures of the toes may be appreciated. They are typically tender on deep palpation of the tarsal tunnel. The gait should be analyzed for abnormalities including excessive pronation or supination, toe eversion, excessive foot inversion or eversion, and antalgic gait.

Light touch and two-point discrimination should be tested. The patient may have diminished plantar sensation in the distribution of either the medial or lateral plantar nerve. Muscle strength and foot range of motion should be assessed. Strength deficits are typically a late finding in tarsal tunnel syndrome.

The Tinel test involves lightly tapping over the tarsal tunnel repeatedly. Pain or tingling in the distribution of the nerve is a positive test. Sensitivity is low at 25% to 75%; specificity is 70% to 90%. The dorsiflexion-eversion test involves passively dorsiflexing and everting the ankle to end range of motion and holding for 10 seconds. Reproduction of symptoms is a positive sign due to compression of the posterior tibial nerve in this position. This test is positive in 82% of patients with tarsal tunnel syndrome.

**Tarsal Tunnel Syndrome Severity Rating Scale**

A score of 10 indicates a normal foot and 0 indicates the most symptomatic foot.

- Scoring for each symptom:

- 2 points for the absence of features
- 1 point for some features
- 0 points for definite features

- The five symptoms:

- Spontaneous pain or pain with movement,
- Burning pain
- Tinel sign
- Sensory disturbance
- Muscle atrophy or weakness