Management options range from expectant therapy to invasive surgical intervention; the choice depends on a variety of factors including the patient's clinical picture and the size of the cyst (ultrasound-guided staging system is the method used in liver cysts).

**Treatment of Hepatic Cysts**(Strength of recommendations**B**, quality of evidence**III**)

- "Watch and wait" approach can be an option in cases in which the cysts are uncomplicated (stages CE4 and CE5) given that long-term follow up with ultrasonography can be ensured.

- Medical treatment with benzimidazoles (BMZ) is indicated for CE1 and CE3a cysts smaller than 5cm in the liver and lung, patients with cysts in two or more organs, and inoperable patients. BMZs are also used following surgery or percutaneous procedures to prevent recurrence. Albendazole (ABZ) is currently the drug of choice at a dose of 10to 15 mg/kg/day. Mebendazole (MBZ) at a dose of 40 to 50 mg/kg/day is another therapeutic option. Medical treatment with BMZ is contraindicated in cysts vulnerable to rupture and in early pregnancy.

- Surgery is the modality of choice for complicated cysts. It is necessary for the removal of large CE2-CE3b cysts, superficial cysts that may rupture with trauma or spontaneously, infected cysts, cysts with biliary tree communication, and cysts exerting pressure on adjacent organs.

- PAIR (puncture, aspiration, injection, re-aspiration) procedure is an ultrasound-guided, minimally invasive modality used in hepatic and other abdominal cysts. Indications include inoperable patients, relapsing cases after surgery, and failure to respond to medical treatment. It provides the best results in CE1, and CE3a cysts over 5cm and is used in combination with medical therapy (BMZ). It is contraindicated in for CE2, CE3b, CE4, and CE5 cysts. Physicians performing this procedure must be equipped to deal with the potential anaphylactic shock. Other percutaneous treatment can be used, but are usually reserved for CE2 and CE3b cysts.

Post-treatment monitoring using leukocyte count, aminotransferases, and ultrasound should be done every 3 to 6 months initially then once yearly once the patient is stable.