Injuries to the superior thoracic artery are rare. When these injuries occur, they often present in cases of penetrating neck/chest trauma. The subclavian/axillary arteries and their branches are only involved in approximately 3% of penetrating neck and chest trauma injuries due to protection from overlying structures. However, damage to these arteries is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Most patients will die before reaching the hospital, and those who survive will often have severely impaired the functioning of the affected limb due to brachial plexus injuries. 14% of these arterial injuries have a concomitant first rib or clavicular injuries.

Rarely, the superior thoracic artery can suffer damage during percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI). Uchikado et al. reported a unique case of injury to the superior thoracic during sheath insertion for stent placement. The patient tolerated the procedure well; however, they reported nausea and hypotension with no abnormal physical findings one-hour post PCI. The authors initially suspected vasovagal reflex, and the diagnosis of superior thoracic injury did not occur until after performing angiography.

In conclusion, clinicians should suspect superior thoracic artery injury in patients presenting with penetrating injuries and pleuritic chest pain. A high degree of suspicion is crucial as patients may present with tachycardia, tachypnea, and hypotension without evidence of external bleeding or hematoma. These patients may present with other pressing concerns, including pneumothorax. Although a chest radiograph is usually the first imaging modality used, a neck computed tomographic angiography (CTA) is the gold standard for diagnosing these injuries. A CTA with contrast showing a hematoma posterior to the clavicle suggests the involvement of this artery.