Lesions around the vertebral L2 level can affect the conus medullaris and is known as conus medullaris syndrome. Symptoms include sudden onset severe back pain, perianal anesthesia, symmetric lower extremity motor weakness with hyperreflexia, and early onset bowel and bladder dysfunction.

Tethered cord syndrome is a condition caused by an abnormal filum terminale that prevents the conus medullaris from ascending and restricts the mobility of the spinal cord. As a result, the spinal cord gets abnormally stretched, with neurologic symptoms referable to the lower cord.

Intramedullary lesions of the conus medullaris are numerous. Neoplastic lesions include glial tumors such as ependymoma, astrocytoma, and glioblastoma multiforme; non-glial tumors include primitive neuroectodermal tumor and hemangioblastoma along with lymphoma, melanoma, and metastases. Non-neoplastic lesions include granulomas such as tuberculosis and sarcoidosis, parasitic infections such as cysticercosis and schistosomiasis, demyelination in multiple sclerosis, vascular lesions such as vascular malformations, cavernoma, and amyloid angiopathy and dysembryogenetic lesions such as lipoma, dermoid cyst, epidermoid cyst, and teratoma.

The incidence of intramedullary tumors in the conus is roughly 10%, with the most common being myxopapillary ependymoma (50%), followed by lipoma, hemangioblastoma, and astrocytoma (11.5% each). Patients present with symptoms such as lower extremity pain, lower back pain, sensory disturbance, bowel and bladder problems, motor weakness, and saddle anesthesia. Sacral nerve root compression can cause severe perineal pain. Conus tumors can cause sacral nerve root compression similar to sciatica or cauda equina syndrome due to degenerative disc disease. Urinary abnormalities are present in 91% of patients and include decreased urge to void, sphincter dyssynergia, and detrusor areflexia. Treatment of all tumors is primarily surgical, with complete resection achieved in roughly 81% of patients. The highest resection rate is 90% for ependymoma and hemangioblastoma, and it is 50 to 76% for astrocytomas.

The artery of Desproges Gotteron can get compressed by L5-S1 disc herniation and lead to conus medullaris syndrome. It is also frequently involved in arteriovenous fistulas, which can be treated by microsurgery or embolization.