As people age, the largest influence on the epigenome is the environment. Direct influencers such as diet can affect one's epigenome, as determined by the Dutch famine studies. in utero are particularly sensitive as the epigenetic profile of the fetus is forming and developing rapidly during this time. in utero epigenetic changes.

Perhaps the most studied clinical application of epigenetic mechanisms is cancer. One of the first reports of epigenetics involved in cancer reported hypomethylation of DNA in cancer cell genomes, which caused overexpression of genes within that cell.

Epigenetics is a promising field of research because of the potential to regulate gene expression without changing the DNA sequence, which may likely cause safety and ethical concerns if performed in humans. The most promising way to treat diseases through epigenetic regulation has been through pharmacology. Previous clinical trials for drugs formulated to block epigenetic modifications associated with cancers have proved successful. The FDA has approved a number of these drugs which target epigenetic regulators to treat various cancers including azacytidine and decitabine for myelodysplastic syndrome, panobinostat for multiple myeloma, and romidepsin for cutaneous T cell lymphoma.

In addition to cancers, many conditions associated with genomic imprinting are the result of malfunctioning epigenetic mechanisms. Epigenetic mechanisms can induce disease, but they are also necessary for normal cell function, specifically in imprinted genes where only one parental chromosome is expressed. For genomic imprinting to successfully occur, the other parental chromosome must be silenced, which occurs through DNA methylation. Noteworthy conditions associated with abnormalities in gene imprinting include Prader-Willi syndrome, Angelman syndrome, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, Russell-Silver syndrome, and Rubenstein-Taybi syndrome.