There are few absolute contraindications to performing nerve conduction studies (NCS) and electromyography (EMG) needle testing. Physicians sometimes defer important electrodiagnostic testing in patients with implanted cardiac pacemakers and defibrillators because of fear about potential negative effects on the device. Multiple studies have indicated that in pacemakers with bipolar sensing, there is no evidence of electromagnetic interference activity. In two studies that looked at unipolar pacemaker sensing and repetitive nerve stimulation studies, some evidence of interference activity was noted.

It is generally accepted that NCS does not routinely cause risk to modern bipolar implantable pacemakers. Nevertheless, it is recommended that stimulation directly over or near the device should be avoided. It is essential to follow device manufacturers’ guidelines and obtain the patient's cardiologist’s advice regarding implanted defibrillators and pacemakers with unipolar sensing. Performing the electrodiagnostic study after device deactivation and monitoring of patients via telemetry is also a possibility. NCS should be avoided in patients with external cardiac pacemakers as these wires could be more electrically sensitive. Stimulating over a central line should also be avoided as it could generate a stimulus to the heart.

Needle EMG should be avoided in those with severe bleeding disorders, but may still be considered in patients on anticoagulation with careful monitoring to ensure proper control of bleeding. Holding anticoagulant or antiplatelet medications is not routinely necessary. Clinicians should use caution when patients have low platelet counts or a high INR outside of the therapeutic range. Needles should never be inserted into areas of active soft tissue infection.