# Continuing Education Activity

Duodenal perforations can either be free or contained. Free perforation arises when bowel contents leak freely into the abdominal cavity and causing diffuse peritonitis. Contained perforation occurs when the ulcer creates a full-thickness hole, but free leakage is prevented by contiguous organs such as the pancreas wall off the area. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of duodenal perforation and explains the healthcare team's role in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the presentation of duodenal perforation.
- Describe the risk factors for developing duodenal perforation.
- Summarize the treatment for duodenal perforation.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve patient outcomes affected by duodenal perforation.

# Introduction

Anatomically the duodenum is part of the gastrointestinal tract between the stomach and small intestine. It includes four segments:

- The proximal segment is known as a duodenal bulb, which connects to the liver via hepatoduodenal ligament containing the hepatic artery, the portal vein, and the common bile duct.

- The second or descending segment is surrounding the pancreatic head.

- The third segment is the horizontal part. The superior mesenteric vessels are ventral to this segment.

- The fourth segment follows the jejunum.

Duodenal perforation is a rare but lethal condition.

# Etiology

**Underlying Duodenal Pathology**

- Peptic ulcer disease (PUD): H. pylori infection and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are two major causes for PUD and subsequently duodenal perforation.
- Smoking, physiological stress, previous history of PUD, and corticosteroids are other risk factors for a perforated peptic ulcer (PPU).
- Alcohol consumption is known to cause to increase gastrin secretion and damage gastric mucosa. However, studies did not show that alcohol can cause PUD.

- Duodenal diverticula

- Infectious disease (TB, rotavirus, norovirus, Ascaris lumbricoides)

- Autoimmune conditions, including scleroderma, Crohn disease, and abdominal polyarteritis nodosa.

- Duodenal ischemia

- Impacted gallstones in the duodenum

- Chemotherapy

- Tumors

**Iatrogenic:**Due to the widespread use of endoscopic procedures, it is becoming more common.

- Endoscopic perforations: It includes diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. However, the incidence of perforation is higher in therapeutic procedures.

- Operative injury: Surgical instruments can cause duodenal perforation. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy can perforate the duodenum (0.015%) during thermal burns by electrocautery or blunt or sharp dissection.

**Trauma:**Isolated duodenal injuries are uncommon and usually occur with other organ injuries.

**Foreign bodies:**Thin and sharp foreign bodies correlations with higher perforation risk.

**Spontaneous perforations:**It occurs in neonates with unknown underlying causes.

# Epidemiology

Although the incidence of PUD has decreased in recent years, it is still the prominent cause of duodenal perforation.Helicobacter pylori and the use of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). However, the perforation of peptic ulcers is still concerning. The aging population, overuse of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), NSAIDs interaction with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and steroids are possible reasons which can explain the high incidence of perforation.H. pylori prevalence ranges are from 50% to 80% in patients with perforated duodenal ulcers.

Post-endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)  duodenal perforations reported with rate ranges from 0.09% to 1.67%.

- Less than 2% of traumatic abdominal injuries involve the duodenum.

- Less than 1% of ingested foreign bodies can cause gastrointestinal perforations.

# Pathophysiology

**Underlying Duodenal Pathology**

The leading causes of perforated peptic ulcers remain NSAIDs use and H. pylori.H. pylori infection is another contributory factor for duodenal ulcers. Possibly, H. pylori, by inducing gastric metaplasia, stimulating Immune response and gastric acid secretion, and reduce mucosal defense, can cause duodenal injury and subsequently duodenal perforation.

**Iatrogenic**

The Stapfer classification categorizes post-ERCP duodenal perforations in four types. The endoscope itself causes type I perforations (lateral or medial duodenal wall perforations). Type II perforations or peri-Vaterian injuries occur during sphincterotomy. Type III perforations or distal bile duct injuries caused by basket or wire instrumentation and type IV perforations diagnosed by retroperitoneal air on imaging and usually are asymptomatic.

# History and Physical

If possible, to obtain a thorough history, clinicians should query patients regarding perforated peptic ulcer risk factors. However, if the PPU occurred, the patient's history does not change the treatment plan.

Three phases define the clinical manifestations of PPU. Within two hours of onset (initial phase), tachycardia, epigastric pain, and cold extremities are characteristic. Within 2 to 12 hours (second phase), pain becomes generalized and increases with movement. Fluid moving along the right paracolic gutter can lead to typical signs such as right lower quadrant tenderness and abdominal rigidity. More than 12 hours (third phase) can manifest as abdominal distension, fever, and hypotension.

Patients with retroperitoneal perforation present more indolently without peritoneal signs.

# Evaluation

**Laboratory Tests**

Usually used to rule out differential diagnoses.

- Increased serum amylase less than four times than normal levels can be associated with PPU.

- Serum gastrin levels are useful in patients with a history of recurrent ulcers to establish the diagnosis of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.

- Leukocytosis and high C-reactive protein level indicate existing of inflammation or infection.

- Blood cultures are necessary before starting antibiotics.

- An arterial blood gas measures the level of metabolic compromise in septic patients.

**Radiography**

In acute upper abdominal pain, an urgent upright chest radiograph (CXR) is a basic essential test for duodenal perforation. Upright CXR shows free air below the diaphragm in 75% of patients. However, it can be normal, especially in patients who present early after symptoms initiation.

A non-contrast CT scan is suitable to see free air just below the anterior abdominal wall in patients with acute kidney injury. The diagnostic accuracy of PPU detection by CT scan is about 98%.

CT features of perforation include duodenal wall thickening, extravasated oral contrast, the presence of extraluminal air, fat stranding, and periduodenal fluid collection.

# Treatment / Management

Management of duodenal perforations depends on the type of perforation. Two kinds of perforation are defined as contained or non-contained perforation. Non-contained perforation divide into two subgroups as minor or major perforation.

- Contained perforations are when free leakage is prevented by contiguous organs such as the pancreas wall off the area. It is feasible to do conservative management in this type of perforation. Before starting conservative management, it is essential to evaluate patients by diatrizoate study to confirm the absence of leakage. Conservative management consists of intravenous fluid therapy, nil per os (NPO), intravenous proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), broad-spectrum antibiotics, H. pylori eradication, and repeated clinical assessment.

- Non-contained perforations are defined as when bowel contents leak freely into the abdominal cavity. Minor and major perforations are two subtypes of this group.
- Minor non-contained perforations: Endoscopic or simple surgical repair are two primary management strategies for this group. Endoscopic management includes through-the-scope clips (TTSC), over-the-scope clips (OTSC), detachable snare loops with clips, and self-expandable metal stents (SEMS).
- Major non-contained perforations: These types of perforations usually need reconstructive surgery, which includes duodenoduodenostomy(first option), Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy(second option), and Billroth II operation.

# Differential Diagnosis

Before imaging, the differential diagnosis for epigastric abdominal pain remains large and includes:

- Abdominal aortic aneurysm

- Acute coronary syndrome

- Aortic dissection

- Pancreatitis

- Appendicitis

- Boerhaave syndrome

- Cholecystitis

- Cholelithiasis

- Diverticulitis

- Duodenitis

- Esophagitis

- Gastroesophageal reflux disease

- Foreign body ingestion

- Gastritis

- Hepatitis

- Ventral hernia

- Mesenteric ischemia

- Small bowel obstruction

- Volvulus

- Pneumonia

# Prognosis

Mortality rate in perforation peptic ulcer (PPU) patients reported ranging from 1.3% to 20%.

Significant risk factors that increase the mortality rate are co-morbidities, resection surgery, presence of shock at admission, female, elderly patients, metabolic acidosis, a delayed presentation of more than 24 hours, acute renal failure, hypoalbuminemia, smokers, and being underweight.

# Complications

Sepsis is common and accounts for 40% to 50% of fatalities in patients with PPU. On arrival in the operating room, about 30% to 35% of patients with PPU have sepsis. More than 25% of the patients Within the first month of surgery develop septic shock, which causes a mortality rate of 50% to 60%.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

A non-randomized study reported that using the management protocol from admission to 3 days after laparoscopic repair reduced the 30-day mortality rate from 27% to 17%. Management protocol in this study included minimizing surgical delay, as well as preventing, detecting, and treating sepsis.H. pylori showed a significant effect in reducing recurrent ulcer incidence at eight weeks and one year for post-surgical patients.

# Consultations

Following a diagnosis of duodenal perforation, consult with a gastroenterologist and gastrointestinal surgeon.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients should be aware of the possible risk factors for duodenal perforation and try to avoid them. Peptic ulcers are still the leading cause, so prevention of duodenal perforation is the same as peptic ulcer disease.

- Patients need to avoid using NSAIDs

- If patients need to take NSAIDs for any reason, they should try to take them at a low dose and for the shortest duration.

- Consider prophylaxis (such as PPI or H2 blockers) if patients require NSAIDs for a long time.

- Patients with peptic ulcer disease should follow gastroenterologist recommendations.

- Quit smoking

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

PUD is treatable with medications. However, PUD may perforate and lead to high mortality risk. The classic triad for PPU is the sudden onset of abdominal pain, abdominal rigidity, and tachycardia. Physicians should be aware that a normal upright chest X-ray does not rule out duodenal perforation. Early diagnosis, quick resuscitation, and urgent surgical intervention are crucial to improving outcomes. Experienced teams should direct conservative management. The gold standard treatment is still exploratory laparotomy and omental patch repair. During the hospital stay, nurses have a vital role in the monitoring of the patients' vital signs and educate the patients and families.

Once the patients have been discharged, they should receive education from the medical care team regarding lifestyle modification, including quitting smoking and avoiding NSAIDs as much as possible. Patients with positive H. pylori should take medication to eradicate the infection; data shows doing this can decrease the mortality rate. Gastroenterology nurses should follow with patients, educate them, and update the team regarding the patient's condition. The pharmacist should discuss with patients the importance of medication compliance (such as PPI, H2 blocker, or H. pylori treatment) to decrease the mortality rate and to limit NSAID use. Only through an interprofessional team approach can clinicians reduce the mortality and morbidity of duodenal perforation. [Level 5]

Older age, shock, delayed surgery, definitive surgery, and ASA risk can lead to poor patient outcomes with PPU undergoing emergency surgery. Hence, improving overall outcomes requires proper resuscitation from shock, decreasing delay surgery grade, reserving definitive surgery for selected patients, and improving ASA score.