The eye is an incredibly complex organ; multiple components and intricate mechanisms must collaborate for the eye to function correctly. The Seidel test assesses for disruption of the cornea, sclera, or a combination of both.  The sclera is a fibrous, opaque, “white of the eye,” the structure that provides support and protection to the deep structures of the eye. Anteriorly at the limbus, the sclera is continuous with the cornea.

All five layers combined are approximately 550 microns or just over half a millimeter thick. The epithelium is about 5 to 7 cells thick that provides the eye with a smooth surface for the tears to form a film.  This film spreads across and keeps the eye moist, healthy, and allows for clear vision. The epithelium has a high turnover rate and is replaced entirely over about 7 days. The Bowman layer is the next layer; it is a dense fibrous sheet that protects the deeper layers. Once a scratch passes Bowman’s layer, the probability of scaring increases significantly. The following layer is the stromal layer that is about 90% of the cornea and is composed of a connective tissue called collagen fibrils. They are uniform in size and are stacked parallel to one another in bundles called lamellae. Their arrangement makes it so they are a transparent layer. The next layer is Descemet’s membrane, which is another extremely thin layer that separated the stroma from the endothelial layer. The final layer is the endothelium that is also one cell layer think and is in direct communication with the aqueous humor of the anterior chamber. The anterior chamber is located behind the cornea and in front of the Iris and pupil. Behind the iris and pupil lies the posterior chamber, which includes multiple structures out of the scope of this discussion.