**Glioma**

Glioma is the most common primary tumor of the central nervous system. The insula is prone to the formation of gliomas, including low- and high-grade astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas, as well as glioblastoma (GBM). The incidence of intracranial insular gliomas ranges from 10% to 25%, and demographic epidemiology follows that of all intracranial gliomas. Prognosis remains dismal, especially for high-grade tumors, with optimally treated GBMs observing median overall survival around 1 year.

Insular gliomas are classified by the aforementioned Berger-Sinai system, with "giant" status given to those involving all four zones. Neuro-functional and survival outcomes are dependent on a host of factors. Survival is associated with tumor characteristics such as pathologic grade, molecular genetics, resection rate, and utilization of adjuvant chemotherapy and patient characteristics such as age and functional status. Resection typically occurs by either the transsylvian or transcortical approaches.

Complications of insular glioma resection include motor and executive dysfunction. Temporary and permanent motor deficits occur at rates of 11% and 4%, respectively, while temporary and permanent aphasia occurs at rates of 11% and 2%, respectively.

**Arteriovenous Malformation**

Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are challenging to treat, and optimal therapy remains somewhat controversial depending on rupture status, location, and other factors. All AVMs can be classified by the Spetzler-Martin grading system (I-V) depending on the lesion's size, draining vein, and presence of regional eloquent cortex. Sylvian fissure AVMs near the insula represent a significant source of potential morbidity or mortality, especially for younger patients. Symptoms can present acutely with rupture or chronically due to mass effect. Sylvian AVMs can thus be further classified based on the location of their nidus by the Sugita system: medial, lateral, pure, and deep. The majority of Sylvian AVMs are either medial (40%) or lateral (40%). With improvements in radiosurgery technology and microsurgical techniques, the ability to manage Sylvian AVMs is becoming an increasingly interprofessional and successful venture.

**Stroke**

Insular stroke can occur due to hemorrhagic (i.e., vessel rupture) or ischemic (i.e., thrombotic, embolic, or iatrogenic) insult. The MCA is the most commonly affected cerebral artery in acute stroke and presents with a wide range of symptoms, and thus it may be difficult to localize insular involvement based on the clinical exam alone. Further, strokes involving only the insular cortex are abundantly rare, with only 49 reports noted in the literature. Nevertheless, insular-confined strokes manifest as dysfunction of its anatomical-functional properties, including somatomotor deficits, dysarthria, aphasia, vestibulocochlear dysfunction, gustatory change, and behavioral-psychiatric disturbance. In general, insular stroke should be suspected in patients with paresis, speech deficit, and dizziness, with more proximal MCA strokes manifesting with the signs and symptoms of other areas accordingly. Diagnosis and treatment follow that of MCA strokes.

**Seizure and Epilepsy**

Seizures arising from the aberrant and excessive neuronal activity may be provoked or unprovoked. Insular seizures may occur due to stroke or glioma but may also follow etiologically from genetic epileptogenic foci, metabolic derangements, or inflammation. With regard to insular epilepsy, manifestations are similar to that of temporal lobe epilepsy. Indeed, debate remains over the true epileptogenic origin of insular seizures (i.e., spread from temporal foci). This uncertainty is complicated by the deep location of the insula, making it difficult to observe seizure activity other than through invasive Phase II electroencephalography (EEG). There is some evidence of true insular epilpetogenic foci provided by video-EEG studies. Nevertheless, patients with insular seizures present with an ictal syndrome characterized by sensory and gustatory auras, dysautonomia, dysphagia, laryngeal constriction, aberrant movements (tonic-clonic or myoclonus), and/or vestibulopathy (i.e., nystagmus). Patients will tend to remain conscious of the event. Diagnosis and treatment follow that of other epileptic pathologies.