Along with systemic therapy and surgical procedures, radiation forms part of the backbone of definitive oncologic care. Radiation is conceptually considered a loco-regional approach to cancer management, in contrast to surgery (generally a local strategy focused on removing gross disease) and systemic therapy (typically designed to control metastatic spread).  The highest doses are delivered to gross disease, while more moderate doses are used for potential areas of spread near the primary tumor, as well as areas at risk for lymphatic spread regionally. Therefore, a thorough understanding of the anatomy of the affected region, as well as patterns of spread for particular histologies, is critical for the design of radiation fields.

Radiation therapy can also be utilized to palliate symptoms related to local tumor progression, such as pain, obstruction, bleeding, or compression. Short courses can be rapidly effective with low toxicity profiles and are therefore well-suited to the goals of hospice and palliative care, potentially improving quality of life even at the very end stages of illness.  Several benign conditions such as heterotopic ossification, trigeminal neuralgia, and keloids can also be treated with radiation.

As technology rapidly advances, more and more applications and strategies are being explored in radiation, allowing for increased precision and better tolerability. However, while technology has evolved drastically, the heart of this field has remained the same for over 100 years. Since the discovery of x-rays and their effect on cancer, the goal of radiation has been maximizing tumor control while minimizing toxicity, seeking both cure and comfort for the cancer patient.