Many formulations of GLP-1 agonists, all of which historically were injectable and administered subcutaneously due to poor oral bioavailability, can be prescribed in the United States. Lixisenatide and liraglutide dosing are once-daily, albiglutide, dulaglutide, semaglutide dosing is once weekly, and exenatide can be dosed either as a twice-daily or a once-weekly injection. Recently, the FDA approved an oral formulation of semaglutide. Researchers have suspended trials investigating taspoglutide as a novel GLP-1 analog due to gastrointestinal side effects and hypersensitivity reactions.

Summary of dosing frequency for some commonly prescribed GLP-1 receptor agonists:

- Dulaglutide - once weekly

- Albiglutide - once weekly

- Liraglutide - once daily

- Semaglutide - one weekly subcutaneously, daily orally

- Exenatide BID - twice daily

- Exenatide QW - once weekly

- Lixisenatide - once daily

- Tirzepatide  - once weekly

Depending on the drug prescribed, the medication may come as a single- or multi-dose pen, and patients may need a separate prescription for needles with various needle gauge requirements. Patients have shown improved satisfaction with once-weekly exenatide compared to a twice-daily regimen, and studies have demonstrated their preferences for narrow needles. However, concerns regarding compliance with a once-weekly, as opposed to a daily regimen, have also been raised. GLP-1 analogs, combined with long-acting insulin in a single injection, have also been introduced to the pharmaceutical market.