The main barriers of microbial infection are anatomical barriers in the form of the bony orbital rim, eyelids, intact conjunctival and corneal epithelium, mechanical barriers like tear film mucus layer and lacrimal system, and antimicrobial barriers like tear film constituents IgA, complement components, lactoferrin, lysozymes and conjunctiva associated lymphoid tissue (CALT). When these barriers are disrupted, it may result in bacterial keratitis.

Contact lens use is one of the major causes of bacterial keratitis. The various factors which cause bacterial keratitis are contact lens (CL) overnight wear, overwear, inadequate cleaning of contact lens, rinsing the contact lens in tap water, contamination, lack of CL hygiene, bandage contact lenses, CL sharing, swimming with contact lenses, CL solution contamination, and CL induced trauma.

Varied ocular surface diseases, either local or systemic, can also result in bacterial keratitis. The various local factors are dry eyes, corneal suture-related infection, abnormalities of eyelid anatomy and function, trichiasis, blepharitis, chronic dacryocystitis, ectropion, entropion conjunctivitis, lagophthalmos neurotrophic keratopathy, recurrent corneal erosions, epithelial defect, secondary bacterial keratitis after viral keratitis, bullous keratopathy.

The bacterial species causing keratitis are the following:

- Gram-positive cocci include Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, and Streptococcus pneumoniae

- Gram-positive bacilli include Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Corynebacterium xerosis

- Gram- negative bacilli includes Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter species

- Enterobacteriaceae species include Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Serratia, and Proteus mirabilis

- Gram-negative diplococci, namely Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Neisseria meningitidis

- Gram-negative diplobacillus include Moraxella lacunata

- Non-tuberculous mycobacterium includes Mycobacterium fortuitum and Mycobacterium chelonae.

- Gram-negative coccobacillus include Haemophilus influenza and Haemophilus aegyptius

- Gram-positive filamentous bacteria include Nocardia asteroids and Nocardia brasiliensis

- Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus is one of the most common bacterial species identified recently

The most common species causing bacterial keratitis include Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeuruginosa, and species of the Enterobacteriaceae family.

The bacterial species that can penetrate the intact corneal epithelium are Neisseria gonorrhoeae,
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Hemophilus aegyptius, and Listeria monocytogenes.