**Gait Analysis**

Human walking occurs in a specific pattern, including various stages, which is referred to as a 'gait cycle.' It mainly consists of two phases, i.e., the stance phase and the swing phase.

The dogma of forensic podiatry is to utilize the proper standardized methodology for scientific examination of every evidence. The gait pattern examination includes ACE-VR, which stands for analysis–comparison–evaluation–verification–report.

- **Gait analysis on the surface:**The analysis of gait pattern on the surface (consisting of a minimum of 3 to 4 consecutive footprints/footwear prints) is performed by considering various parameters including the dimensions, general shape of the prints, patterns in case if ridges are visible, margins of the prints, toe marks, etc. The measurements pertaining to step and stride length are taken into consideration, which may point out the nature of an individual's gait pattern, such as normal gait, running, etc., and associated abnormalities, if any. This analysis may also help approximate stature, sex, age, and the bodyweight of a suspect. A profile of the contributor of the prints may be established. A comparison between the perpetrator of the crime with that of the suspect is made by systematically analyzing and scoring the gait patterns.

- **Gait analysis from CCTV footage/video recording:**The emergence of CCTV cameras and video recording enabled devices (video cameras, mobile phones, dashboard cameras, surveillance cameras, traffic cameras, etc.) has given a fresh dimension to gait analysis. Currently, video recording and footages from CCTV are used to study the gait of the person.

**Forensic Gait Analysis Approaches**

Forensic gait analysis may be human-based/observer-based, as well as computer-based. Both the approaches are very briefly discussed below:

- **Human-based:**The human-based approach (also known as observer-based approach) falls under three categories: photo-anthropometry, morphometric analysis, and superimposition. Photo-anthropometry takes account of measurements of set landmarks. Morphological measurements are taken from photographs in the morphometric analysis. Then both the measurements are combined and superimposed to establish a match between suspect and standard photographs.

- **Computer-based human-assisted:**The computer-based analysis involves algorithms that can either be model-based or appearance based. The model-based approach work on fixed landmarks for extracting the features of gait. This is done by predefining the landmarks using a human model. Later the appearance-based model function by extracting silhouette sequences of walking individuals. In this, a predefined human model is absent. In both cases, the match score is obtained between questioned and suspected gait.

**Forensic Gait Analysis Features/Parameters**

For any traits or features to be useful for forensic purposes, it has to follow certain principles like universality, permanence, and uniqueness. While some may be grouped under class characteristics and some under individual characteristics. Even if one or two features may not be proof enough for a conclusion, it will result in a more reliable and scientifically sound result when these features are combined. Although it is beyond the purview of this article to detail the parameters/features used and factors affecting the forensic gait analysis, a brief account is given. Some of the features taken into consideration while performing forensic gait analysis (static as well as dynamic) that may contribute to the establishment of identity are as follows:

- **Static measurements**: These are the geometrical measurements of the body. For example, the whole leg length, length of knee-foot height, etc.

- **Dynamic****measurements:**These are the measurements related to gait. For example, the distance between both the knees, the length of stride, cadence, etc.

Another classification may include the **spatial parameters**, the**temporal parameters,**and the**angular displacement parameters**.

- **Spatial parameter (distance) -**These parameters can be measured using the measurement of footprints by drawing a progression line, which is an imaginary line corresponding to the direction of walking. The parameters that may be included are step length, stride length, stride length/leg length ratio, stride or step width, longitudinal dimension, horizontal dimension, dimensions of the foot, foot line, direction line, foot angle, gait line, etc.

- **Temporal parameter (time) -**In the videos/footage, these parameters are measured using a stopwatch (manually) or with the help of automated/semi-automated software. It includes step time, stride time, stance duration, swing duration, swing/stance ratio, speed, cadence, etc.

- **Angular displacement parameter (angle) -**Various angles like hip angle, knee angle, are also considered.