The treatment of unruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms has changed over time. Treatment is recommended when the aneurysm diameter reaches 5 to 5.5 cm, is demonstrated as rapidly enlarging for greater than 0.5 cm over six months, or becomes symptomatic. Open surgical repair via transabdominal or retroperitoneal approach has been the gold standard. Endovascular repair from a femoral arterial approach is now applied for most repairs, especially in older and higher-risk patients. Endovascular therapy is recommended in patients who are not candidates for open surgery. This includes patients with severe heart disease and/or other comorbidities that preclude open repair. A ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm warrants emergency repair. The endovascular approach for ruptured AAA has demonstrated superior results and survival compared to open repair if the anatomy is suitable, but the mortality rates remain high. The risk of surgery is influenced by the patient's age, the presence of renal failure, and the status of the cardiopulmonary system.

Data show that for unruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms, endovascular repair has no long-term differences in outcomes compared to open repair. However, data indicates that expansion of the neck of the aorta continues despite endovascular therapy, which is of concern. The need to take beta-blockers cannot be understated in these patients. An open repair has been the gold standard for AAA repair for many decades. It involves a long midline incision followed by replaced of the diseased aorta with a graft. Postoperatively, these patients do need close monitoring in the ICU for 24 to 48 hours.

All patients with small abdominal aortic aneurysms who do not undergo repair need periodic follow-ups with an ultrasound every 6 to 12 months to ensure the aneurysm is not expanding.

Traditionally, the anatomic eligibility for endovascular aortic aneurysm repair was mainly based on three major indexes, 1. the proximal aortic neck, 2. common iliac arteries, and 3. external iliac and common femoral arteries. The mentioned index areas characterize the proximal and distal landing zones. In the proximal aortic neck of less than 15 mm, an endovascular approach is not indicated.

Fenestrated and branched endovascular aneurysm repair (F/B-EVAR) application in managing aortic aneurysms elucidated obvious advantages, including fewer perioperative complications. The advantage was specifically significant in high-volume vascular centers.

The selected stent graft and the characteristics of the stent durability identify the long-term efficacy of the (F/B-EVAR) procedures. F-EVAR and B-EVAR procedures are frequently reported together, and the separate effects of the procedures have not been discussed thoroughly. However, the stent selection, either balloon-expandable (B-EXP) versus self-expandable (S-EXP) stent-graft, is mainly affected by the surgeon's preferences.

Institutional algorithms for juxtarenal aortic aneurysm (JRA) repair have discussed the factors affecting decision-making for the (F/B-EVAR) procedures. However, absolute indications or contraindications criteria in the patient selection are lacking.

Considering the complications with Fenestrated endovascular graft and fenestration stent repair, in-stent stenosis of bare metal renal stents is regarded as the most common indication for secondary intervention. The low rate of type IA endoleak, sac enlargement, and device migration favor the use of fenestrated endovascular repair in patients with juxtarenal AAAs.

**SVS Guidelines on Management of Patients With Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms**

The Society for Vascular Surgery (SVS) issued updated guidelines on the care of patients with abdominal aortic aneurysms that include the following:

- Yearly surveillance imaging in patients with an AAA of 4.0 to 4.9 cm in diameter

- Assessment of distal leg pulses at each clinic visit

- For unruptured AAA, endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) is recommended

- The endovascular procedure should only be done in a hospital that has performed at least 10 cases every year and has a conversion rate to open of less than 2%

- Elective AAA open surgery should be done in hospitals with a mortality of less than 5%, and that perform at least ten open cases a year.

- For ruptured AAA, a facility with a door-to-intervention time of fewer than 90 minutes is preferred.

- Recommend treatment of type I and III endoleaks and type II endoleaks with aneurysm expansion.

- Antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended before respiratory tract procedures, genitourinary, dermatologic, gastrointestinal, or orthopedic procedures unless there is a potential for infection in an immunocompromised patient.

- Color duplex ultrasonography should be used for postoperative surveillance after endovascular surgery.

- A preoperative 12-lead electrocardiogram is recommended in all patients undergoing EVAR or open surgical repair within four weeks of the elective surgery.

- If the patient just had a drug-eluting stent placed, open aneurysm surgery should be delayed for at least six months, or one can perform endovascular surgery while the patient is on dual antiplatelet therapy.

- Only transfuse blood perioperatively if hemoglobin is less than 7 g/dL

- Elective repair should be recommended in low-risk patients when the AAA is 5.5 cm

- The open surgery should be done under general anesthesia