**Clinical Presentations associated with cerebellar dysfunction:**

Ataxia: Lack of normal coordination of movements.

Gait problems: Lesions of the cerebellum typically affect the same side of the body, and patients fall towards the side of the lesion.

Intention Tremor: Low-frequency tremor (below 5Hz) with voluntary movement of the limb. The tremor is exaggerated when the limb approaches the endpoint of its deliberate movement (cerebellar tremor).

Dysdiadochokinesia: The inability to perform fast, alternating movements.

Decomposition of Movement (abnormal coordination): Movement cannot occur smoothly and gets divided into its components.

Dysmetria: Overshooting or undershooting the target. Patients are unable to reach the target at the first attempt and make corrections.

Dysarthria: This is the inability to articulate words properly.

**Signs of Cerebellar Vermis and Flocculonodular Lobe Lesions**

Gait Ataxia: Abnormal coordination of movements while walking. Patients have wide-based, drunk like unsteady, stumbling gait, which is also called “staggering gait.” The patient will be unable to walk on toes or heels and in tandem; also known as truncal ataxia.

Titubation: Tremor (noodling) of the head or axial body. If severe, the patient can’t sit or stand without help.

Nystagmus: Commonly bilateral, these are involuntary, rapid, repetitive eye movements, which can be horizontal or vertical.

**Signs of Cerebellar Hemisphere (Cerebrocerebellum) Lesions**

Limb ataxia: Also referred to as appendicular ataxia. This condition presents with lesions of the intermediate and lateral portions of the cerebellar hemisphere. The degree and locations of ataxia depend on the somatotopic projection of the body parts of the involved cerebellar hemisphere. It can present as dysmetria, dysdiadochokinesis, hypotonia or intention tremor in one or both extremities. Patients can also present with dysarthria.

**Developmental Abnormalities**

Dandy-Walker syndrome is cerebellar hypoplasia and upward rotation of the cerebellar vermis with cystic dilation of the fourth ventricle.

Joubert Syndrome and rhombencephalosynapsis are rare conditions and seen with cerebellar vermis agenesis.

Pontocerebellar hypoplasias are rare, progressive, familial neurodegenerative disorders, which include PCH gene mutations (tRNA splicing endonuclease subunit genes). There are eleven known subgroups.

Medulloblastoma is a common tumor of childhood and roots from embryological cells (granular cells).

Chiari I malformation: This is the caudal location of the cerebellar tonsils. Most of the time, it is asymptomatic. Patients may present with headaches. In severe form Chiari I malformation may cause syringomyelia.