The primary treatment options for recurrent laryngeal nerve injury include voice therapy or surgery. In general, early reinnervation techniques are based on the extent of nerve injury and the disease course. Less serious RLN injuries in which there is no definite transection of the nerve can usually be monitored for around six months with voice therapy as needed. If the recurrent laryngeal nerve becomes separated during surgical intervention, end-to-end anastomosis is performed to repair the nerve.

After a period of conservative treatment, vocal fold medialization techniques can be implemented. This moves the affected vocal cord closer to the unaffected vocal cord, creating improved contact. Vocal fold medialization techniques can include medialization thyroplasties, injection laryngoplasty, arytenoid adduction, and laryngeal reinnervation.

Type 1 thyroplasty involves making an external incision to place an implant that permanently moves the affected vocal cord medially. Overall this is a safe procedure that has a low major complication rate, lower than outpatient thyroidectomy.

Injection laryngoplasty is when the affected vocal cord is injected with a material, filling the vocal cord and moving it medially. These injectables can include carboxymethylcellulose, hyaluronic acid derivatives, collagen derivatives, calcium hydroxyapatite, or autologous fat/fascia. However, a Cochrane review has shown no definitive advantage or disadvantage for any specific material.

Arytenoid adduction is a procedure that involves placing a permanent suture through the muscular portion of the arytenoid cartilage. This pulls the affected vocal cord medial to correct vocal cord paralysis secondary to RLN injury. The procedure is often utilized in conjunction with other corrective procedures.