As mentioned, the initial step in airway obstruction management is ‘ABC,’ i.e., Airway, Breathing, Circulation. An oxygen saturation monitor should be placed, and oxygen by mask should be initiated. In a stable patient in the acute setting, there may be time to perform imaging studies, initiate antibiotic treatment, etc. In the unstable patient in the acute setting, it is crucial to efficiently assess the patient while also taking a quick history/collateral history. Outside the hospital setting, an ambulance should be called. If choking is suspected, the Heimlich maneuver should be performed. In the unconscious patient's case, a pulse check should be performed, and the patient managed as per Basic Life Support Protocols (BLS) while waiting for an ambulance. In the case of acute airway obstruction in a hospital setting, a code should be called, and the Airway Team and the Medical Team involved in the management of cardiorespiratory arrest should be called immediately. The nearest healthcare professionals should initiate the BLS algorithm.

**Pediatric Inhaled Foreign Body**

In the case of suspected inhaled foreign body in children, if the child is in respiratory distress and is unstable, the patient should be moved to the Operating Room (OR) immediately, and the most senior Pediatric ENT and Anesthesiology team members should be involved as soon as possible. A direct microlaryngoscopy and bronchoscopy should be performed to remove the foreign body. The child should be placed supine with a shoulder roll to aid in the extension of the neck. Inhaled Sevoflurane and oxygen can be used for the induction and maintenance of general anesthesia. It is usually preferable to maintain spontaneous respiration.

**Management of Acute Upper Airway Obstruction in Adults**

**Awake Fibreoptic Intubation**

In adults, there will often be different presentations requiring intervention. In the case of upper airway obstruction at the level of the oral cavity or oropharynx, it is important to secure an airway if impending airway obstruction is anticipated. For example, in the case of Ludwig’s angina, i.e., a bacterial infection of the oral cavity, causing tongue and floor of mouth edema, it may be possible to perform awake fibreoptic intubation. In this scenario, the providing physician slides an endotracheal tube (ETT) onto a flexible endoscope.

**Cricothyroidotomy**

In such cases where intubation would be considered difficult or impossible, a cricothyroidotomy is a very quick procedure that can be performed in adults in cases of a true emergency. While the patient is lying supine, the operator holds the larynx in place, makes a vertical incision between the thyroid and cricoid cartilage, and inserts a blunt instrument such as a hemostat through the cricothyroid membrane. This takes some force. It is helpful to insert a bougie with a lumen at this point and then railroad a small, i.e., size six, ETT over this to secure the airway.

**Tracheostomy**

Tracheostomy is sometimes necessary in upper airway obstruction cases where intubation is anticipated to be very difficult or impossible. This can be performed under local anesthetic. If time allows, it should be performed in the OR with experienced staff and with anesthesiology involved. Before the procedure, it is helpful to administer at least 5 to 10 ml of nebulized 1% Lidocaine. In the OR, the patient should have oxygen via face mask or nasal prongs and be comfortable in a supine position, or sometimes semi-recumbent if in respiratory distress. Occasionally the anesthesiologist may administer medication, for example, ketamine, to reduce anxiety without suppressing the respiratory drive.

**Management of Chronic Upper Airway Obstruction in Adults**

A common cause of upper airway obstruction in adults is OSA. Aside from lifestyle modifications such as weight loss, Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) is used to manage this condition. It has been found that nasal Positive Airway Pressure masks are more easily tolerated than orofacial masks.

Surgery is reserved for patients who have failed CPAP therapy and who have a treatable cause of obstruction, or as an adjunct to CPAP therapy. Occasionally, as in the case of children with adenotonsillar hypertrophy, surgery can be the primary treatment. Nasal surgeries, including septoplasty and inferior turbinate reduction, have been shown to improve CPAP tolerance in some studies compared with no surgical intervention for nasal obstruction.

OSA in children is most commonly caused by adenotonsillar hypertrophy, for which surgery is performed to reduce the bulk of tonsillar and adenoidal tissue. It has been documented that a history of sleep-disordered breathing in the setting of enlarged tonsils and adenoids has resulted in adenotonsillar reduction surgery on almost the same frequency as for recurrent infections.