Alfentanil is of the opioid class of medications and thus acts by stimulation of the opioid receptors, of which there are three main subtypes: mu (m), kappa (k), and delta (d). The receptor primarily involved in pain transmission is the m-opioid receptor. The opioid receptors are predominately present in the central nervous system, brain, spinal column, and peripheral nervous system but are also present in vascular, cardiac, lung, gut, and even peripheral blood mononuclear cells. The natural ligands for the opioid receptors are called the “endogenous opioid peptides” and include enkephalins, endorphins, and endomorphins.

Opioids have various clinical effects but are predominately known and used for their profound pain-relieving effects. Their pain-relieving effects are from binding the m-opioid receptor, which is coupled with G1 proteins, resulting in the closure of N-type voltage-operated calcium channels and opening of calcium-dependent inwardly-rectifying potassium channels. The result is intracellular hyperkalemia and a decrease in the neurotransmission of pain signals resulting in increased tolerability of pain. Opioid receptor binding also decreases intracellular cyclic-adenosine-monophosphate (cAMP), which modulates the release of nociceptive (relating to the perception of pain) neurotransmitters (e.g., substance P).

There have not been acute changes to intracellular sodium noted to occur with opioid-receptor binding; however, intracellular sodium may hypothetically have involvement in opioid-receptor affinity to both endogenous and exogenous opioid-receptor binders. Researchers have observed that opioid-receptor binders seem to bind with a higher affinity in the presence of lower intracellular sodium concentrations and higher intracellular potassium concentrations. Of note, there was no observed change in the total number of binding sites of the opioid receptors during these observations. This phenomenon was observed specifically in cells known to have the m- and d-type opioid receptors.

Opioids are also known for their euphoric effects. Euphoria is a feeling or state of intense excitement and happiness. These effects are usually due to the binding of endorphins to opioid receptors in the central and peripheral nervous systems. Endorphins are primarily synthesized and stored in the anterior pituitary gland from their precursor protein proopiomelanocortin (POMC). POMC is a large protein cleaved into smaller proteins such as beta-endorphin, alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), adrenocorticotropin (ACTH), and others. Interestingly enough, studies have suggested that cells of the immune system are also capable of beta-endorphin synthesis because immune cells possess mRNA transcripts for POMC and T-lymphocytes, B-lymphocytes, monocytes, and macrophages have shown to contain endorphins during inflammation.

Usually, euphoric effects are primarily due to endorphin binding at opioid receptors in the peripheral nervous system. However, in opioid administration, it is directly due to opioid drugs binding the opioid receptors at both the pre- and postsynaptic junctional in the peripheral nervous system and at the pre-synaptic junction in the central nervous system. The analgesia produced by endorphins in the peripheral nervous system mainly stems from a decreased synthesis of substance P. In the central nervous system, there is also a degree of analgesic effects from endorphins binding opioid receptors, but it is from inhibiting the release of GABA, resulting in excess production of dopamine. Upon opioid administration, the opioid drug takes on this role.

It bears mention that when administering opioid analgesic drugs to patients, there is a decrease in synthesis and secretion of endogenous endorphins and opioid peptides; this is due to negative feedback on the endogenous endorphin and opioid systems.

Other effects of opioid medications include changes in mood, drowsiness, and mental clouding. However, the distinctive feature of the analgesia induced by opioids is the lack of consciousness. The patient still perceives the pain but describes it as less intense. Thus, opioids do not decrease or treat the cause of a painful stimulus but rather decrease its perception.

Wang Y. et al. conducted an analytical chemistry study on alfentanil hydrochloride impurities and degradation products using liquid chromatography/quadrupole time-of-flight high-resolution mass spectrometry (LC/QTOF-MS/MS). The research can aid in detecting counterfeit alfentanil, illegal alfentanil, and related analogs, and monitoring wastewater for drug diversion as well as quality control for the manufacturing and storage of alfentanil hydrochloride. The researchers found 17 substances. Eight of the substances were degradation products from researcher-induced acidic, alkaline, or oxidative conditions, and 9 of the substances were manufacturing-related. Wang Y. et al. found that alfentanil hydrochloride’s N-phenylpropanamide and piperidine functional groups were most vulnerable to degradation.