As outlined above, preoperative assessment and classification of the stenosis is key in selecting the appropriate repair technique. Lesions amenable to endoscopic repair and those requiring open repair confined to the extrathoracic trachea are often amenable to repair by a trained Otolaryngologist alone. When lesions become intrathoracic or concomitant cardiopulmonary abnormalities need repair, a transthoracic approach with sternotomy is often required. This requires enlisting CT surgery, and these procedures are often done using extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) or cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). The general steps are outlined below.

**Endoscopic Repair**

- Clear communication between the surgeon and the anesthesiologist is paramount. During endoscopic balloon inflation, there will likely be desaturation events for which one must be prepared. Also, electrocautery or laser manipulation greatly increases airway fire risk, and all precautions must be absolutely followed.

- Preoperative IV steroids are encouraged, but prophylactic antibiotics are generally not required. Topical anesthesia using 4% lidocaine allows for improved anesthesia throughout the case and is generally recommended.

- Suspension laryngoscopy is performed, and adequate exposure is confirmed. 4 mm endoscopes are typically adequate for most patients but may be adjusted for small children.

- Identify the stenosis and determine whether radial incisions are appropriate before balloon dilation.

- If indicated, use cold steel instruments or an appropriate laser to make radial incisions through the stenosis.

- Insert an appropriately sized airway balloon into the airway, ensuring half of the balloon is distal and half is proximal to the stenosis.

- Communicate with anesthesia and once the patient is stable, inflate the balloon for the predetermined time.

- Deflate and inspect the stenosis and repeat dilation if indicated.

- Topical steroids can be administered with pledget or injection on the site of dilation to prevent restenosis.

- Hemostasis is achieved with topical agents (oxymetazoline, epinephrine)

**Tracheal Resection and Reanastomosis**

- This is performed for SSTS and can often be done under general anesthesia with endotracheal tube intubation. If the lesion is distal or other cardiac repairs are being performed, ECMO or CPB are recommended.

- Preoperative IV steroids and antibiotics are encouraged.

- Exposure of the stenotic segment of the trachea is performed, ensuring the preservation of vital surrounding structures.

- Extrathoracic lesions can be managed via a transcervical incision and approach.
- Intrathoracic lesions often require a sternotomy.

- After exposure and identification of the stenotic segment to be resected, endoscopic visualization of the planned site of resection is confirmed.

- Prolene sutures are secured below the stenosis to ensure distal control of the airway following resection.

- A vertical tracheotomy along the stenosis is performed, and visual inspection allows for confirmation of resection feasibility.

- Resection of the stenosis proceeds, using caution to avoid injury to surrounding structures.

- Following resection, releasing techniques are performed as indicated to achieve a tension-free closure. These include anterior and posterior blunt dissection (avoiding disruption of laterally based vascular supply) and supra- and infra-hyoid releasing maneuvers.

- The distal and proximal stumps are then reanastomosed in an interrupted fashion, beginning posteriorly and finishing anteriorly.

- Closure of the wound is performed. Depending on patient cooperation, the tension of the closure, the patient may remain intubated and sedated during the immediate postoperative process to ensure adequate healing.

**Slide Tracheoplasty**

- This procedure has become the standard of care for LSTS and distal lesions. It allows for expansion of the stenotic segment while allowing for maximal tracheal preservation. Due to the nature and location of lesions managed with slide tracheoplasty, these are frequently performed via a sternotomy for adequate exposure. This also means that these patients generally require ECMO or CPB for the duration of the procedure.

- It is important to mention the clinical implications of a tracheal bronchus (bronchus suis). This is a rare (<1%) developmental abnormality identified by a bronchus coming off the trachea above the carina and often supplying the entire right upper lobe (1). This abnormality tethers the trachea and inhibits the surgeon’s ability to slide the cut tracheal ends into apposition, usually preventing a successful slide tracheoplasty.

- Preoperative IV steroids and antibiotics are encouraged.

- Exposure is more complicated, often requiring sternotomy, which is performed in conjunction with CT surgery.

- Following adequate stenosis (often via sternotomy), the stenosis site is confirmed endoscopically.

- The center of the stenotic segment is incised horizontally, and supra- and infra-hyoid releasing maneuvers are performed.

- After adequate release, the posterior wall of the proximal segment and anterior wall of the distal segment are incised vertically along the length of the stenosis.

- The two segments are overlapped, ensuring the proximal segment is anterior.

- Closure proceeds in an interrupted fashion, achieving a water-tight and tension-free anastomosis.

- Following a leak test, the chest is closed with the assistance of the CT surgeons.

- Postoperative care centers around avoiding neck extension. This can be achieved with sedation/paralysis for a prolonged period of time or chin-to-chest sutures.