Vernal keratoconjunctivitis is a severe form of allergic disease characterized by marked itching. This is more commonly seen in young boys. The common symptoms include photophobia, burning, foreign body sensation, mucoid discharge, and tearing. Parents also complain about children rubbing their eyes frequently and increasing blinking. The clinical examination findings vary based on the type of disease, further dependent on the geographical location.

Palpebral disease- In the early stages, there is conjunctival hyperemia and velvety papillary hypertrophy of the superior tarsal plate. In the intense disease, flat polygonal macropapillae, which are <1mm in size, are seen along with the whitish inflammatory disease. With further disease progression, these can form giant papillae that are>1mm in size and result from rupture of the dividing septa. Mucoid deposits can occur between giant papillae. The milder form of the pathology is characterized by minimal conjunctival congestion and decreased mucus production.

The bulbar disease-The bulbar disease is also called limbal disease and is particularly more common and severe in tropical regions. This is characterized by congestion of the bulbar conjunctiva in the interpalpebral area. Gelatinous thickened papillae can form around the limbus and are associated with apically located whitish cellular collections known as Horner Tranta Spots.

Corneal signs – Keratopathy is more commonly associated with palpebral disease and can present as superficial punctate epithelial erosions or epithelial macroerosions. The macroerosions usually result from epithelial toxicity from infiltration of inflammatory cytokines and secondary to direct traumatic mechanical effect from papillae. Severe forms can result in plaques and shield ulcers. These can significantly affect visual acuity. These shield ulcers are difficult to heal and can often result in subepithelial scars or keratinization. The scars can be central or peripheral, oval and grey in color, and affect the vision. Shield ulcers are more common in palpebral or mixed forms of the disease and result when the underlying Bowman's membrane is exposed and becomes coated with mucoid discharge and calcium phosphate, resulting in delayed healing and wetting. Shield ulcers should be aggressively treated to prevent secondary bacterial keratopathy.

Pseudogerontoxon is characterized by a paralimbal band of superficial scarring adjacent to the inflamed limbus resulting from recurrent limbal disease. It usually mimics arcus senalis. VKC is also associated with corneal ectasias, particularly keratoconus, which results from persistent eye rubbing and occasionally superficial vascularization. Associated bilateral herpes simplex keratitis has also been reported.

Lid signs - Blepharitis is often associated with patients with VKC. Some cases might be seen with eczema or maceration of the lid. Subconjunctival fibrosis and symblepharon can rarely develop due to the inflammatory sequelae.