EPA and DHA are considered generally safe. The FDA recommends that daily intake not exceed 3 g/day of EPA and DHA combined, with no more than 2 g/day deriving from supplements.

Caution is necessary when taking high doses as it may reduce immune function because of changes in the inflammatory response and may cause bleeding problems. EPA and DHA have not been found to be carcinogenic or mutagenic in human models, but icosapent ethyl (EPA only formulation) has shown benign neoplasm growth in murine models.

The FDA-approved fatty acid prescriptions (icosapent ethyl, omega-3-acid ethyl esters,omega-3-carboxylic acids, and omega-3-acid ethyl esters A) are all pregnancy category C drugs, and it is unknown if the drug can cause fetal harm or can affect reproductive capacity. Conversely, some studies concluded that pregnant mothers should incorporate DHA into their diet via high DHA content food or supplements to increase latency and birth weight.

Additionally, it is not recommended that nursing mothers take DHA or EPA supplements because they can be highly concentrated (possibly 6 to 14 times serum levels), requiring only 200 to 300 mg DHA intake per day in a nursing mother.

Methyl mercury, a toxic organometallic cation, is found in fish. Individuals who use fish as their primary source of OM3FAs or pregnant and nursing women should limit their intake to two to four servings of fish a week and/or replace fish that are high in methyl mercury, such as swordfish, albacore tuna, dolphinfish, kingfish, and shark and replace with fish that have a lower amount of methylmercury, such as salmon, herring, sardines, and trout.