Treatment goals include controlling the local disease along with preventing CNS dissemination. Treatment modalities include intravitreal injections, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy, used alone or in combination. Chemotherapy is considered the first-line therapy for PCNSL.

**Local Therapy**

**Intravitreal Methotrexate (MTX)**

**Dose:**0.4 mg in 0.1 ml

**Indications:**

- Unilateral/Bilateral PIOL

- In combination with systemic chemotherapy for PVRL with CNS involvement

- Relapsed PIOL

- Ocular relapse of PCNSL

The therapeutic dose of intravitreal MTX is maintained in the vitreous for five days.

The common complications of intravitreal MTX include cataracts, corneal epitheliopathy and maculopathy, limbal stem cell damage, optic atrophy, and sterile endophthalmitis.

**Intravitreal Rituximab**

**Dose:**1 mg in 0.1 ml

It is an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody, given as an intravitreal injection. There is a lack of standardization of treatment schedules varying from a single injection to multiple injections at variable intervals.

**Radiation Therapy**

External beam radiotherapy is given to patients with PIOL without CNS involvement.

Whole-brain radiotherapy is added with ocular radiotherapy in cases with CNS dissemination and who do not respond to systemic chemotherapy or cannot tolerate aggressive therapies.

**Vitrectomy**

In cases with significant cellular load, this can be considered as an adjunct therapy for debulking.

**Systemic Therapy**

**Chemotherapy**

Chemotherapy is the mainstay of the treatment - usually used in combination with radiation therapy or can also be used alone as primary therapy. The main barrier to systemic chemotherapy is penetration via the blood-brain barrier and blood-ocular barrier. Methotrexate and Cytosine arabinoside penetrate the blood-ocular barrier and are commonly used.

**Route**– Intravenous, Intrathecal****

**Methotrexate (MTX)**

High-dose methotrexate can penetrate the blood-brain barrier, with a complete response rate of 50 to 80%,

Systemic MTX can cause ocular complications like periorbital edema, increased lacrimation, photophobia, blepharitis, conjunctival hyperemia, and photophobia.

**Cytosine Arabinoside (Ara-C)**

Cytosine Arabinoside, also used as a chemotherapeutic agent, can penetrate the ocular blood barrier.

**Rituximab**

Intravenous rituximab is usually given along with methotrexate in cases with relapse/ recurrences of PVRL in the dose of 375mg/sqm.****

**Combination Chemotherapy**

A combination of MTX and Ara-C was used in patients with both ocular and CNS disease by Valluri et al.

Autologous stem cell transplantation is done in cases of refractory or recurrent PCNSL and PIOL after a course of intensive chemotherapy to rescue from systemic side effects of high-dose chemotherapy.

**Drugs Under Ongoing Trials******

**Pomalidomide**

It's a thalidomide-based agent, usually used for systemic diffuse large B cell lymphoma with better penetration to CNS. It has been tried along with dexamethasone systemically for recurrent or refractory CNS and vitreoretinal lymphoma with promising results. The dose-escalation schedule of pomalidomide that followed was 3,5,7,10 mg orally daily for 21 days every 28 days and dexamethasone 40 mg every week.

**Ibrutinib**

It is an orally administered agent with significant penetration of the blood ocular/CNS barrier.

**Lenalidomide plus Rituximab**

Lenalidomide and rituximab combination has shown promising results in recurrent/ relapsing PCNSL.

**Chemoradiation**

Combining chemotherapy with radiation can be used as primary therapy or as salvage therapy in PIOL.