The majority of patients with hydrocele present with the complaint of painless scrotal swelling rendering the testes impalpable with positive transillumination and fluctuation. The examiner should look at this swelling in both the supine and upright positions. During the examination, the provider should ask the following set of three questions:

1. Is it possible to reach above the swelling and palpate the cord? If no, this could represent a hydrocele (congenital or infantile) or a hernia. A hernia can be differentiated from hydrocele in terms of having expansile cough impulse and reducibility but lacking transillumination and fluctuation.

2. Does the swelling arise from testis or epididymis or encase both of these structures. Hydroceles tend to surround both testes and epididymis, rendering them impalpable.

3. Does the swelling transilluminate?

The primary hydrocele is predominant in middle and later life. A common predisposing factor for hydrocele is residing in a warm climate. As it is painless, it acquires a prodigious size before the patient seeks medical attention. In contrast, the secondary hydrocele is generally smaller, with the exception of filarial hydrocele.

Congenital hydrocele tends to be intermittent as it usually reduces when lying flat due to drainage of hydrocele fluid into the peritoneum. However, applying pressure on the congenital hydrocele does not reduce it.

An encysted hydrocele feels like a smooth oval-shaped swelling near the spermatic cord. It may feel like an inguinal hernia and therefore, should be differentiated. In female patients, the hydrocele of the canal of Nuck is a rare condition in which a cyst develops anterior to the round ligament of the uterus.