Common causes of pulmonary infections in the general population, such as Influenza A and B viruses, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Haemophilus influenzae, are also common in immunocompromised individuals. Besides the common pathogens capable of infecting an immunocompetent individual, immunocompromised patients are also at risk of infection from opportunistic pathogens.

Patients with defective humoral immunity are at increased risk of infection from encapsulated bacteria such as Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae. Those with neutropenia are predisposed to infections from S. aureus, Gram-negative bacilli (including Pseudomonas aeruginosa), as well as fungi such as Aspergillus spp. Impaired T-cell immunity can lead to a range of infections from:

- Viruses, such as Cytomegalovirus

- Intracellular bacteria, for example, Legionella

- Acid-fast bacteria such as Mycobacteria and Nocardia

- Fungi, such as Pneumocystis jirovecii, Aspergillus spp., Coccidioides immitis, Cryptococcus spp., Blastomyces dermatitidis, Histoplasma capsulatum, etc

Latent tuberculosis may also reactivate as immunodeficiency increases. Pneumocystis jirovecii is another common opportunistic fungal pathogen that infects the lungs in the immunocompromised, especially in those with AIDS. The type of pathogens involved in pulmonary infections in patients with AIDS is dependent on the CD4 count of the patient. Typical bacterial infections are common in patients with a CD4 count above 500 cells per cubic millimeter, whereas opportunistic infections occur more commonly as the CD4 count drops below 200 cells per cubic millimeter.

Bacteria such as S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, and Burkholderia cepacia complex, are the most common pathogens involved in pulmonary infections immediately after solid organ transplantation, especially heart and lung. ESKAPE pathogens (Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species) especially cause pulmonary infections after lung transplant. Due to the immunosuppression, infections from other opportunistic pathogens such as Cytomegalovirus (CMV) can also occur after solid organ transplantation. In the early phase following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), the majority of pulmonary infections are due to bacteria, for example, S. pneumoniae, Klebsiella, Gram-negative bacilli, and S. aureus. Up to three weeks following HSCT, which is the neutropenic phase, fungi, especially Aspergillus spp. are a common cause of infections, while CMV infections can occur up to three months following HSCT. Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) is uncommon after HSCT except in the setting of graft-vs-host disease.Fusarium species can also occur, which are seen exclusively in the severely immunocompromised.