The anatomy of the thoracic and lumbar regions of the spine is similar but has some distinct differences that are important for giving anesthetic in the thoracic spine. Anatomical studies have been performed using MRI to better define the space within the spine for regional anesthesia. These MRI images have shown that the mid to lower thoracic segment of the cord lies anteriorly, where there is a CSF-filled space between the dura and the cord. In contrast, the spinal cord and the cauda equina are touching the dura mater posteriorly in the lumbar region. This has demonstrated there is a greater depth of the posterior subarachnoid space in the thoracic spinal cord. In one MRI imaging study with 50 patients, the space between the dura mater and spinal cord in the thoracic spine measured at 7.75 mm at T5 and 5.88 mm at T10.

Next, the interlaminar spaces in the thoracic spine are narrow and more challenging to access with a needle due to overlap from the vertebral lamina. In contrast, the lamina of the lumbar vertebra do not overlap, and the space between them is larger. Furthermore, the spinous processes of the thoracic vertebra point inferiorly versus the lumbar vertebra pointing posteriorly.

When performing thoracic segmental spinal anesthesia, the layers of anatomy traversed are the same as those in the lumbar region where spinal anesthesia is traditionally performed. When the midline approach is used, the layers the needle goes through first are the skin, followed by subcutaneous fat, supraspinous ligament, interspinous ligament, ligamentum flavum, dura mater, subdural space, arachnoid mater, and lastly, the subarachnoid space. When the paramedian technique is used, the needle goes through the skin, subcutaneous fat, paraspinous muscles, ligamentum flavum, dura mater, subdural space, arachnoid mater, and finally, the subarachnoid space.

A smaller number of nerve roots are covered by anesthetic within the subarachnoid space in thoracic segmental spinal anesthesia, providing anesthesia in the necessary surgical field dermatomes. Further, since there is less of a block of the lower extremities, a larger portion of the body does not experience venous dilation, which may compensate for adverse effects in blood pressure intraoperatively.