Etiology of the lateral medullary syndrome include:

- Atherosclerotic disease: can result in thromboembolism, or rarely, hemodynamic failure leading to ischemia.

- Hypertension

- Dissection of vertebral arteries: In a young patient presenting with migraine and signs and symptoms of the LMS, vertebral artery dissection and aneurysm merit consideration.

- Cardiogenic embolism: Cardiac diseases with risk for embolism include atrial fibrillation, mechanical prosthetic valves, left atrial or ventricular thrombus, dilated cardiomyopathy, myocardial infarction, and infective endocarditis. Embolism can also occur in cocaine misuse, neck manipulation, medullary neoplasms, radionecrosis, and hematoma.

- Small vessel disease

- Hypoplastic Vertebral artery:  It may rarely contribute to stroke if additional risk factors are present in young patients.

- Moya-moya disease

- Vertebrobasilar dolichoectasia: Patients may present with vertebrobasilar territory ischemia. Risk factors for vertebrobasilar dolichoectasia include male gender, hypertension, smoking, and previous myocardial infarction. It has correlations with aortic dilations, ectatic coronary arteries, Marfan syndrome, late-onset Pompe disease, and the autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease.

- Other less common causes of ischemia with a predisposition for the posterior circulation include subclavian steal syndrome, Fabry disease, mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and migraines, and maybe the etiology of the LMS.