COVID-19 vaccines are intended to prevent the COVID-19 disease caused by the SARS-CoV- 2 virus. An interprofessional team consisting of clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), nurses, and pharmacists providing a holistic and integrated approach to preventing COVID-19 can help achieve the best possible outcomes for this disease. COVID-19 is a public health emergency that may manifest from mild symptoms to severe multi-system effects in all age groups. Vaccines are the key to limiting severe illness, even as new variants emerge.

Before receiving the vaccination, healthcare professionals providing the COVID-19 vaccination should thoroughly communicate and educate the vaccination recipients on the information presented in the "Fact Sheet for Recipients and Caregivers" before receiving these vaccinations. The healthcare provider should give a CDC vaccination card to each person receiving the vaccine with a return date to complete the two-dose series.

The healthcare team should inform the recipients on the V-safe information sheet, a smartphone app that identifies possible adverse effects following the COVID-19 vaccination through texting, and a website survey. The provider should also register in the federal COVID-19 vaccination program and report any unusual or severe adverse effects to Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). The vaccination information must be included in a proper state or local jurisdiction's preferred system, such as the Immunization Information System (IIS), by the healthcare professional providing the vaccine.

The healthcare team should be prepared for immediate allergic reactions and have the equipment and treatment, such as; epinephrine, antihistamines, stethoscopes, and blood pressure cuffs, on hand in case anaphylaxis occurs following vaccine administration. Providers should also be aware of the limited data on vaccines' interchangeability and complete the two-dose series with the same vaccination as the first dose. The healthcare team should also communicate the vaccination's effectiveness and advise that receiving a vaccine does not ensure protection for all recipients.

Interprofessional communication is vital for establishing patient rapport and increasing public health measures to control the spread of the virus and disease within communities. Patients should be counseled on handwashing, wearing a mask, maintaining a distance of 6 feet, and 14-day quarantine after suspected exposure to limit the spread of the virus. Individual, collective, and preventative measures can help stop the further spread of COVID-19. [Level 5]