**Exudative Age-Related Macular Degeneration (exudative AMD or wet AMD)**

ICGA helps to delineate the extent of occult CNVM. Occult CNVM comprises 60-85% of CNV in wet AMD.

The combined type of CNVM may have a hot spot or multiple hot spots at the edge of the plaque (marginal hot spots), hot spots over the plaque (overlying hot spots), or hot spots away from the plaque (remote spots). In eyes with occult CNVM, a majority (around 60%) of eyes reveal plaques on ICGA, and approximately 30% of eyes show hot spots. The rest of the eyes have combined lesions. The visual prognosis of plaque may be worse compared to hot spots, and hot spots may be treated easily with PDT.

ICGA helps determine the presence of CNVM in a retinal pigment epithelial detachment (PED). In a PED without CNVM (non-vascularized PED), hypocyanescence is noted throughout the phases of ICGA. In eyes with proven occult CNVM with serous PED (vascularized PED) on FFA, 62% showed plaque (size more than one disc area), 38% of eyes showed focal CNVM (with a maximum size of one optic disc area), and in 4% of eyes ICGA could not detect a CNVM.

Advantages of ICGA include the ability to visualize CNVM or other causes of subretinal or submacular hemorrhage. The causes of submacular hemorrhage, as revealed by ICGA in a study on 51 eyes, included wet AMD (around 53%), PCV (about 37%), retinal arterial macroaneurysm (about 6%), and lacquer cracks.

Clear lesion delineation is crucial in treatment modalities like photodynamic therapy (PDT) and laser photocoagulation. Anti-VEGF therapy causes regression of only immature vessels. It does not affect mature vessels.

**Retinal angiomatous proliferation (RAP) or Type 3 CNVM**

RAP may contribute to up to 20% of cases of wet AMD. ICGA also aids in differentiating occult CNVM from retinal angiomatous proliferation (RAP). The feeding retinal arteriole and the draining retinal venule in RAP can be visualized in ICGA.

Cystoid macular edema and PED may be associated.

**Polypoidal Choroidal vasculopathy (PCV)**

ICGA is highly recommended for identifying PCV lesions, and ICGA is considered the gold standard for diagnosing PCV.

- Massive spontaneous subretinal or submacular hemorrhage

- Orange-red subretinal nodule

- Notched or hemorrhagic PED, and

- Poor response to anti-VEGF therapy.

PCV is an abnormality of choroidal circulation in which a vascular network is formed in the inner choroidal layers with an aneurysmal bulge usually at the margin of such network. The aneurysmal bulge is clinically visible as a reddish-orange polyp-like structure.

In ICGA, even though the PCV network starts getting filled with the dye earlier than the retinal vessels, it gets filled slowly. Later the polyps become visible as hypercyanescent lesions. The EVEREST study on PCV used the following criteria to diagnose PCV: early focal subretinal hypercyanescence appearing within 6 minutes of ICG administration with at least one of the following:

- associated branching vascular network,

- pulsatile polyp,

- nodular appearance on stereoscopic view,

- hypocyanescent halo around polyp within 6 minutes,

- orange subretinal nodule on stereoscopic color fundus photo that corresponds to the polyp on ICGA, and

- massive submacular hemorrhage (minimum size of 4 disc area).

It is important to differentiate PCV from CNVM as PCV responds better with photodynamic therapy (PDT) or a combination of PDT and intravitreal anti-VEGF therapy rather than anti-VEGF therapy alone.

**Central Serous Chorioretinopathy (CSCR)**

ICGA of CSCR is characterized by multifocal areas of choroidal hyperpermeability in the mid and late phases.

ICGA also helps to differentiate CSCR from PCV and helps detect underlying CNVM in CSCR.

ICGA forms an important investigation for the recently described pachychoroid disease spectrum, including CSCR, PCV, pachychoroid pigment epitheliopathy (PPE), pachychoroid neovasculopathy (PNV), focal choroidal excavation,

**Retinal Arterial Macroaneurysm (RAM)**

Retinal arterial macroaneurysm can present with pre-retinal, intraretinal, and subretinal hemorrhage. In case of significant pre-retinal hemorrhage, FA may not visualize the macroaneurysm due to the masking effect of the hemorrhage. But ICGA can visualize the macroaneurysm as the infrared rays can penetrate better through the hemorrhage.

**Choroidal Tumors**

**Choroidal melanoma -**ICGA is superior to FA in identifying the tumor vasculature and borders. The tumor microcirculation patterns in ICGA, such as parallel with cross-linking, loops, arcs with branching, and networks, are associated with a higher rate of tumor growth.

**Choroidal hemangioma -**In circumscribed choroidal hemangioma, the intrinsic vascular pattern is seen 30 seconds after injection of ICG. The lesions become intensely hypercyanescent at 1 minute. In the late phases of the angiogram, the dye washes out from the lesion rapidly compared to the background choroid making the hemangioma appear hypocyanescent.

**White Dot Syndromes**

**Birdshot chorioretinopathy**- In ICGA, hypocyanescent dots correspond to the cream-colored lesions in birdshot chorioretinopathy. ICGA is superior to FA in this disease as these lesions are not usually visualized in FA.

**Multifocal Choroiditis -**The white lesions in multifocal choroiditis are visualized as hypocyanescent dots in ICGA. ICGA can be used to monitor the treatment response as the number and size of these hypocyanescent areas decrease with successful treatment with systemic steroids.

**Multiple evanescent white dot syndrome (MEWDS)**- MEWDS presents with unilateral diminution of vision. It is common in young females. It has a transient and self-limiting course. ICGA reveals multiple hypocyanescent spots in the mid and late phases. These spots are more apparent in ICGA compared to FA.

**Serpiginous choroidopathy**- In serpiginous choroidopathy, ICGA reveals choroidal alterations even if there is no clinical or FA evidence. In ICGA, the active lesions appear to be larger compared to FA. Thus it helps in the identification of active lesions. Also, choroidal activity can be present even after the cessation of retinal activity. This can be identified using ICGA.

**Acute posterior multifocal placoid pigment epitheliopathy (APMPPE)**- In acute APMPPE, ICGA reveals hypocyanescent lesions in both the early and late phases of the angiogram. This is hypothesized to be due to choroidal hypoperfusion secondary to occlusive vasculitis.

**Punctate inner chorioretinopathy (PIC)**- Hypocyanescent spots are noted in all phases of ICGA, which may be more in number than is visible on fundus photo or FFA.

**Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR) -**Fundus autofluorescence shows very typical features. ICGA may be normal or may show hypocyanescence. In late-stage AZOOR, a trizonal pattern may be noted. The area outside the lesion shows normal cyanescence (zone 1). The margin shows late extrachoroidal leakage (minimal) (zone 2). Zone 3 or the area inside the lesson shows hypocyanescence due to choriocapillaris atrophy.

**Chorioretinal Atrophy**

In Stargardt disease, there is a complete loss of choriocapillaris ('dark atrophy' or complete absence of choriocapillaris on ICGA) whereas, in geographical atrophy secondary to age-related macular degeneration (ARMD), residual choriocapillaris are present. ICGA aids in differentiating between late-onset Stargardt disease from chorioretinal atrophy. Hypocyanescence is seen in the late phases of ICGA in the case of Stargardt disease.

**Ocular inflammatory Diseases**

**Sympathetic Ophthalmia:**ICGA shows hypocyanescent patches, some of which may become isocyanescent in the late phase.

**Vogt Koyanagi Harada (VKH) syndrome**: The ICGA features in the acute phase include early hypercyanescence and leakage from choroidal stromal vessels, hypocyanescent spots, fuzzy large choroidal vessels, and hypercyanescence of the optic disc.