Trastuzumab is administered as an intravenous infusion over 30 to 90 minutes. It should not be administered as a bolus and should not be administered together with D5W. Per the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) guidelines, due to trastuzumab’s status as a potentially hazardous drug, double-gloves, a gown, and closed-system transfer devices are required during administration. The recommended maintenance dose is 2 mg/kg infused weekly or 6 mg/kg infused once every three weeks. Initial loading doses up to 8 mg/kg may be administered. No dose adjustment is recommended for patients with mild to moderate renal insufficiency; trastuzumab has not been studied in patients with hepatic impairment or end-stage renal disease. The estimated elimination half-life of trastuzumab is 28 days; a higher tumor burden may increase the elimination half-life.

Dosing regimens for currently approved indications include: (refer to institutional protocols and package insert information before prescribing and to check toxicity-related dose adjustments)

- HER2-overexpressing breast cancer:

- As adjuvant treatment in combination with paclitaxel or docetaxel: 4 mg/kg/dose IV for a single dose in week 1, followed by 2 mg/kg/dose IV weekly for weeks 2 through 12, then 6 mg/kg/dose IV every three weeks for weeks 13 through 52; paclitaxel and docetaxel for first 12 weeks.
- In combination with carboplatin or docetaxel: 4 mg/kg/dose IV for a single dose in week 1, followed by 2 mg/kg/dose IV weekly for weeks 2 through 18, then 6 mg/kg/dose IV every three weeks for weeks 19 through 52; paclitaxel and docetaxel for first 18 weeks.
- As monotherapy following an anthracycline-based regimen:

- HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer:

- Combination therapy with paclitaxel: Start with 4 mg/kg/dose IV for a single dose in week 1, then 2 mg/kg/dose IV every week starting in week 2
- Combination therapy pertuzumab: Start 8 mg/kg/dose IV for a single dose on day one of a 21-day cycle in the first cycle, then 6 mg/kg/dose for a 21-day cycle starting cycle 2.
- As monotherapy for recurrent disease: 4 mg/kg/dose IV for a single dose for the first week, then 2 mg/kg/dose starting week 2.

- HER2-overexpressing metastatic stomach cancer: Start 8 mg/kg/dose IV for a single dose on day 1 of a 21-day cycle for the first cycle, then 6 mg/kg/dose IV for a single dose on day 1 of a 21-day cycle starting cycle 2.