Iris ectropion syndrome can be congenital or acquired. Anatomically, the term ectropion uveae is inaccurate as the pigment layer of the iris is separate from the uvea.

Congenital iris ectropion or congenital ectropion uveae (primary iris pigment epithelial hyperplasia) is a developmental anomaly due to the proliferation of the pigment epithelium in the anterior surface of the iris. In a normal iris, the posterior pigmented epithelium of the iris comes anteriorly at the pupillary margin and creates the pupillary ruff. In CEU, there is an exaggeration of this process (an apparent spread of the pigmented epithelium beyond the pupillary ruff to the anterior surface of the iris), and the pigmented epithelium covers the anterior surface of the iris to a variable extent though typically, the pigmentation does not reach the angle. Congenital iris ectropion has been attributed to arrested development of the neural crest cells and may fall in the spectrum of neurocristopathy.

Neural crest cell migration, proliferation, and differentiation are essential in developing several ocular structures such as the corneal endothelium, trabecular meshwork, and the iris. Disorders in these aspects of neural crest cell proliferation, migration, or differentiation form the basis of the etiology of anterior segment dysgenesis syndromes such as Axenfeld Rieger syndrome, Peters anomaly, and posterior embryotoxon. During embryological development, after forming the optic cup, neural crest cells invade the primary mesenchyme surrounding it to form the secondary mesenchyme.

The neural crest cells in the secondary mesenchyme are responsible for the corneal stroma, the endothelium, the iris stroma, and the structures at the angle of the anterior chamber. The migration of the neural crest cells between the surface ectoderm and the lens vesicle occurs in three waves. Primordial corneal endothelium (and later corneal endothelium and Descemet membrane) and the trabecular meshwork form in the first wave. The keratocytes in the corneal stroma result from the second wave, and the iris (pupillary membrane and the iris stroma) forms in the third wave. The epithelial layers of the iris and ciliary develop from the neural ectoderm, and hence these are not considered a part of the uvea. The posterior non-pigmented epithelium (PNPE) of the iris and ciliary body is continuous.

PNPE of the iris later acquired pigments during the iris development. The pigmentation starts at the pupillary margin and progresses radially to the iris root. The anterior epithelial layer of the iris remains non-pigmented. The dilator muscles of the iris (dilator pupillae) develop directly from the anterior iris epithelial layer. The sphincter pupillae develops from neural ectoderm near the anterior epithelial layer of the iris adjacent to the pupillary border. The occurrence of CEU has been proposed due to the failure of regression of the primordial endothelium in the anterior segment.

The neural crest cell origin disorders have been classified by Bahn et al. into 1) deficient neural crest formation and 2) disorders of neural crest cells migration, proliferation, and differentiation. Abnormal migration may lead to sclerocornea, Axenfeld anomaly and syndrome, congenital glaucoma, and posterior embryotoxon.

In addition, abnormal proliferation may lead to Chandler syndrome, Essential iris atrophy, Iris nevus (Cogan Reese) syndrome, and abnormal differentiation results in the formation of either congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy (CHED), posterior polymorphous dystrophy (PPMD), or Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD).

Edward Wilson, in 1990 proposed an alternative classification wherein CEU was accepted as an addition to the anterior segment dysgenesis. This is based on the concept of developmental arrest. Examples of late arrest with retained primordial endothelium are posterior embryotoxon alone, Axenfeld- Rieger syndrome, and congenital iris ectropion syndrome. The second category in this classification is late partial arrest in the posterior iris migration. Classic congenital glaucoma falls in this category.

The third category is the late arrest of final differentiation, wherein the central cornea is also involved. ICE syndrome, CHED, and PPMD fall in this group. Shields proposed congenital iris ectropion to occur late in gestation due to a developmental arrest leading to retention of primordial tissue and anterior insertion of the iris. Anterior migration of pigment epithelium may be due to contact with the primordial tissue.

Acquired iris ectropion is seen in cases of rubeosis iridis and is frequently associated with neovascular glaucoma (NVG). Acquired iris ectropion is due to a fibrovascular membrane on the iris that contracts and pulls the posterior pigment epithelium anteriorly. The various etiologies of neovascularization of the iris and subsequently the development of acquired ectropion uveae include:

- Central retinal venous occlusion (CRVO): This is one of the most common causes. Up to 60% of eyes with ischemic CRVO may be associated with new vessels in the anterior segment (iris or the angle of the anterior chamber). The new vessels formed cause neovascular glaucoma, which typically occurs after 90 days (90-day glaucoma). The most important risk factors (according to the central retinal vein occlusion study) for the development of iris neovascularization include poor initial visual acuity, intraretinal hemorrhages, and a large area of capillary nonperfusion.

- Proliferative diabetic retinopathy

- Central retinal arterial occlusion (CRAO): The NVI usually forms in 18% of the eyes around 1 week to 3 months after CRAO (mean time around 1 month).

- Ocular ischemic syndrome (carotid artery occlusive disease): Around two-thirds of eyes have new vessels in the iris (NVI).

- Hemiretinal vein occlusion

- Branch retinal vein occlusion

- Chronic or very severe ocular inflammation

- Trauma

- Chronic retinal detachment

- Coats disease

- Intraocular tumor

- Retinopathy of prematurity

- Radiation retinopathy

- Sickle cell disease

- Retinal vasculitis and Eales disease

- Uveitis glaucoma hyphema syndrome

- Carotid-cavernous fistula

- Giant cell arteritis

- Takayasu disease

- Anterior segment ischemia due to various causing including squint surgery involving multiple extraocular muscles and scleral buckling)

- Iris melanoma or metastasis can cause vascularization of the iris and the angle of the anterior chamber followed by ectropion uveae. In a series of 25 cases with diffuse iris melanoma, 21 patients (84%) had ectropion uveae.