Serum PSA is the gold standard investigation for screening and detection of prostate malignancy. PSA as a biomarker is a sensitive tool, but its specificity is low. Various benign conditions like BPH, prostatitis, and manipulations like DRE, biopsy, and catheterization can increase PSA levels. Consequently, diagnosis with PSA alone can lead to overdiagnosis and unwanted biopsies adding pressure on the healthcare systems.

There is no safe PSA level below which prostate cancer does not exist. Instead, the likelihood of prostate cancer and an aggressive disease increase as PSA increases. Instead of utilizing an absolute PSA level to establish if a prostate biopsy is necessary, the clinician should consider other variables, including prostate volume, inflammation, medications, patient age, life expectancy, and co-morbidities.

Prostate cancer biomarkers assist the clinician in decision-making in patients with PSA levels in the grey zone of 4 to 10 ng/mL to safely avoid unnecessary biopsies. The biomarkers can also predict clinically significant tumors and help tailor the treatment regimen. Biomarker assays are employed in a grey zone PSA level setting with a negative DRE. It allows clinicians to discuss better-informed decision-making with patients.

Various additional tools like PSA derivative, PSA kinetics, PSA molecular forms, and blood and urine-based biomarkers can be used as standalone or in multiplex panels to arrive at an informed decision. The new prostate cancer risk-stratification biomarkers are intended to assist the clinician in educating and informing patients for optimal shared decision-making.