The majority of preoperative prophylactic antibiotics are administered intravenously (IV). The initial timing of administration, redosing, if applicable, duration of prophylactic therapy, and dosing in obese patients are important components in the prevention of surgical site infections as well as antimicrobial stewardship.

Redosing antibiotics is an important factor due to the half-life of the particular antibiotic used. Factors such as renal dysfunction and extensive burns may impact the half-life of an antibiotic. Based on the antibiotics mentioned above, cefazolin and cefoxitin would have to be administered more than once, depending on the length of the procedure. A perioperative dose of cefazolin should be administered again four hours after the initial preoperative dose, while cefoxitin should be administered again two hours later. Redosing antibiotics due to significant blood loss or dilution during surgery are other considerations being studied at this time.

Unless there is a known infection, prophylactic antibiotics should be discontinued within 24 hours. There remains controversy regarding the duration of therapy to 48 hours postoperatively following cardiothoracic surgery. Two meta-analyses compared 24 hours versus 48 hours as the cut-off in cardiac surgeries. They found a significant decrease in surgical site infections with the extended duration, particularly in sternal infections. The most recent guidelines from the CDC state that additional prophylactic antibiotics should not be administered after the surgical incision is closed in clean and clean-contaminated procedures. Although there could be procedure-specific exceptions, this recommendation applies to patients with or without a drain after the surgical site is closed.

The three antibiotics used in adult surgical prophylaxis, where weight-based dosing is recommended, are cefazolin, vancomycin, and gentamicin. For patients receiving cefazolin, 2 g is the current recommended dose except for patients weighing greater than or equal to 120 kg, who should receive 3 g. Some literature states that cefazolin 2 g  should be sufficient for a patient at any adult weight. Vancomycin is dosed at 15 mg/kg, and gentamicin is dosed at 5 mg/kg. Other commonly used prophylactic antibiotic dosing regimens in adults are clindamycin 900 mg, cefoxitin 2 g, and ertapenem 1 g. All prophylactic antibiotics for pediatrics are dosed based on milligrams per kilogram of body weight. Examples of pediatric dosages include cefazolin 30 mg/kg and vancomycin 15 mg/kg. Pediatric surgical prophylaxis dosages should not exceed the usual adult dose.