XLA is one of the most common primary immunodeficiencies occurring in the pediatric population. Males over the age of 6 months present with recurrent infections due to encapsulated organisms because they lack the ability to produce mature B-lymphocytes and subsequently circulating immunoglobulin.  This disease does not present at birth because maternal IgG provides immune defense during the earliest months of life. The initial presentations of XLA occur most commonly in the pediatric primary care and inpatient hospitalist settings. The involvement of multiple disciplines is vital to improving the outcomes of patients with XLA so that diagnosis can take place as early as possible, with streamlined treatment.

Appropriate care team members for a patient with XLA would most likely include a pediatrician, immunologist, and pulmonologist, as well as other specialists who can contribute to the care of complications and comorbidities associated with XLA. Pathologists and radiologists can aid in the early diagnosis of XLA, while pharmacists can help clinicians select appropriate treatment regimens and perform medication reconciliation. Nursing should be able to counsel the family, answer questions, and assess the progress of treatment. This interprofessional team approach will lead to better outcomes, and give the family/patient more resources form which to access care and information about XLA. [Level V]

Family members or caretakers should be encouraged to take part in the patient’s care and learn how to become effective patient advocates, with the goal of transferring advocacy skills to the patient.

Records should also include a useful contact list regarding healthcare team members, for physicians, staff, physician assistants, therapists, nurses, specialists, specialty centers (e.g., for immunoglobulin replacement therapy), hospitals, pharmacies, support groups, and insurance providers.

The patient needs to understand the necessity for regular follow-up visits. Patients should receive advance information regarding the specialists that they need to see, the tests that are necessary (e.g. routine blood tests, determination of lymphocyte subsets and immunoglobulin levels; liver function tests; hepatitis screening; pulmonary function tests; CT scans) and the role that the resulting information will play in monitoring treatment responses and stemming disease progression.

Randomized-controlled trials (RCTs) supporting the best treatment methods are very limited due to the rare nature of XLA.  Additionally, the poor prognosis associated with a lack of treatment ethically prevents such studies. Current recommendations are made based on an exhaustive review of current case reports and case series of XLA cases from peer-reviewed journals, as well as small RCTs regarding the treatment of primary immunodeficiencies in general.  Expert opinion from an interprofessional team may be necessary when current evidence fails to provide a definitive recommendation for treatment modalities.

Overall, an interprofessional team approach to the treatment of patients with XLA is the proper management methodology.