# Continuing Education Activity

Pericarditis is inflammation of the pericardial sac and is the most common pathologic process involving the pericardium. Temporally, it may be further classified into acute pericarditis, subacute pericarditis, chronic pericarditis, and recurrent pericarditis, the latter of which is estimated to occur in 30 percent of cases. Pericarditis may also be associated with other pericardial syndromes, such as pericardial effusion, cardiac tamponade, constrictive pericarditis, and effusive-constrictive pericarditis. This activity reviews the evaluation, treatment, and prognosis of pericarditis and highlights the role of an interprofessional team in evaluating and improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- List the etiologies of pericarditis. 
- Describe some of the signs and symptoms that patients with pericarditis may exhibit.
- Describe treatment considerations for pericarditis.
- Demonstrate how the interprofessional team can work collaboratively to prevent the potentially profound complications of * by applying knowledge about the presentation, evaluation, and management of this disease.

# Introduction

The pericardium is a double-layered, fibro-elastic sac surrounding the heart. It consists of a visceral layer overlying the epicardium, and a richly innervated parietal layer, separated by a potential space which normally contains 15 to 50 mL of serous fluid.

Frequently, pericardial inflammation can be accompanied by increased fluid accumulation within the pericardial sac forming a pericardial effusion, which may be serous, hemorrhagic or purulent depending on etiology. This fluid accumulation may become hemodynamically significant, particularly when the pericardial effusion is large, or rate of accumulation is too rapid, as the fluid can extrinsically compress the cardiac chambers limiting diastolic filling and causing the syndrome of cardiac tamponade.

The aforementioned pericardial syndromes may be seen in association with acute pericarditis, but are not a prerequisite for the diagnosis, and will be discussed in more detail elsewhere.

# Etiology

The 2015 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of pericardial diseases divided the etiology of acute pericarditis into two main groups, infectious causes, and non-infectious causes.

Viruses are considered the most common infective agents, and include coxsackieviruses A and B, echovirus, adenoviruses, parvovirus B19, HIV, influenza as well as multiple herpes viruses such as EBV and CMV.

Non-infectious causes are numerous and include malignancy (often secondary to metastatic disease), connective tissue disease (such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and Behçet’s disease), and metabolic etiologies (such as Uremia, and myxedema).

Trauma may also cause pericarditis with early onset following injury, or as more frequently encountered in clinical practice, result in a delayed inflammatory reaction.

Multiple medications have been implicated in drug-induced pericarditis, with a long list of possible culprits, but the incidence remains rare. Certain medications, such as procainamide, hydralazine, and isoniazid were historically cited to cause medication-induced systemic lupus erythematosis, with associated serositis and pericardial involvement manifesting as pericarditis.

Miscellaneous disease processes such as amyloidosis, and sarcoidosis should also be considered, especially when pericarditis occurs in association with suggestive systemic findings.

# Epidemiology

Acute pericarditis is one of the most common forms of pericardial disease and a common cause of chest pain. Pericarditis is associated with trauma patients, uremic patients, and malignant disease. It is more common in men.

# Pathophysiology

The pericardium serves multiple functions. It acts as an anchor to the heart within the thoracic cavity, forms a barrier to extrinsic infection, and enhances dynamic interaction between the cardiac chambers.

Due to the parietal layer's rich innervation, any inflammatory process mediated by an infectious, autoimmune or traumatic insult can result in severe retrosternal chest pain, as is commonly seen in acute pericarditis.

# History and Physical

Temporally, pericarditis can be divided into “acute pericarditis” if it lasts for less than 4-6 weeks, “incessant pericarditis” is it lasts for more than 4-6 weeks but less than 3 months, or “chronic pericarditis” if it lasts for more than 3 months. “Recurrent pericarditis” is the term used to denote an episode that occurs after a symptom-free interval of 4-6 weeks in between episodes.

Acute pericarditis accounts for approximately 5% of non-ischemic emergency department chest pain presentations, and for 0.1% of inpatient admissions.

Pericardial pain may be differentiated from ischemic pain, which is worsened by exertion and emotion, and improved with rest or nitroglycerin. The latter is also typically non-positional, non-pleuritic and non-reproducible with palpation. However, atypical presentations of ischemic pain are numerous, and a clinical distinction is frequently difficult.

# Evaluation

The differential diagnosis for chest pain should include angina from stable ischemic heart disease, or acute coronary syndrome, subendocardial ischemia associated with aortic stenosis or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, aortic dissection, myocarditis, pleurisy secondary to pulmonary embolism or pneumonia, costochondritis, esophageal spasm, peptic ulcer disease or referred pain from another organ such as acute cholecystitis. In the acute setting, it is critical to rule out life-threatening causes before entertaining the diagnosis of acute pericarditis, especially when there is uncertainly.

Auscultation classically reveals a left parasternal pericardial friction rub; which consists of a rasping, scratchy triphasic sound corresponding to friction between the pericardial layers during atrial systole, ventricular systole and early ventricular diastole. This is reported in the literature to be present at some point during the illness in 35-85% of cases.

When present, and particularly when triphasic, a pericardial friction rub is highly specific for the diagnosis. Not uncommonly however, one component may be missing producing a biphasic component instead. It should also not be confused with a pleural rub, which may produce a similar sound, but is related to respiration as opposed to the cardiac cycle.

More than half of patients develop typical ECG changes that evolve through 4 stages over a period of weeks, with significant temporal variability.

The initial ST elevation should not be confused with an acute injury pattern, where ST elevation occurs within a localized distribution, and is concave down as opposed to concave up in pericarditis. These changes are also typically associated with reciprocal ST depressions in the other leads (as opposed to AVR only in acute pericarditis), and Q waves are also frequently present within the same distribution - or develop shortly thereafter - as part of the natural evolutionary changes of acute/subacute myocardial infarction. The differential of ST elevations would also include early repolarization abnormalities, which are seen frequently in healthy individuals, and demonstrate an elevated J-point (commonly seen as an initial slur at the beginning of the ST segment), and may occur in several leads but are not usually diffuse.

Clinically, acute pericarditis is suggested by a characteristic chest pain description and the presence of a pericardial friction rub on auscultation. However, laboratory studies, electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiography are still often needed to confirm the diagnosis. The European Society of Cardiology 2015 guidelines require (2) out of (4) criteria to be me in order to diagnose acute pericarditis. (9) They include (1) pericardial chest pain, (2) pericardial rubs, (3) new widespread ST-elevation or PR depression on ECG, and (4) pericardial effusion (new or worsening). Supporting findings also include elevated inflammatory biomarkers (ESR, CRP, leukocytosis), and evidence of pericardial inflammation on advanced imaging, such as cardiac computed tomography (CT) and cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR). Pericardial effusion, though often present, is not required to make a definitive diagnosis of acute pericarditis.

Certain clues may suggest the inciting cause. Viral pericarditis may be associated with a “flu-like” prodrome (such as fever or upper respiratory symptoms), while autoimmune and inflammatory etiologies may have associated systemic findings. This may be evidenced by polyarthritis in Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) patients, skin and kidney manifestations in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) or asterixis and encephalopathy in Uremia for example.

# Treatment / Management

All patients suspected to have acute pericarditis should initially undergo an ECG, echocardiogram, and chest X-ray. Myocardial inflammatory and injury markers such as ESR, CRP and troponins should also be obtained (Class I, LOE C).

First level tests such as a complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, liver function tests, and thyroid stimulation hormone level are recommended if further work up is pursued and may be suggestive of a particular etiology such as uremia or infection. In select patients, blood cultures, viral seromarkers and tuberculosis testing (such as PPD or quantiferon TB essays) may be performed as well. HIV testing with antibody/antigen testing or nucleic acid testing (NAT) should be obtained if patients are found to have an opportunistic infection, since a strong correlation exists between an immunocompromised state, and fungal or tuberculosis infection.

The ESC 2015 guidelines support obtaining a computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as a Class I recommendations when second-line testing is pursued.

Emergent pericardiocentesis is recommended in patient presenting with cardiac tamponade.

An exudative pericardial effusion warrants empiric anti-tuberculosis treatment in parts of the world where tuberculosis is endemic, even while cultures are still pending. If a positive diagnosis  of tuberculosis is confirmed, then medical therapy with at least 6 months is recommended (Class I, LOE C), and pericardiectomy should be consider if there is failure of improvement on therapy within 4-8 weeks (Class I, LOE C).

Pericardial fluid analysis with cytology is recommended for the confirmation of malignant pericardial disease (Class I, LOE B). Further testing may include pericardial biopsy and tumor marker testing such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA-19 (Class IIa, LOE B), although evidence for their accuracy in distinguishing malignant effusions is limited.

The incidence of uremic pericarditis has seen significant decline with the introduction of dialysis.

Cardiac catheterization may be considered to assess for diastolic pressure equalization, and respiratory interventricular dependence if constrictive pericarditis is suspected, but is not recommended diagnostically for patients with acute pericarditis only.

Acute pericarditis treatment begins by addressing the underlying cause. Patients with uremic pericarditis should undergo more frequent dialysis, while patients with malignancy and tuberculosis should receive therapy directed at the primary disease process. For tuberculosis, standard therapy is with quadruple antibiotics (rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol) for at least 2 months followed by isoniazid and rifampicin for a total of 6 months, with or without adjunctive high-dose prednisolone as discussed above.

Most patients will have idiopathic acute pericarditis, and can be managed safely on an outpatient basis with medical therapy alone. Activity restriction beyond that of sedentary life is also advised until symptoms are resolved or CPR levels normalize.

In the majority of patients, empiric treatment with high dose anti-inflammatory agents in addition to colchicine is recommended, and NSAID therapy should continue until symptom relief. This period is typically between 3 days to 2 weeks. Possible regimens include Ibuprofen 600mg every 8 hours, indomethacin 25-50mg every 8 hours, or naproxen 500-1000mg every 12 hours.

The COPE trial randomized 120 patients to conventional therapy with ASA, versus conventional therapy with adjunctive colchicine and followed them over a period of 18 months. The latter group demonstrated less symptom persistence at 72 hours (11.7% versus 36.7%; P=0.003) and significantly less recurrent episodes (10.7% versus 32.3%; P=0.004) as compared to the control group.

Low to moderate doses (i.e. prednisone 0.2–0.5 mg/kg/day or equivalent) with slow taper may also be used if a regimen of NSAIDS/ASA and colchicine is contraindicated. While the latter often offers rapid clinical improvement, there is ample evidence that steroid use increases the risk for recurrent pericarditis after discontinuation of therapy.

Response to therapy is assessed clinically based on symptom relief, but serial CRP measurements can be helpful as well. If there is an incomplete response to anti-inflammatory agents (ASA or NSAIDs) with adjunctive colchicine (such as recurrent pericarditis), then the addition of steroids as triple therapy should be considered after an infectious etiology is ruled out.

For corticosteroid-dependent recurrent pericarditis, steroid-sparing immunosuppressive agents such as azathioprine, IVIG or anakinra (an IL-1 receptor antagonist) may be used as third line therapy.

Certain forms of acute pericarditis, such as iatrogenic pericarditis and uremic pericarditis have been associated with increased risk of hemorrhagic pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade in small studies. Consequently, and despite the lack of strong evidence, it may be prudent to stop anticoagulation when feasible in those patients.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Pleurisy

- Pneumonia

- Acute MI

- Bony pain

- Costochondritis

- Angina

# Prognosis

The overall prognosis of acute pericarditis is excellent, with most patients experiencing a complete recovery. Recurrent pericarditis can occur in up to 30% of patients not treated with colchicine as per current date, and constrictive pericarditis is exceedingly rare following idiopathic acute pericarditis, occurring in <1% of cases. However, the risk of constriction increases with specific etiologies, especially purulent bacterial or tuberculosis pericarditis, and maybe as high as 30%.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis and management of pericarditis is not always simple and is best done with an interprofessional team that includes a cardiologist, radiologist, cardiac surgeon, infectious disease expert, the primary care provider and nurse practitioner. The majority of patients will present with vague chest pain and the diagnosis may be confused with a heart attack, pleurisy or angina. It is vital to consult with a cardiologist before embarking on treatment.

In most cases, conservative treatment with NSAIDs will help resolve the disorder but an echo is usually done to ensure that the patient does not have pericardial fluid and/or tamponade. If drainage of the pericardial fluid is required, the patient needs to be kept NPO and educated about the treatment options. Patients with uremic pericarditis need to be closely followed up as recurrence of pericardial fluid and signs of pericarditis are not uncommon. Patients need to be told to limit strenuous activity which may increase the risk for hypotension and arrhythmias. The pharmacist should educate the patient about medication compliance. If colchicine is used as a preventive remedy, the patient should be informed about the adverse effects and the importance of follow up. A cardiology nurse should follow up on these patients until all symptoms have subsided. At all times, members of the interprofessional team should communicate with each other to ensure improved outcomes.

The prognosis for most patients is good but often recovery can take weeks or months.