Managing astigmatism requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including optometrists, nurses, ophthalmologists, ophthalmic technicians, and opticians. When a patient walks into the clinic, the nurse and the doctor is responsible for taking a thorough history taking and a complete ophthalmic examination. It includes the following:

- History - Habitual squinting is an attempt to reduce the size of the circle of most minor confusion on the retina. A history of amblyopia, as well as corneal disease or cataracts, can be a cause of astigmatism. A family history of keratoconus or certain corneal dystrophies can increase the suspicion of astigmatism.

- Visual acuity – Distant vision, near vision. A report of letters appearing "three dimensional" or with an associated shadow is indicative of astigmatism and, in essence, a description of the image formed at different locations along the conoid of Sturm.

- Refraction – Subjective and objective. An awareness of the need for objective refractive findings such as autorefraction or retinoscopy is essential, as subjective refraction is often hard in patients with higher amounts of astigmatism.

- Intraocular pressure measurement

- Anterior segment examination. The main causes of astigmatism are caused by the cornea and the crystalline lens.

- Fundus examination. This part of the exam will help rule out posterior segment causes of blurred vision and eliminate the rare occurrence of retinal astigmatisms, such as can, in theory, be caused by a retinal staphyloma or other types of scleral distortion.

Additional testing may be indicated:

- Rigid gas permeable contact lens over-refraction. This test allows the neutralization of corneal astigmatism.

- Corneal topography or keratometry. This test may allow the clinician to detect astigmatism and determine whether it is of the regular or irregular type.

If an organic cause is found, it must be treated accordingly. If not, the patient must then be offered optical correction through spectacles or contact lenses. They must also be offered refractive surgery if they fit the criteria. Regular follow-up visits to check for compliance and progression are equally important in managing astigmatism.