This article aims to explain the procedure for treating exhaled ribs using the muscle energy Osteopathic Manipulative Treatment (OMT) method. For example, OMT can be used with various techniques, including high velocity/low amplitude, muscle energy, strain-counterstrain, and myofascial release.

These techniques can be direct or indirect and passive or active. A direct technique is when the restrictive barrier is engaged, while indirect techniques occur when forces are applied away from the restrictive barrier. Passive techniques are ones in which the operator does the work, and the patient is in a relaxed position, and an active technique is one in which the patient is helping with the treatment.

Muscle energy is a direct and active technique such that the patient is placed into their restrictive barrier and participates in their own treatment. When the patient is placed into their restrictive barrier, they participate by actively moving towards their neutral position. During this time, the physician holds an isometric counterforce.

Rib dysfunctions can cause multiple symptoms, including musculoskeletal or chest pain, thoracic outlet syndrome, difficulty in taking a full breath, and overall worsening of respiratory pathology.

Exhaled rib dysfunctions specifically occur when two or more ribs are displaced or stuck “down” or caudad. This means that the rib is restricted during inhalation and cannot move up, preventing the ribs from moving during inhalation. In this case, the top-most rib within the group of ≥ 2 adjacent ribs is targeted for treatment.