Defects affecting specific cone opsin types have associated prefixes – protan for L cones, deutan for M cones, and Tritan for S cones. For example, if L cone opsin is present but abnormal, the patient would be classified as a ‘protanomalous trichromat.’ In contrast, complete loss of L cone opsin would yield a ‘protanope dichromat.’ Such dichromats would be unable to distinguish red and green only see functional combinations of two hues. At the same time, anomalous trichromacy can range in severity from essentially normal color vision to functional dichromacy.

Diseases that primarily affect the cone-rich macula, such as age-related macular degeneration (AMD), may demonstrate early losses in color discrimination before detectable changes in retinal morphology or visual acuity. The loss of color discrimination can affect both the red-green and blue-yellow axes, and severity appears to correlate with an increased quantity of drusen and reticular pseudodrusen in the retina.

Glaucoma and ocular hypertension, diseases that can result in compression of the optic nerve, may also cause color vision defects. Color perception may suffer alteration before other functional or structural changes are detectable and appear to primarily affect the blue-yellow axis.

Numerous other disorders, both specific to the visual system and global, have been associated with color vision abnormalities. Retinal tears and detachments may lead to loss of color vision, as can disorders affecting the optic nerve, including hereditary optic neuropathy, optic neuritis, and optic nerve compression. Many patients with diabetic retinopathy exhibit deficiencies in color vision as well. Multiple drugs have implications in dyschromatopsia, including PDE5 inhibitors, chloroquine, ethambutol, and digoxin, as well as environmental effects such as UV exposure, industrial chemicals, and hypoxia.

Gene therapy is a promising avenue of treatment for many congenital retinal dystrophies. Many genetic disorders present in non-human animals that are analogous to conditions seen in humans. Translational therapies for gene replacement, typically mediated by recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV), have been successful in treating multiple congenital defects affecting color vision. RPE65 genetic defects, which affect the ability of the retinal pigment epithelium to recycle retinyl esters and can cause Leber congenital amaurosis, was successfully treated with gene therapy in dog models. The treatment has since been extended to humans, yielding the first FDA-approved gene therapy treatment for inherited retinal dystrophy.