**FDA Approved Uses**

1. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are useful as adjunctive therapy in systolic heart failure (HF). HF guidelines recommend ACE inhibitors to help prevent HF in patients with a reduced ejection fraction (EF) who also have a history of myocardial infarction (MI), and to prevent HF in any patient with a reduced ejection fraction (EF), or to treat patients with heart failure and reduced EF.

2. ACE inhibitors can be used to treat hypertension (HTN) either alone or in conjunction with other antihypertensives in adults or children over six years old. Hypertension guidelines recommend initiating ACE inhibitors to manage HTN to lower blood pressure (BP). According to the American College of Cardiology, treatment recommendations exist based on various patient populations.

- Patients with daytime BP out of the office at greater than 135 mmHg systolic or greater than 85 mmHg diastolic; this is substitutable with office blood pressure readings of over 140/90 mmHg

- Patients with an in-office or out-of-office BP exceeding 130 mmHg systolic or over 80 mmHg diastolic and the addition of the following factors:

- 
              
- History of cardiovascular disease
              
              
- Type 2 diabetes mellitus
              
              
- Chronic kidney disease
              
              
- Age 65 or older

3. Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and HTN:

- Regardless of race or diabetes mellitus status, ACE inhibitors are recommended as initial therapy to improve kidney outcomes.

- In the non-Black population with diabetes mellitus and without CKD, initial antihypertensive therapy should include either thiazide diuretic, calcium channel blocker (CCB), ACE inhibitor, or angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB).

- In the Black population with diabetes mellitus and without CKD, initial antihypertensive therapy should include a thiazide diuretic or CCB instead of an ACE inhibitor or ARB.

4. Patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) and HTN:

- ACE inhibitors are recommended as part of a regimen in patients with HTN and chronic stable angina if there is a history of left ventricular dysfunction, diabetes mellitus, or CKD.

5. Patients with ST-elevated myocardial infarction (STEMI):

- ACE inhibitors should be initiated within 24 hours of all STEMI, specifically in patients with anterior MI, heart failure, or left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF) of 40% or less.

- ACE inhibitors show efficacy in treatment due to the overall reduction of mortality in multiple disease states. There is evidence of mortality benefits in patients with hypertension, heart failure, Acute MI, and diabetes mellitus.

**Non-FDA Uses**

ACE inhibitors may delay the progression of nephropathy and reduce the risks of cardiovascular events in hypertensive patients with diabetes mellitus type I and type II. The addition of an ACE inhibitor has shown a significant reduction in serum creatinine in hypertensive and normotensive patients with albuminuria. ACE inhibitor therapy has shown a significant decrease in the progression of diabetic nephropathy.

Krecak I. et al. found evidence that ACE inhibitors might have renoprotective properties in patients with polycythemia vera.

Yao J.et al. discovered that ACE inhibitors improve insulin sensitivity in hypertensive patients with diabetes mellitus compared to angiotensin II receptor blockers.

Salmenkari H. et al. found evidence that ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers use in patients with inflammatory bowel disease have fewer hospitalizations, glucocorticoid use, and a milder disease course.