A history of a patient with a viral prodromal period and facial nerve palsy may indicate Bell palsy or RHS. Asking the patient about the development of vesicular eruptions will help distinguish this further. A good otological history (e.g., otalgia, discharge, hearing loss, feeling of fullness in the ear, tinnitus, dizziness) will help to elicit a potential otitis externa/media. It may also assist in the diagnosis of an acoustic neuroma or cholesteatoma. A neurological history is relevant in the context of a UMN facial nerve palsy to help potentially elucidate the cause.

Testing facial movements will help distinguish between an upper (the forehead will be spared) and lower (entire facial movements are compromised) motor neuronal lesion. The degree of facial nerve paralysis is evaluated using the House-Brackman grading system.

**Grade          Definition**

- I               Normal symmetrical function throughout

- II              Slight weakness on close inspection + slight asymmetry of smile

- III             Obvious non-disfiguring weakness, complete eye closure

- IV              Obvious disfiguring weakness, cannot lift the brow, incomplete eye closure, severe synkinesis

- V               Barely perceptible motion, incomplete eye closure, slight movement of corner of mouth, absent synkinesis

- VI              No movement, atonic

Importantly, the difference between grades 3 and 4 is eye closure.

Additional tests used to assess the lesion of the facial nerve clinically are as follows:

- Blink test (corneal reflex) – when tapping on the patient’s glabella, a suspension in blinking will occur on the affected side (the ophthalmic division of trigeminal nerve controls afferent limb, the efferent limb is the temporal and zygomatic branch of the facial nerve)

- Schirmer test (assessing lacrimation of the lacrimal gland) – lacrimation will be decreased by 75% compared to the normal side using a folded strip of blotting paper in the lower conjunctival fornix.  It is important to note that a unilateral lesion within the geniculate ganglion can produce bilateral lacrimal deficiencies.

- Stapedial test – This involuntary reaction in response to high-intensity sound stimuli causes contraction of the stapedius muscle and gets mediated by the facial nerve. Testing of the stapedius reflex can be performed using tympanometry.

- Salivary Test – Salivation rate is assessed from a submandibular duct following stimulation with a 6% citric acid solution. If positive, there will be a reduction in salivation by 25% at the affected side and indicate a lesion at or proximal to the root of the chorda tympani.

- Taste test – though using salt sweet, sour, and bitter tastes along the lateral aspects of the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. A positive result will indicate a lesion at or proximal to the root of the chorda tympani.

**Examine the ear**externally to ensure no evidence of otitis externa, otitis media, chronic otitis media, or cholesteatoma. The presence of vesicles may indicate Ramsay-Hunt syndrome.****

**Examine the parotid**for any masses that may reveal a parotid malignancy.  Examination of the oral cavity for parapharyngeal swellings and vesicular eruptions is also considered essential.

**Examine the eye**, initially to establish closure of the lid. If the eye is unable to fully close, then urgent ophthalmology referral and provision of eye protection equipment is advised.