Antibiotic resistance is a global crisis. Not only a human population but also food and food animals are equally contributing to antibiotic resistance. Animals also carry bacteria in their gut which might also include antibiotic-resistant bacteria. People can get infections from handling or eating meat or food contaminated with resistant bacteria, from contact with animal waste, from touching animals without proper handwashing. Antibiotics are actively used in livestock farming for treatment purposes and used in subtherapeutic levels for growth promotion and increase productivity.

As per WHO, antimicrobial use in livestock can be classified into:

- Therapeutic use- treating animals when clinically diagnosed with illness/infection. According to the US department of agriculture, 1/4th of all dairy cows in 2014 were diagnosed with clinical mastitis, and 87% were treated with mostly cephalosporins.

- Disease prevention-using antibiotics in healthy animals considered to be at risk or before the onset of clinical disease.

- Growth promotion-when the antibiotics are used at subtherapeutic levels to increase weight or efficiency of feed utilization. Proposed theories for growth promotion include alteration in the gut microbiome, decreasing competition for nutrients, and improving absorption, particularly in livestock in crowded conditions.

The study by Boeckel et al. noted that the total consumption of antibiotics in livestock in 2010 was 63,151 tons. They also projected that consumption of antimicrobials will increase by 67% by 2030. It is estimated that 65% of medically important antibiotics in the US are used for food animals, compared to 35% in humans. The antibiotics also used in humans are referred to as medically important antibiotics. This might lead to antibiotic pollution resulting in antibiotic residues in animal-derived products. These products like meat, milk, eggs, when consumed by humans, can cause the emergence of resistant bacterial strains, therapeutic failure in some cases.

The Food and Drug administration report in 2019 revealed that more than 6.1 kilograms of medically important antibiotics are sold and distributed to US farmers.  The most antibiotic use was in cattle (41%), swine (42%), turkeys(10%), and chickens (3%). The most commonly used antibiotics for livestock were tetracyclines(67%), penicillin (12%), macrolides(8%). The data also revealed that sales increased by 4% compared to the year 2018.

Considering the emergent circumstance, CDC founded One health in 2009  to achieve optimum health outcomes via a multisectoral, transdisciplinary approach that recognizes the interconnection between people, animals, and the environment. The plan recommends the complete restriction of medically important antibiotics in livestock for disease prevention and growth promotion.

There are opportunities for antimicrobial stewardship on farms. Some of them are listed below:

- Farmers can eliminate the routine use of antimicrobials for growth promotion and disease prevention. Meanwhile can utilize nonantibiotic strategies.

- Grocers/Restaurants can commit to sourcing food/meat raised without antibiotics, support suppliers with clear antibiotic labeling standards.

- Medical and veterinary professions can educate the community about antibiotic resistance, collect data about prescriptions, establish standards for antimicrobial stewardship.

- Consumers can encourage and support local restaurants committed to stewardship.

- Federal and government should collect annual surveillance data about antibiotic sales, distribution, use in the livestock industry; set guidelines at a local level about right dosing, duration, drug class, and indication for the therapy.