The Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED) showed direct mortality from armed conflict ranged from 2 to 8%. The study also found an extremely variable outcome with regards to the mortality indicators and attributed it to the indirect effects of conflicts, including the devastation of health infrastructure, disease outbreaks, and effective disaster response.

Medical personnel, especially in emergency care, are expected to work under extreme duress regularly. In the case of disasters, there is added stress on the medical staff, which is further aggravated by a lack of human resources and resources, longer working hours, faster patient turnover, inadequate infrastructure, etc. These tend to overwhelm the medical system entirely and therefore require adequate planning and coordination.

The last few decades have seen the development and incorporation of simulation exercises and training into the post-graduate training courses in medical and para-medical institutes all around the globe. There has also been a massive uphaul in the development of medical infrastructure to help prepare medical personnel, including technical and non-technical staff, to cope with disasters. This response has seen a sharp increase in the number of simulation centers and simulation drills in hospitals, medical and para-medical colleges, and universities, as well as the development of specialized organizations with mandates for rapid response and mobilization of trained personnel to assist the local medical structure; this is especially true of multi-disciplinary missions during times of disaster.

Recent years have seen numerous conferences on disaster medicine as well as disaster victim identification; however, there has been discordance between the emergency medical specialists and the non-medical forensic specialists, including forensic anthropologists, forensic scientists, digital forensic specialists, etc. This disparity leads to a lack of coordination and communication between the specialists resulting in inadequate management of the dead by emergency specialists as well as inadequate management of the injured by forensic specialists.