Diabetic women with higher than normal HBA1c levels have around 22% chance of fetal complications. High glucose levels after 32 weeks of gestation have been associated with macrosomia, polycythemia, and hypoglycemia. Major complications of diabetic embryopathy are congenital malformations. The central nervous system and cardiovascular systems are mainly affected, but any organ can be affected. Around 8-12% of all diabetic pregnancies have been associated with malformations.

**Central Nervous System**

These are comprised of neural tube defects, hydrocephalus, anencephaly with or without herniated neural elements, holoprosencephaly, microcephaly, caudal dysgenesis, hydranencephaly, and many others.

**Cardiovascular System**

Transposition of large vessels with or without ventricular septum defects is the most common defect found in infants of diabetic mothers. Hypoplasia of the left heart, atrial and ventricular septum defects, hypertrophy cardiomyopathy, coarctation of the aorta, tetralogy of Fallot are some of the other heart defects.

**Perinatal Mortality of the Child**

Perinatal deaths in gestational diabetes are higher than in the background population. Stillbirths that are increased in diabetic mothers consist of 44 to 84% of all the perinatal mortality rates.

**Other Malformations**

This includes birth defects involving many other organ systems. The oculoauriculovertebral spectrum is one of the rare disorders due to defective organogenesis. It is a craniofacial disorder with associated vertebral column abnormality. Ear structure abnormality, along with hearing loss is the most common manifestation followed by hemifacial microsomia, ocular anomalies, and vertebral column anomalies. Other findings include femoral hypoplasia, renal agenesis, growth delays, and macrosomia at birth.

**Long-term Complications in Offspring**

Children born from diabetic mothers have chances of increased incidence of metabolic syndrome, diabetes, and insulin resistance later on in life. Shoulder dystocia is common in a macrosomic child during delivery. Later in life, polycythemia due to fetal hypoxia stimulated erythropoietin production, and subsequent hyperbilirubinemia is evident. Other electrolyte deficiencies such as hypocalcemia, hypomagnesia are less common. Respiratory distress due to decreased surfactant levels in premature child and hypoglycemia due to maternal hyperinsulinemia has also been reported in some cases.