Frostbite has a prejudice for distal extremities, digits, and those portions of exposed skin with decreased perfusion (nose, ears) and less insulation. As the temperature of exposed skin drops, endothelial cell damage can cause localized edema in the extremity. Hyperviscous intravascular flow and vasodilation causes slowing forces, resulting in microthrombi. The constellation of microvascular injury, venous stasis, and microthrombi all contribute to the development of ischemia attributed to frostbite. Depending on the extent of the exposure and subsequent cellular damage, injuries may be reversible or irreversible.

Normal skin blood flow is about 250 ml/min but during frostbite, the flow drops to less than 20-50 ml/min. As the temperature drops to below 0 degrees Centigrade, blood flow ceases. The slower venous system freezes before the arterial system.

Frostbite causes injury in the following ways:

- Direct damage of the cold to the tissues

- Indirect damage caused by dehydration

- Formation of ice crystals that leads to alteration in electrolytes and lipid layers

- Stasis of the microvessels leading to thrombus formation and ischemia

- Reperfusion injury

Recovery

Frostbite injury is classified into three zones which include:

- Zone of coagulation which is the most distal and often the most severely injured. Here the injury is irreversible

- Zone of stasis is the middle zone where the injury can be moderate to severe. but it reversible.

- Zone of hyperemia is the proximal zone, which is the least injured.

In most cases, recovery from frostbite can take 5-30 days, depending on the severity of injury.