The common pathway through which strangulation injuries cause morbidity and mortality is via cerebral hypoxemia and resultant cerebral ischemia. Four specific pathways are described in the literature.

- External pressure to the jugular veins prevents adequate venous return from the cerebral circulation. Backpressure prevents eventual arterial inflow and results in elevated intracranial pressures. This ultimately results in unconsciousness, depressed brainstem functions, and ultimately asphyxia and death.

- External pressure to the carotid arteries directly prevents oxygenated blood flow to the cerebral vasculature which leads to asphyxia and death.

- Pressure obstruction of the larynx primarily results in the inability to oxygenate the pulmonary vasculature. Systemic hypoxia quickly ensues of which the most pronounced effects are rapid loss of consciousness followed by death.

- Though rare, cardiac dysrhythmias may occur with pressure directed towards the carotid bodies bilaterally. This has the potential to evoke cardiac arrest, and subsequent death if not promptly recognized

Acute sequelae of rapid (or slow) loss of perfusion include various forms of anoxic brain injury. Watershed infarcts can occur in patients with chronic cerebrovascular disease. Ultimately, with a significant initial injury, diffuse cerebral edema can result which may lead to various forms of brain herniation and death. Diffuse axonal injury has also been described in the autopsy literature.

Pathophysiologic phenomenon can also be grouped in relation to the aforementioned three categories of strangulation - hanging, manual strangulation, and ligature-based injuries.

The nature of the hanging injury informs the type of pathophysiology. Judicial hangings from height can result in rapid deceleration mechanisms. Mechanical forces transmitted in this manner can result in what is described as “internal decapitation” – spinal cord transection, cervical vascular transection, and various types of spinal fractures. Classically, the "hangman's" fracture is described when deceleration causes forceful extension of the neck resulting in bilateral C2 pedicle fractures. If the force is severe enough C2 can become severely subluxated from C3, thus threatening the spinal cord. Associated hematomas may also result in neurological compromise. These fractures have been described in motor vehicle accidents where the top of the steering wheel immediately halts the forward movement of a patient's neck (should an airbag not be present) resulting in a similar hyperextension injury. Manual strangulation or hanging without a significant height drop implies less deceleration force, and fractures are not typically common in this population. Many types of cervical spine injuries in these patients are described as unstable.

Compression of the jugular veins results in acute death by causing cerebral hypoxia followed by loss of muscle tone. Once muscle tone is compromised, increased pressure is applied to both the carotid arteries and the trachea. Direct compression of the carotid arteries also leads to a decrease or loss of cerebral blood flow and brain death. The direct pressure on the carotid sinuses causes a systemic drop in blood pressure, bradycardia, and other arrhythmias. Consequences are anoxic and hypoxic brain injury death.

Ligature-based injuries can include focused force trauma to certain structures. Force applied over a smaller surface area may result in more pointed injuries rather than extensive and broader crush-type injuries. The type of ligature may also be important – barbed ligatures may cause penetrating trauma to various neck zones, and may even injure deep structures. All types of aerodigestive injuries must be considered in these patients. Fractures of the hyoid bones and thyroid cartilage result from a force directed towards these structures.

A variety of spinal cord injuries are associated with strangulation and pathophysiology is directly related to the specific mechanism. Complete cord transection might be a sign of rapid deceleration injuries. Alternatively, injury to surrounding structures may threaten nearby neurological anatomy. Hematomas and injury-related edema have all been described as mechanisms that result in spinal cord trauma. Spinal cord ischemia may result from the disruption of vessels necessary to maintain perfusion. Care must be taken in the evaluation as mechanical forces and displaced surrounding structures may injure or disrupt spinal tendons and ligaments. The pathophysiology of these injuries is diverse and if severe can lead to paralysis and ultimately death.

Facial and cervical petechiae and ecchymoses are a common injury pattern found in strangulation injuries. Pressure transmitted via compressed vasculature can result in capillary, venule, and arteriole injuries resulting in these skin findings. Facial plethora or swelling can occur due to the externally-applied pressure. Similar mechanisms result in ocular findings such as subconjunctival hemorrhages. Epistaxis from pressure has been described as well and is thought to be due to pressure-related vascular injury.

Vascular trauma may include transection and intimal tears. These injuries can lead to chronic issues and possibly pseudoaneurysms and other vascular complications. Lower pressures are needed to occlude cervical veins, and higher pressure is required for cervical artery deformation. Thrombotic events may result, which can cause acute occlusion and/or embolic phenomenon.