**Nonoperative Management**

First-line management for the treatment of lateral epicondylitis includes rest from offending activity as guided by the level of pain. Ice after activity and oral/topical NSAIDs can be used to help with pain control. Forearm counterforce straps are prescribed to relieve tension at the lateral epicondyle. These should be worn during activity. The role of counterforce straps is relatively controversial as some patients may report pain over the area of maximal tenderness secondary to direct mechanical compression on the area itself. Brace use in the form of a cock-up wrist splint can be prescribed to take the stress off of the wrist extensors.

Occupational or physical therapy focusing on forearm stretching and strengthening and progression to eccentric muscle strengthening of the common extensor tendon has also shown to be helpful. If the pain does not respond to conservative measures, consider more advanced or invasive techniques such as topical nitrates, botulinum toxin, autologous platelet-rich plasma, and dextrose prolotherapy.

**Surgical Management**

Surgery should be considered as a last resort in the management of lateral epicondylitis. Prolonged nonoperative management (i.e., 6- to 12-months) should be attempted before considering surgical management.  Specific surgical techniques utilized vary throughout the literature. Most surgeons prefer varying degrees of ECRB debridement and/or release of the tendinous origin at the lateral epicondyle. In the setting of the surgeon electing to forego an actual ECRB detachment, a generous debridement should be performed at the ECRB origin with confirmation of debridement of the pathologic tissue and stimulation of a healthy, bleeding, bony bed of tissue at the lateral epicondyle to help stimulate healing potential.