Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth is an under-recognized condition with significant morbidity and mortality. Optimal management of SIBO is by an interprofessional team of primary care physicians, gastroenterologists, surgeons, dieticians, pharmacists, and nurses. Early recognition leads to more favorable outcomes and can prevent severe malnutrition. Once SIBO is diagnosed and the patient is on antibiotics, further management should be directed at treating the underlying etiology to prevent further recurrences.

During initial treatment, nursing should monitor treatment effectiveness and progress and verify patient compliance. The patient’s calorie intake and weight assessments should be frequently monitored during and after treatment to ensure adequate recovery from their illness. Nursing should follow all these areas and report any concerns to the treating clinician. The pharmacist can assist with agent selection, verifying dosing parameters, and performing medication reconciliation. The pharmacist should also work directly with the clinician and nurse regarding potential drug-condition interactions (e.g., opioids, PPIs). SIBO management requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5] The overall outcome depends on the underlying condition's management. If the etiology is not well managed, the overall prognosis is grave.