Commonly accepted criteria for diabetic ketoacidosis are blood glucose greater than 250 mg/dl, arterial pH less than 7.3, serum bicarbonate less than 15 mEq/l, and the presence of ketonemia or ketonuria. The normal anion gap is 12 mEq/l. Anion gap greater than 14-15 mEq/l indicates the presence of an increased anion gap metabolic acidosis.

The majority of patients with DKA who present to the hospital are found to have leukocytosis. Serum sodium in the lab report is falsely low in DKA and can be corrected by adding 1.6 mEq to the measured serum sodium for each 100 mg/dl of glucose above 100 mg/dl. Serum potassium is usually elevated because of a shift of potassium from the intracellular to the extracellular space caused by acidosis and insulin deficiency. However, total body potassium may be depleted or may quickly become depleted with insulin administration. Magnesium is often low and requires repletion as well. The serum phosphate level in DKA may be elevated despite total-body phosphate depletion.

Other tests like cultures of urine, sputum, and blood, serum lipase, and chest radiograph may need to be performed depending upon the case. Pneumonia and urinary tract infections are the most common infections precipitating DKA. Measurement of glycated hemoglobin (A1C) provides information about glucose trends over months.

In acute DKA, the ketone body ratio (3-beta-hydroxybutyrate:acetoacetate) rises from normal (1:1) to as high as 10:1. In response to insulin therapy, 3-beta-hydroxybutyrate (3-HB) levels commonly decrease long before acetoacetate (AcAc) levels. The frequently employed nitroprusside test only detects acetoacetate in blood and urine. This test provides only a semiquantitative assessment of ketone levels and is associated with false-positive results. Recently, inexpensive quantitative tests of 3-HB levels have become available for common use, and these tests offer options for monitoring and treating diabetes and other states characterized by the abnormal metabolism of ketone bodies.

The serum level of pancreatic enzymes is elevated in DKA due to disorder in carbohydrate metabolism.

An ECG will help detect ischemic changes or signs of hypokalemia or hyperkalemia. Peaked T waves can signal hyperkalemia, and low T waves with U wave indicating hypokalemia.

Imaging: A chest X-ray may be done to rule out consolidation. MRI, and to some degree, CT imaging of the head can detect cerebral edema, but imaging should not delay treatment if cerebral edema is suspected.