**Anatomy of the Larynx**

The larynx is found in the anterior neck, connecting the inferior portion of the pharynx with the cervical trachea. There are 6 cartilage subunits; 3 unpaired (thyroid, cricoid, epiglottic) and 3 paired (arytenoid, cuneiform, corniculate). Each cartilage is surrounded by connective and muscular tissue. Although the hyoid bone, attached to the thyroid cartilage through the thyrohyoid membrane, is not a part of the laryngeal framework, it plays a vital role in the swallowing function of the upper aerodigestive tract.

For classification purposes, the larynx is divided into 3 regions based on embryologic development. Each region includes several subsites:

- Supraglottis: The portion of the larynx superior to the apex of the ventricle. It includes the ventricle, false vocal folds, arytenoids, aryepiglottic folds, and epiglottis.

- Glottis: Comprises the true vocal folds from the anterior to posterior commissure; the region extends anteriorly to 10 mm inferior to the true vocal folds and posteriorly to 5 mm inferior to the true vocal folds.

- Subglottis: The portion of the larynx from the inferior border of the glottis to the lower border of the cricoid cartilage.

The surface mucosa of the larynx consists of squamous epithelium with interposed mucous glands. The true vocal cords are lined by stratified squamous epithelium.

The internal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve provides the sensory innervation to the supraglottic larynx.

The supraglottic larynx has a rich lymphatic network initially draining into lymph nodes at levels II and III. The lymphatic network of the glottis is very sparse, especially the free edge of the true vocal cord, which is devoid of lymphatics. The subglottic larynx drains into the paratracheal and deep jugular lymph nodes at levels IV and VI.

**Function of the Larynx**

The 2 principal functions of the larynx are respiration and phonation.

The larynx represents the cephalad aperture of the respiratory tree, joining the upper digestive tract in the oropharynx. Three laryngeal structures protect the trachea and lower airways: the true vocal folds, the false vocal folds, and the epiglottis. The true and false vocal folds abduct during inhalation and exhalation to minimize airflow turbulence and maximize air exchange. Sensory branches of the superior laryngeal nerve create a cough reflex, rapidly closing the true and false vocal folds and increasing intra-thoracic pressure with any unexpected stimulation of the supraglottis or glottis during respiration. This helps prevent foreign material from passing into the lower airways.

The true vocal folds are the structures responsible for producing a normal voice. To do so, they must fully adduct and meet in the midline of the larynx. Air is propelled from the lungs into the trachea, then up through the vocal folds, which vibrate in a fluid wave, owing to their unique structure.

**Laryngeal Anatomy and Function Post-Laryngectomy**

The respiratory and digestive tracts normally meet in the oropharynx and hypopharynx. The posterior wall of the larynx is normally shared with the anterior wall of the esophagus, and both the laryngeal and esophageal introitus form the inferior boundaries of the hypopharynx. This anatomy allows for breathing via the nose and mouth and swallowing via the mouth.

A total laryngectomy eliminates this communication. After a laryngectomy, the entirety of the trachea is diverted to a stoma in the anterior neck, and the pharyngeal remnant is closed on itself to form a neo-pharynx. Thus there is a complete separation of the respiratory and digestive tracts. Breathing through the nose or mouth is no longer possible, as both now connect to the esophagus only. All respiration, including any needed oxygen supplementation or intubation, is via the anterior neck stoma, now an unprotected route to the trachea and lower airways. Similarly, while it is now impossible to aspirate via the nose or mouth, patients must take great care to avoid open water and be mindful of other foreign objects that can now be aspirated directly from the surface of the anterior neck.