In the cardiac operating room setting, protamine is typically administered intravenously as an infusion over 10 to 15 minutes; this slow infusion is intended to decrease the likelihood of side effects that can occur if infused too rapidly. Many anesthesiologists in the cardiac operating room setting will administer a small bolus of protamine, often called a "test dose," to allow for early detection of adverse reactions, including hemodynamic instability. Often, protamine is administered through a peripheral intravenous line rather than a central line, as studies have shown that protamine delivered through a central line can cause an increase in plasma histamine levels and a decrease in systemic vascular resistance.

Protamine is packaged as an intravenous solution in a concentration of 10 milligrams/milliliter. To neutralize heparin, 1 to 1.5 mg of protamine gets injected per 100 units of heparin. Initial protamine treatment for dalteparin, tinzaparin, or enoxaparin overdosage is 1 mg protamine per 100 units of the low molecular weight heparin given. Follow-up doses of protamine in the 0.5 mg range per 100 units can be given if bleeding continues 4 hours later. The efficacy of protamine reversing heparin can be assessed by measuring the activated clotting time or performing a thromboelastogram test. In clinical trials, hemodynamic changes and arterial oxygenation changes decreased with protamine infusion via the ascending aorta vs. a central venous line suggesting this may be the preferred route of administration.