**Monitoring**

Anesthetists should follow ASA Standards for basic anesthetic monitoring for every patient undergoing anesthesia. First and foremost, qualified anesthesia personnel should be present and vigilant throughout the surgery to monitor hemodynamic stability and adequate anesthesia and analgesia. Additional monitors to detect changes in oxygenation, ventilation, circulation, and temperature are essential for a safe and effective anesthetic. Evidence is lacking concerning the use of processed electroencephalogram (EEG), such as the bispectral index (BIS), and the incidence of postoperative cognitive disorder (POCD). However, evidence supports lower anesthetic doses decreasing postoperative delirium risk; some have hypothesized that processed EEG may improve the ability to titrate anesthetic dosage carefully. Monitoring decisions should be patient and procedure-specific, with little data supporting the general use of more invasive monitors. However, many common comorbidities in the elderly will predispose these patients to the need for invasive blood pressure monitoring and other non-standard monitors.

**Positioning**

Aging is accompanied by significant musculoskeletal changes, nearly all of which increase the risk of nerve, joint, and skin injury. Oversight during initial patient positioning and neglect during intraoperative shifting can cause increased pain and infection risks. Stiff joints, particularly in the cervical spine, hips, and shoulders, can prevent optimal patient positioning. Avoid applying force against resistance to increase joint angles, and apply supportive cushioning to rigid extremities. Geriatric patients also have fragile skin and decreased peripheral circulation. When positioning a patient, take additional care to avoid causing skin tears and bruising, and apply extra padding to areas at risk for pressure ulcers, including the sacrum and heels.

**General Anesthesia**

Changes in the dosing of volatile anesthetics have been discussed previously in this article, but there are several other considerations for older patients undergoing general anesthesia. First, a thoughtful airway management plan must be formed to intubate the patient safely. Geriatric patients are often edentulous, making mask ventilation more challenging, and have decreased cervical extension, impairing direct laryngoscopy. These patients also display a wide range of hypotensive responses to induction agents and hypertensive responses to laryngoscopy. Vasopressors and fast-acting antihypertensives should be available during induction to maintain safe and adequate blood pressure. During the maintenance and emergence phases of general anesthesia, tempered dosing and patience are valuable principles, as elderly pharmacokinetics and dynamics can delay the return of respiratory function and extubation.

**Neuraxial Anesthesia**

Several aspects of geriatric care hint toward the overall utility of neuraxial anesthesia to improve outcomes for certain surgeries. One of the most common surgeries performed almost exclusively on elderly patients, repair of fall-related hip fractures, lends itself well to spinal anesthesia. Compared to general anesthesia, Neuraxial techniques are associated with fewer pulmonary complications in patients with lung disease. Decreased requirement of sedating medications may decrease the risk of postoperative delirium. Evidence supports decreased discharge to skilled nursing facilities following total hip replacement for patients undergoing spinal anesthesia rather than general anesthesia.

Conversely, neuraxial anesthesia is not ideal for long surgeries, patients with anxiety, and patients who have difficulty lying comfortably in the required position for surgery. Regional techniques follow similar principles as neuraxial anesthesia. Preservation of pulmonary function and decreased sedation are ideal as long as the patient can safely and comfortably tolerate surgery. Neuraxial techniques are also relatively contraindicated in patients with coagulopathies (pathologic or from anticoagulant or antiplatelet medications), aortic stenosis, or hemodynamic instability secondary to hypovolemia. For regional anesthesia, relative contraindications may include anticoagulation, local tissue infection, and respiratory dysfunction for nerve blocks near the phrenic nerve (specifically interscalene and supraclavicular nerve blocks).

**IV Anesthetic Agents**

As discussed previously, geriatric patients typically require lower doses of intravenous anesthetics due to altered pharmacodynamic response and decreased drug clearance. Care and precision should be taken when administering these medications, especially in the setting of an unsecured airway, as aggressive dosing can lead to apnea or aspiration. Propofol, in particular, requires only 50 to 70 percent dosing (bolus or infusion) relative to that of a younger patient to achieve the same effect. Etomidate is often a more favorable choice as an induction agent in elderly patients with decreased cardiac reserve or hemodynamic instability. Again, a small dose is required for these patients to achieve a similar effect, primarily due to decreases in clearance and volume of distribution. Ketamine may be a practical primary or adjunct agent in certain circumstances but is rarely used in older patients due to postoperative delirium. The bronchodilatory effects of ketamine can be valuable for patients with reactive airway disease or hemodynamic instability without coronary artery disease.

**Opioids**

Elderly patients are at higher risk of opioid-induced apnea, with decreased hypoxic and hypercarbic respiratory drive to compensate for oversedation. Opioids are significantly more potent due to decreased clearance and increased neurologic sensitivity. Due to this increased potency and side effect profile, many physicians are hesitant to aggressively treat pain in elderly patients. Pain should be treated first with non-opioid analgesics, with escalating treatment to weak opioids, then strong opioids until the pain is adequately relieved. For geriatric patients, smaller initial doses should be prescribed and titrated up to meet requirements safely. Consideration should also be given to renal dysfunction, limiting the clearance of morphine and its active metabolite morphine-6-glucuronide. The use of morphine places patients with decreased renal function at risk of apnea. Meperidine should also be used with caution in geriatric patients as it significantly increases the risk of postoperative delirium.

**Neuromuscular Blockers**

The availability of neurotransmitters and neuroreceptors decreases with normal aging, with a significantly profound decline in the setting of neurologic disease. This decrease often results in a prolonged duration of neuromuscular blockade for most agents. In the setting of respiratory dysfunction, these changes increase the risk of postoperative respiratory complications and reintubation. Neuromuscular blocking agents should be avoided or used sparingly in the elderly population, considering agents eliminated by ester hydrolysis or Hoffmann degradation (atracurium, cisatracurium, and mivacurium), as these agents do not prolong paralysis in geriatric patients. Furthermore, weaker pharyngeal muscles and reflexes place older patients at higher risk for aspiration pneumonia in the setting of even minimal residual neuromuscular blockade, so complete reversal should be verified before extubation.

**Fluid Management**

Fluid management has been a problematic area of research in the general population and can be particularly challenging in elderly patients. Depending on cardiac and renal abnormalities, geriatric patients often have poor tolerance for hypervolemia and hypovolemia. To compound this issue, older patients frequently present for urgent surgery at either extreme in terms of volume status, ranging from fluid overload in the setting of congestive heart failure (CHF) to severe dehydration following a fall. Dehydrated patients may benefit from preoperative fluid resuscitation or drinking clear fluids up to two hours before surgery, while fluid overloaded patients may require hospital admission for diuresis to optimize surgical conditions. In general, moderate administration of crystalloids or colloids to maintain euvolemia and avoid CHF exacerbation, pulmonary edema, and dilutional coagulopathies is appropriate for most patients. Depending on cardiopulmonary comorbidities, lower thresholds for transfusion of blood products may also be beneficial.

**Postoperative Delirium and Cognitive Dysfunction**

Postoperative cognitive complications are the most common complication in elderly patients but are often neglected in preoperative discussions and planning. Risk factors include underlying cognitive dysfunction, history of cerebrovascular accident, depression, advanced age >70 years old, alcohol use, poor functional status at baseline, and abnormal electrolytes including sodium, potassium, and glucose. The ASA developed the Brain Health Initiative to help improve postoperative cognitive dysfunction health literacy amongst practitioners. This accessible platform contains tools and resources for practitioners and medical centers to implement preoperative cognitive assessment and postoperative cognitive dysfunction prevention guidelines. An additional goal of this initiative is to describe and study postoperative cognitive dysfunction better. In the near future, changes in nomenclature will likely rename Postoperative Cognitive Dysfunction as Perioperative Neurocognitive Disorder (PND) and further classify conditions based on duration and magnitude as delirium, delayed neurocognitive recovery, and major or mild neurocognitive disorder. Inclusion in future iterations of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) may also improve perioperative neurologic outcomes.

**Mortality**

Many different attempts and strategies have been undertaken to quantify morbidity and mortality risks in older patients in previous years. Most have discovered age to be an independent risk factor, along with the invasiveness of the surgery and baseline comorbidities. For outpatient surgery, a Medicare database review discovered a mortality rate of 0.23% on the day of surgery and a 0.66% 30-day mortality rate, with higher risk associated with ages over 85. For inpatient noncardiac surgery within the Veteran Affairs system, patients over the age of 80 had an 8% 30-day mortality risk, with a 5% increase in relative risk for each year over 80. Additional mortality risk factors include diagnosis of ischemic or nonischemic heart failure, emergency surgery, invasive surgeries (abdominal surgery, aortic aneurysm repair, and thoracic surgery), and delay in emergent surgical intervention. Even minor procedures such as colonoscopies and cataract surgeries place patients at significant risks, and thorough efforts should be taken to minimize complications.