The decision to insert a tunneled CVC into a patient is not without risk, which should be discussed with both the patient and the care team. First, the interprofessional care team needs to decide whether a tunneled CVC is necessary for the patient. Then, the patient must fully understand the reason for the catheter and the challenges that can occur as a result.

On the topic of subcutaneous ports, the oncologist must first decide whether the patient will undergo chemotherapy, whether that therapy will be oral or intravenous, when the chemotherapy will start, and how long the chemotherapy will last. While not discussed in this paper, a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) could be an option, with less risk, if the chemotherapy is planned for a few weeks to months.

Perhaps the patient would benefit from radiation first, as decided by the radiation oncologist, thus delaying port placement until radiation is completed. This should be determined by the patient's oncological team before a surgical or IR referral. Once it is decided to start intravenous chemotherapy, the port should be placed at least two weeks before the start of chemo to prevent a wound complication; this requires a conversation between the oncologist and the surgeon to ensure appropriate timing and placement of the correct subcutaneous port with the correct number of lumens. During pre-admission testing, any concerning medical history should be flagged for further workup by the surgeon, anesthesia, and nursing. During the procedure, the team in the operating room works to ensure patient safety and successful outcomes. The patient is instructed on appropriate post-operative care which includes keeping the wound clean and dry, protecting the port against injury, and if accessed, maintaining a clean, impermeable bandage over the access needle.

Will the infusions occur daily, weekly, monthly? Will the patient go to the office or an infusion center? What will the patient's insurance cover? Does the patient have appropriate transportation to and from their appointment? These questions require an interprofessional team made up of doctors, nursing case managers, and social workers. Maintaining sterility and catheter function is dependent upon the infusion nurses using appropriate techniques and instruments when accessing the port. The entire team, including the patient, should be vigilant for signs of early infection to prevent significant morbidity and mortality.