Thalassemia treatment depends on the type and severity of the disease.

**Mild thalassemia**(Hb: 6 to 10g/dl):

Signs and symptoms are generally mild with thalassemia minor and little if any, treatment is needed. Occasionally, patients may need a blood transfusion, particularly after surgery, following childbirth, or to help manage thalassemia complications.

**Moderate to severe thalassemia**(Hb less than 5 to 6g/dl):

- **Frequent blood transfusions:**More severe forms of thalassemia often require regular blood transfusions, possibly every few weeks. The goal is to maintain Hb at around 9 to 10 mg/dl to give the patients a sense of well being and also to keep a check on erythropoiesis and suppress extramedullary hematopoiesis. To limit transfusion-related complications, washed, packed red blood cells (RBCs) at approximately 8 to 15 mL cells per kilogram (kg) of body weight over 1 to 2 hours are recommended.

- **Chelation therapy:**Due to chronic transfusions, iron starts to get deposited in various organs of the body. Iron chelators (deferasirox, deferoxamine, deferiprone) are given concomitantly to remove extra iron from the body.

- **Stem cell transplant:**Stem cell transplant, (bone marrow transplant), is a potential option in selected cases, such as children born with severe thalassemia. It can eliminate the need for lifelong blood transfusions.

- ****Gene therapy:****It is the latest advancement in severe thalassemia management. It involves harvesting the autologous hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from the patient and genetically modifying them with vectors expressing the normal genes. These are then reinfused to the patients after they have undergone the required conditioning to destroy the existing HSCs. The genetically modified HSCs produce normal hemoglobin chains, and normal erythropoiesis ensues.

- **Genome editing techniques:**Another recent approach is editing genomic libraries, such as zinc-finger nucleases, transcription activator-like effectors, and cluster regulated interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) with Cas9 nuclease system. These techniques target specific mutation sites and replace them with the normal sequence. The limitation of this technique is to produce a large number of corrected genes sufficient to cure the disease.

- **Splenectomy:**Patients with thalassemia major often undergo splenectomy to limit the number of required transfusions. Splenectomy is the usual recommendation when the annual transfusion requirement increases to or more than 200 to 220 mL RBCs/kg/year with a hematocrit value of 70%. Splenectomy not only limits the number of required transfusions but also controls the spread of extramedullary hematopoiesis. Postsplenectomy immunizations are necessary to prevent bacterial infections, includingPneumococcus, Meningococcus, and Haemophilus influenzae. Postsplenectomy sepsis is possible in children, so this procedure is deferred until 6 to 7 years of age, and then penicillin is given for prophylaxis until they reach a certain age.

- **Cholecystectomy**: Patients can develop cholelithiasis due to increased Hb breakdown and bilirubin deposition in the gallbladder. If it becomes symptomatic, patients should undergo cholecystectomy at the same time when they are undergoing splenectomy.

**Diet and exercise:**

Reports exist that drinking tea aids in reducing iron absorption from the intestinal tract. So, in thalassemia patients tea might be a healthy drink to use routinely. Vitamin C helps in iron excretion from the gut, especially when used with deferoxamine. But using vitamin C in large quantities and without concomitant deferoxamine use, there is a higher risk for fatal arrhythmias. So, the recommendation is to use low quantities of vitamin C along with iron chelators (deferoxamine).