**How Does Fluoride Prevent Dental Caries?**

Fluoride exerts its anti-cariogenic action when administered topically through three mechanisms: 1) it inhibits tooth demineralization, 2) it promotes tooth remineralization, and 3) it inhibits plaque bacteria.

**Fluoride Inhibits Demineralization**

As previously mentioned, fluoride incorporated into the enamel crystal structure at the tooth developmental stages does not have a sufficient effect on the acid solubility of enamel.

At the time of bacterial acid production, the fluoride in the plaque fluid travels down with the acid into the enamel sub-surface, adsorbs into its crystal structure, and protects it against dissolution. Fluorapatite Ca10(PO4)6F2 is an enamel mineral much more resistant to acid dissolution than other tooth minerals (carbonated apatite and hydroxyapatite). Fluorapatite results from replacing the OH ion in hydroxyapatite with a fluoride ion.

**Fluoride Promotes Remineralization**

During the normal process of remineralization, the acid produced by bacteria is neutralized by the saliva's buffering action, stopping the dissolution of enamel minerals at the subsurface.

Fluoride enhances tooth remineralization by accelerating the growth of fluorapatite crystals on the partially demineralized sub-surface crystals in the carious lesion. Fluoride adsorbs into this surface and attracts calcium ions. Consequently, this new surface attracts preferentially more fluoride, resulting in a fluorapatite-like surface.

**Fluoride Inhibits Plaque Bacteria**

Fluoride ions (F-) cannot cross the bacterial wall, but at low pH values (when bacteria produce acids), the fluoride ions (F-) travel through the cariogenic bacterial cell wall in the form of HF.