Voluntary urination requires close coordination between muscles of the pelvic floor, bladder, and urethra, as well as the nerves innervating them. Any disruption along the pathway can cause urinary retention. Even if this pathway coordinates and works properly, mechanical obstruction can cause urinary retention or interfere with bladder emptying. Obstruction can result from the urethral channel's narrowing, extrinsic compression, or significantly increased sphincter muscle tone. Neurological impairment can result in incomplete relaxation of the urinary sphincter, inefficient or deficient detrusor muscle contraction, spinal cord infarction/demyelination, epidural abscess, epidural metastasis, Guillain-Barre syndrome, neuropathy, stroke, or trauma to the spinal cord.

Trauma to the lower genitourinary tract, pelvis, or urethra can also cause obstruction. Bladder outlet obstruction in women may also result from constipation, pelvic organ prolapse, pelvic masses, diverticular stones, hematomas, or kidney stones. A urinary tract infection can cause swelling or inflammation of the urethral mucosa resulting in a restricted lumen and subsequent urinary retention.

An unrecognized cystotomy during gynecologic surgery can initially appear as voiding dysfunction. Often, patients will present with postoperative urinary retention or only void in small amounts. Symptoms may be non-specific such as abdominal fullness or hematuria, while delayed findings include ileus, peritonitis, genitourinary fistula, and sepsis. This is because the cystotomy opening acts as a one-way valve that lets urine out of the bladder into the low-pressure peritoneal but does not permit drainage back into the bladder.