**Reflex Grade**

As previously mentioned, the Achilles reflex test is interpreted and graded based on reflex amplitude using a scale such as the NINDS Myotatic Reflex Scale.

- 0 = reflex is absent

- 1 = Reflex is small, less than normal; includes a trace response or a response brought out only with reinforcement

- 2 = Reflex is in the lower half of the normal range

- 3 = Reflex is in the upper half of the normal range

- 4 = Reflex enhanced, more than normal; includes clonus if present, which optionally can be noted in an added verbal description of the reflex

Additionally, a plus (+) or a minus (-) can be added to the number grade to identify an in-between grade response. A grading of 5 can also be used to denote a sustained clonus of >10 rhythmic oscillations after briskly stretching a hyperreflexic muscle, usually performed in the Achilles tendon.

**Interpretation of Observed Reflex**

When examining deep tendon reflexes, it is of utmost importance to compare each reflex response to the corresponding contralateral side. A numeric grading scale remains a subjective quantifier that depends on the examiner's preconceived idea of what a specific grade should be. However, the observation of an asymmetric reflex should be observed across all examiners regardless of their individual grade assignment. Hyporeflexia, hyperreflexia, and asymmetric responses are abnormal and should prompt further examination.

Hyporeflexia is usually indicative of LMN disease, that is, of the peripheral nerve or the anterior (ventral) horn of the spinal cord for that particular level.

The causes of LMN disease include acquired peripheral neuropathies, hereditary causes, or structural damage to the LMN.

Medications such as isoniazid, vincristine, and diphenylhydantoin are also known to cause hyporeflexia. There are multiple hereditary and immune-related causes of hyporeflexia, including but not limited to spinobulbar muscular atrophy, spinal muscular atrophy, distal hereditary motor neuropathies, and Guillian-Barre syndrome.

Hyperreflexia is indicative of UMN disease. Damage to any UMN components (corticospinal tracts, brainstem, internal capsule, and cerebral cortex) leads to a hyperactive deep tendon reflex due to the disinhibition of the spinal reflex arc.