Stereotactic radiosurgery is appropriate for patients with brain metastasis and primary tumors, including meningiomas, vestibular schwannomas, pituitary tumors, and those resistant to conventional whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT).

Brain metastases are the most common intracranial tumors in adults, they can occur in up to 30% of patients with cancer, and this incidence is increasing.

Meningiomas and vestibular schwannomas are extra-axial and have clear, defined margins, lending themselves to conformal SRS techniques. Meningiomas are commonly treated with 12 to 13 Gy in a single fraction, with control rates of 90 to 98% and toxicity less than 10%.

Vestibular schwannomas commonly receive treatment with 12 to 13 Gy in a single fraction.

For pituitary adenomas with invasion of the intrasellar region or cavernous sinus, surgery may only achieve a subtotal resection. In such cases, SRS or fractionated therapy is appropriate.

For primary gliomas, studies have looked at the impact of SRS combined with traditional therapy as a means of dose escalation and to shorten treatment time in patients with limited life expectancy.

Stereotactic radiosurgery can be used to treat vascular pathologies including arteriovenous malformations (AVMs), dural arteriovenous fistulas, and cavernomas. Rates of complete obliteration for AVMs have been quoted as 76% for low-grade Spetzler-Martin I and II, 69% for grade III, and for high-grade IV-V AVMs, obliteration rates range from 0 to 61%.

SRS was originally developed to treat functional disorders, including intractable pain, epilepsy, and movement disorders. The first procedure performed was a thalamotomy for a patient with trigeminal neuralgia.

Stereotactic radiosurgery are useful for seizure control for mass lesions, including tumors, AVMs (mean seizure remission rate of 70%), and cavernous malformations (50%).

Stereotactic radiosurgery is an option for spinal and paraspinal lesions due to its not invasive and targeted approach, including intramedullary and intradural spinal tumors.

Stereotactic body radiosurgery has been in use since the 1990s, including pulmonary and hepatic tumors.