Neurofibromatosis type 1 has cutaneous and noncutaneous manifestations. Cafe-au-lait macules are one of the seven diagnostic criteria for neurofibromatosis type 1. The lesions are sharply demarcated with a homogenous appearance. Axillary and groin freckling, or Crowe sign, is the most specific criteria for neurofibromatosis type 2. Neurofibromas can occur anywhere on the body. They can be cutaneous or internal. Dermal tumors are soft dome-shaped tumors but can also present as pedunculated, nodular, or plaque-like. Internal tumors are deeper and can occur around the eye, retroperitoneal, along with the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, or in the mediastinum. Neurofibromas have the buttonhole sign. Plexiform neurofibromas are usually present from birth and are derived from the nerve sheaths. They can feel like a "bag of worms." Cutaneous manifestation includes scoliosis, long bone dysplasia, learning difficulties, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Lisch nodules are hyperpigmentation in the iris. They do not affect vision. Optic glioma is a tumor of the optic nerve and can affect vision. It occurs in 15% of patients with neurofibromatosis type 1. Patients also have generalized hyperpigmentation, blue-red, pseudoatrophic macules, juvenile xanthogranuloma, glomus tumor, melanoma, nevus anemicus, and pruritus. Patients are at increased risk for rhabdomyosarcoma, myeloid leukemia, and pheochromocytomas.

Neurofibromatosis type 2 patients present most commonly with schwannomas and meningiomas. Bilateral vestibular schwannoma and unilateral vestibular schwannoma occur on the superior division of the eighth cranial nerve. This is the most common type, but it can occur with any cranial nerve. Involvement of the facial nerve with the vestibular schwannoma can make surgical treatment difficult. These patients present with tinnitus, hearing loss, and difficulty with balance. Patients that have the truncated protein were found to have the disease of onset at a younger age and a higher prevalence of tumors. Younger patients also have an earlier onset of symptoms.