The initial workup should start with a resting EKG. The ventricular premature complex is defined electrocardiographically as a premature QRS complex that has an abnormal morphology and duration greater than 120 milliseconds. A large T-wave classically follows it with discordant deflection (opposite polarity) from the QRS complex. There are typically no preceding P waves; however, often, the impulse generated from the VPC can be propagated in a retrograde fashion to the atria and can cause a classic compensatory pause following the VPC. This pause is due to the atrioventricular (AV) nodal blockade due to depolarization from the retrograde impulse and subsequent refractory period of the AV node. Though the sinus node fires at the appropriate time, its impulse is not propagated, as the AV node has been rendered refractory, thus causing an R-R interval that is precisely double the intrinsic R-R interval.

Usually, a VPC is followed by a full compensatory pause because the sinus node timing is not interrupted; one sinus P-wave is not able to reach the ventricles because they are still refractory from the VPC; the following sinus impulse thus occurs on time based on the sinus rate. In contrast, premature atrial contractions (PACs) are usually associated with an incomplete pause because the PAC usually enters the SA node and resets its timing, which enables the following sinus impulse to appear earlier than expected. Not all VPCs, however, get followed by a pause. If a VPC occurs early enough, especially with prolonged heart rates, it may appear sandwiched between the two normal heartbeats. This phenomenon is called an 'interpolated VPC.' The sinus impulse following the VPC is conducted with a longer PR interval because of the retrograde concealed conduction by the premature ventricular impulse into the AV-node junction, slowing the subsequent conduction of the sinus impulse.

The morphology of the QRS complex can be a means to determine the origin of the ventricular premature complex. Left and right ventricular outflow tracts are the most common sites of origin of VPCs and account for approximately two-thirds of all VPCs. The electrocardiographic morphology can similarly determine the ectopic origin of the source of ventricular tachycardia. VPCs with the morphology of a typical left bundle branch block (LBBB) and an inferior axis originating from the right ventricular outflow tract, while VPCs with the morphology of a standard right bundle branch block (RBBB) and an inferior axis originate from the left ventricular outflow tract. VPCs can originate from numerous other locations such as the ventricular free wall, ventricular septum, aortic cusp, tricuspid or mitral annuli, pulmonary artery, fascicles, or papillary muscles. Individuals with multiple abnormal QRS complexes classify as having multifocal VPCs, which are more common than unifocal VPCs. VPCs are also definable by the pattern in which they occur relative to intrinsic beats. Bigeminy indicates a VPC following a single, standard QRS complex, whereas trigeminy indicates a VPC following two normal QRS complexes. Multiple successive VPCs also have a distinct annotation; two VPCs successively is a couplet, three VPCs successively is a triplet, and more than three successive VPCs classify as a run of VPCs or ventricular tachycardia. When there are more than three consecutive VPCs, the term used is non-sustained ventricular tachycardia, and the term sustained VT is when the duration lasts more than 30 seconds. Couplets can be further defined by the interval between the ectopic, ventricular premature complexe, and the subsequent usually conducted beat from the SA node. When the interval between the VPC and a regular beat is stable, it is called fixed coupling. Variable coupling is when these intervals change from beat to beat. VPCs are considered "frequent" if they occur more than 30 times per hour or greater than 20% of total heartbeats.

In addition to a resting EKG, the clinician should obtain ambulatory EKG monitoring for a minimum of 24-hours with a device such as a Holter monitor. If patients are particularly symptomatic, and the initial 24-hour monitoring is unrevealing, an event recorder or loop recorder can provide prolonged monitoring. It is also reasonable to evaluate for underlying electrolytes abnormality, with specific attention to serum potassium and magnesium levels. Additional laboratory evaluation with urine drug screen, TSH level, cardiac biomarkers (troponin), and serum digoxin level merit consideration when indicated. In most patients, especially those who are symptomatic, evaluation with a transthoracic echocardiogram should be considered to evaluate for underlying structural cardiac abnormalities. Further evaluation with exercise/chemical stress testing, nuclear myocardial perfusion imaging, coronary angiography, and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), should also be considered on a case-by-case basis for each patient.