SEA can be catastrophic in no time. The progression of neurologic deterioration to severe spinal cord dysfunction can occur in a matter of just a few hours, making the diagnosis and treatment imperative. The treatment usually comprises decompressive surgery and drainage of the abscess (considered the gold standard under most circumstances), eradication of the primary underlying infectious focus (if detectable), and parenteral antibiotic therapy (to target the likely etiologic agents such as coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS), streptococci, and gram-negative rods). Most authors treat posterior epidural abscesses by posterior laminectomy, drainage of infected and granulation tissue, and normal saline irrigation. The surgeon usually places a drainage system and continues to irrigate the abscess for several days post-surgery until the infection is completely resolved. A combination of third-generation cephalosporin (ceftriaxone) with another antimicrobial showing antistaphylococcal activity (rifampicin, nafcillin, or fosfomycin) is recommended. Physicians should treat patients with antibiotic therapy for 4 to 6 weeks unless there is associated osteomyelitis, in which case they should continue the treatment for 6 to 8 weeks.

With posteriorly located abscesses that are extensive and spread out, one can use CT-guided needle aspiration instead of surgery in select cases with no major spinal cord compression signs or neurologic deficit.

IEA treatment usually requires a combination of a drainage procedure and antibiotic therapy, like most abscesses. Someone can use craniotomy or simple burr holes for drainage. If it involves the dura, graft or other occlusive approaches might be helpful. After clinicians get samples and cultures, they should start antibiotics as soon as possible. Since this is a relatively rare disease, information available for antibiotic choice is mostly anecdotal. They should choose antibiotics for Streptococcus, Hemophilus, and anaerobes to cover infections that have spread from the ear, sinuses, or other areas of the head and neck. Third-generation cephalosporins plus vancomycin plus metronidazole is one regimen. They can then change treatment based on cultures and sensitivities.