The thyroid gland is an endocrine gland that secretes thyroid hormone, a regulatory hormone with multiple critical physiologic functions. Hypothyroid and hyperthyroid states both produce a relatively non-specific constellation of symptoms, and thyroid malfunction is a consideration in the differential diagnosis for a similarly long list of symptoms. Nevertheless, hypothyroidism is classically described as producing cold intolerance, dry skin, lethargy, constipation, pretibial edema, and weight gain.

The thyroid gland is situated in the anterior neck and is invested within the middle layer of the deep cervical fascia. It is bound laterally by the carotid arteries, posteriorly by the pre-tracheal fascia and trachea, and anteriorly by the strap muscles. The right and left thyroid lobes are anterior and lateral to the trachea, joined at the midline by the thyroid isthmus. The pretracheal fascia affixes the thyroid between the 2nd and 3rd tracheal rings in most patients.

In the immediate vecinity of the thyroid gland are the parathyroid glands, which can be identified by their brownish-yellow hue as compared to the yellow hue of fat globules. The superior parathyroid glands are classically found near the posterolateral aspect of the superior pole approximately 1 cm superior to the intersection of the recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) and the inferior thyroid artery (ITA). The inferior parathyroid glands are described as being located adjacent to the inferior aspect of the thyroid lobe between the inferior thyroid artery and vein.

The thyroid gland's prominent blood supply is from the superior thyroid artery, which is the first branch off of the external carotid artery, as well as the inferior thyroid artery branching off of the thyrocervical trunk. Ten percent of patients have an additional unpaired artery, the thyroidia ima artery, via the thyrocervical trunk. Venous drainage occurs into the internal jugular vein via the superior and middle thyroid veins bilaterally, and into the brachiocephalic veins via the inferior thyroid veins bilaterally, though ectopic drainage via anterior thyroid veins is not uncommon.

The vagus nerve gives off two branches bilaterally, the superior and the recurrent laryngeal nerves (RLN), which are most clinically relevant during thyroid surgery. The recurrent laryngeal nerve, later branching off cranial nerve X, travels distally and takes a recurrent proximal course. On the right side, the RLN loops around the subclavian artery, and on the left side, it loops around the aortic arch and courses proximally towards the thyroid gland. The recurrent laryngeal nerves run deep to the gland and are at risk of injury during thyroidectomy. The right recurrent laryngeal nerve runs at a more oblique angle as compared to the left due to its course around the right subclavian artery.

An important variation in RLN anatomy is an anomalous or nonrecurrent RLN. A non-recurrent nerve occurs in less than 1% of patients (between 0.3% to 0.8%).  It is most common on the right side when the subclavian artery anatomy is also anomalous. A retro esophageal subclavian artery is the most common etiology, which is associated with dysphagia lusoria. A left-sided nonrecurrent nerve is more rare, due to its predominant course of looping around the aortic arch.

An additional nerve of importance is the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve (SLN). This nerve runs superior to the superior thyroid artery in 80% of cases, and inferior to it 20% of the time. The SLN branches into external and internal branches approximately 1.5 cm caudal to the carotid bifurcation. Although the SLN is often not always identified during thyroidectomy, care should be taken to be in close proximity to the superior pole when ligating the superior thyroid artery.