Widely acknowledged data has been published on the algorithmic approach to optimizing the management of terrible triad injuries, depending on the degree and pattern of presentation.

One such suggestion for diagnostics and treatment was published by Rodriguez-Martin et al. They noted CT with 3D reconstructions could help determine the type of injury. Furthermore, prior to surgery, all equipment should be prepared. They advised a posterior skin incision that permits access to the medial and lateral aspects of the elbow with recommendations to perform anterior ulnar nerve transposition to prevent ulnar nerve dysfunction postoperatively. Rodriguez-Martin et al. discussed repairing structures from deep to superficial, from the coronoid process and radial head to the lateral collateral ligament. They suggested making all attempts at preserving the radial head before opting for arthroplasty.

Upon intraoperative stability examination, if the elbow dislocated in 30 to 45 degrees of extension, they advised repairing the medial collateral ligament; a dynamic external fixator should be applied if instability persists beyond MCL repair. Careful to avoid varus stress during early motion; light movement should be initiated within the first few days following surgery. If the aforementioned protocol was followed, they documented functional elbow results with average flexion of 110 degrees.

Similarly, Pugh et al. discovered the LCL complex must be repaired in all cases, and furthermore, noted radial head fractures should be treated functionally if minimally displaced or fixed, while replacement with an implant was advised if comminution was present. Repair the anterior column by anterior capsule suture or coronoid process fixation. Pugh et al. also mentioned hinged external fixators versus discussions regarding repair of MCL should instability persist, with the greatest consideration to hinged external protection as it allows quicker articular mobilization.