The presentation and clinical progression of Lemierre disease can usually be divided into 3 main phases. These phases may also serve to diagnose the syndrome.

**Oropharyngeal infection**: The clinical features of Lemierre syndrome begin with an oropharyngeal infection with subsequent febrile episodes and rigors anywhere from 4 to 7 days after the initial illness. Early diagnosis can be challenging as the symptoms are non-specific and usually attributable to self-limited pharyngeal infections. Over two-thirds of patients recount a pharyngeal infection at the onset of the illness, but rarely the illness has been described in the setting of parotitis, otitis media, mastoiditis, sinusitis, and dental infections. Patients with confirmed Epstein-Barr infections may also develop LS, and seropositive patients with mononucleosis can suffer diagnostic delays when LS is not considered as an alternative diagnosis. The persistence of fever and worsening clinical status at 1 week can be an important clinical clue.

**Infection Extension to the Paraphernal Space of the Neck with Thrombophlebitis of the Internal Jugular Vein**: Neck tenderness and swelling may be an early clinical sign that pharyngitis has extended beyond the oropharynx. Unilateral tenderness and swelling at the mandibular angle, known as the “cord sign,” indicates internal jugular thrombosis, but is only present in 25% to 45% of cases. A focused exam of the neck including the suprasternal and supraclavicular regions for signs of cutaneous cellulitis should also be performed and can indicate an extension of the infection to cervical veins and the mediastinal structures.

**Septic Emboli**: OnceF. necrophorum has invaded the cervical veins, septic emboli occur. The most frequently affected organ is the lungs (85%), but joints, liver, kidney, brain, bones, heart and meninges can all be involved. Bacteremia is associated with fever, lethargy, or shock, as well as end-organ damage. Septic shock occurs in approximately 7% of cases. Acute respiratory distress syndrome requiring mechanical ventilation may affect up to 10% of patient presentations.