In normal patients, the ScvO2 is 2 to 3% lower than SmvO2 because the lower body extracts less oxygen than the upper body. In non-shock conditions, there is a good correlation between ScvO2 and SmvO2. However, in shock, there are changes in regional blood flow and oxygen extraction. There is a decrease in mesenteric and renal blood supply (with an increase in O2 extraction) and redistribution of blood flow to the GI tract and the brain in the later stages of shock. Thus, the absolute numerical values of ScvO2 and SmvO2 are not comparable. However, the trends in change parallel one another, and therefore the trend of ScvO2 is often used as a substitute for SmvO2. Additionally, it is important to note that factors such as sedation, recent intubation, and position of the tip of the central catheter (closer to the right atrium, more comparable to SmvO2) must be taken into consideration when interpreting the ScvO2 values. In critical illnesses, ScvO2 is estimated to be higher than SmvO2 by 7% +/- 4%.

PACs are preferred over CVCs in selected cases of patients with critical illnesses. It is a valuable diagnostic and hemodynamic monitoring tool that provides data on mixed venous oxygen saturation, cardiac chamber pressures, CO, and more. Its use in cardiac surgery has shown an overall benefit with a decrease in length of hospital stay and reduced cardiopulmonary morbidity. However, there is an increased occurrence of infections. In patients with sepsis, PACs have failed to demonstrate a clear mortality benefit. Due to its disputed efficacy and safety, its use is limited to aid decision-making in severely ill patients and unresponsive to initial resuscitative measures.

**Values and interpretation of SmvO2:**

**1. SmvO2 >75%**

Normal oxygen extraction (Indicates adequate O2 supply)**2. 75% >SmvO2 >50%**

Compensatory oxygen consumption (Indicates an increase in O2 demand or a decrease in DO2)**3. 50% >SmvO2 >30%**

Exhaustion of extraction (Indicates the beginning of lactic acidosis as the 'critical DO2' is reached and no more oxygen can be extracted)**4. 30% >SmvO2 >25%**

Severe lactic acidosis**5. SmvO2 <25%**

Cell death