In the absence of a consistent definition of neonatal hypoglycemia, recommendations differ as to the lower level of glucose that is acceptable and when intervention is necessary. Though strategies focus on target glucose concentrations, the ultimate goal of management is to reduce the risk of brain injury and long-term neurodevelopmental deficits that may correlate with hypoglycemia.

Early initiation of breastfeeding is crucial for all infants. For asymptomatic infants at risk of neonatal hypoglycemia, the AAP recommends initiating feeds within the first hour of life and performing initial glucose screening 30 minutes after the first feed.

Dextrose gel 200 mg/kg massaged into the buccal mucosa is an effective treatment alternative in asymptomatic late preterm and term infants.

The AAP recommends admission to the neonatal intensive care unit and intervention with intravenous dextrose for the following

All symptomatic infants with a glucose level less than 40 mg/dL

Infants with persistent hypoglycemia despite increased feeding frequency

***Asymptomatic at-risk infants with extremely low blood glucose concentrations <25 mg/dL in the first 4 hours of life or <35 mg/dL at 4 to 24 hours of life.

Intravenous glucose is given as a bolus of 200 mg/kg (dextrose 10% at 2 mL/kg), followed by continuous infusion of dextrose 10% at 5 to 8 mg/kg per minute (80 to 100 mL/kg per day) to maintain blood glucose levels of 40 to 50 mg/dL.

Second-line therapies for the treatment of persistent hypoglycemia include the use of corticosteroids or glucagon.

The PES recommends target glucose concentrations >50 mg/dL for infants at risk of hypoglycemia without a suspected congenital disorder during the first 48 hours of life, and >60 mg/dL thereafter.

For infants with persistent hypoglycemia, the goal of management in infants with suspected hyperinsulinism is to prevent recurrent episodes of low blood glucose levels that put the infant at risk for future episodes of hypoglycemia. For neonates with inborn errors of metabolism and impaired endogenous glucose production, the goal of management is to prevent metabolic acidosis and subsequent growth failure.