There are numerous methods to perform qualitative and quantitative analysis of a polypeptide chain. Here are two major procedures currently used:

**Edman Degradation**

This method is used to find the sequence of amino acids of a protein.

**Mass Spectrometry**

Amino acid sequencing of peptides can be performed through mass spectrometry.

- Break up the protein sample into smaller peptide fragments by the use of proteolytic enzymes.

- Extract the fragments using acetonitrile.

- Dry the fragments by vacuum.

- Insert the peptides into the vacuum chamber of a mass spectrometer such as MALDI-TOF (matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight) or ESI-TOF (electrospray ionization time-of-flight). MALDI is an ionization technique that requires a laser absorbing matrix to create ions from organic molecules with low amounts of fragmentation. ESI produces ions by applying a high voltage to a liquid to form an aerosol. TOF is a measurement of time used to measure the velocity of the ions through the vacuum chamber.

- The mass spectrometer creates a list of molecular weights (called the peak list) from the sample and is then compared against databases (i.e., GenBank or SwissProt) for relevant matches.

- Appropriate software performs a simulated chemical cleavage reaction with the relevant protein sequences found on a database. The mass of these simulated peptide fragments is calculated and then compared to the peak list of the experimental peptide masses. These results are statistically analyzed, and possible matches are shown.