# Continuing Education Activity

Neurothekeomas are rare, benign, superficial cutaneous tumors with variable histologic patterns, including myxoid, cellular, or mixed-type based primarily on the amount of myxoid matrix present. They frequently occur in the head and neck and tend to affect females more often than males, usually in the second and early third decades of life. This activity illustrates the evaluation, treatment, and complications of neurothekeomas and the importance of an interprofessional team approach to management.

**Objectives:**
- Review the definition of a neurothekeoma.
- Describe the typical presentation of a neurothekeoma.
- Explain how to manage neurothekeomas.
- Outline a well-coordinated interprofessional team approach to provide effective care to patients affected by neurothekeomas.

# Introduction

Neurothekeomas are rare, benign, superficial soft tissue tumors that most commonly occur on the head and neck. They tend to affect females more often than males, usually in the second and early third decades of life.

# Etiology

There has been considerable confusion in characterizing and defining the origin of neurothekeomas. In 1980, Gallager and Helwig first classified neurothekeomas as dermal tumors of neural origin with characteristic clinical features and distinctive histology. Clinical features included a flesh-colored or slightly erythematous nodule of soft consistency, located on the head, upper extremities, or trunk, and arising more commonly in young females. Histologic features included spindled cells arranged in nests and cords with a mucinous, myxoid background containing dermal collagen bundles. Because the tumor cells appear similar to Schwann cells on electron microscopy (spindle-shaped and surrounded by a basement membrane without myofilament or melanosomes), the authors proposed the name “neurothekeoma” from the Greek word for sheath.

# Epidemiology

Epidemiologically, females outnumber males almost 2 to 1, and although a wide age range has been reported, the tumor displays a strong predilection for the second and third decades of life.

# Histopathology

Neurothekeomas are classified histologically as myxoid, cellular, or mixed depending on the amount of myxoid matrix.

# History and Physical

Lesions are often a singular subcutaneous dome-shaped papule or nodule measuring less than 2 cm and may be skin-colored, pink to tan, or red to brown. Most lesions are asymptomatic although some may present with pain upon pressure. The lesions tend to grow slowly and are usually superficially located, with rare, deeper involvement of subcutaneous fat or skeletal muscle. The head and neck are the most common locations, but neurothekeomas may also be seen on the shoulder or upper extremities.

# Evaluation

Clinicopathologic correlation is required for the correct diagnosis of a neurothekeoma. If the lesion appears to be very superficial a shave biopsy may be appropriate; however, since these are usually dermal nodules with the possibility of deeper involvement, a deep punch, incisional, or excisional biopsy may be a better option. The chosen skin biopsy technique will vary depending on the size and location of the lesion. When the lesion is small, easily palpable, and not located in a cosmetically or functionally sensitive area, imaging is not generally necessary. There are no known pathognomic radiologic findings; computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance (MR), and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG PET) imaging may be helpful adjuncts for surgical planning and clinical correlation although histology will remain the gold standard for diagnosis.

# Treatment / Management

Surgical excision is the primary method of treatment.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for an epithelioid mass in the head and neck region includes granular cell tumor, cellular neurothekeoma, nerve sheath myxoma, neurofibroma, schwannoma, benign fibrous histiocytoma, melanocytic lesions, for example, Spitz nevus or melanoma, and infection.

Distinguishing neural and fibrohistiocytic lesions from malignancies like melanoma can be difficult given the variable presence of epithelioid cells arranged in a theque-like architecture and given the potential presence of unusual features such as nuclear atypia, mitoses, and extension into fat or skeletal muscle.

The most problematic delineation is between cellular neurothekeoma and nerve sheath myxoma because of overlapping clinical presentation and histology. In the past, nerve sheath myxoma has been inadvertently included within the myxoid variant of neurothekeoma.

# Prognosis

As neurothekeoma is considered a benign entity, the prognosis is excellent with very low recurrence rates following complete surgical excision.

# Complications

As most neurothekeomas are confined within the dermis, complications are generally minor and cosmetic related to the surgical scar. For lesions that have subcutaneous extension beyond the fat and into the skeletal muscle, there may be a risk of localized weakness related to the extent of musculature that is removed with excision.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As the pathogenesis of neurothekeoma remains unclear, there is currently no guidance that can be provided to patients regarding the prevention of such lesions.

# Pearls and Other Issues

In conclusion, neurothekeomas are rare, superficial tumors most often arising in the head and neck, shoulder, or upper extremities of younger females. The tumors tend to be small, less than 2 cm, and histologically are composed of a mix of spindled and epithelioid cells set against a variably myxoid background stroma. The neoplastic cells are generally immunoreactive with CD10, CD68, MITF-1, and NKI-C3 and negative for NSE, S100 protein, or GFAP. The recommended treatment for neurothekeoma is complete surgical excision; recurrence rates are low even for tumors demonstrating atypical features. Head and neck surgeons and pathologists need to be aware of the presentation and clinical course of this uncommon lesion, as well as its similarity to other benign and malignant tumors clinically and histologically, to adequately manage patients and provide appropriate treatment options and follow-up care.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Because neurothekeomas are benign entities that are curative with surgical excision, the best patient outcomes can be achieved with an interprofessional care team of radiologists, surgeons, pathologists, primary care providers, and nurses who are cognizant of the specific clinical presentation and characteristic patient demographics. This will aid in early recognition and proper management of this lesion. Furthermore, neurothekeomas can masquerade as other more aggressive malignancies. Thus, recognizing the morphologic and biologic spectrum of neurothekeoma and its variants helps the health care professional team render the most accurate diagnosis ultimately, and most importantly, for the patient's peace of mind.