There has been variability regarding the management of acute DVT with associated phlegmasia or gangrene. The mainstays of treatment are to prevent the propagation of intravenous clotting and further stasis, reduce venous hypertension, avoidance of hypovolemic shock with fluid resuscitation, prevent progression to fulminant gangrene and preserve tissue viability, and treatment of the underlying condition.

Supportive measures should be performed immediately and are considered first-line. The extremity should be elevated to an angle greater than 60 degrees above the level of the heart to prevent venous stasis and to increase venous return through remaining patent channels. Failure to achieve meaningful elevation may account for progression to venous gangrene. Elevation will also reduce edema and compression on the arterial system preventing circulatory collapse and hypovolemic shock. Historically, other supportive treatments, including hot packs, sympatholytics, antivasospastic drugs, and steroids have been advocated. However, these have proven little to no benefit and are not currently recommended.

Definitive management involves anticoagulation, catheter-directed thrombolysis, thrombectomy, or any combination of the three depending on the severity of the presentation. The majority of patients will respond to treatment with fluid resuscitation, aggressive elevation, and anticoagulation. Unfractionated intravenous heparin should be given immediately as a bolus dose of 10-15 units/kg and then continued as an intravenous infusion being titrated to a therapeutic active partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) of 1.5 to 2 times the laboratory control value. Patients who present with advanced PCD or venous gangrene or those with refractory venous thrombosis on anticoagulation may be considered for catheter-directed thrombolysis (CDT), percutaneous mechanical thrombectomy, or open surgical thrombectomy. Other indications for aggressive intervention will depend on the institution and interventionalists but include the following: extensive thrombus burden, symptoms in a young functional individual, thrombus in the IVC, floating thrombus, propagation of DVT while on systemic anticoagulation, or structural abnormality.

Prior to the advent of endovascular intervention, open surgical thrombectomy was the treatment of choice regarding emergent intervention. This is associated with high rates of recurrence and vessel-related complications such as denudation of the endothelium, rupture, intimal hyperplasia, and poor clinical durability. CDT, on the other hand, allows less mechanical trauma to the vessel and has become preferred over open surgical thrombectomy in patients who are candidates for lysis. Additionally, it allows for potential recanalization and clearing of thrombus from smaller venules that open surgery cannot access. Using this technique, thrombolytic agents are directly infused into the venous system through a multi-side-hole infusion catheter allowing the dissolution of a thrombus in the small distal and collateral vessels not accessible to a balloon embolectomy catheter. Heparin is infused simultaneously at a subtherapeutic rate (300 to 500 IU/hour) to prevent catheter thrombosis, and fibrinolytic is infused into the target area for a maximum period of 48 hours. The most common agent used with CDT is tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), and the usual dose is 0.5 mg to 1 mg/hour. The degree of swelling, as well as pulses, should be assessed routinely, and clotting factors should be monitored with serial lab draws to ensure close monitoring given the increased risk of bleeding. Repeat venography is subsequently performed to determine if the resolution of clot is achieved or adjunctive therapy is warranted, such as mechanical thrombectomy, or balloon angioplasty, and stenting in the setting of structural complications (i.e., May-Thurnher syndrome).

The clinical efficacy of CDT has been proven in several studies demonstrating that patients with symptomatic iliofemoral DVT had significant clinical improvement with a rapid reduction in thrombus burden, restoration of luminal patency, and a decreased risk of valvular dysfunction and post-thrombotic syndrome.

Contraindications to lysis therapy include:

- Absolute contraindications

- Active bleeding or bleeding diathesis (excluding menses)
- Closed head/facial trauma or cerebrovascular accident within 3 months
- Recent neurologic surgery
- Coagulopathy
- Intracranial vascular or malignant lesion or recent spinal surgery
- Prior intracranial hemorrhage

- Relative contraindications

- Surgery within the previous 10 days
- Severe uncontrolled hypertension on presentation
- Recent trauma or gastrointestinal hemorrhage or active peptic ulcer
- Severe liver or kidney disease
- Traumatic or prolonged CPR
- Current use of anticoagulant with INR > 1.7 or PT >15s
- Pregnancy

Percutaneous mechanical thrombectomy (PMT) has also proven to be an effective alternate or adjunctive therapy to CDT using a mechanical thrombectomy catheter that aspirates or macerates the thrombus. There are multiple catheter-directed techniques for mechanical thrombectomy and manual extraction of thrombus, including rheolytic, rotational, aspiration, and angioplasty.  Comparing PMT to CDT, P.H. Lin et al. reported advantages of PMT being less thrombolytic infusion time compared to CDT alone and a lower risk of bleeding. Additionally, they found there were significantly shorter ICU stays as well as shorter hospital length of stay and the need for fewer venograms.

In addition to bleeding complications, in patients who are undergoing CDT or PMT, there is also a risk for pulmonary embolus. Lysis can cause clot fragmentation, and manipulating wires within the veins may dislodge thrombus. Given this concern, consideration should be made for the placement of an IVC filter in select patients with extensive burden that extends into the IVC. Recently, a randomized controlled trial FILTER-PEVI (Filter Implantation To Lower Thromboembolic Risk in Percutaneous Endovascular Intervention) demonstrated an eightfold increase in symptomatic iatrogenic PE in patients who did not receive a filter prior to intervention. However, mortality was no different in those without a filter compared to subjects who had a filter placed.

As mentioned previously, open surgical therapy is performed relatively infrequently. Venous thrombectomy in the form of open exposure followed by passing a Fogarty balloon catheter proximal and distal was historically performed. Other more involved procedures have also been described, such as transabdominal cavotomy and thrombectomy, but this was also more often performed prior to the advent of endovascular, percutaneous therapy and no longer has a role in the treatment of PCD and venous gangrene. Overall, they have been shown to decrease the risk of fatal and non-fatal pulmonary embolus; however, the procedure itself is very morbid.

Although not often encountered in patients who present with phlegmasia and venous gangrene, compartment syndrome should always be considered. If there is a question following the restoration of arterial inflow and venous outflow to the limb, a four-compartment fasciotomy to prevent muscle necrosis should be performed. If amputation is ultimately required because early efforts with fasciotomy have failed, it is recommended this be delayed if possible to give the limb time to demarcate and for edema to improve.