**Closed-globe Trauma**

**Early-onset**

**Traumatic Hyphema**

As a result of sudden compression-decompression forces onto the globe, the highly vascularized ciliary body and iris, most commonly at the angle, can be torn due to the sudden increase in IOP, limbal tissue stretching, posterior and peripheral flow of aqueous, and posterior displacement of the iris and lens, causing bleeding within the anterior chamber (AC). Depending on the extent of the blunt trauma, injury can occur to various angle structures. Commonly there is damage to the iris insertion manifesting as angle recession, followed by cyclodialysis and, very uncommonly, iridodialysis.

The associated injury to vascular structures leads to hemorrhage into the AC, causing a fluid level of blood called hyphema. If blood fills the entire volume of the AC, this is referred to as a total hyphema, also known colloquially as an “8-ball” hyphema.

Rebleeds, or secondary hemorrhages, can occur 2 to 5 days after the initial bleed and are estimated to have an incidence of 20 to 25% in traumatic hyphema.

The severity of hyphema can be graded according to the amount of blood within the AC, which correlates with an increased likelihood of IOP elevation. Grade I, II, III, and IV hyphemas correspond to less than one-third, one-third to one-half, more than half, and the entire AC being filled with blood, respectively.

**Traumatic Iritis**

The mechanism of iritis (anterior uveitis) post-trauma is still poorly understood. It has been suggested that tissue damage from trauma triggers an innate immune response mediated by an increase in vascular permeability and an influx of inflammatory mediators.

Inflammatory cells and precipitates within the AC may block the trabecular meshwork, leading to reduced aqueous outflow and a secondary increase in IOP. Reduced outflow can also be due to inflammation of the trabecular meshwork itself (so-called “trabeculitis”) due to trauma, leading to trabecular meshwork congestion and resultant reduced outflow facility.

**Trabecular Meshwork Injury**

Trauma to the eye can mechanically liberate pigments into the AC, which may block aqueous outflow through the trabecular meshwork, resulting in a rise in IOP.

Late-onset traumatic glaucoma can also occur due to trabecular meshwork injury, or more accurately, the tissue healing process following trabecular meshwork injury. Visible linear tear in the trabecular meshwork under gonioscopy with extension into the Schlemm’s Canal on ultrasound biomicroscopy had been reported after blunt trauma to the globe.

Superficial trauma tends to present as a flap at the scleral spur on the gonioscopy, while deeper tears may show shredded iris processes. Subsequent tissue remodeling from scarring along the angle structures can result in late-onset IOP elevation due to a gradual reduction in aqueous outflow.

**Suprachoroidal Hemorrhage**

Suprachoroidal hemorrhage is most commonly associated with intraocular surgery but can, of course, occur after blunt or penetrating trauma to the globe. The mechanism of hemorrhage in the suprachoroidal space is thought to be secondary to tearing forces on the long or short posterior ciliary arteries - either due to direct trauma or rapid decompression of the globe in the setting of intraocular surgery and globe penetration.

**Late-onset**

**Steroid Response**

Topical corticosteroid preparations are commonly used in an ocular trauma setting to reduce intraocular inflammation. Many patients develop an associated IOP elevation, most commonly 3 to 6 weeks following the initiation of topical corticosteroid treatment.

The mechanism of steroid-induced IOP elevation was thought to be due to increased outflow resistance at the trabecular meshwork. This is secondary to the increased expression of glycosaminoglycans and extracellular matrix proteins.

**Angle Recession**

Angle recession is defined histologically as a rupture between the circular and longitudinal fibers of the ciliary muscles.

Reduced outflow is also felt to be caused by the loss of tension of the ciliary muscle on the scleral spur due to the tearing of ciliary muscle fibers, leading to the narrowing of Schlemm’s canal.

**Lens Subluxation and Dislocation +/- Secondary Pupil Block**

Ocular trauma can cause posterior displacement of the lens-iris diaphragm, subsequently rupturing the zonular fibers that hold the lens in place. A lens may be subluxated when greater than 25% of the zonules are torn, such that the lens is partially displaced from its normal centralized position. Lens dislocation occurs when there is a complete disruption of all or most of the zonules. The lens can then become dislocated into the anterior chamber through the pupil or into the vitreous cavity. IOP elevation can occur via several mechanisms, including pupil block with intermittent or acute angle-closure by a subluxated lens, the release of pigments from chafing of a subluxated or dislocated lens on the iris, and trabecular meshwork blockage from vitreous strands prolapsed into the AC, in the setting of a frankly dislocated lens into the vitreous cavity.

**Phacomorphic Glaucoma**

Trauma, both blunt and globe-penetrating (in this scenario, without breaking the lens capsule), can lead to the rapid development of a large intumescent cataract. The now bulky lens can lead to secondary angle closure due to the forward displacement of the iris and subsequent pupillary block.

**Phacolytic Glaucoma and Lens Particle Glaucoma**

Hypermature cataracts that occur after trauma may be associated with microscopic defects of the lens capsule due to the rapid stretching of the capsule at the time of injury. Soluble lens protein can leak through those defects into the anterior segment. As macrophages phagocytose these proteins, they can ultimately cause blockage of the trabecular meshwork, causing phacolytic glaucoma.

Although there are certain similarities between phacolytic and lens particle glaucoma, they are distinct entities. Pathophysiologically, lens particle glaucoma is caused by actual lens particles rather than soluble lens protein, depositing on the trabecular meshwork and obstructing outflow. These lens particles can come from the traumatic rupture of the lens capsule. These particles can also originate from the cataract itself during cataract surgery.

Rarely, Elsching pearls, which are an accumulation of clusters of proliferating lens epithelial cells formed in the equatorial region of the capsular bag, sometimes also migrating to the posterior capsule and contributing to posterior capsular opacification after cataract surgery, can be released into the aqueous by an Nd:YAG capsulotomy laser which will, in turn, cause an impedance to aqueous outflow.

**Phacoantigenic Glaucoma**

Phacoantigenic glaucoma, also known as phacoanaphylactic glaucoma, is a latent, chronic granulomatous reaction to retained lens material after trauma or cataract surgery.

**Ghost Cell Glaucoma**

Ghost cells are old, spherical, degenerated, and depigmented red blood cells, which also contain clumps of degenerated residual hemoglobin binding onto the cell membrane called Heinz bodies.

Due to the trauma itself or previous surgery, the anterior hyaloid face of the vitreous may be disrupted, allowing passage of ghost cells within the vitreous cavity to the AC. As they are mechanically rigid, they can obstruct the pores of the trabecular meshwork and consequently reduce aqueous outflow. The formation of ghost cells occurs within 1 to 3 weeks after the initial vitreous hemorrhage, but the rise in IOP often occurs 1 to 3 months after.

It is uncommon for ghost cell glaucoma to occur in the setting of an isolated hyphema unless very longstanding, due to the high oxygen levels and high aqueous circulation rate within the AC allowing clearance of the hyphema before the red blood cells can degenerate into ghost cells.

**Hemolytic Glaucoma**

This may be confused with ghost cell glaucoma. In hemolytic glaucoma, red blood cells from either vitreous hemorrhage or anterior chamber hyphema are broken down into hemoglobin and hemosiderin. These, as well as hemoglobin-filled macrophages, in turn, block the aqueous outflow pathway.

**Hemosiderotic Glaucoma**

This is a rare entity caused by the direct toxic effect of intraocular iron on the trabecular meshwork, causing fibrosclerosis and subsequent obstruction of aqueous outflow. The source of intraocular iron can be introduced by trauma in the form of an intraocular foreign body or iron derived from blood in the AC. The hemoglobin in red blood cells is released after hemolysis and, in turn, is further degraded into hemosiderin which contains toxic granules of inorganic iron.

**Carotid-Cavernous Sinus Fistula**

This type of fistula can develop after a trauma to the orbit. It can be subdivided into two subtypes: 1- direct high-flow shunt with communication between the internal carotid artery and cavernous sinus; and 2 -indirect low-flow dural shunt with communication between cavernous arterial branches and the cavernous sinus. Traumatic carotid-cavernous sinus fistula is more frequently high-flow in nature. Other causes of the high-flow fistula may include rupture of an internal carotid artery aneurysm within the cavernous sinus, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV, and iatrogenic causes such as an internal carotid artery endarterectomy.

Low-flow fistula can be caused by hypertension, fibromuscular dysplasia, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV, and dissection of the internal carotid artery. Carotid-cavernous sinus fistula can lead to a raised IOP via increased episcleral venous pressure, which can, in turn, cause angle closure due to edema of the ciliary body and choroid. Raised episcleral venous pressure can also lead to central retinal vein occlusion, leading to ischemia and subsequent iris neovascularization and neovascular glaucoma.

**Open-globe Trauma**

Globe-penetrating injury can lead to secondary intraocular pressure elevation and glaucoma through any of the causes discussed above in the closed-globe trauma section. However, the following mechanisms are specific to eye injuries in which the corneoscleral envelope is breached through penetration or rupture.

**Epithelial Downgrowth**

Epithelial downgrowth occurs when non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelial cells, most commonly the conjunctiva and the cornea, are introduced through a wound into the AC. It comes in different forms, including epithelial pearls, cysts, and membranes. Epithelial pearls are small structures on the iris surface, often far from the original entry site of the trauma.

Elevation of the IOP occurs due to epithelial membrane growth over the trabecular meshwork, causing aqueous outflow obstruction.

**Fibrous Downgrowth**

Fibrous downgrowth can appear similar to epithelial downgrowth, but it tends to be more common, benign, and indolent.