The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status classification system came about to offer perioperative clinicians a simple categorization of a patient's physiological status that can help predict operative risk. The ASAPS originated in 1941 and has seen some revisions since that time. This activity covers the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status classification system's classification of patients so healthcare teams can make informed decisions as to some meaningful correlated outcomes. This activity describes the current understanding regarding the application or misapplication of the ASAPS. This activity illustrates the relevant considerations and controversies regarding the ASAPS. This activity reviews the evaluation and application of the ASAPS and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients while utilizing this classification system.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the included factors and their limitations that influence the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status classification system.
- Review the issues of concern and controversy surrounding the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status classification system.
- Summarize each category within the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status classification system.
- Outline and explain interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication using the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status classification system to facilitate the management of patients in the perioperative period.