**Electrophysiology**

Nerve conduction studies help in confirming the diagnosis of neuropathy and categorizing patients broadly into demyelinating and axonal subtypes. They are also useful in screening asymptomatic relatives of the index patient. The key parameters measured are distal latencies, amplitudes, and velocities of motor and sensory nerves. Slowing of conduction velocities is an indirect measure of myelin dysfunction. Reduced amplitude of compound muscle action potential with preserved conduction velocity indicates axonopathy. Some patients may have features of both demyelinating and axonal neuropathy. Evidence of denervation on concentric needle electromyography is useful in establishing axonal pathology.

The median nerve conduction velocity of 38 m/sec is the commonly used cut-off for differentiating demyelinating from axonal types of CMT. Besides, there is an intermediate form where the nerve conduction velocity ranges from 25 to 45 m/sec.

Slowing is usually uniform and diffuse in inherited neuropathies, unlike acquired etiologies, wherein the changes may be segmental, non-homogeneous, and asymmetrical. However, in GJB1 associated neuropathy, motor conduction slowing is non-uniform and heterogeneous within a single nerve and between multiple nerves, with the velocity being more reduced in the median as compared to the ulnar nerve. This inter-nerve variability is prominent in females.

Temporal dispersion and conduction blocks distinguish acquired demyelinating neuropathies from inherited ones.GJB1 mutations.

Reduction in the amplitude of evoked motor responses and sensory potentials reflects the degree of axonal loss, and this correlates with the clinical disability even in subjects with demyelinating CMTs.

**Nerve Imaging**

Advances in imaging have enabled visualization of peripheral nerves along their entire length with great clarity. Nerve ultrasound and Magnetic Resonance Neurography are increasingly used in the evaluation of neuropathies. In CMTs, there is diffuse enlargement, including roots, plexuses, and peripheral nerves, without any variation between entrapment and non-entrapment sites.

**Genetics**

Genetic testing is useful in establishing a conclusive diagnosis (particularly so in a sporadic patient), medical counseling, reproductive planning, and in selecting patients for participating in therapeutic trials and research.

The commonest genetic abnormality in CMT is copy number variation in PMP22. Molecular techniques that are available to detect copy number variations in PMP22 include polymerase chain reaction (PCR), restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP), array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH). These techniques are time-consuming, labor-intense, and expensive and have limited sensitivity. The multiplex ligation dependant probe amplification (MLPA) follows the principle of comparative quantification of specifically bound probes that are amplified by PCR using universal primers.

The 'gold-standard' in molecular genetic diagnosis is Sanger sequencing. However, it has limitations since the number of genetic variations implicated in CMT is huge, and the frequency of abnormalities in each gene is rare. There are no specific phenotypic distinguishing features between the different CMTs. Except for PMP22, MPZ, GJB1, and MFN2, mutations in other genes are rather rare. Hence it is difficult to prioritize and carry out sequential analysis of all these genes by Sanger sequencing as it is both time-consuming and expensive.

High-throughput or the Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology is capable of massively parallel sequencing of DNA in an efficient, precise, fast, and economical way with improved throughput and high read depth.

Thus the NGS is the preferred technique for establishing the genetic diagnosis in CMT, once copy number variations or mutations in common genes are excluded. Nevertheless, even with whole-exome sequencing, a significant proportion of patients are left without a genetic diagnosis. NGS is negative in cases of mutations in genes that are yet unidentified or not described in the setting of CMT. NGS may miss mutations in the untranslated region (UTR), promoter, and other non-exonic regions. Besides, NGS is not a sensitive technique for identifying copy number variations or epigenetic, post-transcriptional, and post-translational changes. Functional analysis is essential to ascribe the pathogenicity when NGS identifies novel variants.

**Nerve Biopsy**

Nerve biopsy has a role in identifying underlying genetic etiology in sporadic cases, and it helps to distinguish CMT from acquired disorders like CIDP. Nerve biopsy may also support a functional association when the genetic tests detect "variants of uncertain significance" or a novel variant. Morphological and ultrastructural changes in the axons, myelin, nodes of Ranvier, and mitochondria help in understanding the functions of the mutated genes, and to some extent, the pathways leading to disease.

Non-specific changes include axonal loss, demyelination/remyelination, and occasionally features suggestive of inflammation. Chronic demyelination and remyelination induces concentric proliferation of Schwann cell cytoplasm or basal lamina and causes the formation of 'onion bulbs.' In CMT1, demyelination remains stable while axonal loss progresses with time. In some instances, nerve biopsy in CMT1A may show 'tomaculae' that is the characteristic feature of HNPP.PMP22, MPZ, GJB1, and GDAP1 associated neuropathies. Greater susceptibility to inflammation in CMT1A, the involvement of immune cells in genetically mediated demyelination, and superimposed CIDP are some of the hypotheses to explain these inflammatory infiltrates.

MPZ associated neuropathy shows loss of compaction of myelin sheath layers, dissociation of the paired intra-period lines, regular widening between major dense lines, and irregularly un-compacted myelin sheaths.MPZ, MTMR2, MTMR12, MTMR5, SBF2, FGD4, SH3TC2, PRX, and NEFL can cause unusually thickened and folded myelin with redundant myelin loops.SH3TC2-associated neuropathy shows abnormal extensions of the cytoplasm of Schwann cells and 'onion bulbs' formed by concentric proliferations of the basal lamina of Schwann cells, both myelinated and unmyelinated fibers.INF2-neuropathy shows unusual whorl-like proliferation and supernumerary elongated extensions of Schwann cell cytoplasm resembling filopodia, prominent axoplasmic reticulum, and nodal widening.PRX mutations.

Mitochondria are abnormally swollen, rounded, and vacuolated and may show accumulation of amorphous material with loss of cristae in MFN2 and GDAP1 mutations.CNTNAP1 mutations.NDRG1-associated neuropathy (CMT4D) is the pleomorphic granular deposits, sometimes with filaments or vesicles filled with glycogen, in the adaxonal space of myelinated fibers. In NEFL-associated neuropathies, unmyelinated fibers are abnormally condensed and show aggregates containing glycogen granules and dense microtubules. SH3TC2 and NEFL mutations may show "giant axons."EGR2 mutations, there is a total absence of myelin with normal axons.

**Evaluation of Systemic Involvement**

Patients need evaluation for concomitant illnesses like diabetes mellitus, thyroid dysfunction, and vitamins, and other nutritional deficiencies that impact peripheral nerve function. Patients may also need slit-lamp examination (for cataract), intra-ocular tension recording (for glaucoma), laryngoscopy (for vocal cord mobility), and audiometry (for deafness). Patients may undergo spirometry and polysomnography for the evaluation of restrictive lung disease, obstructive sleep apnea, and restless leg syndrome if required. Patients with INF2 mutation may need evaluation for proteinuria arising from nephrotic syndrome due to focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, as they are often asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic and their renal function may worsen rapidly necessitating a renal transplant.