There is no single best test to diagnose SIADH. Patients usually present with hyponatremia with normal volume status. Schwartz and Bartter made a clinical criterion in 1967, which is still valid up to the date.

**The Schwartz and Bartter****Clinical Criterion**

- Serum sodium less than 135mEq/L

- Serum osmolality less than 275 mOsm/kg

- Urine sodium greater than 40 mEq/L (due to ADH-mediated free water absorption from renal collecting tubules)

- Urine osmolality greater than 100 mOsm/kg

- The absence of clinical evidence of volume depletion - normal skin turgor, blood pressure within the reference range

- The absence of other causes of hyponatremia - adrenal insufficiency, hypothyroidism, cardiac failure, pituitary insufficiency, renal disease with salt wastage, hepatic disease, drugs that impair renal water excretion.

- Correction of hyponatremia by fluid restriction

Renal function tests and random blood sugar tests are necessary to check hyperglycemia and uremia as these are the potential causes of pseudohyponatremia.

**Tests for SIADH**

- Serum osmolality and serum sodium

- Urine sodium concentration and osmolality

- Renal function tests: BUN and creatinine

- BSR (Blood sugar random)

- Thyroid profile

- Serum cortisol

- Serum K+, bicarbonate, chloride

- Fasting lipid profile

- Liver function tests

Clinicians must rule out hypothyroidism and adrenal insufficiency before labeling the patient with SIADH. Further tests are required to find out underlying causes according to history. Patients with long-standing smoking history, weight loss, or pulmonary symptoms must have a chest X-ray and CT scan to look for SCLC.