As a congenital disorder, polydactyly may be commonly seen in familial patterns, so it is important to obtain a good family history. Patients presenting with polydactyly will have an extra finger and/or toe, and this is most often discovered in the immediate post-natal period of life for a neonate.

Physical exam findings include the observation of a supernumerary digit. Imaging, including radiographs, is useful for possible surgical planning and to further classify the specific pattern of polydactyly.

The Wassel classification is used for preaxial (radial) polydactyly of the hand. There are seven classes of polydactyly in this system. Type I involves a bifid distal phalanx. In type II the distal phalanx is duplicated. Type 3 is characterized by bifid proximal phalanges. The most common is type IV, with duplicated proximal phalanx. With type V, a bifid metacarpal exists. Duplicated metacarpals are the finding in type VI. Type VII consists of triphalangia.

Postaxial polydactyly is duplications of the small finger (ulnar border) of the hand or along the lateral border of the foot. The Stelling and Turek classification is used to describe postaxial polydactyly of the hand. This classification is divided into 3 types. Type 1 involves soft tissue duplication. Type 2 has bony duplication, while type 3 includes a full ray, including the metacarpal.

Central polydactyly is a duplication of the index, long, or ring fingers, or toes 2,3, or 4. It accounts for a much smaller proportion of polydactyly.

When describing polydactyly of the foot, the main classification used is the Venn-Watson, which has 6 subdivisions based upon metatarsal anatomy. Class 1 involves distal duplication with a normal metatarsal. Class 2 has a block metatarsal, whereas class 3 has a Y shaped metatarsal and class 4 a T shaped metatarsal. Class 5 exhibits a normal metatarsal shaft with a widened head, and class 6 involves complete duplication, including the metatarsal.