Once EA is diagnosed, the infant should be intubated to control the airway and help prevent further aspiration. If not already, a catheter should be gently placed to suction oropharyngeal secretions. The infant should be given antibiotics, intravenous fluids, and given nothing by mouth (NPO). Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) should be considered for the infant as NPO status may last several weeks. Once the neonate is stabilized from a hemodynamic and airway standpoint, a pediatric surgeon should be consulted.

The timing for definitive surgical treatment for EA/TEF depends on the size of the neonate. If the child is greater than 2 kilograms, EA/TEF surgery is typically offered once cardiac anomalies, if present, have been addressed. Very low birth weight neonates (<1500 grams) are typically treated in a staged approach with ligation of the fistula initially, followed by repair of EA once the neonate is larger.

The surgical options for EA/TEF repair include open thoracotomy or video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery.

If there is an ultralong gap EA precluding primary anastomosis, then the interposition of another organ such as stomach, colon, or jejunum can be utilized.

After surgery, the neonate is returned to the neonatal ICU for close monitoring. A chest tube is left in place on the side the chest was accessed. The neonate is continued NPO with the nasogastric tube to intermittent suction. After 5-7 days, an esophagogram is performed looking for an esophageal leak. If no leak is identified, typically oral feeds are begun. If there is a leak, the chest tube will collect the drainage. The chest tube is left in place until the leak seals and/or the neonate tolerates oral feedings.