Periodontal diseases can manifest in several ways. Most often, early stages are not recognized as they are asymptomatic inflammatory responses in the oral cavity. Often, the first reported symptom of periodontal diseases is bleeding during brushing or flossing. Another symptom that may be noted by the patient is halitosis. More severe symptoms at the time of presentation include pain and tenderness during chewing of specific substances, sensitive teeth, receding gums, the formation of discoloring plaque, tooth mobility, and even loss of teeth.

Chronic periodontitis can present in patients of any age, but most often affects middle-aged to older adults. The severity of the disease is based on the amount of clinical attachment loss (CAL). It is described as mild when the CAL is 1 to 2 mm, moderate the CAL is 3 to 4 mm, or severe when the CAL is more than 5 mm

A more rapidly progressing form of periodontitis (formerly termed "juvenile periodontitis" and "aggressive periodontitis") presents with similar symptoms, but this form of condition has a predilection to younger patients. This form of the condition tends to target specific teeth (most commonly first molars and incisors) and often occurs in the absence of the significant plaque accumulation noted in chronic periodontitis.

Routine dental screenings are invaluable in recognizing early disease states and directing early intervention. A review of the patient medical history and comorbidities raises the awareness of dental care providers. Inspection of the tooth and gum can reveal inflammation of the gum line, receding gums, and sometimes even pus-filled pockets. Dental probes are used to measure dental pockets adjacent to several teeth. A probing depth of greater than 3 mm may be indicative of periodontal disease. Depths greater than 6 mm often require more aggressive therapy as these spaces are more difficult to treat mechanically. Dental X-rays also can check for bone loss in accordance with the depth of pocket and disease severity