Accurate and early diagnosis is the key to a successful outcome in these patients. The main significance of pneumatocele is that it must be distinguished from other cavitary pulmonary lesions such as abscess, mycosis, malignancy, and others.

Failure to accurately diagnose pulmonary pneumatocele may lead to unnecessary, harmful, and potentially dangerous diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. For example, misidentification of the lesion as a pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum may prompt additional testing or placement of a thoracostomy tube or drainage catheter. Perhaps a more severe error would be confusing an uncomplicated traumatic pneumatocele with a pulmonary abscess. An abscess requires direct intervention, while a true pneumatocele does not. Instrumenting an uncomplicated pneumatocele could potentially seed the sterile space, thus creating an infection.

**Treatment Options**

Observation

Unilateral ventilation, ventilation with high-frequency oscillation (HFO)

percutaneous drainage, decubitus positioning with the affected side down, selective intubation of the main bronchus on the uninvolved side

Surgical intervention: Injection of intrapleural fibrin sealant, percutaneous catheter placement, chest tube (associated with higher bronchopleural fistula)

Surgical resection: Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS),  lobectomy, pneumatocele removal/deroofing, pneumonectomy.

The clinical picture should be taken into account and not just the size while treating pneumatocele.

Most pneumatoceles disappear spontaneously within a few weeks to 6 to 12 months without intervention. They rarely persist for more than a year. Enlarging, complicated pneumatoceles can cause cardiorespiratory instability. It is unclear if coinfection with multiple organisms increased the risk of developing pneumatocele or is responsible for a more severe clinical presentation. Conservative management of pneumatocele is paramount for typically occurring cases along with the use of appropriately dosed antimicrobials to known infectious agents. Conservative management alone is unlikely to benefit the patient in situations of cardiorespiratory instability or extensive disease, as death has been reported.

In children, 90% of pneumatocele underwent spontaneous resolution. Half of the pneumatocele persists even after drain placement.

The presence of central location( retrocardiac) makes percutaneous or surgical intervention inappropriate choice. In such cases, High-frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) and selective intubation and ventilation of the main bronchus are appropriate non-invasive treatment strategies.

Percutaneous needle decompression is considered when the pneumatocele has the following characteristics:

- Occupying greater than 50% of the hemithorax

- Creating significant atelectasis

- Bronchopleural fistulae development

- Tension pneumatocele

- Persistent signs of chest infection

- Infection within the cyst

- Bronchopleural fistula

- Risk of unable to followup outpatient

Percutaneous needle decompression risks: the development of bronchopleural fistulae

The pneumatocele is also successfully managed by the injection of fibrin sealant via a pigtail catheter.

Decompression by percutaneous pigtail catheter placement in children who develop pneumatoceles as a result of a complication of pulmonary interstitial emphysema with superimposing Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection has been described in a preterm infant in a case report.

Sometimes, patients are not suitable for earlier intervention with percutaneous drainage of the pneumatoceles due to the extent of lung disease and high risk of complications associated with full heparinization and Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support.

Lobectomy is considered a form of definitive management and has been shown to quickly improve the clinical stability of some patients though mortality following this procedure has been reported. There is evidence to suggest that lobectomy is associated with lower postsurgical risk of infection, parenchymal necrosis, and need for further surgery. Lobectomy is not suitable if the amount of salvageable lung tissue is negligible and risked leaving necrotic tissue within the hemithorax.

VATS lobectomy in non-trauma settings has been demonstrated to have a reduction of postoperative morbidity. A major advantage of VATS is it avoids rib displacement. The patient should be stable enough to tolerate a double-lumen tube and video-assisted thoracic surgery exploration. In unstable patients, those with massive chest wall disruption, and/or major air loss and hemoptysis, a single lumen tube is preferred, and thoracotomy is more appropriate.

Pneumonectomy is performed to obtain adequate source control of the proinflammatory and necrotic lung tissue and to evacuate the large pneumatoceles affecting ventilation. Removal of as little lung parenchyma as possible is ideal; however, extensive disease may necessitate pneumonectomy to improve cardiorespiratory status. Pediatric pneumonectomy has previously been described in the literature for enlarging pneumatoceles and bronchopulmonary fistula secondary to pneumonia; however, preoperative care was not well described.

Long-term complications following pneumonectomy in children are infrequently reported. Reports suggest most complications are relatively mild and include scoliosis and changes in spirometry values though most children have no marked impairment in exercise or breathing difficulties.

V-V ECMO and possible pneumonectomy as a salvage procedure in those patients with extensive disease involving multiple lobes.

Post-traumatic pulmonary pneumatoceles usually resolve spontaneously but can be complicated and can require surgery. Complete resolution of traumatic pneumatoceles varies and depends on the size and nature of the lesion. The literature has reported that time to radiological resolution averages 3 months but ranges from 4 weeks to 6 months. Larger pneumatoceles require significantly greater time for resolution. A study by Chon et al. found that lesions filled with blood or greater than 2 cm in diameter have an average resolution time of approximately 5 months.

The indications for diagnostic and therapeutic bronchoscopy in traumatic pneumatoceles include:

- Endobronchial bleeding

- Thick sputum

- Large air leak

- Mediastinal emphysema

- Lobar collapse

Urgent thoracotomy and lobectomy may be required in the case of massive hemoptysis, which is usually not life-threatening.  The indications for video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery or open surgery include:

- Prolonged persistence of an air leak

- Hemothorax or pneumothorax due to pneumatocele rupture

- Failure of lung expansion

- Progressive enlargement of the pneumatocele

- Compression of functional parenchyma

Traumatic pneumatoceles may enlarge with positive-pressure ventilation leading to hypoxemia and respiratory deterioration because of inadequate ventilation. In such patients, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery or open thoracotomy with tube decompression is necessary.

In the case of secondary infection and septic course, antibiotic treatment, according to sputum culture, antibiograms is the first step. The approach to an infected pseudocyst is similar to that for a lung abscess. If an infected pseudocyst is larger than 2 cm or there are unremitting signs of sepsis after 72 hours of antibiotics, the pseudocyst should be percutaneously drained.

If there is no clinical improvement, early CT-guided catheter drainage should be considered. If, despite the drainage, there is no observed clinical improvement, clinicians could proceed with thoracotomy or thoracoscopy.

The average spontaneous time for the radiological resolution of traumatic pneumatocele is three months. The prognosis for most traumatic pulmonary pseudocysts (TPPs) is excellent, and most lesions spontaneously disappear in three months. Followup by chest radiography or alternative imaging is recommended until resolution occurs.

Neonatal pneumatoceles have mostly been described with ventilator-induced air leak conditions during the 1970s and 1980s. Surfactant replacement therapy and lung-protective ventilation strategies have resulted in the decreasing incidence of all intrathoracic air leaks including pneumatoceles

Pneumatocoele, as a result of complicated pneumonia in patients with left ventricular assistive devices (LVAD), has been described in the literature, with successful treatment with surgical resection.

Prophylactic antibiotic therapy is not necessary unless other injuries are present or surgical procedures are performed. Sputum cultures should be collected from all patients who have sustained significant blunt chest trauma, especially in those with hemoptysis, pulmonary contusion, or traumatic pneumatocele. Culture results can then be used to guide treatment decisions if infection occurs. Because pneumatocele infection usually manifests late in its clinical course, and thus prolonged antibiotic prophylaxis could encourage resistant strains and promote colonization. Persistent fever, unremitting leukocytosis, or radiographic changes should prompt suspicion of possible infection, and antibiotic therapy started.

Early lobectomy should be considered in cases of:

- Extensive lung abscess surrounded by necrotic tissue

- Failed bronchoscopic treatment of extensive bleeding

- Lack of response to conservative treatment

One study suggested that pseudocysts larger than six cm or those that have failed to improve following conservative treatment, are potential candidates for surgical resection.

Late thoracotomy has been reported up to six months after trauma due to pneumonic infiltration and persistent cavitary size. Romero et al. reported a case of giant hemopneumatocele that resolved spontaneously with conservative treatment. This observation becomes particularly important in patients with multiple thoracic injuries who may not be able to tolerate surgery.