Complications are avoidable with preoperative and postoperative antibiotics and proper intraoperative surgical technique.

**Posttraumatic Endophthalmitis**

Posttraumatic endophthalmitis is a devastating condition that occurs from 3.3% to 17% in penetrating trauma. The primary risk factors are a delay of primary surgical repair and violation of the lens capsule. The diagnosis can be difficult because the eye is already inflamed from the trauma and surgery.

**Retained Intraocular Foreign Body**

Intraocular foreign bodies in ocular trauma occur from 18 to 41%.

**Wound Leak**

Evaluate the patient the day after the primary surgical repair with fluorescein to check for a wound leak. If a wound leak is present, a bandage contact lens or cyanoacrylate glue may seal it. If the leak is too brisk or large, more suturing is required to create a watertight closure. Wound leaks significantly increase the risk of infection.

**Suture Issues**

Unburied knots and broken or loose sutures can cause the patient discomfort and serve as a track for microorganisms. All suture knots should be buried at the time of surgery; however, if recognized during the postoperative period, a knot can be rotated at the slit lamp. The timing of suture removal is variable depending on the patient's age, size of the laceration, and refractive anomaly induced by the suture.

**Iris Damage**

The iris can tear or dislodge from its root through the initial trauma or during surgical repair. An abnormal iris can cause photophobia, visual disturbances, and an unpleasant aesthetic appearance.

**Cataract**

Cataracts can form from the initial trauma or during the operative repair if the lens capsule is violated. The majority of traumatic cataracts can safely be removed and replaced with a posterior or scleral-fixated lens to improve vision.

**Infectious Keratitis**

Infectious keratitis can occur following trauma by various organisms.

**Retinal Detachment**

Retinal detachments can occur during the trauma or subsequently in the postoperative period. Early intervention is key to preventing vision loss.

**Posttraumatic Glaucoma**

It is not uncommon for secondary glaucoma to occur from penetrating trauma due to various mechanisms.

**Sympathetic Ophthalmia**

Sympathetic ophthalmia is an uncommon immune reaction that occurs in the non-traumatic eye after injuries or surgeries involving the uveal tissue.

**Vision Loss**

Vision loss can occur from all of the complications discussed in this section. Traumatic damage to the optic nerve or other parts of the eye can also lead to vision loss. Corneal scarring, neovascularization, and irregular astigmatism are common reasons for decreased vision after a corneal laceration. Hard contact lenses can be helpful to determine if the visual complaint is related to the cornea versus other parts of the eye. A special fit contact lens can often improve vision significantly.****If the vision loss is related to corneal pathology and not improved with a contact lens, a corneal transplant may be beneficial once the eye has completely healed from the trauma.