The exact pathophysiology of spontaneous intestinal perforation in the newborn is unknown, and several mechanisms have been proposed.

It is speculated that spontaneous intestinal perforation occurs because of bowel wall ischemia and deficiency of muscularis propria. This is supported by the association of spontaneous intestinal perforation with conditions such as patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), which may compromise intestinal blood flow, and the usage of indomethacin is known to cause mesenteric vasoconstriction. Further, the most common location for the occurrence of spontaneous intestinal perforation is the terminal ileum, which is a watershed region and prone to ischemia. However, the histopathology of spontaneous intestinal perforation reveals a focal area of perforation in the absence of inflammation, ischemia, or extensive necrosis.

Association of spontaneous intestinal perforation with antenatal or postnatal glucocorticoids followed by exposure to early indomethacin has been linked to the changes in nitric oxide synthase production in the intestinal and neuronal smooth muscle. Stressors such as maternal chorioamnionitis, oligohydramnios, and low APGAR scores can also cause a premature surge of cortisol. It is postulated that inhibition of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (NOS) by steroids, along with the inhibition of endothelial nitric oxide synthase by the indomethacin, may lead to disruption of intestinal motility.

Further, glucocorticoids cause mucosal hyperplasia at the expense of submucosal thinning, leading to necrosis of the submucosal layer, which increases the vulnerability to intestinal perforation in deficient birth weight infants.

Early enteral nutrition has been shown to reduce the incidence of spontaneous intestinal perforation.

Infection may also have a role in the pathogenesis as evidenced by the isolation of pathogens such as candida and coagulase-negative staphylococcus from the peritoneal fluid cultures and the resected intestinal specimens.