Patients with Boxer’s fractures present with complaints of dorsal hand pain, swelling, and possible deformity in the setting of one of the mechanisms typically associated with this injury involving direct trauma to the hand.

Complete physical exam of a potential Boxer’s fracture should include an examination of the entire hand, comparison to the contralateral hand, with special attention to the following:

- Skin: Closely inspect the skin for any breaks, especially near the metacarpal head, typically the point of impact. When a Boxer’s fracture is sustained by a blow to the face, the recipient’s tooth may cause a laceration or abrasion known as a “fight bite." This may require operative irrigation and debridement.

- Neurovascular exam: As with all suspected fractures, a neurovascular exam should test for sensation, motor function, and blood flow distal to the injury.

- Angulation: Boxer’s fractures are typically associated with apex dorsal angulation, thereby resulting in depression of the MCP joint and loss of the normal knuckle contour. With significantly angulated fractures, “pseudo-clawing” may be observed due to damage to the extensor apparatus; pseudo-clawing is a hyperextension of the MCP joint and flexion at the PIP joint. The degree of angulation is determined using plain films.

- Rotational alignment: Any degree of malrotation warrants referral to a hand surgeon and therefore assessment of rotational alignment is a crucial component of the physical exam. Alignment can be assessed by examining the hand with the MCP and PCP joints in flexion, and DIP joints extended. If lines are drawn along the digits and extended distally, normally aligned digits will show the convergence of these lines. If the line extended from the fifth finger does not converge towards the others, suspect malrotation.

- Malrotation can also be detected by examining the hand with the MCPs flexed, and PCPs and DIPs extended. The fingernails should be in line along a single plane.