**Epidural Space and Dura Mater**

While it was once thought that the dura was avascular, it is actually highly vascular in nature, as the major vessels that supply it run in the epidural space deep to the skull. The major arteries that supply the dura are derived from the internal carotid, vertebral, maxillary, ascending pharyngeal, lacrimal, occipital, and ethmoidal arteries. Of the arteries that supply the dura, the middle meningeal artery (MMA), which branches from the internal carotid artery’s maxillary branch, is the most important.

The dural venous sinuses are venous channels formed where the periosteal and meningeal layers of the dura mater separate and serve as the major pathway for venous drainage from the brain. They include the superior sagittal sinus, inferior sagittal sinus, straight sinus, and sigmoid sinus, among others.

**Subdural Space**

The most notable blood vessels related to the subdural space are the bridging veins, which pass through the subdural space transversely on their way to drain the cerebral hemispheres into the dural venous sinuses. The rupturing of these veins is the most common cause of subdural hematomas.

**Arachnoid Mater and Subarachnoid Space**

The arachnoid mater is avascular. Areas of the subarachnoid space where there are large gaps are referred to as cisternae. The ambient cistern, which surrounds the midbrain, contains branches of the posterior cerebral and superior cerebellar arteries; it also contains the basal vein of Rosenthal. The superior cerebellar cistern contains the petrosal vein and the superior cerebellar artery. Additionally, where the arachnoid mater bridges the cerebral hemispheres deep to the falx cerebri, the subarachnoid space houses the anterior cerebral arteries.

**Pia Mater**

The pia mater is highly vascularized and contains networks of capillaries that nourish the brain. Additionally, the portions of the pia mater that form the perivascular space eventually fuse with the blood vessels they surround.

**Meningeal Lymphatic Vessels**

The lymphatic system of the meninges was recently discovered in 2015 via the use of electron microscopy, and work is ongoing to better understand its structure and function.