The Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) guidelines for the management of hyperphosphatemia suggest that, in dialysis patients, phosphate levels require lowering toward the normal range; however, there is no given specific target level. In chronic kidney disease patients not receiving dialysis, serum phosphate levels require maintenance in the normal range (i.e., under 4.5 mg/dL [1.45 mmol/L]). There are several strategies to control phosphate levels.

**Acute hyperphosphatemia**

If renal function is good, renal phosphate excretion can increase through extracellular volume expansion by saline infusion and diuretics.

**Dietary Restriction**

Dietary restriction of phosphate is effective both in predialysis and in dialysis patients. KDIGO recommends a daily phosphate intake of 800 to 1000 mg/d with a daily protein intake of 1.2 g/kg body weight. Also, it is reasonable to consider phosphate sources (e.g., animal, vegetable, additives) in making dietary recommendations. Severe protein restriction can cause malnutrition and, eventually, poorer outcomes.

If renal function is impaired, it is an indication for hemodialysis.

**Phosphate Binders**

In patients with persistently or progressively elevated phosphate despite dietary phosphate restriction, phosphate binders are the agent of choice. These are also used, concurrently with dietary restriction, when phosphate levels at presentation are very high (greater than 6 mg/dl)

Phosphate binders reduce the absorption of dietary phosphate in the gastrointestinal tract, by exchanging the anion phosphate with an active cation (carbonate, acetate, oxyhydroxide, and citrate) to form a nonabsorbable compound that gets excreted in the feces.

Aluminum-based agents are amongst the most effective and best tolerated. But doubts regarding their potential to cause aluminum toxicity, presenting with encephalopathy, osteomalacia, microcytic anemia, and premature death, have discouraged their prolonged use.

**Calcium-based binders**

Calcium-based binders (e.g., calcium carbonate and calcium acetate) are effective and do not have adverse effects associated with aluminum-based agents. However, they can lead to a positive calcium balance, which can aggravate the development of ectopic calcification in the media and intima of arterial vessels, a major contributing factor for the excess cardiovascular mortality observed in CKD patients.

**Magnesium carbonate**

Magnesium carbonate effectively reduces serum phosphate levels and shows good gastrointestinal tolerance. It also reduces vascular calcification by interfering with hydroxyapatite formation.

**Sevelamer**

Sevelamer is a crosslinked polymer that exchanges phosphate with HCl or carbonate in the gastrointestinal tract. The phosphate-laden polymer gets excreted in the feces. Both sevelamer hydrochloride (HCl) and sevelamer carbonate are options. Besides controlling hyperphosphatemia, sevelamer also improves endothelial function, binds bile salts, resulting in a significant reduction in serum total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. However, this action may interfere with the absorption of fat and fat-soluble vitamins.

**Lanthanum Carbonate**

It is a chewable, calcium-free phosphate binder, which uses metal lanthanum for phosphate chelation. Lanthanum carbonate binds phosphate to form the nonabsorbable compound lanthanum phosphate.

**Ferric Citrate**

Ferric citrate exchanges citrate with phosphate in the gastrointestinal tract to form ferric phosphate, which is insoluble and excreted in the feces. An additional advantage of ferric citrate is that it increases serum ferritin, reducing the need for intravenous iron and erythropoietin stimulating agents in chronic kidney disease.

**Sucroferric Oxyhydroxide**

Sucroferric oxyhydroxide is a chewable, iron-based phosphate binder. A lower dose helps in better compliance. As iron gets excreted as part of the phosphate complex, it does not cause iron overload.

**Drugs targeting intestinal phosphate transporters**

**Nicotinic Acid and Nicotinamide**

These drugs lower sodium-dependent intestinal phosphate absorption via a reduction in NaPi2b expression. The degree of reduction is modest. Adverse effects included flushing, nausea, diarrhea, thrombocytopenia, and accumulation of potentially toxic metabolites.

**Tenapanor**

Tenapanor inhibits sodium/hydrogen ion-exchanger isoform 3 (NHE3), which plays a role in secondary active phosphate absorption. It thus reduces intestinal sodium and phosphate absorption.

**Renal replacement Therapies:**

Both peritoneal and hemodialysis remove phosphate, but the amount of phosphate absorbed from a normal diet is for more than that removed by any of these dialysis methods. Recommendations are for more intensive dialysis to improve phosphate removal.

**Management of Secondary Hyperparathyroidism:**

For better control of hyperphosphatemia, control of secondary hyperparathyroidism is essential, using vitamin D metabolites and the calcium-sensing receptor agonists. Calcitriol or synthetic vitamin D analogs should not be given unless the serum phosphate concentration is < 5.5 mg/dL and the serum calcium is less than 9.5 mg/dL, as these agents can increase the serum calcium and phosphate, leading to metastatic and vascular calcification in patients with hyperphosphatemia before treatment.

For all dialysis patients, the target serum levels of phosphate should be between 3.5 and 5.5 mg/dL (1.13 to 1.78 mmol/L).  Serum levels of corrected total calcium should be maintained lower than 9.5 mg/dL (less than 2.37 mmol/L). The values of the parathyroid hormone (PTH) should remain less than two to nine times the upper limit for the PTH assay.