Free tissue transfer has become the standard of care for the reconstruction of complex defects. For those patients who request autologous reconstruction, those who have adequate tissue for reconstruction, and those medically acceptable for surgery, the use of the DIEP flap can be an excellent option for breast reconstruction and allows for a breast with a natural appearance and texture because better cosmesis can be achieved with skin and soft tissue, and there is no sacrifice of the abdominal musculature which has led to a marked decrease in the hernia rate.

In the literature currently, there are large-scale controlled studies on the use and beneficial effects of the DIEP flap in breast reconstruction. These investigations include randomized controlled trials (RCTs), observational trials, and many case series.

To evaluate the success of the free flap, a recent retrospective study was performed, including 965 DIEAP flap breast reconstructions in 739 patients with 444 unilateral and 295 bilateral cases.

As to the long-term effectiveness of the DIEP flap for breast reconstruction, controversies exist, for example, in a recent retrospective analysis including a total of 3,310 cases, corresponding to 15,991 abdominally based unilateral immediate breast reconstructions. National data were collected to determine the differences in total hospital costs, length of stay (LOS), and early postoperative complications after free TRAM (fTRAM), right transverse pedicled myocutaneous flap of the abdomen (pTRAM), deep inferior epigastric perforator (DIEP), and superficial inferior epigastric artery perforation flaps (SIEA), the authors found that fTRAM, DIEP, and SIEA flaps incur higher hospital total charges, have longer lengths of stay, and experience more immediate complications compared with pTRAM.

For many authors, DIEP flaps exhibit fewer complications related to flap ischemia and donor site morbidity. This remains to stay unclear to other authors:

A literature search of articles published between January 1, 1990, to January 1, 2017, was performed in a meta-analysis by Woonhyeok et al., including Eleven articles comparing pedicled TRAM (pTRAM) flaps with either free TRAM (fTRAM) or DIEP flaps. No difference was observed concerning which flap-type was most beneficial regarding flap vascularity and donor site morbidity.

Several techniques have been used to reduce the incidence of flap necrosis. The most popular is the one using Indocyanine Green Angiography.

In a recent study published by Austin Hembded in July 2020,  Indocyanine green angiography was used, and a retrospective review was performed on 1000 free flaps for breast reconstruction. The author concluded that intraoperative indocyanine green fluorescence angiography decreases the odds of fat necrosis, saves volume when flap trimming at inset, and can significantly reduce the postoperative surveillance burden in DIEP-based breast reconstruction.

Although the DIEP flap remains the first choice for breast reconstruction, some patients are excluded from this choice due to insufficient donor tissue volume, previous abdominal surgery, or aversion for the abdominal scar at the donor site. When the abdomen is not a potential donor site, other sites must be considered. The profunda artery perforator flap is an excellent option for breast reconstruction with a high success rate and a low complication rate.  The SGAP flap represents an alternative for autologous breast reconstruction when DIEP is not available, particularly in patients with a low BMI because the donor site usually has enough tissue.