# Introduction

A hinge joint is a type of synovial joint that exists in the body and serves to allow motion primarily in one plane.

# Structure and Function

Hinge joints function by allowing flexion and extension in one plane with small degrees of motion in other planes.

# Embryology

Hinge joints begin to develop as limb buds around week 4 of embryogenesis.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

**Elbow**

The structures of the elbow receive much of their blood supply from branches of the brachial, radial, and ulnar arteries that form a series of anastomosis around the joint. Most of the elbow lymphatics follow the vasculature and flow to the axillary, clavicular, and cervical lymph nodes. Some of the lymphatics from the forearm and hand flow through the cubital nodes.

**Knee**

The structures of the knee receive much of their blood supply from a plexus of arteries with branches from the popliteal artery and femoral artery. The genicular arteries and tibial recurrent arteries are the main contributing branches. Much of the lymphatic drainage from the knee follows vasculature and travels to the popliteal and inguinal lymph nodes.

**IP Hand**

The IP joints of the hand receive blood supply from branches of the radial and ulnar arteries. The major contributing branches are the superficial and deep palmar arches. Lymphatics travel superiorly along the upper extremity to the cubital, axillary, cervical, and clavicular lymph nodes.

**IP Foot**

The IP joints of the foot receive blood supply from branches of the anterior and posterior tibial arteries. The major contributing branches are the dorsal and plantar metatarsal arteries. Lymphatics flow superiorly up the lower limb through the popliteal and inguinal lymph nodes.

**Ankle**

The structures of the ankle receive much of their blood supply from anastomosis between branches of the anterior and posterior tibial and fibular arteries. Lymphatics flow superiorly up the lower limb through the popliteal and inguinal lymph nodes.

# Nerves

**Elbow**

The components of the elbow receive innervation from branches of the median, radial, ulnar, and musculocutaneous nerves.

**Knee**

The components of the knee receive innervation from branches of the femoral nerve (L1, L2, L3) and the sciatic nerve (L4, L5, S1, S2, S3), which branches into the tibial nerve and common peroneal nerve.

**IP**

The IP joints of the hand receive innervation from branches of the radial, median, and ulnar nerves. The IP joints of the foot receive innervation from branches of the tibial, sural, and fibular nerves.

**Ankle**

The components of the ankle receive innervation from branches of the tibial, sural, fibular, and saphenous nerves.

# Muscles

**Elbow**

Flexion is primarily the function of the brachialis, biceps brachii, and brachioradialis muscles, which originate on various locations of the humerus and scapula and insert on portions of the radius and ulna. Extension is primarily accomplished by the triceps brachii and anconeus muscles, which originate from various locations on the humerus and scapula and insert on portions of the ulna.

**Knee**

Flexion is made possible, primarily, by the articularis genus, rectus femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, and vastus medialis. These muscles originate from various locations on the femur and anterior inferior iliac spine. The vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, and vastus medialis conjoin to form the patellar tendon, which crosses the knee anteriorly and inserts on the patella and tibial tuberosity. Extension is predominately the function of the biceps femoris, semitendinosus, semimembranosus, gastrocnemius, plantaris, gracilis, and popliteus.

**IP hand**

Flexion of the hand IP joints primarily occurs through the functions of the flexor digitorum profundus, flexor pollicis longus, and flexor digitorum superficialis. They originate from various locations of the radius, ulna, interosseous membrane, and medial epicondyle, and insert on portions of the phalanges. Extension of the hand IP joints is provided by the extensor pollicis longus, extensor pollicis brevis, extensor digitorum, extensor indicis, and extensor digiti minimi. They originate from various locations of the radius, ulna, interosseous membrane, and lateral epicondyle, and insert on portions of the phalanges.

**IP foot**

Flexion of the foot IP joints result from the action of the flexor digitorum longus and brevis, flexor hallucis longus and brevis, quadratus plantae, and flexor digiti minimi brevis. They originate from various locations of the tibia, fibula, and calcaneus, and insert on portions of the phalanges. Extension of the foot IP joints is primarily the function of the extensor digitorum longus and brevis, lumbricals, and extensor hallucis longus muscles, which originate on the tibia, calcaneus, flexor tendons, and fibula, and insert on portions of the phalanges.

**Ankle**

Plantarflexion and inversion result from the actions of the gastrocnemius, plantaris, soleus, tibialis posterior, and anterior. They originate from various locations of the femur, tibia, and fibula, and insert on portions of the calcaneus, navicular, medial cuneiform, and metatarsal bones. Dorsiflexion and eversion occur as functions of the tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, extensor digitorum longus, peroneus brevis, and longus. They originate from various locations on the tibia and fibula and insert on portions of the phalanges, metatarsals, and medial cuneiform bones.

# Physiologic Variants

During the pathologic process of IP joint osteoarthritis (OA), the proximal interphalangeal joint (PIP) develops Bouchard’s nodes, and the distal interphalangeal joint (DIP) develops Heberden’s nodes. These nodes are bony and gelatinous outgrowths of the joint articular cartilage. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is another disease that can cause deformities of the PIP and DIP joints.

Rickets is a disease consisting of weak bones that most often occurs due to vitamin D deficiency in children. This disease can greatly affect the knee joint as a weakened bone of the femur and tibia allow for the development of varus bowing in the lower extremities that alters the biomechanics of the knee hinge joint.

# Surgical Considerations

All fractures that involve any surface of a hinge joint are considered for surgical treatment to maintain functional integrity and to help prevent OA.

# Clinical Significance

The hinge joints, just like most joints of the body can undergo degeneration of articular cartilage and develop OA, especially the knee and IP joints of the hands and feet. Trauma, activity level, weight, lifestyle, and genetics all play a role in the development of OA. Treatment centers around activity modification, physical therapy, NSAIDs, steroids, and replacement.

Dislocation of any hinge joint is also possible but occurs most often in the IP joints. Treatment of IP dislocations usually involves reduction and splinting as opposed to elbow, knee, and ankle dislocations that often require surgical treatment to repair surrounding structures.

All hinge joints become less stable as ligaments become compromised. The ligaments of the ankle are commonly injured when one sustains an ankle sprain. The lateral collateral ligaments of the ankle are injured most commonly with the majority of ankle sprains being low grade and managed with conservative treatment.

# Other Issues

The degeneration of articular cartilage on the surfaces of hinge joints is the source of much pain and dysfunction. This has fueled research in the area of cartilage replacement and regeneration. Adipose-derived stem cells are now being injected into joints to help decrease inflammation and promote regeneration of cartilage. Hyaluronic acid is a glycosaminoglycan that occurs naturally throughout the body and specifically in synovial fluid. It is now synthetically produced and injected into joints as viscosupplementation to help decrease friction and pain between articular surfaces. The mechanisms behind these treatment modalities are not completely understood, and both lack substantial studies, and more research is needed.