# Introduction

The brain and spinal cord are enveloped within three layers of membrane collectively known as the meninges, with the cranial meninges specifically referring to the section that covers the brain. From superficial to deep, the three layers are the dura, arachnoid, and pia—the term “mater,” Latin for mother, often follows these names (i.e., dura mater, arachnoid mater, pia mater).

# Structure and Function

**Epidural Space**

Between the roof of the skull (i.e., calvarium) and the superior surface of the dura potentially lies the epidural space.  While arteries and veins run between the inner surface of the calvarium and the dura, the epidural space typically exists pathologically, since the superficial layer of the dura, the periosteal layer, is securely attached to the periosteum of the skull.

**Dura Mater**

The outermost mater of the meninges, the dura, is composed of two layers: the periosteal layer that lies closest to the calvarium and the meningeal layer that lies closest to the brain tissue. These together contribute to the dura being a thick, dense, fibrous membrane that is quite inelastic. The periosteal layer consists of fibroblasts and osteoblasts, with a large quantity of extracellular collagen existing within its intercellular space, giving the dura its strength.

**Subdural Space**

The subdural space is the space that potentially exists between the meningeal layer of the dura and the arachnoid mater. Similar to the epidural space, the subdural space typically exists only under pathological conditions.

**Arachnoid Mater**

The arachnoid sits between the dura and the pia and is an avascular membrane that is involved in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) metabolism via the subarachnoid space.

**Subarachnoid Space**

The subarachnoid space is the cerebrospinal fluid-filled space that exists between the arachnoid and the pia. Within the lateral ventricles of the brain, the choroid plexus produces CSF, which passes into the subarachnoid space via the foramina of Luschka.

**Pia Mater**

The deepest layer of the meninges, the pia mater, is composed of two layers and, unlike the arachnoid, follows the contours of the sulci and gyri. The outer layer of the pia, referred to as the epipial layer, contains collagen fibers; the inner layer, or the intima pia, contains elastic and reticular fibers.

# Embryology

While the dura mater, sometimes called the pachymeninx, is derived from the mesoderm, the arachnoid and pia mater, together called the leptomeninges, are derived from the ectoderm. Specifically, the development of the meninges begins with what is known as the perimedullarly mesenchyme, which contains cells from both the ectoderm and mesoderm.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

**Epidural Space and Dura Mater**

While it was once thought that the dura was avascular, it is actually highly vascular in nature, as the major vessels that supply it run in the epidural space deep to the skull. The major arteries that supply the dura are derived from the internal carotid, vertebral, maxillary, ascending pharyngeal, lacrimal, occipital, and ethmoidal arteries. Of the arteries that supply the dura, the middle meningeal artery (MMA), which branches from the internal carotid artery’s maxillary branch, is the most important.

The dural venous sinuses are venous channels formed where the periosteal and meningeal layers of the dura mater separate and serve as the major pathway for venous drainage from the brain. They include the superior sagittal sinus, inferior sagittal sinus, straight sinus, and sigmoid sinus, among others.

**Subdural Space**

The most notable blood vessels related to the subdural space are the bridging veins, which pass through the subdural space transversely on their way to drain the cerebral hemispheres into the dural venous sinuses. The rupturing of these veins is the most common cause of subdural hematomas.

**Arachnoid Mater and Subarachnoid Space**

The arachnoid mater is avascular. Areas of the subarachnoid space where there are large gaps are referred to as cisternae. The ambient cistern, which surrounds the midbrain, contains branches of the posterior cerebral and superior cerebellar arteries; it also contains the basal vein of Rosenthal. The superior cerebellar cistern contains the petrosal vein and the superior cerebellar artery. Additionally, where the arachnoid mater bridges the cerebral hemispheres deep to the falx cerebri, the subarachnoid space houses the anterior cerebral arteries.

**Pia Mater**

The pia mater is highly vascularized and contains networks of capillaries that nourish the brain. Additionally, the portions of the pia mater that form the perivascular space eventually fuse with the blood vessels they surround.

**Meningeal Lymphatic Vessels**

The lymphatic system of the meninges was recently discovered in 2015 via the use of electron microscopy, and work is ongoing to better understand its structure and function.

# Nerves

The meninges primarily receives innervation by the vagus and trigeminal nerves, with some cervical spinal nerves contributing to a lesser degree.

# Surgical Considerations

Meningiomas are the most common type of cranial neoplasms and arise from the cells that make up the arachnoid villi, known as arachnoid cap cells. They are typically benign but can present in an atypical or malignant fashion.

# Clinical Significance

The meninges plays a role in numerous pathological conditions. Bacterial meningitis (BM) is a condition where one gets inflammation of the meninges due to bacteria invading the subarachnoid space, most commonly by the pathogens Streptococcus pneumoniae and Neisseria meningitides.

Traumatic and atraumatic intracranial hemorrhages within different locations of the meninges are a common set of conditions that are directly related to the structure and function of the meninges and can be classified by their specific location within the meningeal layers. For example, an epidural hematoma is the collection of blood in the tight potential space between the dura and the skull (i.e., the epidural space).