**Early AV Thrombosis**

Mechanical failure causes early Av thrombosis. This can result in inflow or outflow from the fistula, central stenosis, or small vein caliber. When an early AV thrombosis if identified requires surgical intervention to correct the technical, mechanical error. This can be avoided though thorough preoperative planning and workup.

**Late AV Thrombosis**

Late AV thrombosis is commonly due to intimal hyperplasia. Angioplasty, thrombectomy, and tPA thrombolysis are possible interventions to attempt to salvage.

**Venous Hypertension**

Patients may develop venous hypertension which in up to 50% of patients is secondary to central stenosis. The patient can develop symptoms of limb edema, varicosities, prolonged bleeding following dialysis sessions or increased venous pressures during dialysis. Treatment is geared towards treatment of central stenosis. This can be done through endovascular treatment with angioplasty and stenting. If unsuccessful, ligation and an alternative limb may be used.

**Arterial Steal Syndrome**

Steal syndrome is arterial blood redirected away from the hand. Symptoms vary depending on the severity. Mild symptoms may be exacerbated and only present during dialysis. The treatment is dependent upon the severity, mild cases may resolve with time. However, more severe symptoms often necessitate ligation of the access.

**Ischemic Monomelic Neuropathy**

IMN is characterized by acute pain, paresthesia, weakness or paralysis immediately following the creation of an AV fistula creation. There is limited ischemia to the nerves as IMN is a type of steal syndrome.  Ligation of the access prevents continuing progression and permanent nerve damage.

**Pseudoaneurysm**

Occur from repeated cannulation causing the destruction of the native vessel or graft leaving thinning of the skin. Ways to avoid the development of pseudoaneurysms are rotating puncture sites. Most can be observed without consequence. Repair involves excision of the affected area and repair with transposed vein or graft.

**Bleeding, Seroma, Infection**

Following surgical intervention bleeding, infections and seroma development are complications not specific to fistula creation but surgery in general. Bleeding may be exacerbated by uremia requiring DDAVP to assist with control of bleeding in a dialysis patient.