Each vertebra of the spinal column is usually made up of a body, spinous process, vertebral foramen, bilateral transverse processes, and pairs of superior and inferior articular facets. Cervical vertebrae have unique anatomical features that distinguish them well from other spine areas. Their bifid spinous processes provide a space for nuchal ligamental attachment, and triangular vertebral foramina accommodate the thicker cervical spinal cord. The third unique characteristic is the presence of transverse foramina, which transmits vertebral arteries on either side of the cervical spine. Besides this, anatomical and functional similarity provides an opportunity to describe the cervical vertebrae into the upper and lower cervical spine.

**Upper Cervical Spine (C1-C2)**

Atlas (C1) and axis (C2) are the first two cervical vertebrae and are named separately due to their distinctive anatomical features. They reside in the spine's craniovertebral junction, where the base of the skull meets the spinal column. The ring-shaped atlas lacks a body and spinous process, potentially responsible for supporting the head. While working together, the atlas and axis primarily allow spinal rotation, flexion, and extension; and are thus considered the most flexible segment of the entire spine.

Atlas is a unique ring-shaped vertebra lacking a vertebral body that articulates with the occiput above and axis below by corresponding condyles on its lateral masses. While in the medial aspect, the odontoid process of axis or dens articulates with an anterior arch of the axis as the median atlantoaxial joint. The odontoid process of axis or dens is the remnant of the C1 body that fused with the body of the axis and became a unique identity for C2. This median atlantoaxial joint allows free rotation of the head without involving the trunk. A transverse ligament runs posterior to the dens and attaches with either lateral mass of the atlas, preventing anterior subluxation of the atlas on the axis.

**Lower Cervical Spine  (C3-C7)**

In contrast with the upper cervical vertebrae, all five vertebrae in the lower cervical spine possess a vertebral body with superior concave and inferior convex surfaces. The uncinate process is a characteristic feature of lower cervical vertebrae that articulates with a depressed area of the adjacent upper vertebral body. This articulation provides additional stability and prevents cervical vertebral listhesis (spondylolisthesis). Additionally, C7 has a slightly larger vertebral body and smaller vertebral foramen than other cervical vertebrae and does not contain the vertebral artery. Having inferior facets and spinous processes, it resembles thoracic vertebrae hence called transitional vertebrae.

Vertebral articulations in the spinal column integrate vertebral foramina into a continuous canal named the spinal canal, whereas intervertebral foramina form on either side of each pair of vertebrae. The Intervertebral foramen or neuroforamen is bounded by the superior notch and inferior notch of the corresponding vertebrae and acts as an exit path for spinal nerve rootlets. Among the eight pairs of cervical spinal nerves, C1-C7 rootlets exit the spinal canal through the superior notch of corresponding cervical vertebrae and C8 through the inferior notch of the C7 vertebra.

**Ligaments**

The vertebral column has some ligaments which are present throughout the spine. But there are a few ligaments that are unique and present in the cervical spine only. Anterior and posterior longitudinal ligament (covering the vertebral body ), ligamentum flavum (connects the laminae), and interspinous ligament (connects the spinous process)  are present at every vertebral level, whereas the nuchal ligament (connects the tip of the spinous process and provides attachment for muscles)  and transverse ligament of the atlas are present in the cervical spine only. Ligaments of the cervical spine can further group as external and internal ligaments. Examples of the outer ligaments are atlanto-occipital, anterior atlantooccipital, and anterior longitudinal ligaments. Examples of internal ligaments are the transverse ligaments, the accessory ligaments, the alar ligaments, the accessory atlantoaxial ligament, and the tectorial membrane.

**Intervertebral Discs**

Cervical intervertebral discs facilitate motion, transmit weight, and provide stability to the spine. Each disc has four parts, the central nucleus pulposus, which is surrounded by annulus fibrosus, and two end plates, which are attached to the body of the vertebrae. Intervertebral discs are thicker anteriorly, and for this thickening, they are responsible for physiological lordosis of the neck.

**Movements of the Cervical Spine**

The cervical spine's flexibility provides a wide range of motion, including flexion, extension, rotation, and lateral flexion. The atlantoaxial joint offers 50% of all cervical rotation. Besides, the atlantooccipital joint contributes 50% of flexion and extension of the neck.

- Flexion: Forward bending of the cervical spine. It occurs while looking downwards.

- Extension: Bending backward or straightening of the cervical spine. Example: performing overhead work.

- Rotation: Turning the head, along with the cervical spine, to one side. Example: Looking at the shoulder.

- Lateral flexion: Bending of cervical spine laterally to the right or left side.

**Functions of Cervical Spine**

The cervical spine plays many roles in the head-neck area, including:

- **Protection of the spinal cord:**It is a bundle of nerve fiber that is a continuation of the brain stem. The spinal cord traverse through a canal in the vertebral column called the spinal canal. The cervical spine protects it from external compression.

- **Provide support to the head:**The cervical spine holds the head in position and bears its weight.

- **Supports blood supply to the brain:**The cervical spine carries a vertebral artery in its transverse foramen and helps them to send blood to the brain.

- **Supports Head-Neck movements:**Cervical spine and neck muscle provide a wide range of motion in this region.