Homonymous hemianopsia frequently results from vascular injury. In adults, cerebral infarcts and intracranial hemorrhages being the most common (42% to 89%). They are followed by tumors, trauma, iatrogenic events, and neurologic disease.

**Structure and Function**

The optic nerves run near the midline inferior to the frontal lobe, and superior to the cavernous sinus on each side. Their purpose is to transfer retinal information to the appropriate region of the occipital primary visual cortex.

**Embryology**

Development and differentiation of the eyes begin around week three of gestation.

**Vascular Supply**

The major vascular supply to the anterior intracranial structures is the circle of Willis and its associated branches. The optic nerve is supplied by the internal carotid artery (ICA), specifically the superior hypophyseal and ophthalmic arteries.

**Neuroanatomical Pathway**

Each optic nerve transports information from the retinal ganglion cells to the optic chiasm and through the retrochiasmal pathway to varying areas of the brain for use in a number of ways. There exist nearly 2.4 million fibers from the optic nerve that then pass through to the optic chiasm.

As a result, each optic tract leaving the chiasm contains a mix of contralateral nasal (crossed) and ipsilateral temporal (uncrossed) fibers. These fibers receive information from their opposite visual field - the left temporal fibers view the left nasal field. This arrangement coordinates the left retrochiasmal visual pathway with the right half of each eye's visual field and vice versa. Both optic tracts travel near the basal ganglia, internal capsule, and cerebral peduncle on each side.

Nearly 80% of nerve fibers from the optic tract enter the ipsilateral lateral geniculate nucleus. The remainder project to the Edinger-Westphal nuclei (afferent signal for pupillary light reflex).

From the LGN, neurons spread to the primary visual cortex via radiations. These optic radiations, also called geniculocalcarine tracts, are divided into superior and inferior segments (sometimes also termed posterior Baum's loop and anterior Meyer loop). Like the relationship between nasal and temporal fibers and their visual fields, the superior radiation projects inferior field information, and the inferior radiation projects superior field information. The superior pathway courses posteriorly through the parietal lobe before contacting the visual cortex. The inferior radiation first courses anteriorly, along the roof of the lateral ventricle's temporal horn, before turning laterally and projecting through the temporal lobe as Meyer loop.

At the primary visual cortex, Brodmann area 17, even further organization of visual information takes place in order to best merge the images received from each eye. Similar to the rest of the pathway, the visual cortex is also retinotopically arranged. In this way, the central field of vision (macular portion) is received by the posterior pole of the visual cortex.