Treatment modalities depend on the severity of the disease. Those with a milder form of the disease with mild, non-nephrotic range proteinuria, normal serum creatinine levels, and normal eGFR can be treated conservatively with only ACE inhibitors with a 3 to 6 months regular follow up to assess disease progression. Statin inhibitors are also added due to the increased rate of atherosclerosis and possible cardiac involvement seen in those with chronic kidney disease (CKD). Those with a greater degree of glomerular disease, hematuria, hypertension, increased serum creatinine and decreased eGFR are treated with corticosteroids at 1 mg/kg/day with a maximum dose of 60 to 80 mg/day for 12 to 16 weeks. The dose of steroids is then tapered off. If the patient is non-responsive to steroids or cannot tolerate them, then calcineurin inhibitors like tacrolimus (0.04 to 0.08 mg/kg/day) can be added.

Lupus nephritis is said to be in its active phase if its class III or IV and its treatment are divided into induction and maintenance phases. Some studies have shown that a combination of methotrexate and intravenous cyclophosphamide pulse therapy is associated with increased positive outcomes for refractory diffuse proliferative lupus nephritis. In some severe cases, cyclophosphamide at 2 mg/kg/day has been added to steroids, and the dose is then tapered down to 1.5 mg/kg/day.

Anti-GBM disease has shown great response to treatment with a combination of pulse methylprednisolone, two weeks of plasmapheresis followed by two months of corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide.