The muscles of the back are divided into three categories.

The first category is the superficial back muscles; these are part of the extrinsic back muscle.

- Trapezius

- Originates from the superior nuchal line, external occipital protuberance, nuchal ligament, and spinous processes of C7-T12
- Attach to the lateral third of the clavicle, acromion, and spine of the scapula
- Innervated by the accessory nerve (12th cranial nerve)

- Latissimus dorsi

- Originates from spinous processes of T7-L5, sacrum, thoracolumbar fascia, iliac crest, and 10th through 12th rib
- Inserts to the intertubercular groove of the humerus
- Innervated by the thoracodorsal nerve

- Levator scapulae

- Originates from the transverse processes of the first four cervical vertebrae
- Inserts to the superior angle of the scapula
- Innervated by the dorsal scapular nerve

- Rhomboids* 

- Minor

- Originated from the nuchal ligament and spinous processes of C7-T1
- Inserts to the superior part of the medial border of the scapula (the line which is located between the superior angle and trigonum scapula
- Innervated by the dorsal scapular nerve


- Major

- Originated from spinous processes of T2-T5
- Inserts to the inferior part of the medial border of the scapula (the line which is located between the inferior angle and trigonum scapula
- Innervated by the dorsal scapular nerve

*Rhomboid major and rhomboid minor are part of the deep shoulder girdle muscle group.

The second group of muscles is the intermediate group. It is part of the extrinsic back muscle. These muscles assist in the human respiratory function and are intimately associated with the ribs.

- Serratus posterior inferior

- Originated from the ligamentum nuchae and spinous processes of C7-T3 vertebrae
- Inserts to the superior aspect of 2nd through 5th ribs 
- Innervated by the anterior rami of the T1-T4 spinal nerves

- Serratus posterior superior

- Originated from the spinous processes of T11-L3 vertebrae
- Inserts to the inferior border of the 9th through 12th ribs 
- Innervated by the T9-T12 spinal nerves

The final group of muscles is known as intrinsic or deep back muscles.

This group further subdivides into several categories in the back and neck.

The superficial layer consists of the splenius muscles located in the lateral and posterior neck regions.

The main muscle groups in the intrinsic muscles are the erector spinae muscles and the transversospinalis group.[3] The main movements of these muscles are flexion/extension, side bending, and rotation.

- Iliocostalis, most laterally located

- Longissimus, the largest part of the group

- Spinalis, most medially located

The functions of this muscle group are to maintain posture, lengthen the spine, and bend the spine to the side. It is the primary extensor of the back when it runs bilaterally.

The third component of the intrinsic muscles in the human back is the transversospinalis muscles.

- Semispinalis is located in the cervical and thoracal regions and has thoracic, cervicis, and capitis muscles.

- The multifidi lie deep to the semispinalis muscles, located along the entire spine, particularly in the lumbar region.

- The rotatores are the deepest part of this group, located along the entire spine, particularly in the thoracic region.

Like the erector spinae group, the transversospinalis group is located bilaterally on the vertebral column. These muscles assist in bending the back posteriorly when contracted bilaterally.