In PAVSD, the degree of pulmonary artery involvement steers the clinical picture and the treatment options. It may present as isolated valvular atresia or with proximal pulmonary trunk involved. The right and left pulmonary arteries may or may not communicate. Major aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCA) usually supply the lung parenchyma. These MAPCA arise may arise from the thoracic or abdominal aorta, subclavian arteries, internal mammary arteries, intercostal arteries, etc. MAPCA are usually aberrant and stenosed at either end. In other instances, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) may also contribute to supplying pulmonary circulation.

The intrapulmonary arterial structure mainly relies on the size and flow of PDA. In the absence of PDA, or too many aberrant MAPCA, the intrapulmonary arteries may not be developed properly leading to pulmonary hypertension. The associated VSD is usually membranous in origin. Other defects like atrial septal defects are also not uncommon but their association with PAVSD is not well understood. The right ventricle may hypertrophy in response to pulmonary atresia. The left chambers of the heart are usually normal. The coronary artery network is usually normal but may rarely present with fistulas.

Due to the atresia of the pulmonary arteries and valve, the right ventricle is unable to pump the blood adequately towards pulmonary circulation. This situation is incompatible with life in severe cases where the valve is completely atretic since the blood oxygenation is severely diminished. The pressure in the right ventricle increases equal or above to that of the left ventricle. The presence of the associated defect in the interventricular septum (VSD) plays a key role. Blood then flows towards the path offering the least resistance which in this case is left ventricle via the VSD leading to the right-to-left shunting of blood.

The overriding position of the aorta has a compensatory role by receiving the blood from both the ventricles and pump it to both systemic circulation and pulmonary circulation via the patent ductus arteriosus. Patency of ductus arteriosus is crucial in the initial survival of these patients. In mild to moderate cases where the pulmonary vasculature and valve are mildly atretic, the right ventricle can pump adequate blood in the pulmonary circuit for oxygenation. PDA in these cases may spontaneously collapse before the presentation.