Treatment of dural sinus thrombosis can be divided into two main components. The first component is treating the clot and the conditions leading to the clot. The second component is treating the sequelae of the clot. The clot itself is usually treated with anticoagulation like a venous thrombus.

In both studies, acutely anticoagulated patients had reduced risk of mortality and better functional outcomes at follow up. The decision to anticoagulate is complicated by the frequent presence of intracerebral hemorrhage. These studies notably did not exclude patients with intracerebral hematoma (ICH) from receiving anticoagulation. Deaths in those studies were not felt to be attributed to bleeding or worsening of existing intracranial bleeds by the study's authors. These studies have led current AHA guidelines to recommend acute anticoagulation with either unfractionated or low molecular weight heparin even in the setting of ICH. However, any decision to anticoagulate a patient must be made with a careful weighing of the benefits and risks of anticoagulation.

Patients with VST should continue to be anticoagulated with warfarin for 3 to 6 months if provoked (pregnancy, trauma, infection), and 6 to 12 months if unprovoked. If any underlying thrombophilia is present or other venous thromboembolic events have occurred, careful consideration should be given to lifelong anticoagulation. At this time, current guidelines do not endorse direct-acting oral anticoagulants, but there are many small studies and case series detailing successful use.

Women with VST while pregnant should be anticoagulated with low molecular weight heparin throughout the pregnancy. For future pregnancies, consideration should be given to prophylactic anticoagulation with low molecular weight (LMWH). If a thrombus is thought to be provoked by a localized CNS infection, e.g., meningitis/brain abscess, then the infectious nidus is treated with appropriate antibiotic coverage and any necessary drainage procedures.

Indications for more aggressive measures to break down the clot are not yet part of clinical guidelines such as the AHA or European Stroke Organization, but they are used in clinical practice, and there is evidence to suggest some benefit in certain cases. In current practice, thrombolytic therapy is usually reserved for patients with clot burdens that are clinically not improving as expected, or the slow rate of improvement is either placing them at risk of vision loss or other significant morbidity or mortality. The decision to pursue systemic versus catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy is guided by the availability of cerebrovascular interventions and provider preference. At this time, the two have not been compared head-to-head prospectively, but retrospective studies of catheter-directed therapy do show some promising results.

Additionally, if thrombolytic therapy fails to produce the desired clinical improvement and recanalization of the occluded sinus, various types of mechanical thrombectomy have been tried with some success.

Treatments of the sequelae of the venous thrombus are numerous as venous thrombi lead to many complications. For patients with chronically elevated intracranial pressure (ICP), the ICP can be medically lowered with acetazolamide, or CSF diversion with ventriculoperitoneal shunts or optic nerve sheath fenestration. In patients with acutely elevated ICP, more common temporizing measures such as elevation of the head of bed, hyperventilation, paralytic agents, can be done as they would in any other condition. For patients with severely elevated ICP, decompressive craniectomies can be performed. For patients with seizures after dural sinus thrombosis, antiepileptic medications are routinely used.