CAR leads to progressive and rapid visual loss caused by rod and cone dysfunction with retinal degeneration. It is characterized by acquired, acute, or subacute sudden, bilateral,  progressive, painless visual deterioration, which can sometimes have a chronic presentation. Even though CAR is usually bilaterally symmetrical, it can be asymmetric and sequential or rarely even have a unilateral presentation.

Early cases of CAR may mimic various other conditions and may be difficult to diagnose. Nonspecific complaints are not uncommon and include glare, photosensitivity, reduced vision, especially in scotopic conditions, floaters, photopsia, apparent graying or darkening of the surrounding environment, transient visual obscurations, and 'bizarre visual sensations.' Clinical features of cone dysfunction are decreased visual acuity, abnormal color vision, metamorphopsia, central scotoma, and abnormal cone-mediated electroretinogram (ERG).

Rod dysfunction leads to prolonged dark adaptation, nyctalopia, constricted visual fields, mid-peripheral or ring scotomas, and abnormal rod-mediated ERG. Loss of vision in patients with CAR can occur over weeks to months. Patients with recoverin antibodies in their serum have a diffuse involvement of both rods and cones and suffer from profound visual impairment compared to patients with anti-α-enolase antibodies. Patients with anti-α-enolase antibodies are also less likely to develop nyctalopia due to more limited central cone involvement.

Visual symptoms in CAR may manifest even months or years before the diagnosis of the neoplasm and occur as a result of the remote effect of the neoplasm. The interval may be as long as 11 years.

Recent onset acquired nyctalopia in an elderly patient with no family history of retinitis pigmentosa or no evidence of vitamin A deficiency are other clinical clues for CAR diagnosis.

A slit-lamp examination may reveal the presence of low-grade inflammation in the anterior chamber or cellular debris in the anterior vitreous. The fundus may appear normal, but some patients may have retinal pigment abnormalities in the form of bony spicules or atrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, vascular attenuation, and optic disc pallor. Other fundus findings include vascular sheathing, macular edema, periphlebitis, chorioretinal atrophy, and vitritis. Vitritis may be seen in up to 20% of patients. Cancer patients also develop cataracts at an early age.

Malignancy is associated with the overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS).