An intravenous catheter (IV)  is placed before the induction of anesthesia. Typically, a patient breathes 100% oxygen before induction of anesthesia. The patient's vital signs are monitored throughout the procedure. The intravenous anesthetic of choice is administered, followed by hyperventilation with a bag mask to induce hypocapnia which lowers cerebral blood flow and reduces the seizure threshold. After general anesthesia is successfully induced, a muscle relaxant is given to prevent myalgias and musculoskeletal injuries during the seizure. A tourniquet is commonly placed on one of the lower extremities to block muscle relaxants from reaching the area. This helps monitor the motor portion of the seizure by allowing personnel to observe the tonic and clonic activity of the lower extremity. A soft bite block is then placed to prevent the patient from developing an oral injury during the seizure.  The electrical stimulus is then administered to induce the seizure and is monitored by a processed EEG.

The goal is for the seizure to last around 25 to 75 seconds but no shorter than 15 seconds.

There are a variety of anesthetic agents and muscle relaxants that are used to induce anesthesia for ECT. Most dosing regimens for medications administered should be used in the lowest effective dose.

Methohexital is considered the gold standard for induction of anesthesia for ECT. It is a barbiturate that stimulates Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors which are the main inhibitory receptors in the brain. Methohexital produces anesthesia for approximately 4 to 7 minutes, which is ideal for ECT. It does not affect seizure threshold and, compared to propofol, does not shorten seizure length.

Etomidate is a unique drug that also works by activating GABA receptors in the brain. Studies have shown that it tends to produce a longer seizure compared to propofol.

Propofol also acts as a GABA agonist. However, it tends to shorten seizure duration as it increases the seizure threshold. It is used in ECT as an anesthetic agent when previous seizures induced by ECTs have been prolonged and when a rapid onset is needed. Propofol is dosed at 1.5 to 2 mg/kg.

Ketamine is N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist, and it causes dissociative anesthesia as well as analgesia. It is not often used in ECT as it tends to increase seizure length and causes indirect myocardial stimulation. Ketamine also has antidepressant properties, and studies are ongoing determining its effectiveness as an adjunct for the treatment of depression. Doses of 1 to 2 mg/kg are typically used to induce adequate anesthesia.

Sevoflurane is an option for induction of anesthesia in ECT. It has a slow onset compared to intravenous anesthetics. It can be helpful to initiate anesthesia to obtain IV access on a patient who is uncooperative awake. When used for a short period, sevoflurane has a quick recovery. In a systematic review, sevoflurane reduces seizure length more prominently than propofol, barbiturates, and ketamine.

Succinylcholine is the preferred muscle relaxant for ECT. It is a depolarizing neuromuscular blocker and is given in doses of 1 mg/kg to produce adequate muscle relaxation for intubating conditions within 30 seconds of administration. It typically lasts 5 to 8 minutes.

Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents are good alternatives to succinylcholine, with the most common being rocuronium. Rocuronium is given at doses of 0.6 mg/kg to produce intubating conditions. Its effects last around 35 minutes. If the patient is on an antiepileptic medication or mood stabilizer such as lithium, the anesthetic provider must be aware. Lithium can delay the onset and prolong the actions of succinylcholine and nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents.