The mammary glands are modified tubuloalveolar apocrine sweat glands located on the anterior thoracic wall. They consist of an epithelial bilayer contained within active adipose tissue. These cells have the support of a loose framework of dense fibrous connective tissue known as Cooper ligaments.

Two distinct types of cells comprise the epithelial bilayer. Luminal cuboidal cells form the inner portion and line the lactiferous ducts. These ducts radiate from the nipple and dilate into the lactiferous sinuses just beneath the areola. Further subdivision of the lactiferous ducts leads to lobes and lobules, of which the adult female mammary gland has 15 to 20 and 20 to 40, respectively. Each lobule ends in small bulb-like glands known as terminal ductal lobular units, wherein milk gets produced in response to prolactin. The outer portion of the bilayer is constituted by myoepithelial cells. These spindle-shaped cells have smooth muscle cell properties and participate in the process of milk ejection during lactation. Together, the epithelial components of the mammary gland constitute 10 to 15% of its overall volume.

Transplantation and lineage tracing studies have shown that the epithelial components of the mammary gland originate from the stem and progenitor cells found in the ductular and basal epithelia. However, there is controversy since more than one cell population with stem cell properties has been found on the mammary epithelium. The known stem cell populations include mammary-reconstituting units, bipotent mammary stem cells (MaSCs), and unipotent mammary epithelial progenitors. The bipotent MaSCs can differentiate into both luminal and myoepithelial cells and are characterized by the profile CD49f/CD29/CD24. Stem cell expansion is mediated by progesterone, which induces RANK-L secretion in progesterone positive mammary epithelial cells. Secreted RANK-L acts on the RANK receptor found on hormone receptor-negative progenitor cells, which induces their proliferation.

Each lactiferous duct connects to the exterior through orifices found in the nipple. These 0.5 mm orifices have tiny sphincters that prevent leakage during breastfeeding. A circular, pigmented area known as the areola surrounds the nipple. The pigment of the areola varies among individuals, as it can range from pink to nearly black. This pigment is also subject to darkening during puberty, pregnancy, and sexual arousal and orgasm. The areola is covered by stratified squamous epithelium, which is continuous with the nipple and surrounding skin. Additionally, the areola contains in its periphery some nodular elevations known as tubercles of Morgagni, which represent the openings of Montgomery glands. These are modified glands that represent an intermediate stage between sweat and true mammary glands. They secrete a substance that provides lubrication during breastfeeding. Deep to both areola and the nipple, smooth muscle bundle fibers are responsible for nipple erection secondary to various sensory stimuli, including cold, arousal, and breastfeeding.

The adipose component of the mammary gland forms a large portion of the breast’s stromal fat pad. The variation in breast size amongst women is related to the adipose tissue volume rather than the epithelial component itself. Adipose tissue is abundant in the interlobular spaces, while its presence in the intralobular stroma is scarce. Adipose tissue actively regulates mammary gland homeostasis, as it participates in epithelial growth, intercellular communication, angiogenesis, and milk production. Additionally, it serves as a reservoir of interstitial fluids that includes locally-derived molecules (for example, prolactin) and those synthesized elsewhere. The intimate and unique relationship between the adipose microenvironment and the mammary epithelium raises the question as to whether these adipocytes are functionally different from those in other body depots.

Fibroblasts are also important components of the mammary stroma. These cells most often neighbor the basal side of the epithelial branching tree. They have various functions, including growth factor synthesis, metalloproteinase (MMP) production, and extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition. The ECM is made up of collagen types I and III, proteoglycans, hyaluronic acid, fibronectin, and tenascins. It actively supports epithelial survival by suppressing apoptosis, a process mediated by MMP-2. It also participates in secondary and tertiary branching of mammary ducts, a process mediated by MMP-3. The ECM also participates in tumor suppression via virtue of the intact basement membrane. The basement membranes are thin, 100-nm thick sheets of glycoproteins and proteoglycans, laminins, and collagen IV fibrils.

The vascular and lymphatic networks develop in close association with the mammary epithelial tree. Myoepithelial cells synthesize VEGF-C and VEGF-D, which likely drive lymphangiogenesis. Adipocytes can also regulate angiogenesis, as they too secrete VEGF.

Immune cells regulate invasion into the fat pad, and thus, are necessary for ductal morphogenesis; this is especially true for macrophages, mast cells, and eosinophils. Mast cells are also implicated in mammary involution during the later stages of life, as they are capable of activating plasma kallikrein and, thus, the plasminogen cascade.