A fracture of the distal radius among the most common fractures that present to the emergency department or a primary care office in the United States.

- Colles fracture: fracture of the distal radius resulting in dorsal angulation

- Chauffeur fracture: avulsion fracture of the radial styloid

- Smith fracture: fracture of the distal radius that leads to increased volar angulation or volar displacement

- Barton fracture: fracture of the distal radius leading to the displacement of the distal fragment and the carpus, resulting in a fracture-subluxation of the wrist.

All of these fractures are treatable surgically. Commonly a volar approach is utilized to reduce a distal radius fracture. After skin incision and dissection through subcutaneous tissue, the interval between the flexor carpi radialis tendon subsheath and the radial artery is opened revealing the pronator quadratus. The pronator quadratus is elevated off of the fracture site, and a volar plate is applied to provide structural fixation to the reduced fracture.

The scaphoid is the most commonly fractured carpal bone, and like distal radius fractures, it is commonly the consequence of a fall onto an outstretched hand. Nonunion is a common complication in this injury due to the delicate vasculature of the scaphoid. However, not all fractures of the scaphoid require surgical attention. Indications for surgical management in a scaphoid fracture include displacement, fracture of the proximal pole, and nonunion.

Falls onto outstretched hands do not only cause damage to osseous structures of the radiocarpal joint, but it can also cause damage to ligamentous structures. The scapholunate interosseous ligament plays a crucial role in wrist stability and injury to this structure can be challenging to diagnose. Patients typically complain of pain and wrist popping or clicking with wrist extension and grip.