The first branch of the superior mesenteric artery is the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery. This artery bifurcates into anterior and posterior branches, both of which form anastomoses with branches of the superior pancreaticoduodenal artery (a branch of the celiac artery). The inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery supplies the head of the pancreas and the duodenum.

The superior mesenteric artery then gives off several jejunal and ileal arteries to the left, and the middle colic, right colic, and ileocolic arteries to the right. The jejunal and ileal arteries form anastomotic arcades within the mesentery, from which small, straight end arteries called vasa recta supply the intestinal wall. The jejunal blood supply consists of a few arterial arcades with numerous long vasa recta. The ileal blood supply contains more arterial arcades with fewer, shorter vasa recta.

The middle colic artery supplies the transverse colon, while the right colic artery supplies the ascending colon. The ileocolic artery is the inferior most branch of the superior mesenteric artery and supplies the ascending colon, appendix, cecum, and ileum.

The major anastomosis between the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries is the marginal artery of Drummond, supplying the splenic flexure. A more proximal anastomosis between the two is formed via the Arc of Riolan, also known as the meandering artery. It is typically an arterial anastomosis between the middle colic artery, which is a branch of the superior mesenteric artery, and the left colic artery, a branch of the inferior mesenteric artery.