Tapeworms require single or multiple hosts to complete their life cycle. Infection of the host depends on the stage of the life cycle the tapeworm is in when the host becomes exposed.

For diphyllobothriasis, humans become infected by consuming undercooked or raw fish infected with the worm larval stage (cysticerci).D. latum; however, with improved molecular testing, other species are being recognized as pathogenic.Diphyllobothrium may live for decades in the human host and continue to pass eggs through their lifetime.

Taeniasis has a similar reproductive cycle as Diphyllobothriasis. Eggs expelled in animal or human stool contaminate the water and vegetation that cattle or swine ingest. Eggs or gravid proglottids (worm segments) are ingested and penetrate the intestinal wall to infiltrate various striated muscles or other tissue and develop into cysticerci. If humans ingest undercooked pork (T. solium) or beef (T. saginata) with cysticerci, the worm will attach to the jejunum and mature to an adult worm in 5 to 12 weeks for T. solium and 10 to 12 weeks for T. saginata.

Ingestion of cysticerci only causes taeniosis or the intestinal adult tapeworm infection; ingestion of cysticerci does not cause cysticercosis, which is due to the direct ingestion of T. solium eggs passed in the stool due to poor hygiene practices.Taenia eggs. Embryos hatch in the small intestine then may invade and spread hematogenously to the central nervous system (neurocysticercosis) or muscle and other tissue. Person-to-person spread is more common than previously thought rather than contamination through environmental sources.