**Imaging:**An anorectal fistula is a clinical diagnosis, but imaging is beneficial in determining the course of a fistulous tract or determining its etiology. Imaging studies include endo-anal ultrasound, CT pelvis, CT-fistulography, and MRI of the pelvis.

**Endoanal Ultrasound**

Endorectal ultrasound is also a useful modality to assess for an abscess with similar sensitivity but less specificity than MRI.

**CT scan and CT Fistulogram**

Computerized tomography is useful for identifying abscesses and drainable fluid collections, as is quick and readily accessible in the majority of clinical scenarios. Although it is not as sensitive or specific as pelvic MRI for classification of anal fistulas.

In the outpatient setting, CT-fistulography is a useful and efficient modality for identifying fistula tracts preoperatively.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**

MRI of pelvis assists in the identification of fistulous tracts and occult abscesses as well as characterizing proximity of tracts to the internal and external sphincters to coordinate effective planning. Although CT pelvis is useful for the evaluation of underlying abscess, it is less sensitive than MR in identifying fistulous tracts.

MRI is a compelling preoperative tool, particularly in complex fistulas and those with an external opening greater than 2 cm from the anus.

It is efficacious in identifying post-operative complications such as an abscess or recurrent fistula, particularly at or after 12 weeks postoperatively.

**Laboratory Findings**

Basic laboratory panels should be obtained in patients, including complete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel. Low hemoglobin may reveal underlying anemia, which could be secondary to an inflammatory bowel disease or gastrointestinal malignancy. Leukocytosis may reveal an underlying infectious process or occult abscess, as well as an elevated C reactive protein. Other blood tests for inflammatory bowel disease, rapid plasma reagin, and others.