Speaking broadly, the hypothalamus is a high-level sensory integration and motor output area that maintains homeostasis by controlling endocrine, autonomic, and somatic behavior.

First, the hypothalamus receives internal stimuli via receptors for circulating hormones. The blood-brain barrier is particularly permeable at the subfornical organ and organum vasculosum around the hypothalamus, allowing blood osmolarity sensation. When osmolarity increases during dehydration, the antidiuretic hormone (ADH) causes renal water reabsorption. The hypothalamus senses external stimuli via the spinothalamic tract carrying somatic sensory information, particularly pain. The hypothalamus is involved in limbic sensory integration via the fornix and mammillothalamic tract in the Papez circuit and the stria terminalis connection to the amygdala. Cortex level sensory perceptions are received via the medial forebrain bundle. The retinohypothalamic tract carries light signals to the suprachiasmatic nucleus, regulating the diurnal pattern of hormone release. The integration of these inputs at the level of the hypothalamus leads to appropriate physiologic and behavioral responses that maintain life across time.

Second, the hypothalamus output regulates the endocrine system, autonomic system, and somatic behavior. There are 11 unique nuclei within the area inferior to the thalamus.

The paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei both produce the peptides oxytocin and ADH, which are released from neuronal axons into the capillaries of the posterior pituitary. These are both hormones and neurotransmitters. Oxytocin in systemic circulation controls uterine contraction during labor and milk let down in breastfeeding. Systemic ADH increases the translocation of aquaporin to the apical membrane in the renal distal convoluted tubules, increasing water reabsorption during dehydration. These hormones share a common peptide, which means that excess oxytocin, or synthetic oxytocin used in labor and delivery, can activate renal ADH receptors. Thus hyponatremia is a side effect of synthetic oxytocin. ADH also causes vasoconstriction to increase blood pressure in severe hypovolemia and release von Willebrand factor from the Weibel-Palade bodies of endothelial cells to control bleeding. Furthermore, both oxytocin and ADH, acting as central neurotransmitters, are involved in pair bonding.

The preoptic, anterior, and posterior nuclei regulate body temperature by decreasing the sympathetic tone of skeletal muscle, increasing the sympathetic tone to the skin, dilating capillaries, and improving heat exchange with the exterior. Males and females differ in the distribution of estrogen receptors in the preoptic nucleus, influencing sexual and maternal behavior.

The suprachiasmatic nucleus regulates hormone secretion and behavior diurnally according to light input through the eyes. Twenty-four-hour oscillations of clock transcription factor activity and action potential frequency increase locomotor activity during the day and decrease it at night—moreover, cortisol peaks around sunrise, and growth hormone peaks near midnight. Most myocardial infarctions happen in the early morning due to the stress hormone cortisol peak, which raises blood pressure.

The ventromedial nucleus regulates feeding behavior. Destruction of this area causes hyperphagia, such as that seen in Prader-Willi syndrome. Satiety, as perceived by this area, leads to decreased eating.  The dorsomedial nucleus controls rage behavior. Lack of satiety can lead to aggression. The lateral hypothalamus perceives hunger and increases eating. Destruction of the lateral area causes anorexia.

The arcuate nucleus releases hormones secreted by axon terminals into the hypothalamohypophysial venous portal system to control anterior pituitary hormone release. The corticotropin-releasing hormone causes the anterior pituicytes to release adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) into capillaries, which drain into the cerebral venous system. ACTH travels through systemic circulation to stimulate the adrenal cortex (zona reticularis) production of the stress-response hormone cortisol. Given its diversity of inputs, the hypothalamus enables the body to respond to both physiological and psychological stressors. Again, cortisol production varies throughout a 24-hour day, with the highest level around sunrise and the lowest around sunset due to the interconnections between the arcuate and suprachiasmatic nuclei. Thyrotropin-releasing hormone leads to systemic TSH secretion, increasing the synthesis and release of thyroid hormone to regulate metabolism. The hypothalamus senses body energy stores in part by receptors for the adipocyte hormone leptin. When reserves are low, the hypothalamus decreases metabolism by decreasing the thyroid hormone.

Pulsatile GnRH leads to increased release of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). Continuous GnRH causes decreased LH and FSH release. LH stimulates male testes to produce testosterone and female ovaries to produce estrogen. These hormones lead to secondary sexual development in males and females, respectively. A surge in LH causes ovulation. FSH stimulates male spermatogenesis and female oocyte maturation. Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) leads to the release of growth hormone (GH), which stimulates tissue growth and metabolism. Somatostatin decreases GH release and opposes GHRH. Dopamine inhibits prolactin secretion as part of the hypothalamohypophysial dopamine circuit. Phenothiazine antipsychotics interrupt this pathway, leading to a galactorrhea side effect. Many of these hormones can be manipulated clinically by synthetic analogs. These are treatments for diseases like uterine leiomyomas, anovulation, hypogonadism, breast and prostate cancer, birth control, and acromegaly.

The mamillary nucleus contributes to the limbic system as part of the Papez circuit. It is also involved in memory formation and controls exploratory behavior.

The hypothalamus sits atop a motor hierarchy which includes the cerebral cortex, limbic system, brainstem, and spinal cord motor neurons. The hypothalamus integrates internal and external information about the state of the organism and governs action patterns to maintain homeostasis across the lifespan. The sensory areas of the cerebral cortex provide abstract sensory perceptions. The limbic system provides potent emotional stimuli. The spinohypothalamic tract provides pain and temperature information. The brainstem provides serotonin and norepinephrine. The hypothalamus integrates these stimuli and activates action patterns and postures in the cerebral cortex and brainstem. These signals travel through the spine to the muscles and produce behaviors.