Most patients with a femoral neck fracture will present to the emergency department. Obtain the proper injury radiograph films and history from the patient. With the identification of a femoral neck injury, the patient should immediately become non-weight bearing. From a triage standpoint, the younger patients that benefit from joint sparing fixation should promptly obtain a referral to orthopedics.

For elderly patients, it is vital to identify medical comorbidities. These patients should be medically optimized before operative treatment. Especially in females, it is often painful to urinate, so the placement of a Foley catheter for comfort within the emergency department may be necessary and discontinued postoperatively with ambulation. In the orthopedic unit, it is essential to note the operative approach used because it dictates the post-operative precautions the patient should maintain. For example, for a posterior approach, the patient typically has an abduction pillow to sleep with at night. Posterior precautions also include not crossing the legs, leaning forward while seated, and letting the toes point inward. These precautions help prevent dislocation. Physical therapy and mobilization postoperatively are essential to help patients return to function.

Patients that suffer a femoral neck fracture can benefit from preoperative evaluation and postoperative management of their comorbidities. This interprofessional care team may include orthopedics, geriatrics, internal medicine, trauma surgery, anesthesia, cardiology, operating room and orthopedic nurses, physical therapists, and any other subspecialty that may help manage the patient’s comorbidities.