**History**

In general, patients with symptomatic endometriosis are frequently nulliparous females of reproductive age with a chief complaint of heavy or painful menses. Their periods will often last longer than seven days. They may complain of chronic pelvic pain, pain with sexual intercourse, or defecation (see a full list of symptoms below). Their periods are typically regular, though they may have shorter menstrual cycles (less than 27 days). The onset of pain for these patients is typically 2 or 3 days prior to the onset of their menses, and the pain typically begins to resolve a couple of days after their menses has started.

Endometriomas can cause severe pain. They are most commonly found on the ovaries, and the pain is typically isolated to the side of the lesion. However, depending on the extent of their disease and the laterality of their lesions, patients may experience bilateral or generalized pain. If an ovarian endometrioma ruptures, the thick endometrial fluid can spill throughout the abdomen and cause significant pain and inflammation. These patients often present with an acute surgical abdomen.

Although endometriomas are most commonly found on the ovaries, it is important to remain vigilant with patients that come in with complaints of pain. Endometriomas have been found in other unsuspecting places. For example, there are many documented cases of endometriomas being present within abdominal surgical incision scars. Endometrial implants have also been documented within the lung parenchyma and the brain. Therefore, if a patient complains of cyclical pain during their menstrual cycles, endometriosis is something to keep in mind, regardless of where the pain is located.

**Symptoms**

- Pelvic pain

- Heavy menses

- Painful menses

- Back pain

- Painful sexual intercourse (dyspareunia)

- Painful defecation (dyschezia)

- Painful urination (dysuria)

- Urinary frequency

- Nausea/vomiting

- Bloating

**Physical**

Endometriosis, including those with endometriomas, typically has minimal findings on physical exams. Endometriomas, if large enough, could be felt on a bimanual exam. However, apart from this, these patients have few abnormal findings. You will often find generalized pelvic tenderness or tenderness in the affected area. However, this can also be sensitive to the timing of the exam with respect to the patient’s menstrual cycle. The patient will often have more pain if the exam is completed just before the onset of her menses compared to if it was done just after her menses were completed. Other possible findings on the bimanual exam include a fixed or retroverted uterus, suggesting scarring secondary to endometriosis. At times, nodularity of the uterosacral ligaments can also be palpated.

However, patients who present after an endometrioma rupture could demonstrate an acute abdomen upon evaluation. Findings in these cases include peritoneal signs such as abdominal rigidity, rebound pain, and involuntary guarding.