**Pectus Excavatum**

Cardiopulmonary impairment correlates with the severity of defect or coexisting cardiac anomalies coexistence; therefore, pulmonary function tests, echocardiography, and radiological assessment are mandatory with special attention in exercise tolerance.

**Pectus Carinatum**

The same pectus excavatum workup must take place for pectus carinatum. Haller index in pectus carinatum doesn’t have a cutoff value, but in many series, the principal value of their patients is 1.9 and is associated with respiratory distress during exercise. Pectus morphology frequently classifies as symmetrical or asymmetrical chondrogladiolar or chondromanubrial defects, with the presence of normal or narrow thorax.

**Poland Syndrome**

Poland’s syndrome evaluation focuses on soft-tissue, skeletal, and upper extremity malformations, and always thinking in associated anomalies related to a specific phenotype (Right and left-sided, bilateral). TC (Computed tomography), MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), and angiography with three-dimension reconstruction, cross-sectional, and sagittal views are the most useful imaging tools.

**Sternal Clefts**

The initial evaluation focuses on associated anomalies and life-threating conditions. If indicated, preoperative evaluation tools are; chest TC scan with intravenous contrast with 3-D reconstruction and chest magnetic resonance angiogram. Ophthalmological and cardiological evaluation, lung functional tests, neuro-radiologic imaging, and laryngotracheal-bronchoscopy is often required.

**Ectopia cordis**

Evaluation principles are similar to those of sternal clefts. In this specific condition, evaluation is focused on severity determination and grant neonatal vital support and protection to exposed structures.

**Jeunes Syndrome**

The initial evaluation is focused on respiratory distress support and carry out an extended investigation to detect organic anomalies coexistence. Evaluation tools highlights are; ophthalmoscopy, chest, and extremities radiology imaging (computerized tomography, magnetic resonance, X-rays), abdominal ultrasound, laryngoscopy, and bronchoscopy. If indicated, a preoperative workup is necessary.

**Jarcho-Levin syndrome**

The initial evaluation focuses on respiratory distress support and costovertebral anomalies (vertebrae segmentation and the ribs deformities morphology) identification with imaging test (computerized tomography, magnetic resonance, X-rays). Surgical treatment options are designated on a case-by-case basis. A genetic test is mandatory to inheritance patron determination.