All these muscles are named based on their origin and insertion (except the digastric muscle). The first part of the name indicates its origin, and the second part suggests its insertion. But here the origin, and insertion can be interchangeable depending on whether the hyoid bone is mobile or fixed by the infrahyoid muscles.

Digastric Muscle: It is a spindle-shaped muscle consisting of two bellies (di = two, gastric = belly), the anterior and the posterior bellies which are held together with an intermediate tendon. The posterior belly is quite long compared to the anterior belly of the digastric muscle and takes origin from the temporal bone (mastoid notch) and the anterior belly from the mandible (digastric fossa near the symphysis menti).

Stylohyoid Muscle: This muscle accompanies the posterior belly of digastric, and both receive innervation from the same nerve (facial nerve). This slender muscle takes origin from the middle of the styloid process (temporal bone) and gets inserted to the hyoid bone (junction of the body and greater cornu) superior to omohyoid. Stylohyoid pulls the hyoid bone backward and upward, thus, in turn, elevates the tongue and elongates the floor of the mouth, helping in deglutition. The intermediate tendon of digastric muscle passes through stylohyoid muscle near its insertion.

Mylohyoid Muscle: This is a flat muscle taking origin from the inner surface of the body of the mandible (mylohyoid line). The origin is quite broad and extends from the symphysis menti (anteriorly) to the last molar tooth (posteriorly). Hence the name mylo (mylo = molar in Greek). The insertion is by joining with the opposite mylohyoid muscle in the midline of the neck (median fibrous raphe) anteriorly and body of hyoid bone posteriorly sloping downward and medially, on each side. Thus together it forms the gutter of the floor of the mouth and acts as a support for the tongue. Therefore it is also called as the diaphragma oris (oral diaphragm).

Geniohyoid Muscle: It is short, slender, ribbon-shaped muscle, situated deep to mylohyoid, representing the most proximal component of rectus cervices muscle. It takes origin from the inferior genial tubercle (symphysis menti) and gets inserted to the body of the hyoid bone. The two geniohyoid muscles on either side of the midline are parallel and close to each other.