The following muscles of the foot provide support and allow for the effective function of the medial longitudinal arch. Research shows the intrinsic plantar muscles of the foot play a role in the stance phase of the gait cycle by assisting in foot ground force transmission and shock absorption. During the early and mid-stance phases, these muscles lengthen and dissipate mechanical energy. In the late stance phase, they produce mechanical energy to assist and stabilize the foot during propulsion.

The abductor hallucis is in the first layer of the intrinsic muscles. It originates in the calcaneal tuberosity and inserts at the base of the great toe, allowing the great toe to abduct. Its blood supply comes from the medial plantar artery, and innervation is by the medial plantar nerve.

The flexor digitorum brevis muscle is also in the 1st layer of intrinsic plantar muscles. This muscle originates in the calcaneal tuberosity and inserts on toes two through five at the middle phalanx, allowing those digits to flex. The flexor hallucis brevis muscle flexes the great toe. It originates on the lateral cuneiform and cuboid bones and inserts on the proximal phalanx of the great toe. Both muscles have the same blood supply and innervation as the abductor hallucis (medial plantar artery and medial plantar nerve).

The three plantar interossei muscles originate at the medial metatarsal of the third through fifth digits and adduct the toes. They insert on the proximal phalanges. The interossei muscles are supplied by the plantar metatarsal artery and innervated by the lateral plantar nerve.

The next set of muscles involved in the medial longitudinal arch is those that are grouped based on their actions in the foot and ankle. The tibialis posterior originates in the upper two-thirds of the tibia’s medial posterior surface. The tendon then inserts on the plantar surfaces of the second, third, and fourth metatarsals (the deep slip) and the tuberosity of the navicular (the superficial slip). It is supplied by the posterior tibial, peroneal, and sural arteries and innervated by the tibial nerve. Although the important action of the tibialis posterior is to invert the foot, it also helps in the supination, plantar flexion, and adduction of the foot. Thereby the actions of this muscle provide the maintenance of the height of the arch. Damage to the tibialis posterior could potentially cause the arch to collapse, leading to significant issues. The tibialis posterior also has a long elastic tendon. The recoil and stretch of this tendon absorb and dissipate mechanical energy at the hindfoot.

The tibialis anterior muscle originates on the lateral condyle of the tibia and the upper half of the lateral tibia. The insertion is on the medial cuneiform at the medial and plantar surfaces and base of the first metatarsal. This muscle’s actions include dorsiflexing the ankle and inverting the hindfoot. It receives supply via the anterior tibial artery and innervation from the deep peroneal nerve.

The flexor hallucis longus muscle originates on the posterior fibula at the inferior two-thirds and inserts at the base of the great toe’s distal phalanx on the plantar surface. This muscle mainly flexes the great toe. Its blood supply derives from the posterior tibial artery, and innervation is from the tibial nerve. The flexor hallucis longus acts as a bowstring for the medial longitudinal arch.

The flexor digitorum longus muscle originates on the posterior distal tibia and splits into four tendons. These tendons insert on the base of the distal phalanges 2 through 5 on the plantar surface. The tendons allow for the flexion of these digits. The posterior tibial artery supplies this muscle, and its innervation is by the tibial nerve.

The peroneus longus (fibular longus) originates at the head of the fibula and upper fibular shaft and inserts on the lateral base of the first metatarsal and the medial cuneiform’s posterolateral portion. It plantar flexes the ankle and everts the foot. Vascular supply is by the anterior tibial artery and innervated by the superficial peroneal nerve. This muscle also forms a sling with the tibialis anterior muscle.

The peroneus brevis (fibular brevis) originates at the inferior lateral portion of the fibula and then inserts on the fifth metatarsal’s styloid process to plantarflex the ankle and evert the foot. It receives vascular supply from the peroneal artery and innervation via the superficial peroneal nerve.