**Teamwork in Enabling Effective Informed Consent**

Authorities of various types, including state legislature statutes and national organizations, such as the American Medical Association (AMA) and ACR, set standards on IC for medical imaging that turn the patient education's subjective process into an objective process. The greater the number of persons involved in facets of medical care decisions, the more challenging coordination of the process becomes. Obtaining IC for medical imaging often involves two mostly independently functioning medical teams, such as when medical imaging services are provided at a radiology inpatient or outpatient center instead of services provided at a private practice office. The members of different medical teams involved in a patient's care should communicate effectively to enable the members to communicate effectively with the patient. IC conversations for medical imaging exams when material risks are possible are often best held by a referring clinician(s) in conjunction with a radiologist to address non-radiological and radiological issues.

**Teamwork in Improving Patient Safety Outcomes at Individual Healthcare Facilities**

All interprofessional healthcare team members (clinicians, specialists, nurses, radiology techs, and radiology pharmacists) should monitor patients' concerns about not experiencing helpful communication with HCPs about their medical imaging experience. HCPs should analyze "near misses" as well as actually occurring adverse events from failures of medical imaging justification, optimization, and other human and machine errors. When an adverse event occurs, the initial priority is to limit further harm to the patient. It is a good ethical practice to inform patients and answer their questions about adverse events. Afterward, events should be discussed among the healthcare team members to plan how such events can be prevented in the future. Creating a non-blame culture of reporting, reviewing, and addressing safety concerns has improved patient safety in radiology departments.