Histopathology depends upon the type of tumor. These tumors' embryological origin varies as omentum is made up of different tissues like vessels, lymphatic, and fats.

Primary leiomyosarcoma of omentum on histopathology may show long fusiform cells with high mitotic index along with areas of coagulative tumors necrosis and myxoid change; immunohistochemistry may be positive for desmin and smooth muscle actin and strongly negative for S100 and CD34 as in leiomyosarcoma.

SFT is derived from mesenchymal cells; it is mostly composed of spindle-shaped cells and collagen bundles.

According to WHO, liposarcoma is classified into five types, well-differentiated, pleomorphic, round cell, myxoid, and dedifferentiated.

The origin of extra gastrointestinal stromal tumors (EGISTs) is not fully known, but their histology and immunophenotype are similar to GISTs. It is thought they are GISTs that have been separated from the gastrointestinal tract, or they can arise from the mesenchymal cells of the omentum.

Histological examination of mesothelioma of omentum may show an epithelial, sarcomatoid, or biphasic pattern. Epithelial type tumors comprise 75% of cases and vary from well-differentiated with tubulopapillary pattern to solid sheets of round or polygonal cells. Such tumors may mimic carcinomas, and it can be difficult to distinguish epithelioid mesothelioma from a metastatic carcinoma, particularly adenocarcinoma. The sarcomatoid type tumors may be indistinguishable from fibrosarcomas on histology alone. Immunohistochemistry can help differentiate sarcoma and adenocarcinoma. These tumor cells are positive for calretinin, cytokeratin, and epithelial membrane antigen and negative for S-100 protein, Leu-M1, CEA, thrombomodulin, and placental alkaline phosphatase, positive immunoreactivity for calretinin greatly increase the accuracy of the diagnosis.