There are various methods of esophageal reconstruction that have been previously described in the literature. Advances in microsurgery have made it possible to accomplish both the resection of large pharyngoesophageal tumors and subsequent reconstruction of circumferential esophageal defects in a single operation.

The posterior mediastinum is the most commonly used conduit after esophagectomy, although other routes such as substernal and subcutaneous have been described. Besides the posterior mediastinum, the alternative routes are rarely used only in special situations in which patients required esophageal diversion or when multiple operations preclude the posterior mediastinal space.

**Gastric Pull-up**

Despite the number of options, the main conduit is the stomach, which is advanced cephalad into the posterior mediastinum in the "gastric pull-up" isoperistaltic technique.

The single anastomosis of the gastric esophageal conduit makes it less technically demanding than any of the other conduit choices. Anastomotic leaks can be managed conservatively if the leak is small and contained. If there is a large leak or any undrained fluid collections, then the patient may need a thoracotomy to repair the leak. If there is complete graft necrosis, then the stomach conduit should be resected, and a cervical esophagostomy should be constructed along with exploratory laparotomy for jejunal tube placement.

**Colon Interposition**

If the stomach cannot be used for an esophageal reconstructive conduit, then the colon may be used. The right or left colon can be utilized. The main conduit is typically the right colon due to its rich blood supply, and part of the transverse colon is also typically used.

**Jejunum Free Flap**

The jejunal free flap is one of the best reconstructive options for circumferential defects of the cervical esophagus.

**Pedicled, Local Flaps: Deltopectoral and Supraclavicular Island Flaps**

The deltopectoral and supraclavicular island flaps were the mainstay for the reconstruction of partial pharyngoesophageal defects prior to the widespread use of microsurgical techniques. These flaps are still excellent options for patients who may have definite contraindications to free flap reconstruction, such as occluded donor vessels secondary to atherosclerotic disease, lack of recipient's vessels, and severely impaired cardiopulmonary reserve. The main advantages of these flaps are the fact that they are relatively easy to harvest compared to free flaps, their large arc of rotation, and their robust blood supply.

**Radial Forearm Free Flap**

The radial forearm free flap can be used for both partial and circumferential esophageal defects. In partial defects, the radial forearm flap acts can be used as a tissue patch to cover the defect. In circumferential defects, the radial forearm flap can be tubularized to restore the continuity of the esophagus and ultimately achieve adequate deglutition.

**Anterolateral Thigh (ALT) Free Flap**

The ALT flap can also be used for both partial and circumferential defects of the esophagus. It is based on the lateral descending branch of the circumflex femoral artery and its venous output on a pair of venae comitantes that drain into the profunda femoral vein.