Chronic aspiration is a condition that can be recognized by a primary care provider, including pediatricians, or by a hospitalist or intensivist while inpatient. It is a well-researched, well-understood pathology with established standards of care for each subset of patients. In this context, the nursing staff is vital for early recognition of aspiration syndromes and observing eating in at-risk patients. The evaluation further involves consulting a certified speech-language therapist to do a speech and swallow study. Therefore, care for these patients involves the efforts of a multidisciplinary and interprofessional healthcare team, functioning as a cohesive unit, documenting all interactions, interventions, and findings, and communicating with other team members whenever necessary. This will optimize patient outcomes. [Level 5]

A radiologist may need to be utilized at this point to do a visual fluoroscopic swallow study. A radiologist is also required for imaging as a chest CT scan. Further diagnostic studies, including FEES, laryngoscopy, and bronchoscopy, require an otorhinolaryngologist, a general pediatric surgeon, or a pulmonologist to perform and evaluate the results of these tests. Evaluation of the underlying disorders causing the aspiration may require consultation from a neurologist. This is especially important with pediatric patients that have evidence of persistent dysphagia and may have an underlying neuromuscular disorder or cognitive delay contributing to their aspiration risk. Management may include conservative measures that involve watching and instructing patients on proper feeding techniques.

This may require in-hospital staff or frequent pediatric visits to the speech-language therapist in pediatric patients. In the elderly, nursing home staff or home health nursing care will be instrumental in successfully implementing aspiration prevention and long-term management. In all of these areas, close supervision by physicians or nursing staff is vital to ensure further aspiration events do not occur or that they are rapidly identified and receive immediate intervention. Surgery may be necessary for cases of chronic respiration that do not improve with conservative management. An ear, nose, and throat surgeon, general surgeon, or pediatric specialist will need to be consulted for these operations. This demonstrates the necessity of teamwork in providing care to these patients.