Craniopharyngiomas are slow-growing tumors thus are usually diagnosed late when the patient develops compressive symptoms. Symptoms usually indicated the location of tumors and proximity to surrounding structures.

**Headaches**

Headaches are reported in approximately 50 % of patients. Headaches may be due to increased intracranial pressure (ICP) with associated nausea and vomiting or meningeal irritation from the cystic fluid.

**Visual Symptoms**

62% to 84% of craniopharyngiomas patients will present with visual symptoms. The most common visual disturbance encountered is temporal hemianopsia due to optic chiasm compression. The dysfunction of the optic pathway is present in 50-75% of patients.

**Hormonal Deficiency**

At the time of the initial presentation, approximately 40 to 87% of patients present with at least one hormonal deficit. In adults, 40% of patients will have gonadotroph deficiency presenting as amenorrhea in females and loss of libido and erectile dysfunction in males. 85% of adult patients will have growth hormone (GH) deficiency presenting as non-specific symptoms like weight gain, central obesity, and fatigue. Approximately 25 % of patients will have adrenocortical hormone (ACTH) deficiency leading to weight loss, generalized arthralgia, dizziness, and hypotension. TSH deficiency is present in 25% of patients with symptoms of weight gain, fatigue, cold intolerance, and constipation. Vasopressin deficiency, also known as diabetes insipidus, is reported in approximately 20% of patients presenting with symptoms of polyuria and polydipsia.