As mentioned above, the primary difference between muscles of facial expression and muscles of mastication is their embryological origin, and the embryological origin is what determines their innervation. The muscles of facial expression are innervated by the facial nerve, whereas the muscles of mastication receive innervation from the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve.

The facial nerve exits the stylomastoid foramen in the lateral skull base and gives off branches to the auricular muscles, the posterior digastric muscle, and the stylohyoid muscle, then it enters the parotid gland, where it divides the superficial and deep lobes. Within the parotid gland, the facial nerve splits into five major branches at a point referred to as the "pes anserinus" because the branches and their anastomoses resemble the webbed foot of a goose. The branches then exit the anterior, superior, and inferior borders of the parotid gland en route to the mimetic muscles. These facial nerve branches travel on the masseteric fascia within the midface, deep to the SMAS. Because the SMAS is contiguous anteriorly with the facial muscles, inferiorly with the platysma, and superiorly with the temporoparietal fascia and the frontalis muscle, facial nerve branches in these areas are likewise found on the deep surface of these structures. There are three exceptions, which are muscles innervated from their superficial surfaces because of their deep location within the face. They are the buccinator, the mentalis, and the levator anguli oris muscles.

The muscles of the upper face are innervated by the frontal (also known as temporal) branch: frontalis, corrugator supercilii, and procerus.

The mandibular nerve separates from the trigeminal ganglion in Meckel's cave, a pouch in the tentorium cerebri at the petrous apex of the temporal bone. From there, it exits the skull via the foramen ovale and enters the infratemporal fossa, where it passes between the tensor veli palatini and the lateral pterygoid muscles and gives off branches to the medial pterygoid, tensor veli palatini, and tensor tympani muscles. It then divides into anterior and posterior branches; the anterior branch gives off motor fibers to the lateral pterygoid and masseter muscles, as well as the deep temporal nerves that control the temporalis muscle. The posterior branch is predominantly sensory but includes motor fibers within the inferior alveolar nerve that control the anterior digastric and mylohyoid muscles.