# Introduction

The substantia gelatinosa of Rolando (SGR) is a grey matter structure of the dorsal spinal cord primarily involved in the transmission and modulation of pain, temperature, and touch. The structure is eponymously named after famed Italian anatomist Luigi Rolando, who first described the neuroanatomical region in the early 19th century. The gelatinous appearance of the SGR is due to the region’s abundant neuropil and relatively lower density of myelinated neurons.

The SGR spans the entire spinal cord extending rostrally into the medulla oblongata, where it becomes the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve. Moreover, the structure receives and integrates inputs from peripheral sensory fibers (e.g., C, A-delta, and A-beta) of the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) along with descending pathways from the brain and brainstem and finally outputs to other regions of the dorsal horn and ascending pathways of the anterolateral system. The SGR serves a critical neurophysiological role in the gate control theory of pain.

# Structure and Function

Grossly, SGR is a gelatinous, crescent-shaped, grey matter structure situated at the apices of the posterior spinal column corresponding to Rexed Lamina II of the spinal grey matter. In humans, laminae II may further subdivide into the outer (lamina IIo) and inner (lamina IIi) zones.

Contrary to popular dogma, the SGR does not contribute a significant number of second-order neurons to the anterolateral system (which are instead located primarily in Lamina I and III-V). Rather, the SGR serves as a major synaptic site between first- and second-order neurons with an abundant population of interneurons modulating communication. The neurons and axodendritic synapses of lamina II exhibit an abundance of receptors and neurotransmitter classes, a full review of which is in Merighi 2018.

Moreover, SGR integrates inputs from multiple sources. The first of such inputs are from the primary afferent fibers (PAFs) of the dorsal root ganglia (DRG). Different classes of PAFs transmit sensory information to the SGR; however, the most abundant are C (slow, dull pain, heat, itch), A-delta (sharp pain, cold), and A-beta (crude touch, mechanoreceptive) fibers.

The common neurotransmitter released by all PAFs is glutamate, either alone or in conjunction with others, with one of the most clinically significant being substance P, responsible for mediating noxious stimuli. Lastly, the SGR receives modulatory input via descending pathways from higher-order central nervous structures including the periventricular grey matter, periaqueductal grey matter, locus coeruleus, gigantocellular reticular nucleus, and nucleus raphe magnus; these structures mentioned above contribute predominantly serotonergic, noradrenergic, GABAergic, and glycinergic neurons that amplify or attenuate the spinal transmission of nociception to the ascending pathways.

Following sensory modulation, the SGR projects to other subdivisions of the ipsilateral SGR, contralateral lamina II, ipsilateral lamina I, III-V, other regions of the dorsal horn, and the anterolateral system.

# Embryology

Neurogenesis begins around the third week of intrauterine life with primary neurulation. During this time, the notochord, via molecular signaling, induces the overlying ectoderm to differentiate and become the neural plate.

At the end of the fourth week of development, the fusion of neural folds and closure of the cranial and caudal neuropores completes neural tube closure and primary neurulation. The primary brain vesicles develop from the cranial end of the neural tube, whereas the spinal cord develops from the caudal end. Dorsal thickening of the mantle layer of the caudal neural tube forms the alar plate from which the grey matter structures of the dorsal spinal horns, including the SGR, are embryologically derived.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The SGR, like other dorsal spinal structures, is vascularized predominantly by the two, paired, posterior spinal arteries which supply the posterior one-third of the spinal cord. However, multiple, complex anastomoses exist with the posterior spinal arteries to provide collateral blood supply and ensure adequate perfusion.

# Clinical Significance

The most clinically significant role of the SGR is pain modulation via two primary modes: (1) spinal gate control and (2) supraspinal descending pain pathways.

The gate control theory of pain, first proposed by Melzack and Wall in 1965, posits that the transmission of peripheral nociception from PAFs to second-order projection neurons is not automatic and instead undergoes modulation beforehand at the spinal dorsal horn.

During an injury, local inflammatory mediators depolarize small-caliber nociceptive PAFs - in the absence of stimuli from large-caliber fibers from mechanical manipulation - cause net disinhibition of inhibitory interneurons at the SGR allowing for an “open gate” for unimpeded transmission of noxious stimuli from PAFs to second-order projection neurons.

Additionally, the descending pain pathways complement spinal gate control by augmenting pain modulation via supraspinal input structures at the level of the SGR. The descending efferents, predominantly serotonergic and noradrenergic, synapse onto inhibitory interneurons in lamina II and induce the release of endogenous opioids such as enkephalins, endorphins, and dynorphins.

Due to its role in modulating painful stimuli, the SGR is a prime therapeutic target for multiple medical and pharmaceutical interventions. Peripherally, pain attenuation is achievable through local anesthetics that reduce depolarization preferentially in small-caliber noxious PAFs. Transcutaneous electrical stimulation (TENS) both at low and high frequencies at intensities up to motor threshold preferentially depolarize large-caliber PAFs (e.g., A-beta), resulting in analgesia via peripheral gate control as discussed above.