The duration of a QT interval is largely dependent on the duration of the ventricular action potential. This duration is largely dependent on closure and/or opening of ion channels in the heart with the influx of positive ions (sodium, calcium) causing depolarization, and the efflux of positive ions (potassium) causing repolarization. Any disturbance in these ion channels that leads to an excess of positive ions intracellularly will lead to prolongation of the action potential, leading to QT prolongation. The pathophysiology of congenital and acquired causes is explained below.

- Congenital: Mutation in genes coding for ion channel proteins results in their malfunction, leading to excess intracellular positivity. Though rare, this entity results in a high risk of sudden death. So far, mutations of any of  15 genes have been linked to Long QT syndrome, with KCNQ1 being the most common gene mutated, and is the cause of Long QT syndrome type 1.

- Acquired: More commonly, prolongation of QT interval is acquired. As one can expect, disturbances of electrolytes (hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia) will lead to QT prolongation. Also, certain medications affect those ion channels and lead to QT prolongation. Virtually all of the drugs that produce Long QT syndrome act by blocking the outward IKr current, which is mediated by the potassium channel encoded by the KCNH2 gene. Medications are known to cause this include antiarrhythmic drugs such as sotalol and amiodarone, certain antibiotics such as macrolides and fluoroquinolones, antipsychotics such as haloperidol and olanzapine, and certain gastric motility agents (such as cisapride). A great resource to know which drugs prolong QT interval is www.crediblemeds.org.