Dialysis is indicated for a patient with symptomatic uremia (e.g., nausea, vomiting, refractory hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, etc.) that is not treatable by medical means. It should be initiated as soon as possible, regardless of the patient’s GFR.

Patients presenting with a uremic emergency (e.g., hyperkalemia, acidosis, symptomatic pericardial effusion, or uremic encephalopathy) require emergent dialysis, which should be initiated gently to avoid dialysis disequilibrium syndrome. These are neurologic symptoms secondary to cerebral edema occurring during or shortly after the initiation of dialysis.

The best renal replacement therapy is renal transplantation, although practitioners may consider long-term hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis. Renal transplantation is associated with improvements in both survival and quality of life.

Iron replacement should be initiated in patients with anemia of chronic kidney disease and underlying iron deficiency (as long as serum ferritin is greater than 100 mcg/mL). This can be done with dialysis treatments or oral therapy if dialysis has not yet been initiated. Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents, such as erythropoietin or darbepoetin, may additionally be used in low doses (due to the increased risk of cardiovascular mortality) once hemoglobin levels reach below 10 g/dL.

Hyperparathyroidism and associated or isolated hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia can be treated with oral calcium carbonate or calcium acetate, oral vitamin D therapy, and oral phosphate binders (e.g., calcium carbonate, calcium acetate, sevelamer or lanthanum carbonate).

Patients with uremia secondary to urinary obstruction should undergo Foley catheterization to relieve the obstruction. Afterward, the cause of obstruction should be looked into, and a permanent management plan should be sorted.

A dietitian should be consulted if dietary alterations are being considered. Patients with chronic kidney disease should reduce potassium, phosphate, and sodium intake to 2 g to 3 g, 2 g, and 2 g per day, respectively. Though there is some conflicting evidence regarding protein intake in patients with kidney failure, the current low-protein diet recommendations before initiation of dialysis are 0.8 g to 1 g of protein/kg of weight per day with an added gram of protein for each gram of protein lost in the urine in patients with nephrotic syndrome.

A low-protein diet is not recommended in patients with advanced uremia or malnutrition, as this type of diet can result in worsening malnutrition and has been associated with an increased risk of mortality with the initiation of dialysis.

Patients with a creatinine clearance of less than 20 mL/min should avoid excessive potassium intake and use certain medications with caution (e.g., potassium-sparing diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzymes (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor blockers, beta-blockers, NSAIDs, etc.).

Due to the buildup of uremic toxins and potentially increased risk of bleeding and hemorrhage, extra care must be taken when prescribing oral anticoagulants or antiplatelet medications to ESRD patients.

Finally, nephrotoxic medications, such as NSAIDs and aminoglycoside antibiotics, should be avoided in all patients with renal disease. N-acetylcysteine may be administered before administering intravenous contrast for radiologic imaging to avoid nephrotoxicity. However, alternative modes of imaging like MRI should be considered in these patients to avoid the risk of acute kidney injury altogether.