**Gardner syndrome:**is a variant of FAP and is an autosomal dominant inherited disease characterized by multiple intestinal polyps together with extra-intestinal manifestations including multiple osteomas, connective tissue tumors, thyroid carcinomas, hypertrophied pigmented epithelium of the retina, and also frequent retained supernumerary teeth and odontomas.

**Muir-Torre syndrome:**MTS is a rare subtype of LS characterized by sebaceous neoplasms of the skin and visceral malignancies, with colonic carcinoma being the most common.

**Turcot syndrome:**TS is the association of primary brain tumors. It divides into two subtypes: TS type I (Intestinal polyps are large, fewer in number than 100, and are apt to undergo a malignant change. Associated brain tumor is usually a glioblastoma or an astrocytoma.) and TS type II (Familial adenomatous polyposis-associated type. There is a predisposition to the development of medulloblastoma.)

**Juvenile polyposis coli:**JPC is a rare disease characterized by juvenile hamartomatous polyps in the gastrointestinal tract. The lifetime risk of CRC is 20%.

**Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome:**PJS is characterized by the pigmentation of mucocutaneous melanin and multiple gastrointestinal polyposes. The clinical manifestations mainly included black spots, abdominal pain, and anemia.

**Hamartoma tumor syndrome:**This is called PTEN (PHTS).

**Cowden syndrome:**CS classically is characterized by multiple hamartomas that can occur in any organ, macrocephaly, mucocutaneous lesions, an increased risk of breast and thyroid cancers, and ovarian and colon cancer. The lifetime risk of CRC is 13%.

**Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome:**BRRS is a congenital disorder frequently characterized by hamartomatous intestinal polyps, lipomas, macrocephaly, and genital lentiginosis. BRRS patients with a PTEN mutation share the same risk of developing cancer as patients with CS.

**Proteus syndromes:**PS is a disorder characterized by progressive excessive growth at the level of the skeleton, skin, fat, and central nervous system, with few hamartomatous polyps. Complications include hemimegaloencephaly, bullous lung disease, pulmonary embolism, and deep vein thrombosis. The tumors are usually benign, although there are reports of rare cases of malignant tumors.

**Solamen syndrome:**The****term 'SOLAMEN syndrome' "Segmental Overgrowth, Lipomatosis, Arteriovenous Malformation, and Epidermal Nevus." These patients are carriers of germline mutations in the phosphatase and PTEN homologs.