**Palatal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)**arises from the stratified squamous epithelium of the oral mucosa. It often presents with bony erosion, perineural spread, invasion of the maxillary alveolus laterally or nasal cavity, and maxillary sinus superiorly.

**Adenoid cystic carcinoma (AdCC)**arises from the intercalated ducts of mucin-secreting glands and presents with three different histologic subtypes, including cribriform (most common), tubular, and solid (most aggressive).

**Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC)**contains varying amounts of mucin-producing cells, epidermoid (squamous) cells, and intermediate cells.

**Polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma (PLGA)**is a rare salivary gland tumor that is most commonly found in the palate.

**Low-grade papillary adenocarcinoma (LGPA)**was once considered to be under the spectrum of PLGA but has since been classified as a separate entity due to its more aggressive nature.

**Acinic cell carcinoma (ACC)**is encapsulated by a fibrous capsule and is divided into a mixture of nests containing solid, microcystic, papillary-cystic, and follicular components. Cells have a characteristic basophilic granular cytoplasm.

**Mucosal melanoma (MM)**consists of malignant melanocytes of varying phenotypes (epithelioid, spindle-cell, and plasmacytoid) arranged in a sheet-like, organoid, alveolar, solid, or desmoplastic architecture.

**Kaposi sarcoma (KS)**presents with a mixture of vascular slits, extravasated erythrocytes, and proliferating spindle cells.

**Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)**histopathology shows irregular lymphocytes mixed with plasma cells, histiocytes, and lymphoid follicles.