For the treatment of congenital anomalies:

- Treatment of imperforate hymen involves making a cruciate incision to open the vaginal orifice.

- If a transverse septum is present, surgical removal is required.

- Hypoplasia or absence of the cervix in the presence of a functioning uterus is more difficult to treat than other outflow obstructions. Surgery to repair the cervix is rarely successful, and hysterectomy is typically required. The ovaries should be retained to provide the benefits of estrogen and to allow for the possibility of future childbearing by removing mature oocytes for in vitro fertilization and transfer of embryos to a gestational carrier.

- If the vagina is absent or short, progressive dilation is usually successful.

Females diagnosed with primary amenorrhea associated with all forms of gonadal failure and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism require cyclic estrogen and progestogen therapy for the initiation, maturation, and maintenance of secondary sexual characteristics.

- Therapy can be initiated with conjugated estrogens per day or estradiol per day.

- Females with short stature should not receive high doses of estrogen as this can cause the epiphyses to close prematurely.

- Hyperplasia can occur due to unopposed estrogen stimulation of the endometrium. To prevent hyperplasia, estrogen can be provided daily in combination with progestogen.

- Patients with gonadal streaks and mosaicism may be able to ovulate and conceive either following the initiation of estrogen therapy or spontaneously.

- If the diagnosis of 17 alpha-hydroxylase deficiency is established, treatment can be initiated with exogenous corticosteroid replacement therapy with either hydrocortisone or dexamethasone.

Therapeutic measures should aim to target the underlying cause or primary amenorrhea.

- Craniopharyngiomas may be resected either during craniotomy or with a transsphenoidal approach.

- Germinomas are very radiosensitive; thus, surgery is seldom indicated.

- Hyperprolactinemia and prolactinomas may respond to dopamine agonists.

- Specific therapies can target underlying causes such as anorexia nervosa or malnutrition.

- Individuals diagnosed with Kallman syndrome or other etiologies for hypothalamic amenorrhea may be treated with hormone replacement therapy.

If a female's karyotype contains the Y chromosome, such as gonadal dysgenesis, gonad removal should be performed to prevent tumors.