Cobalamin (vitamin B12) deficiency may result in different types of presentation and should be managed with a holistic approach. An interprofessional healthcare team approach is needed, including clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, dieticians, and nutritionists. Early diagnosis and treatment are very much crucial as they may progress into irreversible neurological damage. Specialists involvement is necessary for several instances, such as:

- A gastroenterologist or a GI surgeon should be a part of the healthcare team because many intestinal diseases cause cobalamin deficiency.

- Oncology follow-up may be needed as bowel, or pancreatic malignancy can cause cobalamin deficiency.

- A dietician or a nutritionist is also part of these patients as a dietary deficiency can cause cobalamin deficiency.

- D. latum infection can cause cobalamin deficiency; therefore, follow-up may be necessary with infectious disease specialists.

- Concomitant iron deficiency anemia or reduced potassium level may present during treatment so that hematologists may guide further treatment of these conditions.

Clinicians should be aware of possible adverse effects, such as allergy and anaphylaxis. So precautions should be taken, and the intradermal test is necessary if an allergy is suspected. Patients should be educated about the disease and management because some patients may discontinue cobalamin once they feel better.

A physician is responsible for the diagnosis, evaluation, proper treatment, and tailor therapy of patients for an individual basis. Given the array of causes for vitamin B-12 (cobalamin) deficiency, interprofessional collaboration is often required for diagnosis, treatment, and improving patient outcomes with this condition. [Level 5]