Skeletal muscle constitutes approximately 40% of the total human body weight. Its composition is many individual fibers bundled together into a muscle spindle; this gives the skeletal muscle a striated appearance. A single muscle fiber is composed mostly of actin and myosin fibers covered by a cell membrane (sarcolemma). These fibers are the functional unit of the organ, leading to contraction and relaxation. There are two major classifications of skeletal muscle: Type I (slow oxidative) and Type II (fast-twitch). The vast diversity in the makeup of skeletal muscle leads to variations in speed and length of contractions in different muscle groups, depending on their specific function.

The cardiac muscle or myocardium is an involuntary, striated muscle that encloses the chambers of the heart. It is comprised of individual cardiomyocytes, which are similar in structure to skeletal muscle. Each cardiomyocyte contains cytoskeletal and contractile elements, all of which are connected through intercalated discs. These are highly adherent complexes, which allow the cardiac muscle cells to receive rapid electrical transmission and contract as a single unit.

The cells of smooth muscle are also composed of actin and myosin fibers; however, they are arranged in sheets rather than spindles which give this type of muscle a smooth appearance. These cells are present in the walls of many organs such as the lungs, gastrointestinal tract, reproductive organs, blood vessels, and even in the skin.