Since systemic toxicity with external exposure to ammonia is rare, there are no systemic antidotes for the management of ammonia poisoning. Management is largely supportive. Remove the patient from the source and decontaminate the patient. Start by supporting the airway, breathing, and circulation.

After a quick physical examination, assess the need for an advanced airway. Indications for an advanced airway include the following:

- Depressed mental status

- Deep burns in the face or proximal airway

- Hoarseness or stridor

- Severe respiratory distress

Supplement the patient with warm, humidified oxygen. Liberal fluid resuscitation should be avoided as these patients seldom have acute lung injury.

If skin burns are identified during the physical examination, then follow standard burn management. Irrigate the burns with tepid water for at least 15 minutes, followed by frequent irrigation for at least 24 hours. Avoid using any medications or dressing as this will prevent the natural elimination of ammonia by vaporization.

If eye injury is suspected, then irrigate the eye with tepid water for at least 30 minutes or until the conjunctival pH reaches 6.8 to 7.4. Consult ophthalmology early as ammonia exposure can lead to permanent eye damage.

If oral ingestion is suspected, then dilute the ingestion with water or milk. Arrange early gastroenterology consult for endoscopic evaluation. Do not induce emesis as this will incur further injury by the second pass of the toxin. The patient should be kept nil per oral until the completion of an assessment of the need for surgical management. Early surgical management is associated with improved patient outcomes in those patients with an identified impending perforation.

The evidence for corticosteroid use in the management of ammonia toxicity is conflicting and hence, should be avoided. Steroids may be beneficial in those patients who are exhibiting signs of airway edema and airway hyperreactivity after exposure to ammonia.

The majority of the patients who present with ammonia exposure can be safely discharged from the emergency department after 6 hours of observation, after ruling out significant injury, and if the patient can tolerate oral feeding. Some of the indications for hospital admission include persistently symptomatic patients, and those with endoscopically demonstrated burns. Patients with respiratory distress or abnormalities in laboratory values attributable to ammonia exposure should also be admitted for further evaluation.