Life-threatening intraoperative complications include bleeding, usually from a large vessel like the azygous vein. Massive bleeding requires packing of the chest and mediastinum and immediate thoracotomy for control of the bleeding vessel. Minor bleeding usually stops with gentle packing and time. Other complications include the massive air leak from a hole in the posterior membranous trachea or bronchus. This is noted intraoperatively as a large air leak, and the inability to ventilate the patient. Treatment of this is immediate recognition, and the surgeon and the anesthesiologist work together to advance the endotracheal tube past the tear and then using a thoracotomy incision, the hole is repaired. If the conduit is not viable because the blood supply has been compromised, then another conduit like the colon should be chosen. Finally, if the conduit will not reach the neck, then either another conduit is chosen, or a thoracotomy performed and the anastomosis placed in the chest. Injuries to one or both recurrent laryngeal nerves are known complications as well. If recognized at the time of injury, the nerve should try to be repaired but is often too small for this. An otolaryngologist (ENT) consult is necessary to assist with this, and a formal tracheostomy may be necessary during the hospital course.

Postoperative complications are similar to other operations. The usual gamut of bleeding, infection, hernias, pain, fevers, etc. prevails. Unique complications include pneumonia and cardiac arrhythmias. Others include deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolus, as well as urinary tract infections and superficial wound infections. Leaks from the cervical anastomosis tend to be minor, and if there is no drain in place, they can be managed by opening the cervical wound and either draining or packing the wound. These leaks are more forgiving than thoracic leaks, as most of the cervical leaks heal spontaneously. Thoracic leaks, on the other hand, are life-threatening and demand operative exploration. This is also what makes the transhiatal approach more desirable. Cervical incisions that become red or inflamed or fevers starting about three days postoperatively indicate a leak until proven otherwise. A water-soluble contrast study is indicated for any signs and symptoms suggestive of a leak.

Occasionally, other deep space abscesses may develop where a computed tomography (CT) scan is indicated. Findings of a leak demand attention and appropriate drainage with IV antibiotics as a secondary treatment. Delayed gastric emptying or conduit emptying is common as well. The patient should be upright eating and after oral intake for 2 to 3 hours minimum so that gravity can help move the bolus down the intestinal tract. Small frequent meals are better than larger meals at the initiation of oral intake. All patients should have a contrast study anywhere from 3 to 7 days postoperatively to rule out any type of leak. If the study is normal, then oral intake can commence. Longer-term complications include anastomotic strictures, which are common after leaks from the initial surgery are noted. These can be treated with endoscopic dilation and occasionally stenting.