The operating room can be a stressful environment requiring synchrony of motion between all members of the operating room staff: anesthesiologists, surgeons, nursing, and even operating room aides. At the center of the operating room is the patient, the surgeon performing a procedure, and an anesthesia provider often manipulating an anesthesia machine to ensure appropriate patient comfort, oxygenation, and ventilation. Anesthesia machines have become complex pieces of medical equipment incorporating a ventilator and various forms of monitoring devices to ensure patient safety requiring an anesthesia provider's vigilant attention to ensure proper functioning. Despite the advances made in anesthesia delivery, the anesthesia machine is still prone to human error inhibiting proper function. Teamwork and education about the anesthesia machine amongst all operating room personnel can help create awareness about its importance, areas of weakness and solutions to common problems to reduce morbidity and mortality in the operating room.  For example, a nurse noting an anesthesia provider having a difficult time mask ventilating a patient with a beard can squeeze the reservoir bag of an anesthesia machine while an anesthesia provider uses two hands to create a better mask seal to facilitate anesthesia machine function.

Technology related to anesthesia machines has advanced extensively to make anesthesia safer to administer. Human error appears to be the dominant factor related to critical anesthesia incidents and negative outcomes related to the administration of anesthesia. In a cohort study of critical incidents related to the administration of anesthesia, only 4% of substantive negative outcomes were related to equipment failure. [Level 3] Greater education amongst healthcare providers about the functions/workings of the anesthesia machine and better interprofessional communication can allow for more rapid identification of errors and likely reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with anesthesia.

Operating room staff must be educated about the occupational hazards associated with improper use of anesthesia machines. Exposure of volatile anesthetics to rats has been associated with a range of medical complications, including nephrotoxicity from Compound A associated with sevoflurane and impairments in memory.