**Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) Screening**

There is considerable controversy regarding PSA screenings for prostate cancer. The issue is not that PSA screening does not find prostate cancer but that it leads to overdiagnosis and overtreatment of indolent cancers without clinical significance for the patient.

There is a multitude of guidelines from a variety of professional organizations and societies regarding PSA screening. They all recommend a discussion of the risks and benefits of PSA screenings and starting testing in appropriate individuals who desire screening only after the process of shared decision-making has been completed.

There is a clear distinction between recommendations for men at average risk and those at high risk. High-risk individuals would include those men with a direct blood relative with prostate cancer (especially if it appeared at an early age or resulted in death), all those of African descent, a family history of multiple malignancies, Lynch syndrome, or known BRCA2 or similar high-risk germline carriers.

All of the guidelines recommend halting routine screenings in men with less than a 10-year life expectancy or by age 70 to 75. The average life expectancy of a generally healthy 75-year-old (according to the Social Security Actuarial Tables) is about 11 years, so the 75-year-old cutoff for routine screenings is suggested.

For a more detailed and comprehensive discussion of the PSA testing controversy, please review our companion StatPearls reference article on "Prostate Cancer Screening."

Summary of Published PSA Screening Guidelines:

- The American Cancer Society suggests starting PSA screening discussions at age 50 for men at average risk and earlier for high-risk individuals.

- The American Medical Association recommends discussing PSA screening at age 45 for high-risk men and age 50 for normal-risk individuals.

- The American Urological Association recommends initial discussions regarding screening for high-risk individuals aged 40 to 54 years and average-risk men 55 years and older.

- The European Association of Urology (EAU) recommends starting a review of screenings at age 40 for men with known BRCA2 germline mutations, age 45 for other high-risk individuals, and age 50 for average-risk males.

- The United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) currently recommends discussing the pros and cons of PSA screening for prostate cancer with men aged 55 to 69.

**Tissue-Based Biomarkers**

All of these biomarker tests are intended to help in the decision-making process for patients with a predicted life expectancy of at least ten years and where the results are likely to make a difference in their final treatment selection.

Of the multitude of assays that have been developed, the most valuable are ConfirmMDx, Decipher, Oncotype DX, Prolaris, ProMark, and Somatic tumor testing for targeted therapy.

**ConfirmMDx,**developed by MDxHealth, Inc. in Irvine, California, is a tissue-based assay used to predict the incidence of finding malignancy on a repeat biopsy for patients whose initial histology was negative. It reports the likelihood of finding cancer as a percentage.RASSF1, GSTP1, and APC, in the biopsy specimen. The concept is based on epigenomic changes that are presumably found in tumor-adjacent normal tissue. The Methylation Analysis to Locate Occult Cancer (MATLOC) and the Detection of Cancer Using Methylated Events in Negative Tissue (DOCUMENT) studies have validated the assay.

The latter found a negative predictive value (NPV) of 90%, and another study found an NPV of 96% in patients with lower methylation levels.

Patients who have had a negative prostate biopsy can consider using the ConfirmMDx test if they are contemplating a second biopsy. It is appropriate for patients with unexplained, persistent high, or rising PSA levels. It can also be useful in patients with high-risk factors or even just heightened anxiety about their biopsy results, such as multiple negative biopsies.

**The Decipher Prostate Genomic Classifier**is useful in two clinical scenarios: for men with localized prostate cancer deciding between active surveillance vs. intervention and in patients with high-risk pathology or clinical features after radical prostatectomy to decide on treatment or observation. The assay gives a result as a Genomic Classifier (GC) score of 0-1.0 (also known as the Decipher Biopsy score or Decipher Radical Prostatectomy score). The clinical endpoints targeted are the 5-year risk of metastasis, the likelihood of high-grade cancer on radical prostatectomy, and the 10-year prostate cancer-specific mortality risk.

The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines suggest that the assay could be offered to patients with very low, low, and intermediate risk on biopsy, with a life expectancy of a minimum of 10 years. It can also be offered to patients with pathological T2 disease and positive surgical margins, persistent or recurrent PSA levels after radical prostatectomy, or pathological T3 disease to help decide on adjuvant radiation therapy.

Technically, the Decipher test is a transcriptomic assay that uses the microarray method to study the expression of 22 genes, namely, LASP1, IQGAP3, NFIB, S1PR4, THBS2, ANO7, PCDH7, MYBPC1, EPPK1, TSBP, PBX1, NUSAP1, ZWILCH, UBE2C, CAMK2N1, RABGAP1, PCAT-32, GLYATL1P4, PCAT-80, and TNFRSF19. These genes play an important role in the cell cycle, cell growth, differentiation, and androgen receptor signaling. The assay was developed by comparing 192 RP samples from men with metastatic prostate cancer and 353 healthy controls. The initial validation produced an area-under-curve (AUC) of 0.90.

A systematic review of 42 studies using data from 30,407 patients was conducted by Jairath K et al. to analyze the utility of Decipher in clinical decision-making.

**The Oncotype DX Genomic Prostate Score**was developed following similar commercial assays for breast and colorectal cancer. This assay is suitable for men with very low and low-risk prostate cancer. The assay offers results as a Genomic Prostate Score (GPS) of 0-100. The resulting score displays the likelihood of Gleason Grade Group 1 or 2 after radical prostatectomy or the likelihood of organ-confined disease after definitive surgery.

The assay uses reverse transcriptase PCR to study the expression of 12 genes involved in cell proliferation, organization, stromal response, androgen receptor pathway, and five housekeeping genes. TPX2, FLNC, GSN, TPM2, GSTM2, BGN, COL1A1, SFRP4, AZGP1, KLK2, SRD5A2, and FAM13C are the genes measured for expression. Oncotype DX has been validated in various cohorts.

**The ProMark test**was intended for patients with a Gleason grade group (GGG) score of 1 or 2 on biopsy (Gleason 3+3=6 and 3+4=7), which generally represents very low, low, and favorable intermediate-risk disease. The clinical endpoint predicted is the risk of Gleason grade group ≥3, or non-organ confined cancer after radical prostatectomy. Results are depicted as a score of 0 to 1.

The test uses measurements of eight proteins involved in cell proliferation, signaling, and stress response, namely DERL1, CUL2, SMAD4, PDSS2, HSPA9, FUS, pS6, and YBOX1.

Validation of the ProMark test showed:

- The positive predictive value (PPV) for detecting favorable disease with a risk score ≤0.33 is 83.6% with a specificity of 90%.

- The positive predictive value (PPV) for identifying unfavorable disease with a risk score >0.80 is 76.9%.

A clinical trial on the "Effects of a new diagnostic test on the care of prostate cancer patients: The ProMark clinical utility study" (NCT04550416) was completed in 2020, but the results have not yet been reported.

**The Prolaris prostate cancer prognostic test**is used in two clinical scenarios: newly diagnosed patients with prostate cancer (Prolaris biopsy test) and after radical prostatectomy (Prolaris post-prostatectomy test). Results are given as Cell Cycle Progression (CCP) scores of 0 to 6. The clinical endpoint is the 10-year risk of prostate cancer-specific mortality as well as the 10-year risk of biochemical recurrence (BCR) after radical prostatectomy.

The NCCN recommends the Prolaris assay for virtually all biopsy-proven prostate cancer patients (very low, low, favorable, and unfavorable intermediate-risk and high-risk) with a minimum life expectancy of 10 years. It can also be used post-prostatectomy. These indications were recently expanded.

Prolaris is a transcriptomic assay utilizing quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing to measure the gene expression of 31 cell cycle progression genes against 15 housekeeping genes. The assay has been validated extensively yet is being clinically used relatively sparingly to help decide on active surveillance or definitive intervention (surgery/radiation) in borderline lower-risk prostate cancers.

**Somatic Tumor Testing**is generally performed on patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer who have progressed on androgen receptor-directed therapy, irrespective of any prior treatment with docetaxel.

Multigene molecular testing for patients with low, intermediate, and high-risk prostate cancer who enjoy an estimated life expectancy ≥10 years is suggested by the NCCN expert committee. The most recent NCCN guidelines recommend tumor genetic testing for homologous recombination repair mutations, microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H), deficient mismatch repair (dMMR) genes, and tumor mutational burden in patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC).

- Homologous recombination repair (HRR) genes: The HRR pathway is a metabolic process that aids the homology-mediated repair of damaged DNA.BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, BARD1, BRIP1, CDK12, CHEK1, CHEK2, FANCL, PALB2, RAD51B, RAD51C, RAD51D, and RAD54L. It may be suitable for a PARP inhibitor. (see below)

- Microsatellite instability (MSI): Microsatellites are short stretches of repetitive nucleic bases. During replication, slippage errors may occur, leading to microsatellite (MSI) and genomic instability. Microsatellite instability is categorized as low, stable, or high. Clinically, the former two states (Low, Stable) are similar.

- Mismatch repair (MMR) genes: DNA Mismatch repair is a biological process that identifies and rectifies base mismatch, insertion, or deletion mispairs that may occur during DNA replication or recombination.MLH1, MLH3, MSH2, MSH3, MSH6, PMS1, and PMS2, in addition to significant proteins including ExoI, Pol δ, PCNA, RPA, HMGB1, RFC, and DNA Ligase I.

- Tumor mutation burden (TMB): From a biological perspective, the Tumor Mutation Burden (TMB) is the total number of mutations present in the DNA of a cancer cell. This is determined by calculating the number of mutations per megabase of the genomic sequence examined.

A finding of high microsatellite instability (MSI-H), deficient mismatch repair genes (dMMR), or high tumor mutation burden (TMB ≥10 mut/Mb) is an indicator for the addition of pembrolizumab, an immune checkpoint inhibitor, in appropriate clinical settings.

**PARP inhibitors**block the activity of the enzyme polyadenosine diphosphate-ribose polymerase (PARP), which would normally act to repair damaged intracellular DNA. They can effectively treat castration-resistant prostate cancers with HRR (BRCA) mutations. Olaparib and rucaparib are two examples.

- Olaparib can be used in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer and BRCA or other DNA damage repair gene mutations where the malignancy has progressed.

- Rucaparib may also be used in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer patients who test positive for BRCA mutations and have previously been treated with androgen receptor blockers and taxane-based chemotherapy.

- The FoundationOne CDx is a tissue-based molecular assay approved by the FDA for metastatic castrate-resistant prostate as a companion diagnostic for Olaparib, the biomarker being a panel of the homologous recombination repair (HRR) genes.

**Androgen Receptor Splice Variant 7 (AR-V7**) has been associated with more aggressive disease, shorter progression to metastatic cancer, higher PSA levels, greater disease burden, and shorter overall survival in metastatic prostate cancer patients.

Niclosamide and TAS3681 have been specifically designed to target and inhibit AR-V7, but their clinical use is still being investigated.

**Future and Investigational Biomarkers**

Newer potential biomarkers are being studied and developed, such as:

- Androgen receptor splice variant 7 (AR-V7) testing using liquid biopsy techniques

- PD-1/PD-L1 testing

- CD276 testing

- CD73 testing

- Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs)

- Cytotoxic CD8 tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)

- Regulatory T cells (Tregs)

- Mast cell testing

The NCCN guidelines mention Ki-67% and PTEN assessment as possible biomarkers, but they are not currently recommended.

The PTEN/TMPRSS2-ERG test developed by Metamark was designed for patients with a Gleason grade group score of 1 or 2 on biopsy. The assay checks for deletion of PTEN and fusion of TMPRSS2-ERG.PTEN function is associated with poorer outcomes, and the presence of TMPRSS2-ERG fusion predicts an increased risk of metastasis. The role of these assays in aiding clinical decisions is limited today, and the NCCN expert committee does not currently recommend them.

A study by Thomas Dillinger et al. found seven genes (SERPINB1, ACSS3, SCGB3A1, NKX2-6, HOXA7, CRABP2, and DHRS4L2) were hypermethylated in malignant tumor samples compared to normal adjacent tissue.

Recent research shows that circular RNAs and linear transcripts could be useful as biomarkers for prostate cancer.

- A combination of circATXN10 and linSTIL could be a useful biomarker to distinguish normal from malignant prostate cells.

- The biochemical recurrence rate could be predicted by linGUCY1A2, linNEAT1, and linSTIL. The method used is RT-qPCR on flash-frozen fresh tumor samples.

**Concise Clinical Summary of Prostatic Tissue Biomarkers:**

Prostate cancer tissue-based biomarkers are only useful and recommended for patients with a predicted 10-year or more life expectancy who are at a critical decision point in management. The test results are likely to make a significant difference in treatment selection.

A detailed description and review of the prostate cancer risk groups can be found in our companion StatPearls reference article on "Prostate Cancer."

- Negative biopsy: ConfirmMDx

- Very low-risk disease: Oncotype DX, Prolaris, or ProMark

- Low-risk disease: Decipher, Oncotype DX, Prolaris, or ProMark

- Favorable intermediate-Risk Disease: Decipher, ProMark, or Prolaris

- Unfavorable intermediate-risk and high-risk disease: Decipher or Prolaris

- Metastatic disease: Somatic tumor testing

- PSA persistence or recurrence after prostatectomy: Decipher or Prolaris