Hirschprung disease has been classified as an intestinal dysganglionosis and should be differentiated from intestinal neuronal dysplasia (IND) and isolated hypoganglionosis (IH). The diagnostic criteria for IND have evolved since 1992, and the following diagnostic indexes by Borchard et al. are widely accepted: (1) abnormally hyperplastic submucous plexus, and (2) enhanced peri-vascular acetylcholine esterase (AChE) activity in the submucosal layer. Several additional criteria might be utilized to confirm the IND, including heterotopic ganglion cells, abnormally enhanced acetylcholinesterase activity in the lamina propria, and the circular muscular layer.

Moreover, HD should be differentiated from the wide spectrum of Hirschprung disease variants, which clinically mimic HD signs and symptoms. It not only includes IND but other disorders with the presence of ganglion cells in rectal biopsies, including intestinal ganglioneuromatosis, isolated hypoganglionosis, immature ganglia, absence of the argyrophil plexus, internal anal sphincter achalasia (ISA), and megacystis-microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome (MMIHS). Internal anal sphincter achalasia might be easily distinguished from the others with the only pathologic finding on the anorectal manometry suggestive of the absence of rectosphincteric reflex, while the intestinal neuronal dysplasia type B (the most common type) might be diagnosed based on the following criteria: submucosal hyperganglionosis with giant ganglia, ectopic ganglion cells, and enhanced acetylcholine esterase activity. Utilizing specific staining on the rectal biopsy specimen might be essential to differentiate the remaining pathologies on the spectrum. Intestinal ganglioneuromatosis, which is mainly confined to the colorectal area and might spare the small bowel, would be differentiated based on the extraordinary proliferation of both the submucosal and myenteric plexuses comprising of thick nerve trunks and accompanied by scattered mature neurons, giant ganglia, and enhanced AChE activity.

Isolated hypoganglionosis, as one of the rarest differential diagnoses in this era, might be suggested based on immunohistochemical staining.

The absence of the argyrophilic plexus, an infrequent differential diagnosis of HD, might be caused by the disturbed differentiation of the argyrophilic cells.