Central cord syndrome patients usually require extensive physical therapy for significant neurologic recovery. These patients may develop chronic issues, including autonomic dysregulation with uncontrolled blood pressure, neurogenic bladder requiring catheterization, pressure ulcers, neuropathic pain, and spasticity with chronic pain issues.

Autonomic dysreflexia should be initially managed by sitting the patient upright, loosening tight clothes, and removing any noxious stimuli that may be present. Hypertension due to autonomic dysreflexia may be managed with nifedipine or transdermal nitroglycerin if conservative measures do not resolve the autonomic dysreflexia.

Patients with neurogenic bladder may require intermittent self-catheterization but will remain at risk for iatrogenic bladder infections. The majority of the patients will have the return of bladder function after six to eight months.

Neuropathic pain and spasticity are common. First-line medications for neuropathic pain are gabapentinoids and TCAs. Other considerations include SSRI/SNRI, transcranial electric stimulation, and physiotherapy. Spasticity should be managed with a regular stretching program and antispasmodic medications. Baclofen is the hallmark of spasticity management. Patients may require additional medicinal therapy in consultation with a pain specialist or neurologist for their neuropathic pain and spasticity. Also, providers should consider chemodenervation with botulinum toxin or alcohol injections. Lastly, baclofen pumps can be implanted as well.