# Introduction

The pericardiacophrenic artery and vein make up, with the phrenic nerve, the pericardiacophrenic neurovascular bundle. The vessels pass through the superior thoracic aperture into the superior mediastinum and course along the pathway of the phrenic nerve anterior to the lung roots. The vessels are located between the fibrous pericardium and the parietal pleura in the middle mediastinum and extend inferiorly onto the dome of the diaphragm.

The pericardiacophrenic artery supplies blood to the pericardium, diaphragm, and phrenic nerve. While the pericardiacophrenic arteries supply blood to these various tissues, they are also a non-coronary arterial collateral blood supply to the heart.

The pericardiacophrenic veins are variable tributaries of the right and left brachiocephalic veins (also formerly known as the innominate veins) or internal thoracic veins. The pericardiacophrenic veins are a minor portocaval anastomosis connecting splenic vein and superior vena cava and can become engorged in portal hypertension. Imaging the pericardiacophrenic veins (or arteries) is a reliable aid in clinical procedures that require locating the phrenic nerve.

# Structure and Function

The right pericardiacophrenic artery courses caudally between fibrous pericardium and pleura along the right margin of the heart as it accompanies the phrenic nerve anterior to the root of the lung to the diaphragm. The left pericardiacophrenic artery is displaced laterally by the developing heart and passes along the left (obtuse) margin of the heart to the diaphragm, also in the company of the phrenic nerve. The pericardiacophrenic artery arises from the internal thoracic artery, a branch of the first part of the subclavian artery.

The pericardiacophrenic arteries travel between the pleura and pericardium and constitute a collateral blood supply to the coronary arteries to the heart.

The pericardiacophrenic veins, which are veni communicantes, each of which can be single or double, begin on the anterosuperior aspect of the diaphragm and drain superiorly into the brachiocephalic veins directly or via their internal thoracic venous tributaries.

# Embryology

The long course of the pericardiacophrenic vessels through the thorax is mostly determined by the course of the accompanying phrenic nerve, which derives from cervical spinal nerves 3, 4, and 5 and then descends through the superior thoracic aperture traversing the thorax on its way to innervate the diaphragm. The phrenic nerve is pulled caudally during embryogenesis as the septum transversum, a major primordium of the diaphragm, descends from a location craniad to the developing brain by craniocaudal folding to its adult location separating the thorax and abdomen. The phrenic nerve receives its arterial supply from the pericardiacophrenic artery when the nerve passes through the superior thoracic aperture, or at vertebral levels T2-3, the point at which the artery branches off from the internal thoracic artery. The roots and superior-most portions of the phrenic nerve are supplied by the ascending cervical arteries.

The embryological origin of the internal thoracic artery, from which the pericardiacophrenic artery branches, is the eighth intersegmental somatic artery. This embryological artery is the dorsal "aortic arch" directly caudal to the seventh intersegmental somatic artery, which gives rise to the distal subclavian artery.

The pericardiacophrenic veins develop from subcardinal veins draining cranially from the diaphragm and entering into the brachiocephalic veins to flow into the superior vena cava and the right atrium. Venous drainage of the superior-most portion of the phrenic nerve is via deep cervical veins, derived from pre-cardinal veins.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The pericardiacophrenic arteries supply blood to the anterior aspect of the fibrous pericardium, to the phrenic nerves along their common course, and to the anterosuperior aspect of the diaphragm, where the arteries terminate via anastomosis with the musculophrenic artery (also a branch of the internal thoracic artery), and superior phrenic and inferior phrenic arteries (somatic body wall arteries).

# Nerves

The pericardiacophrenic vessels course along the pathway of the phrenic nerve, anterior to the lung hilum, and splay out at the pericardium to provide blood to the pericardial sac, diaphragm, and phrenic nerve. The pericardiacophrenic arteries are essential for blood supply for the phrenic nerve.

# Surgical Considerations

During ablation surgery for atrial fibrillation, CTA imaging of the pericardiacophrenic artery can accurately locate the phrenic nerve within the pericardiacophrenic neurovascular bundle, thus avoiding damage to the nerve.

During the placement of a central venous line, the pericardiacophrenic vein can be accidentally catheterized, instead of the superior vena cava, using the internal jugular approach.

In a transradial approach for percutaneous coronary artery intervention, there is a risk of perforating the pericardiacophrenic artery during wire advancement intended for the aorta because the aorta and the pericardiacophrenic artery can appear to have similar parallel courses.

# Clinical Significance

Hemoptysis resulting from anterior lung lesions that have eroded the pleural linings can involve the pericardiophrenic arteries.