**Branches of the Mandibular Nerve**

The mandibular nerve is the third division of the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V division V3). The mandibular nerve leaves the skull via the foramen ovale at the cranium base, dividing into anterior and posterior branches (Figure 1). The main trunk of the mandibular nerve gives off a branch that supplies the medial pterygoid muscle and a meningeal branch known as nervus spinosus. The anterior division of the mandibular nerve contains mainly motor fibers that supply the temporalis, lateral pterygoid, and masseter muscles. A sensory branch, the long buccal nerve, emerges from the anterior division. The posterior division is mainly sensory, giving off the auriculotemporal, lingual, and inferior alveolar nerves. Before entering the mandibular foramen, the inferior alveolar nerve gives a branch to the mylohyoid muscle; the nerve then enters into the inferior alveolar canal and terminates into 2 terminal branches, the incisive and mental nerves.

**Location of Mandibular Foramen**

For an inferior alveolar nerve block to be effective, the local anesthetic solution must be deposited near the nerve before entering the mandibular foramen. Few studies have described that the deposition of local anesthetic molecules into the pterygomandibular space can produce the desired anesthesia.

Literature suggests that the position of the mandibular foramen may vary. The mandibular foramen may not always be located midway within the anteroposterior dimension of the mandibular ramus. The foramen lies around 2.75 mm from the middle of the mandibular ramus in the posterior direction. Also, the distance between the mandibular foramen and coronoid notch is suggested to be 19 mm; it may be either level with or below the occlusal plane. The location of mandibular foramen in relation to the occlusal plane may also vary with age. The mandibular foramen is located below the occlusal plane level in adults, and in children, it is found below or at the level of the occlusal plane.