The eyelid consists of four to seven layers of tissue, depending on the distance from the eyelid margin. Theoretically, each of these layers can give rise to malignant neoplasms. The upper and lower eyelid layers include:

- Skin, subcutaneous tissue, and adnexa (upper and lower lids)

- Orbicularis muscle (upper and lower lids)

- Orbital septum (upper and lower lid)

- Pre-aponeurotic orbital fat (upper lid, superior to tarsus)

- Pre-capsulopalpebral fascial fat (lower lid, inferior to tarsus)

- Levator aponeurosis (upper lid)

- Capsulopalpebral fascia (lower lid)

- Müller muscle (upper lid)

- Tarsus with the meibomian glands (upper and lower lids)

- Palpebral conjunctiva (upper and lower lids)

Adnexal structures in the eyelid skin include eyelashes, sebaceous glands of Zeis, and sweat glands of Moll. The levator and orbicularis muscles are composed of striated muscle, while Müller's muscle is composed of smooth muscle.

The marginal aspect of the orbicularis muscle is called the muscle of Riolan; the superficial part of this muscle is visible as a colored line that separates the meibomian gland orifices from the row of eyelashes. This line is called the gray line and is significant as it demarcates the position of the eyelid septum. Lesions in front of the septum are called preseptal. Most malignant eyelid lesions are preseptal as they originate in the skin.

Knowledge of the anatomy above aids in staging these lesions according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Tumor-Nodes-Metastasis (TNM) Classification System.

In 2021, the largest analysis of cutaneous melanoma of the eyelid was published. In this study, the 5-year overall survival rate was 88.6% for melanoma in situ and 77.1% for invasive melanoma. Additionally, the authors found that age ≥75 years at diagnosis, T4 staging, lymph node involvement, and the nodular melanoma histologic subtype portended poor survival.

Additional risk stratification and staging tools include:

- Fitzpatrick skin type

- 8th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system

- Clark level of invasion (**see section Prognosis: Melanoma**)

- Breslow tumor thickness (**see section Prognosis: Melanoma**)

**Table 1**

The tumor is not resectable because of extensive invasion of ocular, orbital, or craniofacial structures or brain

cN0

pN0