A thorough history, complete review of systems, and physical exam are essential for determining the cause of fistula in patients who have not recently had a perirectal abscess drained. Patients with inflammatory bowel disease may be tender on an abdominal exam and provide a history of bloody diarrhea, abdominal pain, or systemic symptoms such as weight loss or fever. A complete sexual history is vital as lymphogranuloma venereum can, in some instances, cause a perianal fistula.

A history of malignancy or radiation to the pelvis is essential as fistulas from radiation are well documented, and treatment should be coordinated with the patient’s cancer care.  A history of rash or multiple new sexual partners should prompt suspicion for syphilis. A patient with a chronic cough or a history of tuberculosis could present with the disease as an anorectal fistula, particularly if he or she is from an endemic region. Multiple draining fistulas, fistulas in abnormal locations, and fistulas that are chronic or recurrent should raise concern for a systemic process.

Typical complaints include itching, drainage, discomfort, and possible pain with defecation on presentation. Patients that had an abscess that was inadequately drained may present with a fistula and recurrent perianal abscess. The surgical and procedural history is vital as a history of anorectal procedures is associated with the development of an anorectal fistula.

A perianal exam and anoscopy in the office are necessary for the evaluation of concurrent abscess, assessing external fistulous opening and other anorectal diseases such as fissure or hemorrhoids. On inspection, a small opening outside the anus with or without visible drainage may be seen. The drainage may be serous, serosanguinous, bloody, purulent, or fecal matter depending on the location of the fistula. Around the opening, there may be hypertrophied tissue, which is suggestive of a developed tract; this is sometimes palpated on the digital rectal exam. The digital rectal exam is also essential to assess for any tenderness, which suggests occult abscess.

Anoscopy may reveal the internal opening; however, usually, an exam under anesthesia is necessary to find the internal opening of the fistula. Cutaneous openings which lie anterior, or ventral, to transverse anal line typically are connected to the anal canal via a radial tract according to Goodsall’s rule. While his rule states openings posterior or dorsal to this transverse anal line will appear posteriorly internally. Perianal skin may have irritation from chronic drainage, and patients often complain of having to wear pads or change their underwear frequently during the day.