The most effective way to decrease the adverse effects of radon is to prevent exposure. The amount of radon in the air is commonly measured in pCi/L (picocuries per liter of air). About 0.4 of pCi/L of radon is usually found in outside air, and the US Congress has a goal of indoor radon levels never exceeding outdoor levels. Since radon toxicity does not present with any warning signs or symptoms, it is important to measure and keep indoor radon levels low.

Several methods exist to reduce radon levels. The EPA recommends hiring a trained contractor to assist in the evaluation and reduction of radon. Some techniques can reduce radon entry in the home, and others can reduce its levels after it has entered. One of the most common methods is soil suction, which draws radon from the house and vents it through a pipe to the air above the house where it is then diluted. This method helps prevent radon from entering the home. There are four different types of soil suctioning. Determining the most effective method depends on the type of house.

For basement and slab-on-grade houses, radon levels are reduced by one of several types of soil suction: subslab suction, drain tile suction, sump hole suction, or block wall suction. In active subslab suction,****suction pipes are installed through the floor slab and into the rock or soil underneath. They can also be inserted from the outside of the home below the concrete slab. A radon vent fan connected to this suction pipe can then draw the radon from below the house and release it into the air.

At the same time, this creates a negative pressure under the slab. Passive subslab suction is similar to the active subslab suction. However, it is not as effective at reducing radon levels. It relies mostly on natural pressure differentials instead of a fan. Certain types of houses have drain tiles****or perforated pipes near the base of the house. Adding suction can help reduce radon levels. Another variation is a sump hole suction. When a sump that usually drains water from a house is capped, it can be used as a location for a radon suction pipe that removes radon with the expelled water. Finally, block wall suction can be utilized in basements with hollow block suction walls. This reduces radon and depressurizes the wall and is usually used in conjunction with a subslab suction.

Crawlspace houses usually utilize submembrane suction to reduce radon levels. This requires the placement of a plastic sheet over the earth-floor. A vent pipe and fan are then utilized to draw radon to the outdoors from under the sheet.

Other types of radon reducing methods that can be used in all types of houses include the following:

- Sealing: Sealing cracks to reduce the flow of radon inside a home. However, the EPA does not recommend the use of this method on its own because it has not been proven to significantly lower radon levels.

- House/room pressurization: Utilizes a fan to blow air into the basement or living area to create increased pressure. This will prevent radon from entering the house. This method is usually utilized if other methods have failed.

- Heat recovery ventilator or air-to-air heat exchanger: Installed to further increase ventilation in a home.

- Natural ventilation: This occurs in all homes by opening windows, doors, vents, etc. This is not a permanent or long-term method. Once the ventilation is closed, radon levels increase within 12 hours.

All homes should be tested for radon levels and, if elevated, should be reduced. Even a new home built with radon-resistant features should be tested to make sure that radon levels are below 4 pCi/L.