Treatment of SON is directed by the extent and severity of the disease and the unique clinical factors of each individual patient. As SON primarily affects the younger population, conservative management, and joint preserving therapies ideally would be at the epicenter of treatment options. Unfortunately, non-operative management is generally not successful. One study found that 80% of patients treated with protected weight-bearing required total knee replacement (TKR) by 6 years from treatment initiation.

Recent studies have shown promising results of the role of bisphosphonates and prostaglandin I-2 in managing SON. Jaeger et al. found that the most marked clinical and radiological benefits were in patients who were in the early stages of the osteonecrosis disease progress. A very limited benefit was shown from these infusions for patients who had advanced stage osteonecrosis.

Further research has been done into non-operative options in the treatment of osteonecrosis in the femoral head and may, in due course, be applied to the knee, including the use of hyperbaric oxygen,

There are several joint-preserving methods that have had increasing interest in recent years, primarily as a manner of delaying the necessity of TKR in a patient group who are often young, active, and are more likely to be immunocompromised secondary to a concurrent disease process. If the cartilage surface is not depressed or arthritic, joint-preserving techniques such as core decompression and bone grafting are available.

Mont et al. reported a 92% success rate in both clinical and radiological outcomes by employing a variant of core decompression surgery known as percutaneous drilling. In their study, which had a mean follow up period of 3 years, they concluded that the procedure was quick, had low morbidity, and was an effective alternative to alleviate symptoms and delay the requirement for TKR in a high percentage of patients; thus a worthwhile initial surgical intervention.

TKR is the only viable option for patients with subchondral bone collapse, Ficat stage III and IV disease. TKR aims to restore anatomical joint anatomy to provide a good symptomatic and functional outcome. In cases of SON, unicondylar implants are contraindicated as SON often affects both femoral condyles. A meta-analysis showed that 97% achieved a good outcome with a knee society score of greater than eighty out of one hundred in patients who underwent TKR with cemented components. This included the option of using ancillary stems to ensure good fixation and stability of the prosthesis if required, such as in cases with severe metaphyseal disease or reduced bone strength. This review included data with a mean follow up of 8 years, and it was found that within this follow-up period, the revision rate was 20%.