While the epidemiology of VRE is not fully known, it is well known that patients in the ICU are at a very high risk for VRE colonization and infection. There are reports that VRE can be transmitted by direct patient contact, touching of contaminated surfaces/equipment or through hand transfer after contact with the affected patient. In almost every hospital in the US, VRE has become a serious problem. In response to this epidemic, almost every hospital now has an infectious disease committee that oversees the use of antibiotics and audits procedures at the bedside for sterility. It is here that the role of the infectious disease nurse and pharmacist is vital. The current recommendations are to 1) only use vancomycin when absolutely needed, and permission must be obtained from the board-certified infectious disease pharmacist and clinician infectious disease specialist 2) educate all healthcare workers about VRE 3) implement infection control measures including hand washing, gloves, and gowns when coming into contact with patients who have VRE and 4) maintain a clean working environment with strict aseptic control. There is evidence to support the use of an interprofessional approach to prevent nosocomial spread of VRE. Many hospitals have now enforced the use of contact isolation and regular surveillance cultures.

**Outcomes**

Despite the proactive measures, VRE continues to be a problem in many hospitals. Short-term data show that the key to preventing VRE is the cautious use of the antibiotics and remaining compliant with infection control measures, especially in high-risk patients.