**Laboratory Work**

Evaluation of poly-arthritis can be extensive.

Rheumatological workup usually recommended includes: Rheumatic factor (RF) and anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies (CCP) for rheumatoid arthritis (RA), antinuclear antibody (ANA) for systemic lupus erythematosus and some other entities, anti-smith and anti-double-stranded DNA for confirmation of lupus, anti-Scl-70 for systemic sclerosis, anti-Ro (SSA) and anti-La (SSB) for Sjogren syndrome, anti-U1-RNP for mixed connective tissue disease, anti-neutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) for granulomatosis with polyangiitis (C form) and microscopic polyangiitis (P form), Anti-Jo-1 for myositis, anti-histone for drug-induced lupus erythematosus, cryoglobulin for vasculitis and hepatitis C.

Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein are non-specific markers of inflammation but usually helpful in ruling in a pathology causing significant inflammation and also monitoring its response to treatment.

Polarized microscopy of synovial fluid can help with crystal arthritis diagnoses, such as gout and pseudo-gout. Clinicians also analyze synovial fluid for cell count, gram stain and cultures. Synovial fluid leukocyte counts less than 200/mm are normal, between 200/mm and 2000/mm are associated with non-inflammatory arthritis, and over 2000/mm with inflammatory arthritis. If the cell count is over 50000/mm, physicians should treat the fluid as infectious.

Work up should also rule out common infectious diseases that cause arthritis. We will achieve this with testing for hepatitis, Lyme disease, and parvovirus.

**Imaging Studies**

Imaging is a costly proposition and has a low diagnostic yield. There are usually no positive findings in the cases of acute polyarthritis. There is also no need to do imaging of every single joint involved. Some joints are "high yield" and provide information essential for diagnosis and treatment; some other joints are not.

X-rays are helpful in showing fractures, dislocations, and osteomyelitis. In advanced osteoarthritis, the x-rays are useful and show erosion, sclerosis, joint space narrowing, osteophyte formation; but usually by the time these changes are present, the disease is well advanced and easily recognizable from history and physical. Also, many aging patients have x-rays compatible with osteoarthritis without having clinical symptoms; therefore, the correlation can be tricky. Although hand, wrist and metacarpal x-rays are unnecessary for a diagnosis of RA, they occasionally do help, and the response to treatment is at times monitored based on findings on x-rays. Cervical X-rays (specifically the C1-2) is essential during follow up of RA to look for damages and help prevent a pathologic fracture of the joint which would be devastating.

Ultrasound is readily available in the clinics and hospitals and is has utility for a variety of functions, but it has a limited role in polyarticular arthritis for detecting erosions and synovitis. Clinicians can easily perform joint injection under the guidance of ultrasound.

Radionuclide scans are rarely done but have specific purposes. Picking up metastases, Paget disease of the bone, and osteomyelitis represent several of these indications.

**Biopsy**

Biopsy many times have the final word; as is in most of medicine. There are enough diagnostic modalities for polyarticular arthritis to render biopsy unnecessary, but still, biopsies are occasionally done to diagnose or confirm a clinical suspicion for different vasculitis, arteritis, infectious etiologies, or granulomatous diseases.