Hypercalciuria is generally considered to be the most common identifiable metabolic risk factor for calcium nephrolithiasis. It also contributes to osteopenia and osteoporosis. Its significance is primarily due to these two clinical entities: nephrolithiasis and bone resorption. On average, hypercalciuric calcium stone formers have decreased bone mineral density than matched controls which are neither stone formers nor hypercalciuric. Even among kidney stone patients, those with hypercalciuria will have average bone calcium density measurements 5% to 15% lower than their normocalciuric peers.

The definition of hypercalciuria can be a bit confusing. Traditionally, it has been defined as daily urinary calcium excretion of greater than 275 mg in men and greater than 250 mg in women. This definition ignores concentration, age, renal function, and weight considerations as well as the obvious question of whether a different normal excretion amount is reasonable based solely on gender.

Hypercalciuria also can be defined as a daily urinary excretion of more than 4 mg calcium/kg body weight. This definition is somewhat more useful in the pediatric age group if the child is over two years old; but in adults, it tends to allow higher urinary calcium excretions in heavier and obese individuals compared to lighter patients. One solution is to use 24-hour urinary calcium concentration (less than 200 mg calcium/liter urine is normal" but less than 125 mg calcium/liter is optimal).

Another clinically useful definition, especially in pediatrics, is the random or spot urinary calcium/creatinine ratio (less than 0.2 mg calcium/creatinine mg is normal while less than 0.18 mg calcium/creatinine mg is optimal). Its benefit is that it does not necessarily need a 24-hour urine collection with every visit just to track hypercalciuria.

Which definition to use depends on the clinical situation and the availability of reliable 24-hour urine collection data. For optimal results, one approach is to look at all of the definitions and concentrate treatment on optimizing the worst of them. This "optimization" approach focuses less on what is normal and more on what an optimal level would be for a calcium stone forming patient. This type of optimization also can be used for other urinary chemical risk factors besides hypercalciuria.

Young children and infants tend to have higher urinary calcium excretion and lower urinary creatinine levels, so the suggested normal limits for calcium/creatinine ratios differ by age as follows:

- Up to six months of age: less than 0.8

- Six to twelve months of age: less than 0.6

- 24 months and older: less than 0.2