Tumor lysis syndrome is diagnosed based on criteria that were developed by Cairo and Bishop.

The second limitation is the use of creatinine levels greater than 1.5, the upper limit for age and gender. This is not standard as a patient with CKD (Chronic Kidney Disease) will have elevated creatine in the absence of AKI.

The Cairo-Bishop criteria also factor in the severity of tumor lysis syndrome based on the severity of illness from grade 0 (asymptomatic) to 4 (death).

**Laboratory Diagnosis of Tumor Lysis Syndrome**

Requires 2 or more of the following criteria achieved in the same 24-hour period from 3 days before to 7 days after chemotherapy initiation:

- Uric acid 25% increase from baseline or greater than or equal to 8.0 mg/dL

- Potassium 25% increase from baseline or greater than or equal to 6.0 mEq/L

- Phosphorus 25% increase from baseline or greater than or equal to 4.5 mg/dL (greater than or equal to 6.5 mg/dL in children)

- Calcium 25% decrease from baseline or less than or equal to 7.0 mg/dL

**Clinical Diagnosis of Tumor Lysis Syndrome**

Laboratory tumor lysis syndrome plus 1 or more of the following:

- Creatinine greater than 1.5 times the upper limit of normal of an age-adjusted reference range

- Seizure

- Cardiac arrhythmia or sudden death

Other origins of AKI should be excluded.

In the evaluation of tumor lysis syndrome, the following studies are necessary:

**Imaging**

X-Ray and CT scan of the chest to evaluate the presence of mediastinal mass and the presence of a concomitant pleural effusion

CT scan and an ultrasound of the abdomen and retroperitoneal structure if the mass lesion is located in the abdomen or retroperitoneum. Care must be taken with intravenous (IV) contrast because of the presence of AKI in tumor lysis syndrome.

**Electrocardiography (ECG)**

ECG is part of the workup for patients with tumor lysis syndrome to check for findings associated with hyperkalemia and hypocalcemia. Hyperkalemia is a potential cause of fatal arrhythmia in tumor lysis syndrome.

**Complete Blood Count (CBC)**

CBC helps in the diagnosis of malignancy associated with tumor lysis syndrome. The hallmark of most malignancy is leukocytosis with anemia and thrombocytopenia.

**Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP)**

The metabolic derangements associated with tumor lysis syndrome are hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and hyperuricemia. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, and lactate dehydrogenase are also elevated in tumor lysis syndrome. CMP must be monitored between two to three times daily before and after initiation of therapy. Elevated laboratory value might be indicative of the beginning of tumor lysis syndrome.

**Urine Analysis**

Precipitation of uric acid salt can cause obstructive uropathy. In the treatment of tumor lysis syndrome, alkalinization of urine with sodium bicarbonate is the standard of care. Frequent urine analysis with an assessment of urine pH, specific gravity, and output is mandatory.