**Ischemic stroke**

Ischemic stroke is heterogenous, with over 100 pathologies implicated.

Large vessel disease includes atherosclerosis, arterial dissection, and artery-to-artery embolism. Thrombotic or embolic occlusion of major arteries can present in predetermined syndromes due to decreased blood flow to specific areas of the brain that correlate with exam findings. Large vessels include intracranial arteries (circle of Willis and its proximal branches) and extracranial arteries (common carotid, internal carotid, vertebral).

The primary small vessel diseases causing lacunar strokes are lipohyalinosis and atherosclerosis. Lipohyalinosis is a concentric hyaline thickening of small cerebral vessels leading to the occlusion of penetrating arteries. Atherosclerotic plaques of parent arteries involving the ostium of perforating branches can also lead to occlusion, and microatheromas can occlude small penetrating arteries.

Numerous sources of cardioembolism lead to stroke and include arrhythmia, valvular heart disease, bioprosthetic and mechanical heart valves, and cardiomyopathy.

The main risk factors for ischemic stroke include advanced age, hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, cigarette smoking, arrhythmia, and cardiac disease.

**Intracerebral hemorrhage**

ICH is the second most common type of stroke. ICH is typically caused by the rupture of small arteries secondary to hypertensive vasculopathy, cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), coagulopathies, and other vasculopathies. Hypertensive vasculopathy is most common in non-lobar ICH (basal ganglia, thalamus, cerebellum, and brainstem), whereas CAA is more common in lobar ICH.

**Subarachnoid hemorrhage**

Approximately 5% of all strokes are caused by spontaneous SAH, due to a ruptured aneurysm in 85% of patients. Other causes of spontaneous SAH include drugs (eg, amphetamines and cocaine), coagulopathy, a ruptured arteriovenous malformation, and vessel rupture due to a dural venous sinus thrombosis. Risk factors associated with SAH are smoking, hypertension, excessive alcohol consumption, advancing age, personal history of another type of aneurysm or SAH, and family history of an intracranial aneurysm.