The dose of the radiation exposure is usually over 5000 cGy, but it can be seen in as little as 3000 cGy. Remember that 1 rad is equal to 1 cGy. The biologic effect of radiation is to cause DNA damage, lipid peroxidation, and protein denaturation. The cells exposed to the radiation will either die or dysfunction and then undergo cellular repair. The cells that are most damaged by radiation are the more rapidly dividing cells which are found in the dermis, mucosa, and vascular tissue. Endothelial cells are particularly prone to damage which results in the fibrotic changes and the lack of normal functioning cells in the radiation-damaged tissue. The cellular sensitivity to the radiation goes from tumor cells most sensitive, then endothelium, fibroblasts, muscle, and then nerve cells.

The acute clinical phase occurs during the first 6 months after the radiation therapy, which is commonly fractionally dosed. This phase may have no gross changes in the tissue but can cause dose-dependent changes. These changes clinically can be manifested by hair loss, erythema, blistering of the skin, and ulceration of the skin. Lung tissue may develop radiation-induced pneumonitis that typically occurs 2 to 3 months after radiation therapy and is considered a subacute phase phenomenon. Clinically the pneumonitis behaves like chronic bronchitis. This may gradually resolve or evolve into a chronic pulmonary fibrosis problem. If radiation therapy damages the spinal cord, then demyelination can occur, and clinically, this causes electrical-like shocks down the legs when the spinal column is extended. This is known as Lhermitte's sign. Most of the time this symptom will resolve without treatment, but sometime the symptoms may persist more than 6 months and become a chronic problem. These delayed effects of radiation therapy are typically seen more than 6 months after the radiation therapy but may occur 5 or more years later. The delayed effects of radiation therapy are dependent on the tissue that has been irradiated.

The pathology behind the soft tissue damage follows the principle that the cells that have a faster turnover rate or dividing at a faster rate have more sensitivity to the radiation and are more damaged than cells that are not undergoing division. Endothelial cells in the arterioles and capillary beds are particularly more sensitive to the radiation than stromal cells. This results in an obliterative endarteritis causing hypoxia in the tissue and the characteristic fibrotic changes to the stroma of the radiation damaged tissue. The arterioles may try to re-grow, but this proliferative endarteritis results in a disorganized telangiectatic growth of vascular tissue and often doesn’t provide adequate oxygenation of the tissue to maintain normal function. The relatively hypoxic and fibrotic tissue is now susceptible to tissue breakdown from trauma or infection. The resulting chronic wounds are very difficult to treat, and further surgical intervention and grafting may be problematic because of the underlying lack of vascularity of the tissue.