The etiology of patellofemoral syndrome is without a clear consensus; however, it is likely multifactorial and secondary to training practices. It is thought to involve 6 anatomic areas, including subchondral bone, synovium, retinaculum, skin, nerve, and muscle.

**Malalignment and Muscular Imbalance**

The patellofemoral joint function relies on a complex interaction between static and dynamic structures involving the entire lower extremity as the patella tracks in the trochlea. Static components include leg length discrepancies, abnormal foot morphology, hamstring and hip musculature tightness, angular or rotational deformities, and trochlea morphologies. Dynamic components include muscle weakness, ground reaction forces, and insufficient or excessive foot pronation. Studies involving malalignment that potentially contribute to PFS are conflicting with no clear consensus, likely secondary to its multifactorial nature. Multiple studies have concluded that hip abductor weakness may play a major role.

**Overactivity and Overload**

Many patients with PFS do not demonstrate any signs of malalignment. Instead, during careful interviewing, overload of the patellofemoral joint is often described, which can lead to the development of PFS.

**Trauma**

Direct or indirect injuries to the patellar area can damage structures leading to PFS.

Though studies have pointed to the above causes or risks of developing patellofemoral syndrome, most will agree its development is rarely secondary to a single component.