Patients commonly present with causalgia or burning pain, paresthesias, and hypesthesia over the upper lateral thigh. Symptoms are typically unilateral. Onset is usually subacute over days to weeks. Patients will typically point to or rub their outer thigh when describing symptoms and may have associated hair loss over the area secondary to repeated rubbing. Symptoms are typically unchanged from seating or standing position. However, symptoms may be associated with prolonged hip extension, such as walking or rising from a seated position or prolonged standing. Symptoms may also be relieved by hip flexion movements such as sitting. More rarely, symptoms are worsened by the Valsalva maneuver or other causes of increased intra-abdominal pressure.

Pertinent history includes tight-fitting clothing, recent trauma, recent weight gain, or pregnancy. The area of paresthesia or numbness is usually able to be distinguished on the exam. Symptoms are purely sensory since the LFCN does not contain motor fibers.

Diagnostic maneuvers include the pelvic compression test in which the patient lies on their unaffected side, and the examiner applies downward pressure on the patient’s ilium/pelvis for approximately 45 seconds. A test is positive if symptoms are reduced and has a reported sensitivity and specificity of 95% and 93%, respectively. Findings not associated with meralgia paresthetica include motor deficits, abnormal lower extremity reflexes, other sensory losses outside the LFCN distribution, or other neurologic symptoms.