The gestational sac is the first sign of a developing pregnancy, usually identifiable at approximately five weeks gestation. The sac is a round fluid collection that at times is surrounded by two echogenic rings representing the layers of decidua, also known as the double decidual sac sign. When the gestational sac is located on one side of the endometrium and surrounded by an echogenic area, this is known as the intradecidual sign. The absence of these signs does not rule out an intrauterine pregnancy. Visualization of any round or oval fluid collection within the mid-uterus likely represents an intrauterine pregnancy. However, a gestational sac must be distinguished from a “pseudogestational sac” in cases of a suspected ectopic pregnancy. The fluid from the ectopic pregnancy collects in the uterus and mimics a gestational sac. These collections usually contain irregular borders or debris.

The yolk sac is a thin-walled circular structure that develops within the gestational sac, usually after 5.5 weeks of gestation, and usually resolves by 12 weeks. The yolk sac provides nutrition and gas exchange to the developing embryo. The embryo, typically visible at approximately six weeks gestation, is connected to the yolk sac at the midgut via the yolk stalk. The embryo’s first distinguishable structure is the flickering cardiac activity that should develop by a crown-rump length of 7 mm in a normal pregnancy. The presence of a gestational sac with a yolk sac or an embryo is required for a definitive diagnosis of pregnancy.

By 11 weeks gestation, organogenesis is complete, and most fetal anomalies have already formed by this period. Fetal anomalies are present in 2 to 3% of pregnancies, and traditionally a comprehensive fetal anatomic survey has been performed in the mid-second trimester to assess these anomalies. Due to improvement and advancement in ultrasonography, these anomalies can now be seen in the late first trimester. The common malformations of neural tube defects (anencephaly, myelomeningoceles), cystic hygromas, abdominal wall defects, limb abnormalities, and holoprosencephaly can be seen 50% of the time in singleton pregnancies at this early gestational period. Additionally, markers of aneuploidy such as hypoplastic nasal bone, abnormal cardiac findings, abnormal ductus venosus flow can be seen. However, brain structures (cavum septum pellucidum or corpus callosum) or diaphragmatic hernias are not fully developed at this stage and must be evaluated in the mid-second trimester. It is important to note that the early appearance of developing organ structures can be mistaken as anomalies to the untrained eye. For example, before 13 weeks, there is a physiological bowel herniation into the base of the umbilical cord and can be mistaken as an abdominal wall defect if specialized training is not completed before the interpretation of a late first-trimester anatomy scan.

In addition to a comprehensive fetal anatomic evaluation, evaluation of the placenta, including location, texture, and cord insertion, is assessed. If placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) is suspected or a low-lying placenta is visualized on a transabdominal exam, a transvaginal approach for evaluating the placenta is recommended. Suspicion for PAS is based on clinical risks factors such as previous cesarean deliveries in addition to ultrasounds findings. In the first trimester, low implantation of the gestational sac could represent cesarean scar implantation and increase the risk of PAS. In the second and third trimesters, the presence of placenta previa in addition to placental findings of lacunae, disruption in the retroplacental hypoechoic zone, myometrial thinning, or uterovesical hypervascularity greatly increases the likelihood of PAS. The presence of placenta previa with suspicion for PAS markedly increases maternal and fetal mortality, and cesarean delivery is recommended. Detection allows for early multidisciplinary cesarean delivery planning at a tertiary care center where experienced and specialized surgeons are available.

Lastly, maternal pelvic anatomy(uterus, cervix, ovaries, adnexa) is assessed. Evaluation for abnormalities such as fibroids, adnexal masses, Mullerian duct anomalies is evaluated in the first trimester and mid-second trimester scans. The presence of ultrasound abnormalities or clinical indications can lead to additional specialized ultrasound examinations such as serial transvaginal cervical lengths or limited follow-up imaging.