One problem with using troponins to diagnose acute myocardial infarctions is that troponins can be elevated in other conditions as well.

Another cause of elevated troponin levels is cardiac muscle injury due to non-ischemic causes. Direct, blunt trauma to the chest can cause significant myocardial damage and, in turn, can lead to increased troponin.

Another issue that complicates the measurement of troponins for the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarctions is chronic kidney disease (CKD).

A meta-analysis of 14 studies showed that the specificity of an elevated troponin over the 99th percentile was drastically decreased in patients with CKD. It is crucial to know if the troponins are trending over time in these patients.

Troponin bound to heparin causes lower measured troponin plasma concentration compared to serum.

The specificity of the antibody is critical. One of the possible sources of interference for the sandwich-type immunometric troponin assays is endogenous antibodies directed against the proteins of nonhuman species (i.e., heterophile antibodies).

Interfering endogenous antibodies are called heterophile antibodies when there is no clearly defined immunogen, and the antibody reacts with immunoglobulin from two or more species or has RF activity.

Human anti-animal antibodies (HAAA) are high-affinity, specific, polyclonal antibodies produced against a specific animal immunogen whole immunoglobulin of IgG or IgM class.

One stimulus that is increasingly responsible for HAMA production is mouse monoclonal antibodies used in diagnostic image analysis and immune-directed therapy.

Apart from false-positive results, heterophile antibodies can cause falsely low results if they bind to the variable regions of the capture antibody, mimicking the antigen to be measured and preventing troponin from binding.

Autoantibodies also have the potential to cause interference in troponin immunometric assay methods. False-positive or false-negative values may arise, depending on whether the autoantibody-analyte complex partitions into the free or the bound analyte fraction.

More recently, Eriksson and co-workers have suggested the incidence of falsely negative troponin values at low levels to be as high as 3.5%, as indicated by low cTnI recoveries of ≤ 10%. The major effect of this interfering factor occurred when troponin concentration was low. The identity of the interference is unknown but has a molecular weight of 100 to 200 kDa, suggesting it to be protein in nature.