Clinicians must have a high suspicion for ACS during a VOC. Early treatment leads to lower mortality, shorter length of stay, reduced cost and less chance of recurrence. Once initiated, treatment of ACS must be aggressive since the disease process can escalate quickly.

Acute management of ACS includes pain control, intravenous (IV) fluids, antibiotics, supplemental oxygen, and blood transfusions. Pain control for children normally starts with ketorolac, since it is nonsedating and less likely to cause hypoventilation than opioid pain medication. Adult pain management can also begin with ketorolac. Both pediatric and adult patients whose pain is not adequately controlled with ketorolac and acetaminophen will require opioid pain medication best delivered by a PCA (patient controlled anesthesia) device. Pain control in ACS is a balance between analgesia to prevent atelectasis and oversedation which can lead to hypoventilation and hypoxia. Fluid management is necessary in cases of dehydration since hypovolemia can cause additional sickling. Recommendations no longer advise large volume IV hydration, since overhydration can lead to pulmonary edema, which again leads to more respiratory complications. Fluid management should be directed by the patient’s hydration status.

Broad-spectrum antibiotics should to given to every ACS patient. Infection is more likely in the pediatric population than in adult patients. However, in both groups, it is difficult to differentiate between ACS and pneumonia. Patients should be started on a third-generation cephalosporin (cefotaxime or ceftriaxone) for routine bacterial coverage and a macrolide (azithromycin or erythromycin) for atypical coverage.  If there is a concern for MRSA, vancomycin should be added. Treatment should last 7 to 10 days. Incentive spirometry should be done every 2 hours while awake to prevent atelectasis.

Supplemental oxygen should be given to correct a low SpO2 or PaO2. However, it is reasonable to give supplemental oxygen to any ACS patient because an appropriate oxygen saturation can mask possible focal hypoxemia. Co-oximetry is the most reliable way to monitor oxygen levels in SCD because patients have an oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve that is shifted to the right. Pulse oximetry can underestimate a patient’s oxygen pressure, and ABG can overestimate it. SpO2 should be kept above 92%, and PaO2 above 70 mmHg or no less than 3% below baseline. Of course, if supplemental oxygen is insufficient to correct hypoxemia, treatment can be escalated with BiPap, intubation, or ECMO as required.

Packed red blood cells (PRBC) transfusions have demonstrated some efficacy in case series. Unfortunately, no randomized controlled trials are evaluating PRBC transfusions versus supportive therapy for the management of ACS. Transfusions are given to improve oxygenation in ACS and have been shown to increase both SpO2 and PaO2. Blood transfusions are indicated when hemoglobin is 10% to 20% below baseline, less than 5 gm, a down trending hematocrit, if there is a worsening of radiographic signs, worsening symptoms, or if exchange transfusion is delayed. The goal of PRBC transfusion is to increase hematocrit to 30%, or Hg to 11.  Exchange transfusions are used in severe cases of ACS. Indications would include severe hypoxemia, multilobar disease on chest radiographs, or failure of blood transfusion.The goal of exchange transfusion is to increase hemoglobin to 10 and decrease HbS to less than 30%. Exchange transfusion allows hemoglobin to increase while avoiding hyperviscosity. When considering transfusion/exchange transfusion, consult with a hematologist.

Bronchodilators are indicated when there is underlying asthma. However, they can be administered in any case in which bronchospasm is identified or suspected. Steroids have been shown to shorten the length of stay but carry the risk of a higher rate of rebound VOC and increased risk of re-admission and increased risk of fat emboli. Bronchoscopy/BAL is only indicated if ACS is refractory to conventional treatment.