The management of central post-stroke pain requires a multidisciplinary approach. It includes various pharmacological (antidepressants, anticonvulsants, opioids, N-methyl D-aspartate receptor antagonists, and miscellaneous therapies) and non-pharmacological options.

Dr. Henriette Klit and his coworkers propose a stepwise approach.

**Antidepressants**

Studies have shown that amitryptiline (75 mg) is superior to carbamazepine, according to a three-phase crossover randomized clinical trial. Amitryptiline is started from low doses of 10 to 20 mg per day, with weekly increment in dose, until the pain is relieved, and the patient has no side effects (anticholinergic effects). Pain is relieved after 4 to 7 days of reaching the optimal dose. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have not been tried for central poststroke pain.

**Anticonvulsants**

If antidepressants are not effective, an anticonvulsant like carbamazepine is added, especially if the pain is sharp and lancinating. Carbamazepine is started with 100 mg per day (average dose 800 mg per day) with a gradual increase of dose until the pain is improved or the patient has intolerable side effects. Somnolence and dizziness are the most common side effects of carbamazepine. Gabapentin is effective for both central or peripheral origin neuropathic pain, with an optimal daily dose of 1800 mg. It is particularly effective for the spontaneous intermittent component of pain or thermal allodynia. Long-term use may cause weight gain. A single trial has shown that lamotrigine is moderately effective in central poststroke pain.

**Opioids**

If antidepressants and anticonvulsants are not effective alone or in combination, opioids may be considered. Intravenously-infused tramadol was found effective in patients with chronic central poststroke pain.

**N-methyl D-aspartate Receptor Antagonist**

Oral ketamine (maintenance dose of 50 mg three times per day) along with oral diazepam (maintenance dose of 5 mg three times per day) can be effective. Intravenous ketamine is reserved for the refractory cases of central poststroke pain.

**Various Invasive and Non-Invasive Non-Pharmacological Techniques**

The following are available for managing the patients but have variable efficacy.

Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (r TMS): It is a motor cortex stimulation technique that is noninvasive and has a long-lasting effect.

Motor cortex stimulation: Overall results to relieve pain in the patients are variable but encouraging.

Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS): Especially low-frequency TENS is found to effective in combination with social support and family education.

Deep brain stimulation (DBS): It is an option of treatment in a limited number of patients. As ablation of any area of the brain might cause other deficits or even aggravates the pain.

**Future of Central Poststroke Pain Management**

Antiplatelet medications, especially cilostazol, may have a role in the treatment of central post-stroke pain. The thalamic hemorrhagic stroke makes cilostazol easier to pass through the blood-brain barrier due to disruption of the barrier at the site of hemorrhage. The exact mechanism of action for relieving thalamic pain is unknown.

Vestibular Caloric Stimulation (VCS): It is found to be effective, but more trials are needed.

Other modalities, such as psychotherapy, behavioral therapy, and educating patients and family about various coping strategies, are also considered. Evaluation for depression and timely management is important. patients with stroke with central post-stroke pain should be enrolled for rehabilitation and management of other co-morbidities.