Since myxedema coma has a high mortality rate of up 60%, all patients require admission to the intensive care unit.

Hypothermia should be managed with warming blankets and increasing the temperature in the room. Care in warming the patient is advised as this will cause peripheral vasodilation and may lead to hypotension and shock. As the patient receives treatment with thyroid replacement, the hypothermia will slowly resolve. Hypotension requires careful management due to multiple issues commonly present concurrently, such as hyponatremia, hypoglycemia, and hypothermia. As stated above, rapid rewarming of the patient will increase vasodilation, worsening hypotension. This action necessitates the use of fluids to maintain hemodynamic stability. If hypotension is refractory to IV fluid resuscitation, then vasopressors should be initiated until Levothyroxine has time to act. If hypoglycemia is present, 5 to 10% dextrose with half normal saline should be administered carefully. The dilemma occurs if the patient presents with hyponatremia as well. Hypotonic fluids should be avoided. Low sodium can precipitate altered mental status, and correcting the deficiency is vital. There is a careful balance between fluid restriction and the need for fluids. A central venous line is also a recommendation.

Prompt initiation of thyroid hormone therapy is of paramount importance when myxedema coma is highly suspected, even before having thyroid hormone results back (even though results usually come back quickly in most clinical institutions).

According to the most recent American Thyroid Association (ATA) guidelines, the recommended initial dose is 200 to 400 mcg IV once (lower dose for elderly, or underlying cardiac disease or arrhythmia with some reports up to 500 mcg). Subsequently, dosing is 1.6 mcg/kg/day, reduced to 75% when given IV as a preferred route, for patients may not be able to tolerate PO, and the absorption could be impaired secondary to intestinal impaired motility and edema. TSH, FT4, FT3 should be measured at baseline and then every 24 to 48 hours until the patient's mental status starts to improve.

One case report in 2017 split dose of levothyroxine to 200 mcg LT4 every 8 h in five consecutive doses (total dose of 1 mg) resulted in significant restoration of depleted thyroid status and clinical improvement within 48 hours after treatment initiation.

The severity of myxedema coma should not rely solely on higher levels of TSH, for it does not always correlate either secondary to suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis in critically ill patients, a slower response in the elderly, or secondary hypothyroidism from pituitary causes. The expectation for serum FT4 to show normalization in 4 days after starting therapy.