# Continuing Education Activity

Cenegermin is a medication used in the management of neurotrophic keratitis. It is in the recombinant human nerve growth factor (rhNGF) class of medications. This activity describes the FDA-approved indications, action, and contraindications for cenegermin as a valuable agent in treating neurotrophic keratitis. In addition, this activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions ) pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in the management of patients with neurotrophic keratitis. It also provides information for clinicians on managing toxicity if an overdose has resulted while administering cenegermin.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for cenegermin therapy.
- Describe the mechanism of action of cenegermin.

- Review the proper administration of cenegermin ophthalmic solution.
- Summarize the risks associated with initiating cenegermin therapy.

# Indications

Cenegermin is the only FDA-approved pharmacologic therapy to treat neurotrophic keratitis (NK). In addition, it is the first-ever topical biologic approved in the field of ophthalmology. Cenegermin ophthalmic solution 0.002% received initial FDA approval in 2018. It is a topical recombinant human nerve growth factor (rhNGF) with high specificity for the anterior segment of the eye to support corneal innervation and integrity.

Although the prevalence of neurotrophic keratitis is low, the impact of such a serious pathologic process and its associated sequelae can be devastating. Before approval, surgical intervention was the only available therapeutic option for neurotrophic keratitis. Cenegermin provides a novel non-surgical treatment that has the potential capacity to offer total corneal healing. Cenegermin may be used as the first-line treatment for patients with neurotrophic keratitis unresponsive to conventional non-surgical treatment for more than two weeks. Recent studies have shown cenegermin's efficacy in treating NK in pediatric populations with various underlying congenital diseases.

There are no non-FDA-approved indications of cenegermin to date. It is important to note that cenegermin received orphan drug designation by the FDA, which provides incentives to assist and encourage the development of drugs for rare diseases.

# Mechanism of Action

Neurotrophic keratitis is a degenerative corneal disease characterized by partial or complete loss of corneal sensation. This occurs due to impaired trigeminal sensory innervation and derangement of epithelial repair.

Morphologic and metabolic disturbances lead to recurrent epithelial defects, stromal ulceration, and eventual corneal perforation.

Cenegermin is an rhNGF produced in recombinant Escherichia coli as an inactive pro-peptide, with the molecular formula of “C583H908N166O173S8”. Cenegermin is cleaved by enzymatic hydrolysis into nerve growth factor (NGF) active form upon topical instillation. Mature NGF is a small protein composed of 118 amino acids that form a noncovalent dimer with three intramolecular disulfide bonds.

The nerve growth factor binding to TrkA leads to intracellular activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), Ras, phosphoinositide 3-kinase(PI3K), cell division control protein 42 (Cdc42), and phospholipase-c gamma (PLC-γ). The exact mechanism is not entirely clear. Recombinant human nerve growth factor acts directly on corneal epithelial cells to maintain limbal epithelial stem cell potential and lacrimal gland receptors to promote tear production. Recombinant human nerve growth factor has been shown to support corneal re-innervation through the accelerated recovery of nerve fiber density.

Clinical trials evaluated the safety and efficacy of cenegermin in 151 neurotrophic keratitis patients in two, eight-week, randomized controlled, double-blind studies. Patients were administered eye drops six times daily in the affected eye(s) for eight weeks. In these trials, 69.6% of patients treated with cenegermin achieved complete corneal healing in eight weeks, compared to 29.4% of patients treated without cenegermin. Compared to the vehicle, patients treated with cenegermin showed statistically significant reductions in lesion size and the rate of disease progression during blinded treatment. Based on clinical trials, cenegermin is effective in restoring corneal integrity, corneal sensitivity, and transparency.

# Administration

Cenegermin is supplied as an ophthalmic solution containing 0.002% (20 mcg/mL) cenegermin as a clear, colorless solution in a multiple-dose vial. Contact lenses should be removed before application and reinserted after 15 minutes. One drop of cenegermin is instilled in the affected eye(s) six times a day at 2-hour intervals for eight weeks. (Each mL contains active: 20 mcg of cenegermin (0.002% w/v).

Cenegermin is supplied weekly in an insulated pack with dry ice containing seven multi-dose vials. Cenegermin weekly cartons should be stored in the refrigerator promptly after receiving them. The carton should be kept between 36 degrees F to 46 degrees F for no longer than 14 days. Before application, a vial should thaw for 30 minutes at room temperature. Shaking the vial is not advised.

Proper administration requires strict adherence to a specific stepwise regimen. Instructions for administration as per product labeling are as follows.

- Attach the vial adapter to the vial.

- Clean the surface of the valve connector.

- Wait approximately one minute, allowing the valve to dry.

- Screw pipette clockwise into the connector.

- Ensure that the plunger is pushed all the way down.

- Invert the vial and gently draw the pipette plunger allowing the pipette to fill with the solution.

- After filling the pipette, unscrew the pipette counterclockwise from the connector.

- Retract the lower eyelid and instill drops into the conjunctival fornix.

- Make sure not to touch the eye with the tip of the pipette.

- Blink a few times after administration to allow even spreading across the surface of the eye.

Completion of the full 8-week course is critical for treatment success. If a dose is missed, resume treatment as normal at the next scheduled administration. If multiple topical ophthalmic drops are being used, administer the drops at least 15 minutes apart to avoid dilution.

# Adverse Effects

The most common adverse reaction is eye pain, reported in approximately 16% of patients. Other less frequent adverse drug reactions include visual acuity reduction (10.7%), ocular hyperemia (6.7%), ocular inflammation (5.3%), tearing (5.3%), corneal deposits (4%), cataracts (4%), and foreign body sensation (2.7%). Mild to moderate eye discomfort is expected; however, patients should notify their ophthalmologist or health care professional if more serious eye reactions occur.

Adverse events were not observed in animal reproduction studies. Additionally, there are no known significant drug interactions. Ophthalmic cenegermin is not expected to cause any adverse effects in breastfed infants.

# Contraindications

There are no contraindications listed in the product label provided by FDA/manufacturers labeling. However, patients with hypersensitivity to the active substance or excipients listed on the product label should avoid using cenegermin.

Many eye drops contain corticosteroids or preservatives (e.g., benzalkonium chloride, cetrimide). According to FDA/manufacturer product labeling, eye drops containing these substances could slow down or interfere with corneal healing, avoiding their use during treatment with cenegermin. Treatment of active ocular infection is necessary before the use of cenegermin. If there is an ocular infection during the treatment period, avoid using cenegermin until the resolution of the infection.

# Monitoring

Patients receiving cenegermin ophthalmic solution should be monitored for the clinical progression of neuropathic keratitis. Mild to moderate eye discomfort during treatment with cenegermin is expected. Adverse fetal effects on organogenesis were not observed in pregnant rats or rabbits at clinically relevant doses. In addition, during pre-and postnatal development studies, administration to rats throughout gestation and lactation produced no adverse effects in offspring at clinically relevant doses. Therefore, ophthalmic cenegermin is not expected to cause any adverse effects in breastfed infants.

Most patients do not have adverse drug reactions as systemic absorption of topical ophthalmic nhNGF is unlikely. After administration, the drops pass through the nasolacrimal duct to the nasal and then the oropharyngeal cavity and are degraded by proteases. To limit any potential amount of systemic absorption of the drug, after application, apply pressure to the tear duct at the corner of the eye for one minute and wipe any excess solution with a tissue. Treatment can cause temporary blurring and visual disturbance for a few minutes after topical instillation. Patients should wait until their vision clears before driving or operating machines.

Patients should be monitored for ocular cancer during and after treatment as cenegermin is a growth factor and may theoretically affect ocular cancer as per product labeling. However, animal or human studies have not been conducted to determine the carcinogenic potential of cenegermin therapy.

# Toxicity

Based on clinical trials and product labeling, topical overdose is not likely to occur or be associated with toxicity. A topical overdose of cenegermin may be flushed from the eye(s) with lukewarm water. It is important to note that cenegermin is minimally absorbed in the systemic circulation, and there is no risk of systemic toxicity. However, in unexpected hypersensitivity reactions, clinicians should take measures to maintain a patent airway, breathing, and circulation.

There is no data on the use of cenegermin in pregnant women; however, animal studies do not indicate direct or indirect harmful effects on reproductive toxicity. There is no data on the effects of cenegermin therapy on human fertility. However, daily subcutaneous administration in male and female rats had no effects on fertility parameters at 1709 times the maximum recommended human ophthalmic dose (MRHOD). Subcutaneous and ocular administration in female rats was associated with ovarian findings, including ovarian follicular cysts, persistent estrus, changes in ovarian weight, reduction of corpora lutea at doses greater than or equal to 119 times the MRHOD according to product labeling.

Topical overdose is not likely associated with toxicity. It is important to note that there is no specific antidote for cenegermin. However, the topical overdose of cenegermin may be flushed from the eye(s) with tepid water. Ophthalmic cenegermin is not expected to cause any toxic effects in breastfed infants.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Managing patients on cenegermin therapy requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including a referring optometrist, primary care physician, ophthalmic technician, pharmacist, and ophthalmologist. At the primary care level, a high index of suspicion and prompt referral to an ophthalmologist is necessary to diagnose neurotrophic keratitis early. In addition, ophthalmologists monitor care and assess therapeutic effectiveness. Clinicians (MDs, DOs, PAs, NPs) should be aware that patients rarely complain of symptoms due to a lack of corneal sensation. More often, patients complain of blurred vision and occasionally present with redness of the affected eye.

Following diagnosis, clinicians should emphasize strict adherence to cenegermin therapy to achieve complete corneal healing. Ophthalmic technicians educate patients on medication compliance and treatment schedule and reinforce proper administration. Pharmacists should ensure proper dosing and counsel the patient about adverse drug reactions. Specialty trained nurses should counsel the patients on important safety information, expected side effects, and adherence to therapy. Clinicians should refer patients to an ophthalmologist for possible surgical intervention if there is a failure to achieve corneal healing despite adequate cenegermin therapy.

Without proper management, the morbidity from neurotrophic keratitis is high. Cenegermin offers a unique non-surgical approach to managing neurotrophic keratitis and restoring corneal integrity. Each healthcare provider needs to understand the indications, administration, and adverse effects of cenegermin therapy. An interprofessional team-based approach involving clinicians, specialists, ophthalmic technicians, pharmacists, and patients leads to the achievement of desired therapeutic outcomes on cenegermin therapy, minimizes adverse drug reactions, and decreases disease recurrence, which translates to improved quality of life.