If a patient presents with a superior quadrantanopia, treatment is directed toward the underlying pathology as the visual field deficit does not affect the quality of life. As the deficit in homonymous superior quadrantanopia is toward one side and only the superior quadrant, most patients do not need correction.

For patients with complete homonymous hemianopia, several techniques can be used and are described.

- Macular splitting and paracentral defects may make seeing individual words difficult. A colored piece of paper placed vertically along the left or right side of the page is often helpful when the loss of the margins is a source of the difficulty. It can also be used horizontally and moved down the lines of the page.

- Other strategies include teaching patients with left hemianopias to shift their gaze to the left side of every line and to the first letter of every word and instructing those with right hemianopias to reach the end of a word before going to the next.

Patients with chronic, dense homonymous hemianopias can be offered optical assistance from prisms, but only a minority of them will find it beneficial.

- Prism therapy should be used only in individuals who have normal mentation and in whom the hemianopia is isolated.

- A 15–45 (usually 30) diopter base-out Fresnel press-on prism can be placed on the temporal half of an eyeglass ipsilateral to the hemianopia. This optically displaces images in the blind half of the vision toward the good hemifield. A small central area should be cut out from the Fresnel prism to reduce double vision.

- The prism works by allowing patients to notice novel objects in their blind field; they must then turn the head in that direction to use their good field to see the objects more clearly.

- Unfortunately, most individuals find this too confusing, and only 20%–30% continue to use it. It certainly does not improve their vision to the point that they can drive or read normally.

Children with congenital or early-onset hemianopia may develop a rare compensatory phenomenon with an exotropic eye and head turn, both toward the field defect, an adaptive mechanism to increase the useful visual field.

Visual occupational therapy and rehabilitation can be helpful. Compensatory oculomotor strategies, designed to enhance visual saccades into and exploration within the defective hemifield, may be tried.