All formulations of **amphotericin****B (AMB-d, L-AMB, ABLC, ABCD)**are contraindicated in patients with a known or likely hypersensitivity to amphotericin B or any components of the L-AMB, ABLC, or ABCD formulations.

- **AMB-d**carries two FDA boxed warnings: 1) amphotericin B deoxycholate should be used for invasive, potentially life-threatening mycoses and avoided in non-invasive fungal infections (oral thrush, esophageal candidiasis, and vaginal candidiasis in patients with neutrophil counts within normal limits); 2) risk of accidental overdose. The use of this agent should also exercise extreme caution in patients with renal impairment and or electrolyte abnormalities.

- **L-AMB, ABLC, and ABCD**do not carry FDA boxed warnings but require caution in renal impairment.

**Nystatin**is contraindicated in patients with hypersensitivity to the drug or any additional components in the dosage formulation.

All **azoles**should be avoided in patients with hypersensitivities to azole drugs or dosage form components and used with caution in patients with renal impairment/failure and or hepatic impairment/failure.

- **Fluconazole**requires cautious administration in patients with electrolyte abnormalities, torsades de pointes, and or medical history, family history, and or current QTc prolongation.

- **Itraconazole**has an FDA boxed warning against the use in treating onychomycosis in patients with CHF. Itraconazole is contraindicated in pregnancy, left ventricular dysfunction, and current or active congestive heart failure. This drug should be used cautiously in patients with cystic fibrosis, cardiovascular disease, pulmonary disease, and the elderly.

- **Ketoconazole**carries several FDA boxed warnings:

- This agent should be used only when another effective antifungal, including azoles, cannot be tolerated or is not available

- This agent carries a significant risk of hepatotoxicity, even in patients without predisposing factors, and thus any treatment with ketoconazole should include close liver function monitoring.

- Ketoconazole has several contraindicated drug interactions that may cause QTc prolongation by increasing concentrations of cisapride, disopyramide, dofetilide, dronedarone, methadone, quinidine, or ranolazine. Ketoconazole is a cytochrome P450 inhibitor.

- **Voriconazole**is contraindicated in galactose malabsorption/intolerance, Lapp lactase deficiency, glucose malabsorption, uncorrected electrolyte abnormalities, and pregnancy. Clinicians should use this agent with caution in patients with a medical or family history of QTc prolongation, history of torsades de pointes, and or hematologic malignancy.

- **Isavuconazole**is contraindicated in patients with familial short QTc syndrome and should be used with caution in patients with hematologic malignancies.

- **Posaconazole**is contraindicated in pregnancy. Caution is advisable in patients with electrolyte abnormalities, renal insufficiency, cardiomyopathy, torsades de pointes, or medical history/family history/congenital prolonged QTc interval.

**Terbinafine**should be utilized with caution or avoided in patients with hypersensitivity reactions, depression, gastrointestinal issues, liver failure, and immune suppression secondary to hematologic effects.

All **echinocandins**are contraindicated in patients with hypersensitivities to any of the echinocandin drugs or dosage form components. Caspofungin should be used with caution in hepatic impairment.

Treatment with **griseofulvin**should include considerations for potential adverse events in susceptible patients and those with existing disease states; particularly patients with a hypersensitivity to griseofulvin, a hypersensitivity to penicillins (there is a possible cross-reaction between penicillins and griseofulvin), hepatic failure, patients with known porphyrias, and patients that are pregnant or nursing.

**Flucytosine**carries an FDA boxed warning that this agent should be used with extreme caution in renal impairment and that hematologic, hepatic, and renal function should have close monitoring. This agent is contraindicated in patients with hypersensitivity to this drug or its components, first trimester pregnancies, and breastfeeding women. Caution is advisable with this agent in patients with renal impairment, hepatic impairment, bone marrow depression, and pregnant patients in their second or third trimester.

The **quinolines**iodoquinol and clioquinol are contraindicated in patients with hypersensitivities to the drugs or their components.

Antifungals, which are utilized only as topical agents, including **ciclopirox, potassium iodide,**and**zinc pyrithione,**should be avoided in patients with hypersensitivities to these agents.