Self-management of T1D  includes administering insulin multiple times daily with glucose monitoring and attention to food intake and physical activity every day, which is a considerable burden. Whereas newer technologies have helped people improve their glycemic control, they are costly, complex, and require education and training. Many people with diabetes fear hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, and the development of complications, and depression, anxiety, and eating disorders can develop. The medical, education, training, psychological, and social challenges faced by people with T1D daily are best addressed by an interprofessional team that includes clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), nurses (including diabetes nurse educators), pharmacists, dieticians, mental health professionals, social workers, podiatrists, and the use of community resources. Individualized treatment approaches, which can reduce the burden and further improve outcomes, are needed, and the interprofessional care model will yield the best possible patient outcomes.

It is imperative for all interprofessional team members to coordinate their activities and interventions with the rest of the team and utilize open communication channels to ensure everyone involved in patient care, as well as the patient themselves, has access to the same accurate, updated patient information. Nurses are often crucial in coordinating activities between various professionals on the case and play a role in patient evaluation, education, and monitoring. Pharmacists should work directly with diabetes educators to ensure proper insulin dosing and participate in patient medication education and reconciliation. These examples of interprofessional care will help drive improved patient outcomes. [Level 5]