Classical criteria for CSD diagnosis: (i) close contact with cats or a scratch or bite from a cat, (ii) typical CSD histology (granuloma with a central pyogenic abscess, with lymphoid hyperplasia not being sufficiently specific to establish a diagnosis of CSD), and (iii) positive serology by an immunofluorescence assay for antibodies against B. henselae.

A diagnosis of CSD must rely on the presence of a combination of epidemiological, histological, and bacteriological criteria, since no single criterion may be considered the gold standard.

The diagnostic modalities commonly used in the diagnosis of Bartonella infection include serological testing, culture, histopathology, and polymerase chain reaction. There are five blood tests available: Western blot, ELISA, and IFA tests, PCR DNA detection, and culture. However, it must be emphasized that Bartonella often is only intermittently present in the peripheral blood (bacteremia) of infected animals.

**Direct Detection Methods:**

1. Isolation in culture.

2. Detection of antigens of the pathogen.

3. PCR- detection of the nucleic acid (DNA).

4. Visualization by special stains.

**Indirect Detection Methods:**

1. Serology - detection of antibodies against the pathogen.

2. Detection of an immune cellular response against the pathogen- Bartonella skin tests. No longer used

The culture of the bacterium gives a definitive diagnosis, but it is a very time-consuming and expensive process with incubation periods as long as 21 days. Bartonella bacteria are very slow-growing, fastidious, and primary isolation is difficult, with the detection of colonies only after 1 to 4 weeks of incubation on blood agar plates. As Bartonella species are difficult to culture, culture is not routinely recommended. Serology is the best initial test and can be performed by indirect fluorescent assay or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.

Serological testing such as indirect fluorescence assay for B. henselae antibodies was the first microbiological test available but has a variable positive predictive value. It is an indirect diagnostic method that can be negative in the early stage of the disease. In some studies, the positive predictive value of the indirect immunofluorescence assay for B. henselae was reported to be high (=91.4%). Conversely, some studies found a lack of sensitivity of the serological test among patients with CSD. While there is variability in multiple studies of B henselae IgG and IgM indirect fluorescent antibody and ELISA serology, typical sensitivity values are approximately 50% to 80%, Bartonella infection. Unlike culture and PCR of blood, serology does not rely on Bartonella being present in the blood. It can be used to evaluate response to therapy.

Histopathological examination of the tissue infected by Bartonella species usually shows neutrophils, lymphocytes, and debris scattered throughout the lesions. Warthin-Starry silver staining will show small dark staining bacteria and electron microscopic findings include pleomorphic bacilli with a trilaminar wall. Histopathological examination for Bartonella bacilliformis is performed using Giemsa stain, and it shows cytoplasmic inclusions known as Rocha-Lima inclusions.

Advanced diagnostic techniques such as PCR on lymph nodes or other material have been applied to the detection of Bartonella. PCR provides the advantages of high specificity and rapid identification, however lacking in sensitivity, ranging from 43% to 76%. The sensitivity of PCR with samples of lymph node tissue or aspirates is 30-60% for CSD. A polymerase chain reaction can detect different Bartonella species; specificity is high, but the sensitivity is lower than with serology.