**Chemotherapy-induced Nausea and Vomiting (CINV)**

CINV is a well-known side effect associated with chemotherapy regimens. The vomiting response consists of a complex system of afferent and efferent messengers traveling to and from regions within the medulla termed the "Chemotherapy Trigger Zone" and "Vomiting Center." Chemotherapy is believed to induce this signal cascade through two separate mechanisms: peripheral and central.

The peripheral pathway is associated with acute emesis and vomiting that occurs within 24 hours of chemotherapy initiation. The mechanism involves the activation of serotonin/5-HT3 receptors within the gastrointestinal (GI) mucosa. The toxic effect of chemotherapy agents leads to the destruction and or injury to enterochromaffin cells within the GI tract, subsequently causing their release of serotonin. Serotonin receptors bind with the abundant release of serotonin molecules and send afferent signals to the Chemotherapy Trigger zone. Here, the culmination of afferent signals occurs and triggers an efferent signal from the Vomiting Center back to the periphery. The efferent signal leads to the contraction of abdominal muscles, diaphragm, and stomach. The outcome of such contractions is emesis.

The central pathway is primarily involved in delayed emesis, vomiting that occurs greater than twenty-four hours after dosing of chemotherapy. The mechanism predominately occurs within the brain and is regulated by the neurotransmitter substance P and its affinity for Neurokinin-1 (NK-1) receptors. The presence of chemo agents leads to the body's release of substance P and its subsequent binding to NK-1 receptors within the brain. The substrate-receptor interaction leads to direct signaling of the Chemotherapy Trigger Zone within the medulla, which compiles the signal and triggers the Emetic Center to send efferent signals to induce emesis.

To date, clinicians have attempted to alleviate CINV through a combination of medications that act as antagonists at serotonin/5-HT3 and neurokinin1 receptor sites.

Grimison et al. performed a crossover study of 72 patients experiencing refractory CINV despite receiving guideline-consistent antiemetics comprised of corticosteroids, NK-1 antagonists, 5-HT3 antagonists, and plus/minus olanzapine. Subjects were randomized to receive either placebo or oral THC:CBD (2.5 mg:2.5 mg) in cycle A and subsequently received the opposite trial drug in cycle B. For cycle C, participants remained blinded but received the medication that they felt was most beneficial. Results proved that supplementation of THC:CBD in conjunction with the already approved antiemetic regimen significantly decreased episodes of both nausea and vomiting. Additionally, the patients' rate of complete response (defined as no episodes of emesis) increased from 14 to 25% with the addition of THC:CBD. Despite the significant improvements in controlling CINV, 31% of participants experienced adverse events, including but not limited to sedation, dizziness, and disorientation as a byproduct of their use of cannabinoid therapy. Despite the significant increase in adverse events, 83% maintained a preference for THC:CBD over placebo.

Polito et al. investigated the effect of cannabis therapy within the pediatric oncology population suffering from CINV. Nabilone, a synthetic THC analog that acts as an agonist at CB1 and CB2 receptor sites, was provided to subjects in addition to their antiemetic regimen that most commonly consisted of a 5-HT3 antagonist. Results showed that patients receiving highly emetogenic chemotherapy and moderately emetogenic chemotherapy achieved complete acute chemotherapy-induced vomiting control in 50.6% and 53.8% of subjects, respectively.

**Analgesia**

There are many sources of pain for oncology patients. Pain can be associated with chemotherapy,  radiation treatment, or the disease itself. Patients with metastatic disease and those receiving anticancer treatment report prevalence of pain in 64% and 59% of cases, respectively.

Johnson et al. evaluated the efficacy of cannabinoid therapy when supplemented with opioid treatment for patients with advanced cancer over a two-week span. Subjects were randomly divided to receive either THC:CBD extract, THC extract, or placebo. The study drug was provided as an oromucosal spray, with each spray containing 2.7 mg THC and 2.5 mg of CBD. Results showed a statistically significant decrease in pain reduction compared to placebo in the THC:CBD group, but not the THC group. Additionally, 43% of THC:CBD subjects demonstrated a greater than 30% decline in pain on the NRS pain scale, which is deemed a clinically significant improvement. Interestingly, despite the addition of the experimental drug, none of the groups demonstrated a change in the median dose of their baseline opioid medication. Based on the results, the study's authors recommended supplementation of the tested THC:CBD extract to improve pain control in patients with advanced cancer when symptoms are unrelieved by opioid medication.

Pawasarat et al. retrospectively reviewed morphine milliequivalent (MME) consumption in oncology patients using and not using medicinal marijuana. Their results showed that patients utilizing medicinal cannabis had a significantly lower daily intake of MME at both the onset and culmination of the study compared to patients receiving only opioid medication for pain control. As they trended MME intake throughout the study, it was noted that the rate of increase of opioid consumption was decreased in medical marijuana users compared to non-users.

**Cachexia**

The hormone Leptin triggers afferent signals to the brain leading to decreased appetite and increased energy expenditure. When the body is in a state of starvation, Leptin levels are suppressed, and the hormone ghrelin and appetite-stimulating neuropeptides such as neuropeptide Y are upregulated. Tumors possess the ability to release cytokines mimicking leptin and subsequently suppressing ghrelin and neuropeptide Y signals. The effect of this pathologic process is anorexia (loss of appetite) and cachexia (loss of muscle with or without loss of adipose tissue).

Strasser et al. investigated the effects of a cannabis extract consisting of 2.5 mg of THC and 1 mg of CBD vs. 2.5 mg THC vs. placebo in terms of their ability to improve appetite and quality of life over a 6-week timeframe. Cannabis extract proved to be the most beneficial in improving appetite in 73% of patients, whereas THC and Placebo were less effective at 58% and 69%, respectively. Despite such improvements, statistically significant values were not met by either group in terms of improvement in appetite or quality of life.

A 20 institution, double-blind, randomized trial of 469 advanced cancer patients was performed assessing the usefulness of Dronabinol (2.5 mg BID) in isolation vs. combined with megestrol acetate (orexigenic agent) vs. isolated megestrol acetate. Subjective improvement in appetite proved superior in the single-agent megestrol acetate arm compared to the single-agent dronabinol group (75% vs. 49% of patients, respectively). A significant increase in the percentage of patients gaining > 10% from their baseline body weight was found when comparing the megestrol acetate group to the isolated dronabinol group, at 14% and 5%, respectively. Combination therapy (11%) vs. megestrol acetate (14%) showed no significant difference in terms of weight gain. The authors concluded that megestrol acetate was superior in inducing appetite and increasing weight gain compared to dronabinol. Furthermore, combination therapy of dronabinol and megestrol acetate did not demonstrate a significant difference in terms of appetite or weight gain compared to megestrol acetate alone.

Bar-Sela et al. performed a similar study evaluating the efficacy of THC:CBD capsules in producing weight gain > 10% from baseline over a 6 month period. Despite a high rate of dropout (most commonly due to disease progression or side-effects from the study drug), 50% (n= 3) of the patients completing the 6-month study achieved a > 10% weight gain, while the remaining 50% of patient's weight remained stable.

**Tumor Suppressor**

Several studies have investigated the effectiveness of cannabis use and its anti-tumor properties with specific cancer cell lines. Results of these studies have found evidence for inhibition of tumor cell proliferation and invasion, induction of apoptosis, and enhancement of the body's immune surveillance of tumor cells.

Dr. Baram et al. investigated the effect of various combinations of cannabis extracts and their effect on 12 different cancers. Results demonstrated a variable response depending upon the cancer type and content profile of the specific cannabis extract. Of the 12 cancer varieties tested, components of THC were found to be successful in inducing cell death. Apoptotic features and/or inhibition of proliferation were found to be the underlying mechanism. Interestingly, two extracts consisting of equal amounts of THC but varying levels of other cannabinoids (i.e., CBD, Cannabigerol [CBG], THCA, etc.) had different outcomes in terms of cell death. Such findings indicate the likelihood that the interplay of the combination of cannabinoids may be the true determining factor of the extract's effectiveness rather than the presence or amount of THC. Therefore, the authors recommend whole extract cannabinoid therapy as opposed to single-agent THC formulations that have higher anti-tumor properties.

Another pertinent finding of the study discovered that each cancer type possessed unique cannabinoid receptors and had varying responses to specific cannabinoid extracts.  Of the 12 cancer cell lines evaluated, breast and colon cancer had the lowest reported rate of tumor cell death.