The alignment of facets on lateral imaging with the head kept in neutral positioning is the mainstay of dichotomizing the variants of AAI. The National Emergency X-Radiography Utilization Study**(**NEXUS) study group advocates an open-mouth odontoid, anterior-posterior, and cross-table lateral view. Computed tomography (CT) has higher diagnostic specificity.

**Criteria for AAI**

- Atlanto-dens interval of more than 5 mm

- Overriding of the anterior arch of the atlas over the odontoid

- Space available for the cord (SAC) of less than 13 mm

- Violation of the Steel’s rule of thirds (one-third cord, one-third odontoid, and one-third safe space)

- Translation of the tip of the odontoid of more than 4 mm of the basion.

**Types of AAI**

- **Greenberg**—reducible and irreducible

- **Fielding and Hawkins**—anterior, posterior, lateral, and rotational.

- **Wang classification system**- instability (type I), reducible dislocation (type II), irreducible dislocation (type III), and bony dislocations (type IV).

Types of AAI depending on the alignment of facets on lateral imaging with the head kept in neutral positioning:

- **Type 1:**the facet of the atlas is dislocated anterior to that of the axis

- **Type 2:**the facet of the atlas is dislocated posterior to that of the axis with rotatory atlantoaxial dislocation

- **Type 3:**though the facets are aligned, instability is confirmed by clinical and specific radiological cues.

Types 2 and 3 are chronic and ‘central’ or ‘axial’ atlantoaxial instability.