The International Association of the Study of Pain revised the definition of pain which is verbatim as follows:

- Pain is always a personal experience that is influenced to varying degrees by biological, psychological, and social factors.

- Pain and nociception are different phenomena. Pain cannot be inferred solely from activity in sensory neurons.

- Through their life experiences, individuals learn the concept of pain.

- A person’s report of pain should be respected.

- Although pain usually serves an adaptive role, it may have adverse effects on function and social and psychological well-being.

- Verbal description is only one of several behaviors to express pain; inability to communicate does not negate the possibility that a human or a nonhuman animal experiences pain.

Because pain is a psychosociobiological phenomenon, this definition outlines that pain can not be regulated solely by the activity of sensory neurons which is why it is inappropriate to dismiss a patient as "crazy" when an anatomical structural cause is not identified in the diagnostic workup for the pain.

In reviewing the cellular underpinnings of chronic pain, there are pronociceptive changes evident when afferent nociceptive signals are amplified with a lack of descending modulation in the dorsal horn pathway.  Serotonin and norepinephrine act in descending modulation- bolstering this tone is used in chronic pain therapy. CNCP can occur from prolonged nociceptive stimulation, nerve injury, inflammation that can sensitize the pain transmission fibers, the death of inhibitory cells, or structural neuroplastic changes.