Orbital cellulitis is defined as a serious infection that involves the muscle and fat located within the orbit. It is also sometimes referred to as postseptal cellulitis. Orbital cellulitis does not involve the globe itself. Although orbital cellulitis can occur at any age, it is more common in the pediatric populationStaphylococcus aureus and Streptococci species. Rare cases of orbital cellulitis caused by non-spore-forming anaerobes Aeromonas hydrophila, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Eikenella corrodens have also been reportedMucorales which causes mucormycosis and Aspergillus which can cause life-threatening invasive orbital infectionsAspergillus infection of the orbit occurs in patients with severe neutropenia or other immune deficiencies, such as HIV infection. Other rare reported cause of orbital cellulitis is mycobacteria, especially Mycobacterium tuberculosis

Orbital cellulitis is primarily diagnosed clinically by objective findings on physical examination combined with presenting signs and symptoms. The most important distinguishing feature of orbital cellulitis is the presence of ophthalmoplegia, the presence of pain with eye movement, and/or proptosis

Treatment of orbital cellulitis includes antibiotics and other supportive therapies. An ophthalmologist and otolaryngologist should also be consulted for proper examination and because, in some cases, surgery may be required. Without prompt diagnosis and proper treatment, the infection of the orbit can progress and extend to the adjacent anatomical locations and result in serious complications S. aureus (including methicillin-resistant S. aureus [MRSA]), Streptococcus pneumoniae, other Streptococci, as well as gram-negative bacilli. The antibiotic regimen should also include coverage for anaerobes when an intracranial extension is suspected. Antifungals are indicated only when a fungal infection is suspected in the appropriate clinical setting. Further details on specific antibiotics will be explained in the diagnosis section. Analgesics such as NSAIDs and acetaminophen can be used alone or in combination to achieve effective pain control in patients with orbital cellulitis.