Many complications can arise due to osteosarcoma itself or from modalities used to diagnose or treat it.

- 
**Tumor-Specific Complications**

Complications of the tumor itself include pathological fractures. These may occur at presentation or during preoperative chemotherapy. As mentioned above, patients in both these scenarios have poorer outcomes than those without pathological fractures.

- 
**Biopsy-Related Complications**

When devising an approach to biopsy a lesion concerning osteosarcoma (or any sarcoma, for that matter), careful planning of the biopsy approach is necessary to lower the potential for tumor cells to seed the biopsy tract and surrounding tissues. A biopsy tract that extends across multiple compartments may necessitate a larger field of resection, which increases the risk of treatment-related complications.

- **Treatment-Related Complications**
- **Chemotherapy Side Effects**
- When utilizing chemotherapy, the majority of the side effects occur during the treatment process. Nausea, malaise, alopecia, anemia, and anorexia are possible but usually resolve shortly after the completion of the chemotherapy cycle. There are, however, some long-term side effects, which may include cardiotoxicity, pulmonary toxicity, and gradual hearing loss. There are reports of later development of a secondary malignancy.


- **Radiation Side Effects**
- Radiation is known to impart superficial side effects, including skin dryness, itching, peeling, and uncommonly, burns. Menstrual changes, erectile dysfunction, and infertility are all reported adverse events in cases of pelvic radiation. When the chest and abdomen are involved in radiation treatment, diarrhea, incontinence, rectal bleeding, nausea, vomiting, dry mouth, dysphagia, pneumonitis, and fibrosis are possible. Much like chemotherapy, there is a small risk of late development of a secondary malignancy.


- **Periprosthetic Infection**
- Prostheses-related infections are a relatively frequent complication (approximately 10% of limb salvage surgeries) most often due to lengthy surgery time, repeated surgery at the same site, and immunosuppression secondary to chemotherapy. First-line treatment of these periprosthetic infections typically involves one or more debridement procedures with both local and systemic antibiotic therapy (systemic and local antibiotic cement beads). If these efforts are ineffective, the implant requires removal, followed by debridement and washout. A cement spacer impregnated with an antibiotic generally gets placed before the insertion of a new prosthesis. Ultimately, amputation may be necessary for a number of these patients.


- **Implant Failure**
- The most common reason for reconstruction failure is the mechanical breakdown of the mega prosthesis. Mechanical failure necessitates the replacement of the prosthetic. The tibia is the most frequent site of mechanical failure.


- **Fracture/Non-Union of Allograft/Autograft**
- Fracture/non-union of allograft/autograft reconstruction is a relatively infrequent complication, but it does occur. Chemotherapy, radiation, and extracorporeal treatment of autograft bone have been reported to increase the risk of these complications. Refractory cases may necessitate metallic implant placement or amputation.