**History**

When evaluating a patient with glossitis, a thorough history is an absolute necessity. Specifics include an overall nutritional status and any dietary restrictions, tobacco, and alcohol use, and any fluctuation of symptoms with food or environmental exposure. A thorough past medical history should include concurrent immunosuppressive conditions, cancer history, as well as any autoimmune or endocrine conditions.

The patient's daily medications should also have a review, and any medication changes should undergo evaluation concerning changes in the patient's glossitis symptoms. The most common symptoms of glossitis include pain in the tongue, redness, swelling of the tongue, loss of papillae of the tongue, or any new visible tongue lesions. The clinician should also obtain a family history of geographic tongue.

****Physical Exam****

The examination of the tongue is an essential part of the physical examination and is a component of the overall oral cavity examination. The examiner should note the appearance of the tongue surface (dorsal and ventral), as well as the character of the mucosa (wet, dry, erythematous, leukoplakia, etc.). Any lesions visible on the tongue should be noted, as well as the overall dental health. Chronic friction from jagged teeth can lead to mucosal changes and even ulcerations of the tongue that the examiner must distinguish from primary tongue pathology. The language and floor of mouth should be palpated to assess for tenderness or palpable lesions. A thorough head and neck exam are also necessary to note any lymphadenopathy.

Atrophic glossitis

- Erythematous tongue

- Lack of the lingual papillae and a smooth, shiny, dry appearance

- Atrophic tongue

Median rhomboid glossitis:

- Central rhomboid-shaped hyperkeratotic areas. These classically appear as erythematous plaque-like lesions and may be tender to palpation. Classically present in the central dorsum of the mobile tongue.

Benign migratory glossitis:

- Areas of smooth tongue with loss of papillae that may have a surrounding white border; these may change position (migrate) over time and may be sensitive to touch or specific foods.

- Must be differentiated from a stable leukoplakic or erythroleukoplakic lesion which is more worrisome for malignancy

Geometric glossitis:

- Painful linear fissures throughout the mobile tongue

Strawberry tongue

-   Red denuded appearance on the dorsal of the tongue.

-   Persistent hypertrophic fungiform papillae.