Bortezomib is a relatively new drug for the treatment of multiple myeloma. Because of its narrow therapeutic index, the drug is used only by a few healthcare professionals. Ordering should be under the direction of an oncology specialist who is well-versed in the use of the drug.  The drug is administered parenterally and requires close monitoring by the nursing staff. Besides checking the CBC, the liver function involves assessment. Before starting the drug, a baseline chest X-ray is recommended.

Bortezomib therapy requires a collaborative effort from the interprofessional healthcare team. The drug can cause hypotension, and the nurse must check the BP frequently. Nursing staff should report any signs of adverse events to the attending clinician immediately and check with the pharmacist. If there are any questions about the drug, one should consult with the pharmacist first. The pharmacist should also verify all dosing and consult the ordering clinician regarding any discrepancies, as well as performing full medication reconciliation. Before dispensing the drug, the pharmacist should ensure that the patient has no allergies and has been worked up for tuberculosis and perform medication reconciliation. Also, the patient must receive education regarding the potential long-term adverse effects that can occur, including neuropathy.

It is through this type of interprofessional effort between physicians, nurses, and pharmacists that bortezomib therapy can achieve optimal therapeutic outcomes for patients while minimizing the potential for adverse events. [Level 5]