**MRI Contrast**

While iodine-based contrast directly affects the passage of the signal through the target material, gadolinium indirectly changes the signal measured in the surrounding water. MRI signal is detected by subtle variances of the magnetic fields created by the orientation of water molecules. A large magnetic field aligns these molecules; then, they are subject to radio pulses, which modulate the orientation and angulation and measurable signal. After the radio pulse, the water molecules start to realign themselves with the MRI magnet field, and the T1 and T2 signals can be measured, which gradually tapers through a period known as relaxation time.

Like iodine, gadolinium is toxic with properties similar to calcium. It is attached to a chelating molecule that mitigates its harmful effect while allowing it to alter the MRI signal of the surrounding water.

**Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis**

In the late 1990's gadolinium-based intravenous contrast MRI studies were on the rise, and similarly, reports of a strange skin disease arose that confounded researchers. While it baffled many scientists for years, eventually, an association with gadolinium-based contrast and poor renal function was made.

NSF was eventually found to be associated with reduced renal function, and the FDA put a black box warning on gadolinium-based drugs.

Additional factors have been shown to increase the risk of NSF to include AKI in the setting of chronic renal dysfunction, concomitant hepatic dysfunction, repeated boluses of contrast, a high volume of contrast, hypertension requiring medical therapy, diabetes, and patients undergoing dialysis.

**Gadolinium Allergy**

Like iodinated contrast, intravenous gadolinium injections correlate with allergic-like and physiologic-like reactions, with a majority of constituting physiologic reactions. Allergic reactions are believed to be equal or less than those of iodinated contrast, with rates published between 0.004 and 0.7%.

The rate of contrast extravasation is less than those of CT, with supportive care being adequate for almost all patients.

**Gadolinium in Pregnancy and Breastfeeding**

Gadolinium is detectable in the fetus and breast milk after intravenous injection. The effects of intrauterine gadolinium administration are not well known; thus, gadolinium-based contrast is generally avoided whenever possible while pregnant.