Deep lacerations to the scalp are inclined to bleed profusely for several reasons.

- Vasoconstriction is prevented due to the close-fitting adherence of the dense connective tissue to the blood vessels.

- The pulling effect of the occipitofrontalis muscle precludes the closing of the actively bleeding vessel and the surrounding skin.

- There are numerous anastomoses of the scalp blood vessels, such as the anastomosis of the occipital and the posterior auricular veins.

Scalp arteriovenous malformations (AVM), or cirsoid aneurysms, are uncommon lesions whose etiologies are most commonly congenital, post-infectious, or traumatic.

Subgaleal hematoma (SGH) is an abnormal collection of blood beneath the galea aponeurosis of the scalp, commonly caused by traumatic shearing of emissary veins in the loose areolar tissue. This condition is more commonly seen in neonates, infants, and small children, although there have been case reports of SGHs occurring in adults.[5] Mild trauma typically occurs via contusion, hair pulling, or vacuum-assisted vaginal delivery. Treatment is typically conservative, principally with bandage compression.

The ‘danger area of the scalp’ refers to the layer of loose areolar connective tissue as it contains the valveless emissary veins that connect the superficial veins in the subaponeurotic space with the intracranial venous sinuses. This connection makes it possible for an infection to spread from the scalp to the meninges.

Cavernous sinus thrombosis is the development of a blood clot within the cavernous sinus. The cavernous sinus is one of the dural venous sinuses, a cavity at the base of the brain that helps drain deoxygenated blood from the brain via the superior and inferior ophthalmic veins, the superficial middle cerebral veins, the sphenoparietal sinus, and the inferior cerebral veins. The cavernous sinus has connections to the pterygoid venous plexus via the inferior ophthalmic vein, deep facial vein, and emissary veins. Due to this connection, superficial facial infections from the nose, sinuses, ears, or teeth may spread to the cavernous sinus to cause this disorder.

Symptoms may include proptosis, unilateral periorbital edema, decrease or loss of vision, headaches, and possible cranial nerve paralysis, particularly of the delicate abducens nerve that runs through the cavernous sinus. There are two types of cavernous sinus thromboses: septic and aseptic. Treatment of septic disease includes initial broad-spectrum IV antibiotics covering staph and strep, the most commonly associated bacteria, then a prolonged course (3 to 4) weeks of targeted IV antibiotics. Surgical drainage may be necessary in cases of sphenoidal sinus infection.

Scalp veins may be used for venous catheterization as they offer easy access with little risk.