When a bright light is shone on one eye, its pupil constricts. This pupillary constriction is known as a direct light reflex. Simultaneously, the pupil of the other eye also constricts. This response in the contralateral eye is known as a consensual light reflex. The light reflex is mediated by retinal photoreceptors and subserved by four neurons.

- **First**(sensory afferents) connects each retina with both pretectal nuclei located in midbrain at the level of the superior colliculus. Impulses from the nasal half of retina decussate in the optic chiasm and pass via contralateral optic tract to reach the contralateral pretectal nucleus. Impulses from the temporal half of retina travel via the ipsilateral optic tract to reach the ipsilateral pretectal nucleus. It is estimated that the fibers decussate within the chiasm in a ratio of crossed to uncrossed fibers of 53:47.

- **Second**(internuncial) connects each pretectal nucleus to both Edinger-Westphal nuclei. Thus uniocular light stimulus evokes bilateral pupillary constriction. This consensual light reflex results in an almost similar amount of pupillary constriction since pupillomotor output to both the eyes is the same.

- **Third**(preganglionic motor) connects the Edinger-Westphal nucleus to the ciliary ganglion. These fibers pass through the inferior division of the oculomotor nerve.

- **Fourth**(postganglionic motor) innervate sphincter pupillae via short ciliary nerves.

The relative afferent pupillary defect is usually seen in lesions of the afferent arm of the light pathway. When the light is shifted from the normal eye to abnormal eye, the total pupillomotor input is reduced, hence the amount of pupillary constriction is less when compared to stimulation of the normal eye.

**RAPD in Lesions of the Optic Nerve**

Ischemic optic neuropathies, such as arteritic ischemic optic neuropathy (AION), Nonarteritic ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION) causes RAPD via optic nerve ischemia and infarction secondary to optic nerve edema. Other diseases causing such asymmetric or unilateral damage of optic nerve resulting in RAPD include glaucoma, optic neuritis, retrobulbar neuritis, and traumatic optic neuropathy.

**RAPD in Lesions of the Optic Tract**

The axons of the retinal ganglion cells from the nasal retina decussate in the optic chiasm joining the temporal fibers of the other side. In addition, there may be a partial crossing of temporal fibers in the chiasm.

**RAPD in Lesions of the Pretectum**

The asymmetry of pupillomotor input extends from the optic tract to the pretectal nucleus. Hence lesions of pretectum produce RAPD in the contralateral eye. The relative afferent pupillary defect in such situations is without the associated loss of visual acuity, color vision, or visual field. This is because just before fibers reach lateral geniculate body (light pathway), few fibers (pupillary reflex) go to the pretectum. Hence for the lesions at the brachium of the superior colliculus (just before the fibers reach the pretectal nucleus), vision is not affected.

**RAPD in Glaucoma and Visual Field Defects**

In conditions such as glaucoma, RAPD occurs secondary to damage to retinal ganglion cells and loss of retinal nerve fiber layer.

**RAPD in Retinal Disorders**

RAPD occurs secondary to the death of photoreceptors and viable retina.

**Induced RAPD**

**RAPD in Cataract**

Detection of RAPD in the case of cataracts is controversial. RAPD in cataracts usually indicates underlying damage to the afferent visual pathway (damage of the optic nerve or the retina, or visual pathway) and **not due to cataract in itself.**Since the time of Galen, RAPD was noted to indicate poor visual gain post-cataract surgery.

**RAPD in Eye Patching and Dark Adaptation**

A ptotic eyelid or eye patch increases retinal sensitivity due to dark adaptation and causes a false RAPD of up to 1.5 log units in the uncovered eye. The contralateral physiological afferent pupil must be allowed to resolve prior to commenting on the pupil. In most of the cases, this induced RAPD disappears within 30 minutes of examination in an illuminated room or removal of the eye patch.

**Miscellaneous**

**RAPD in Amblyopia**

According to classic teaching, in amblyopia, there is no structural abnormality of the retina or the optic nerve, and hence RAPD should not be found. However, a study on amblyopic eyes showed that 'easily visible' RAPD (>0.3 log units) was noted in 29 of 55 subjects (52.7%), and a total of 45 of 55 patients (81.8%) had RAPD. Most of the cases had RAPD of a maximum of 0.6 log units. Some cases had minimal RAPD of <0.3 log units, which was detected by a modification of the standard RAPD test. There is no definite proven hypothesis on the cause of RAPD in amblyopic eyes. Various presumed hypothesis includes impairment of the function of the central retina

**RAPD in Anisocoria**

In anisocoria, the retina in one eye is shaded by iris more than the other. This difference in retinal illumination can produce an RAPD in the eye with a smaller pupil. For every 1 mm difference in the size of pupils, a defect of 0.1 log units of RAPD is noted. Hence a difference of 3 mm between the pupils produces a clinically detectable RAPD. This artefactitious pupillary response can be alleviated by placing neutral density filters over the larger pupil at a rate of 1/10 of the log unit for every millimeter of anisocoria.