The pterygoid plexus has great clinical significance when dealing with infections. Due to its relation with the cavernous sinus, disseminated infection can drain into the cavernous sinus in the cranial cavity and cause a multitude of problems. Cavernous sinus thrombosis is a major complication that can be fatal if left untreated. This process occurs by embolization of bacteria, enabling the formation of thrombosis. The resulting thrombosis can potentially trap the bacteria in the sinus, creating further complications. Also, thrombosis blocks the normal drainage of the veins of the face causing periorbital edema, among other clinical signs. Compression of contents of the cavernous sinus can lead to neuropathy of cranial nerves III, IV, V1, V2, and VI. Major symptoms include cranial nerve VI palsy, diplopia, ophthalmoplegia, and paresthesias of the upper face covered by the ophthalmic and maxillary branches of the trigeminal nerve. Furthermore, cavernous venous thrombosis can potentially spread to the central nervous system. Since there are no valves in the cavernous system, the venous blood can spread to dural sinus and cerebral vein, potentially causing meningitis, brain abscess, or a stroke.

Lastly, if damage occurs to the pterygoid plexus, the maxillary artery, or any vessels nearby, a hematoma can present. This damage is usually self-limiting and best treated with ice, compression, and rest. All in all, the complex anatomy and relations of the pterygoid plexus requires thorough knowledge and understanding of the region as well as caution and careful maneuvering when operating within this region.