Aprepitant and fosaprepitant are generally very well tolerated with minimal side effects. They are well tolerated like other antiemetics(with low adverse event profile), such as single doses of ondansetron.

- A systematic review of 17 RCTs suggested that adverse drug reactions such as hiccups, fatigue, asthenia, and serious infections were reported in patients receiving aprepitant.

- Common side effects (defined as > 10 percent incidence) are headache, fatigue, anorexia, constipation, diarrhea, nausea, and hiccups.

- Less common side effects (defined as 1 to 10 percent incidence) include dizziness, insomnia, bradycardia, hypotension, pharyngolaryngeal pain, mucosal inflammation, stomatitis, dyspepsia, anemia, neutropenia, hot flash, pruritus, dehydration, and fever.

- Rare side effects (defined as less than one percent incidence) include candidiasis, staphylococcal infection, febrile neutropenia, weight gain, polydipsia, disorientation, euphoria, vivid dreams, cognitive disorder, lethargy, somnolence, conjunctivitis, cough, acid reflux, epigastric discomfort, malaise, and chills.

- Patients taking oral contraceptive medications should use a backup means of contraception or abstain from sexual activity to reduce the chances of an unplanned pregnancy. A pregnancy test is necessary if the patient misses a menstrual cycle.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

- Aprepitant is a dose-dependent inhibitor and inducer of the cytochrome P450 CYP3A4 family of enzymes. Aprepitant also induces CYP2C9. Any medication or substance metabolized by this pathway may be affected, resulting in clinically appreciable effects. Commonly cited interactions include benzodiazepines, warfarin, ketoconazole, and dexamethasone. A dose reduction in dexamethasone is recommended when coadministered with aprepitant or fosaprepitant.

- Oxycodone is also metabolized by CYP3A4 to its active metabolite oxymorphone and can lead to increased exposure of oxymorphone when administered with aprepitant. Hence it is important to monitor patients closely during concurrent therapy. There is also an impact of aprepitant on hormonal contraceptives due to CYP3A4 induction, which can lead to oral contraceptive failure. Patients should be advised to use an alternative method of contraception. Quetiapine is a CYP3A4 substrate; increased plasma levels of quetiapine are seen when coadministered with aprepitant.