Evaluation of non-cardiac chest pain in older patients, males, white race, and those presenting with dysphagia are candidates for esophageal function testing.

Dysphagia is reproducible on investigative studies such as esophageal manometry.

Twenty-four-hour manometry is the best modality to diagnose DES as a cause of noncardiac chest pain and should be combined with endoscopy and barium swallow to rule out any kind of inflammation and neoplasia in the esophagus.

Findings on manometry are:

1. Aperistalsis in greater than 30% of the wet swallows

2. 20% simultaneous contractions

3. The amplitude of the contractions in the distal three-fifths of the esophagus to be greater than 30%.

Although the diagnosis is usually made by means of esophageal manometry, tests like endoscopy and barium swallow are helpful in excluding inflammatory or neoplastic changes.

Diffuse esophageal spasm has a characteristic corkscrew or rosary beads appearance which reflects abnormal contractions that leads to compartmentalization and curling of the esophagus, thus giving the classic finding in barium studies.

The introduction of newer techniques like high-resolution manometry (HRM) and esophageal pressure topography (EPT) has significantly enhanced the ability to diagnose DES.

Studies using catheter-based high-frequency ultrasound imaging have shown an increase in the baseline muscle thickness in patients with diffuse esophageal spasm.

To make the diagnosis clear, diseases such as diabetes, which can also present with similar symptoms should also be ruled out using blood glucose and HbA1C levels.