The best therapeutic approach is adopting multimodal therapy for peritoneal cancer. A combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy is the mainstay of treatment. Chemotherapy includes systemic and peritoneal chemotherapy. The foundation for implementing this treatment strategy was laid by Dr. Sugarbaker. Multiple clinical trials and systematic reviews have been done over time, which emphasizes the survival benefits of multimodal therapy over the traditional palliative approach (60 months vs. 4 to 12 months).

EOPPC is managed the same way as the serous ovarian carcinomas. Hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and omentectomy is done in all cases. It is followed by chemotherapy and targeted therapy with poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors that block DNA repair. It includes olaparib, rucaparib, niraparib, or veliparib. Platinum-based chemotherapy is favorable and used for the neo-adjuvant treatment strategy. However, many platinum-resistant tumors have proven unresponsive, and multimodal therapy is advantageous in such cases. A phase III clinical trial has indicated the superiority of intraperitoneal chemotherapy over intravenous in terms of overall survival (60 months Vs. 50 months, p=0.03).

In MPM, cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal chemotherapy (IPC) are considered the first line. In intraperitoneal chemotherapy, heated (HIPEC), or early postoperative (EPIC), data collected favors the HIPEC.

In DSRCT, neo-adjuvant chemotherapy is the primary approach for management. Systemic chemotherapy comprising cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, vincristine, etoposide, doxorubicin, and mesna (P6 protocol) is done, followed by aggressive surgical excision. However, the studies on using HIPEC as an adjunct therapy are still going on. Consolidative whole abdominal radiotherapy in the pediatric population in particular, and in adults generally is essential to improve the outcome.

Primary Leiomyosarcomas of the peritoneal cavity is an aggressive tumor that is managed with extensive wide margin surgeries in resectable tumors and systemic chemotherapy for metastatic disease. Pre and postoperative radiotherapy are of paramount importance.

The CRS and HIPEC have yielded tremendous evidence-based significance in this challenging metastatic disease of the peritoneum. Bypassing the hepatic metabolism and first-pass effect, intraperitoneal chemotherapy provides improved therapeutic ratio for drugs and overall better clinical outcomes.

**Cytoreductive Surgery (CRS)**

It is the procedure of surgically removing all the tumors from the parietal and visceral peritoneal layers, and incorporates both en-bloc resections of affected organs or tissues and peritonectomy. No tumor nodule greater than 2.5 mm is left. Electrosurgery is employed for visceral implants where surgical excision remains difficult and to limit bleeding from the visceral peritoneum.  Hence, the goal is the eradication of the macroscopically visible disease. However, due to associated enhanced morbidity, patient selection for this procedure is deemed essential. The PCI (peritoneal carcinomatosis index), a measure to quantify the extent of peritoneal involvement, and the histological tumor grade are used. Good performance status of the patient is also required. The PCI score > 17 in colorectal associated PC and PCI> 12 in gastric cancer are contraindications for the surgery. The tumor involvement of crucial anatomic sites of the abdomen and multiple extra-abdominal metastatic lesions also precludes the CRS.

**Hypothermic Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy (HIPEC)**

It is the process of pumping powerful chemotherapy drugs at a temperature higher than average body temperature (usually 108F/41-43C) into the peritoneal cavity for 2 hours immediately following the surgery. Hyperthermia impairs DNA repair in cells, induces apoptosis, inhibits angiogenesis, and promotes denaturation of proteins. This cytotoxic effect causes cancer cells to die at 104F while the healthy cells survive the temperature till 111F. The surgery improves the absorption ability of drugs, while the loco-regional action of chemotherapy drugs results in homogenous drug distribution and causes minimal exposure to the rest of the body. The goal of this chemotherapy peritoneal dwelling is to remove the microscopic residual disease efficiently. The agents preferred in HIPEC are mitomycin C, Oxaliplatin, cisplatin, and doxorubicin.

Moreover, instead of CRS, the laparoscopic approach can also be utilized for the administration of HIPEC. Laparoscopic HIPEC was found effective in 95% of cases of refractory malignant ascites in a related systematic review of the literature.

**Early Postoperative Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy (EPIC)**

It is another regimen of intraperitoneal delivery of chemotherapy drugs. It is started on a postoperative day one and continued for 5-7 days. The solution containing chemotherapy drugs bathes the mesothelium for 4 to 24 hours, then is drained over 1 hour and, finally, re-administered.

**EPIC VS. HIPEC**

EPIC has the advantage over HIPEC that increased lingering and longer contact time between drugs, and the peritoneal surface is allowed, resulting in more uniform drug distribution and enhanced cytotoxic effects. The instilled solution of chemotherapy drugs covers only 30 to 40% of the peritoneal surface if allowed for a short period. Moreover, the adhesions following surgery are formed with any delay in chemotherapy induction, which renders the cancer cells entrapped in the fibrin deposits. However, the cells are still susceptible to the actions of chemotherapy drugs over five days allowed in EPIC. Further advantages are that closed abdominal technique in EPIC is easier, and drugs do not need to be heated. Therefore, the studies in mice indicated the superiority of EPIC over HIPEC in terms of overall survival.

**Pressurized Intraperitoneal Aerosol Chemotherapy (PIPAC)**

It is a novel approach to administering intraperitoneal drugs in a minimally invasive manner. It is used as a laparoscopic palliative approach in patients in whom CRS +HIPEC is not an indication, has a considerable tumor load, or large quantities of persistent ascites. The goal is to alleviate symptoms and improve quality of life (QoL). The procedure involves connecting a device called Capnopen with an injector and inserting it into the peritoneum through a trocar. There is a nebulizer technology that pressurizes the chemotherapy drugs into aerosols. The process takes 1 hour, and drugs like cisplatin and doxorubicin are used. The drugs are removed after 30 mins by a closed suction system. Through PIPAC, drug delivery is done in a repeated, safe way without adverse systemic effects. This pressurized delivery results in the requirement of smaller doses with resulting higher drug concentration, deeper penetration, and an effective uniform drug distribution.

The studies on the use of PIPAC in PC from intestinal, appendiceal, gastric, and ovarian cancers have emphasized its safety, better tolerability, and control on ascites production.