This article will go over the general steps of arthrocentesis. The specific techniques of arthrocentesis of various joints are not to be discussed here. For those specifics, see the articles titled "Elbow Arthrocentesis," "Knee Arthrocentesis," and "Shoulder Arthrocentesis Technique."

- Define the joint anatomy by palpating the surrounding bony landmarks. Ultrasound may be helpful in locating effusions.

- Select a puncture site and an approach to the joint based on the appropriate anatomy. Be sure to avoid tendons, major blood vessels, and major nerves.

- Apply the antiseptic solution to the area of needle insertion and surrounding skin. Allow the skin to dry and then put down the sterile drape surrounding the area of needle insertion.

- Using a 25 gauge to 27 gauge needle, first create a wheal of local anesthetic at the point of insertion. After the skin is anesthetized, infiltrate the skin down to the area of the joint capsule. For extremely painful joints, a regional nerve block can be used.

- Attach a larger needle of appropriate length to an appropriately sized syringe. Insert the needle into the joint space along the anesthetized track.

- For draining larger effusions, a three-way stopcock can be placed between the needle and the syringe.

- To change the syringe during the procedure, grasp the hub of the needle with a sterile hemostat and hold it tightly while removing the syringe.

- An attempt should be made to remove as much fluid or blood as possible. If fluid stops flowing, the joint is either drained completely, the needle tip is dislodged, or debris is obstructing the needle. Slightly advance or retract the tip, rotate the bevel, or aspirate less forcefully.

- Place fluid into appropriate tubes and send the synovial fluid for studies as indicated by the clinical scenario.

- Place a dressing or bandage over the puncture site, and apply pressure to achieve hemostasis.