The development of biosafety guidelines is part of the overall quality management systems implementation. For newly established facilities, ensure biosafety before the start of operations. Workflow inside the laboratory must facilitate an efficient means for carrying out processes by the laboratorian. Activities involving dirty areas (e.g., a specimen receipt, sample preparation, etc.) should be kept separate from the clean areas (e.g., microscopy, automated instrumentation, recording of results, etc.). Procedures for laboratory workflow can be tested through observation and evaluation by a designated biosafety officer, laboratory supervisor, or an independent consultant who can conduct monitoring activities and provide technical assistance.

For labs using BSC, a smoke pattern test using in-house or commercial testers may be regularly performed to assess for good airflow before use. Anemometers may be used to check for air velocity. BSC certification provided by a service professional must be secured before use and continually re-certified once a year.

Before performing any laboratory test, the provision of required training on biosafety to the laboratory workforce is vital, either as a focused training program or as part of the training curriculum for certain laboratory procedures. Laboratory managers, section heads, and supervisors should also receive biosafety training, including topics covering bio-risk management and biosafety program implementation. Effective supportive supervision of laboratory staff working in any facility is a key factor for the sustained implementation of quality laboratory services.