The breast self-examination begins with tactile assessment as the patient searches for irregularities through palpation. A methodical, systematic approach is necessary to ensure a consistent and reproducible evaluation. To examine the right breast, the patient should orient herself by rolling on her left side and placing her right hand, palm up, on her forehead. This maneuver optimizes positioning by allowing the breast to lie flat against the thoracic wall. The middle fingertip pad should be used to perform small circles with light, medium, and deep pressure investigating varying depths of breast tissue. To complete the examination of the breast's outer half, up and down motions of palpation are performed medially from the axilla to the nipple and vertically from the clavicle to just below the bra line. As the fingers traverse the breasts, they must remain in contact with the skin to avoid missing any tissue plane. Assessment of the inner half of the breasts requires changing to a supine position, removing the hand from the forehead, and placing the inactive arm at a right angle on the examination surface. The same palpation technique is utilized for the inner breast, including the area of the nipple and sternum. The same patient positioning and maneuvers are implemented to examine the left breast but on the opposite side.

A visual survey of the breast tissue requires an inspection from three angles, with arms at the side, arms raised above the head while bending forward, and hunched over with the hands placed on the hips. Each of these positions should be observed in a mirror from a direct view, right profile, and left profile. While typically one breast may be larger than the other, new disparities in size should be noted. The skin should be appraised for any rashes, erythema, puckering, dimpling, or textural anomalies resembling an orange peel (peau d’orange). The nipples must be monitored for scaling, erythema, pruritis, edema, discharge, or new inversion. Asymmetric venous distribution or dilation should also prompt further consideration.

The Maurer Foundation for breast health education provides step-by-step breast self-examination instructions featuring patient-oriented language and graphical representation of each maneuver. Advocates for Breast Self-Examination emphasize the relationship of quality patient education to the screening tool's success and that trained medical professionals are ideal instructors for the procedure.