Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS) is a rare but severe form of childhood epilepsy characterized by a triad of multiple seizure types, characteristic EEG findings, and intellectual impairment. It is one of the epileptic encephalopathies. The frequent seizures, resultant intellectual impairment, and complex treatment regimen for a patient (child or adult) with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS) require substantial effort by the parents and family. The majority of the time, LGS patients will require 24/7 support in some form. A coordinated interprofessional team approach is needed to improve patient outcomes and quality of life. A team of clinicians including pediatricians, neurologists, psychiatrists, neuropsychologists, and often surgeons is needed to provide a comprehensive treatment plan while minimizing the adverse outcomes.

A team of nurses consisting of pediatric specialty nurses and psychiatric specialty trained nurses is needed to assist the team to augment this treatment plan. The nurses are able to provide parents and patients with the necessary education in regards to the expected course and complications to allow early and prompt treatment of adverse events. The nurses can help individualize patient care by communicating these findings with the clinical providers.

Given the side-effect profile and multitude of medications used to treat LGS the role of the pharmacists becomes vital in the care of LGS. The pharmacist can help directly in treatment planning by providing adequate treatment options and doses of each medication when used in combination with others. The pharmacist is essential in communicating with the providers potential adverse effects of the chosen regimen, as well as inter-drug interactions that may lower the efficacy of antiepileptic agents.

Most patients and families will benefit from assessment and help from social and rehabilitation services (physical, occupational, and speech therapy) to enhance the quality of life for both the patients and their caregivers.

A collaborative interprofessional team approach is needed to ensure that patients with LGS receive early intervention whether it be regarding diagnosis, treatment, education, or support services, to improve patient care and outcomes.