**Laparoscopic**

This is the most common technique for interval tubal ligations. It allows for inspection of the abdomen and pelvis, is effective immediately, and allows a relatively rapid return to activity.

- **Electrocoagulation:**Bipolar device is used to occlude the tube, at least 3 cm of the isthmic portion. Monopolar electrocoagulation is seldom a choice due to association with thermal bowel injury.

- **Mechanical Devices:**In the United States, the most commonly used devices are the silicone rubber band, the spring-loaded clip, and the titanium clip lined with silicone rubber. These are deployed using special applicators, and they are most effective if the Fallopian tubes are normal. Misapplication and failure can occur if the tubes are thickened, dilated, or form adhesions.

- **Tubal Excision:**The surgeon can remove part or all of the Fallopian tubes. This technique is especially useful if the tubes are abnormal, it has high contraceptive efficacy, and it may decrease the risk of ovarian cancer.

**Hysteroscopic**

In the United States, there are currently no hysteroscopic sterilization devices on the market. Hysteroscopic sterilization cannot be done postpartum or postabortion. It offers a relatively non-invasive method for tubal occlusion that could be beneficial to patients who are weak surgical candidates, and it has the benefit of being able to be performed in the office setting. The hysteroscopic technique involves introducing medicine into the Fallopian tubes via the tubal ostia, which subsequently block or scar the tubes. Some past hysteroscopic techniques required follow-up imaging to ensure occlusion. Either sedation or general anesthesia are options if this procedure occurs in the operating room. In the office setting, a paracervical block or light sedation are options if safely available.

**Laparotomy/Minilaparotomy**

This technique is generally used for postpartum procedures, though it may merit consideration for patients for whom laparoscopy carries such a high risk that laparotomy is safer.

- **Pomeroy:**Mid-isthmic portion of the Fallopian tube is elevated and then folded at the midpoint. One or two rapidly absorbable sutures are tied around the double thickness of the tube, and the folded portion excised sharply.

- **Parkland:**An opening is made in an avascular section of the mesosalpinx. Two absorbable suture ties are passed through the opening and used to ligate the proximal and distal ends of the Fallopian tube. The segment (at least 2 cm) between the ties gets excised.

- **Uchida:**The midportion of the Fallopian tube is ligated and excised. Then the utero-tubal serosa is hydrodissected, and the proximal tubal stump gets pulled into the mesosalpinx. The peritoneum is closed over the proximal cut end of the tube.

- **Irving:**The midportion of the Fallopian tube is ligated and excised. Then the proximal tubal stump is inserted into an incision made into the myometrium and securely sutured to bury the proximal stump in the myometrium.

- **Distal Fimbriectomy:**The fimbriated end of the Fallopian tube is ligated and excised.

- **Complete Salpingectomy:**The entire Fallopian tube to the (except the interstitial portion) is excised; this can be done with suture ligation, laparoscopic bipolar devices, etc.

Tubal segments require a pathology consultation to confirm transection. A common structure ligated accidentally is the round ligament. Identification of the fimbriated end of the Fallopian tube before excision can help confirm the correct structure. Unless performing a complete salpingectomy, care is necessary to excise a sufficient section of the Fallopian tube. All cut edges require inspection for hemostasis.