Naltrexone's primary use is to manage alcohol and opioid use disorder. An interprofessional team approach that includes clinicians, pharmacists, and mental health professionals working with patients on naltrexone therapy may improve patient outcomes.[Level 5] The interprofessional team must communicate openly regarding dosing and compliance, be vigilant for signs of opioid withdrawal and adverse events (especially depression and suicidality), and share any notable changes with all team members.

In addition, the following resources and tools can help healthcare members to manage patients better:

- Clinical opiate withdrawal scale (COWS) helps to rate common signs/symptoms of opiate withdrawal and monitor symptoms over time.

- The naltrexone readiness form is used to verify the patient's medical history, drug use history, lab information, physical exam findings, and other pertinent information to check patient readiness.

- The naltrexone education form ensures the patient understands how naltrexone works, the length of treatment, and the adverse effects.

- Initial and follow-up medication management forms help patients track and maintain abstinence.

Healthcare professionals with experience in psychiatry and substance use disorders should prescribe naltrexone. The nurses working in outpatient psychiatry must know how this drug should be used and what precautions are necessary to optimize the chances of successful outcomes. Most patients with alcohol and opiate use disorder managed with naltrexone need close monitoring but may be monitored as outpatients. Data suggest that naltrexone can help reduce alcohol intake, but its benefits do not occur in everyone.

Pharmacists can verify dosing, offer education on interactions and adverse effects, and help monitor the patient as treatment progresses. The patient must always carry a medication safety card to inform the caregiver of the relevant medical management considerations. All team members must use open communication to inform other team members of any concerns or possible changes in patient status. Regarding opioid use disorder, naltrexone has been shown to lower the frequency of negative drug tests. Still, relapse rates are high if the patient receives no adjunct behavior therapy; therefore, interprofessional coordination and collaboration among mental health professionals, such as counselors, psychologists, or social workers, as well as physicians, advanced practice practitioners, specialists, pharmacists, nurses, and public health professionals are crucial to optimal patient outcomes.