**Non-surgical Option**

1. Spectacles: Single vision lenses are a relatively cheaper option. Patients can comfortably read near; however, one needs separate distant glasses if one has a refractive error for distance also. Bifocal lenses are of great help, especially if the person has both refractive errors for distance and presbyopia. However, bifocals are more expensive than single vision lenses.

The bifocal lenses can be classified based on their make as:

- Fused bifocal: A depression curve in the crown glass is fitted with a flint button.

- Solid bifocal: made from a single material

- Cemented bifocal: a segment is glued onto a single vision lens.

- Split bifocal: two separate lenses are held together with a frame.

Based on the design, it can be classified as:

- D-seg or straight top bifocal lens

- Round segmented bifocal lens

- Executive bifocal lens

- Kryptok lens- here, the segment for near vision correction is round.

The advantage of the Kryptok lens is that the transition is not visible from outside in contrast to D-seg, where the segmentation is very well demarcated. So. it is cosmetically better; however, image jump can occur with all these designs.

Progressive lenses have a gradient of power for near add in the central zone. The peripheral part of the lens may cause distortion.

2. Contact lenses: Contact lenses can help deal with presbyopia in 2 ways. Monofocal contact lenses can correct one eye for distance and the other for near. Always, the dominant eye is corrected for distance. This concept is called 'monovision.' The advantage with monovision is that the clarity of vision is good over a range of distance; however, the contrast sensitivity and stereopsis are reduced.

**Surgical Options**

1. Corneal procedures: Monovision with laser refractive correction is well known.

Conductive keratoplasty is another procedure where corneal collagen shrinkage at the mid-peripheral cornea results in increased refractive power of the cornea and thus correcting for presbyopia.

Intracorneal inlays made of polyvinylidene fluoride are available for the correction of presbyopia. The inlay is placed intrastromal after lifting a corneal flap. The central aperture measures around 1.6mm. This pin-hole effect results in increased depth of focus and hence used for presbyopia correction.

2. Scleral procedures: There are various scleral expansion procedures with PMMA annulus into the sclera overlying the ciliary muscles, which promise to correct the presbyopia. The scleral implants are proposed to act by causing scleral expansion over the ciliary muscles, thus restoring the ciliary muscle contraction and accommodation. Radial scleral cuts (posterior) over sclera are also said to serve the purpose, by the same mechanism. However, the data is not sufficient and convincing.

3. Monovision with intraocular implant: These options are beneficial when the patient has presbyopia and a higher degree of ametropia.

4. Phakic intraocular lenses include anterior chamber lenses (angle supported and iris-claw) and posterior chamber lenses. These days anterior chamber angle supported multifocal lenses are available, which not only corrects for near but also corrects ametropia for distance.

5. Clear lens extraction followed by IOL implantation for correction of presbyopia and ametropia has popularized. Planned myopic astigmatism after cataract surgery gives some pseudo-accommodation.

Asymmetric IOL designs are available that claim to have the same contrast sensitivity as mono-focal lenses.