Auerbach plexus is one of two significant components of the enteric nervous system. It is a collection of interconnected neurons that spans from the esophagus to the rectum. Structurally, axons start over 100 nm away from the smooth muscle cells they innervate. In contrast to other areas of the peripheral nervous system, they lack a clearly defined postsynaptic area and do not form neuromuscular junctions. Excitatory and inhibitory motor neurons allow smooth muscle cells of the intestines to exist in an electrical syncytium. Control of these signals is initiated by various neurotransmitters that can produce either relaxation or contraction of these smooth muscles. Specific patterns of movement that are the result of this process create the peristalsis that transports food along the gastrointestinal tract.

There are numerous neurotransmitters involved in this process. The most important ones responsible for intestinal relaxation are vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), nitric oxide, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide, and purine. Alternatively, stimulation of intestinal contraction is mostly due to tachykinins and acetylcholine. As mentioned above, specific patterns of contraction and relaxation are what create the peristaltic reflex, and the myenteric plexus mediates this process. Acting with the interstitial cells of Cajal through the gastrointestinal system, alternating between distal relaxation and proximal contraction, the system facilitations movement of waste through and out of the body.