Existing research points towards an underlying genetic basis. Four genes are associated with up to 70 percent cases of Familial ALS, namely the C9ORF72, TARDBP, SOD1, and FUS. Over 25 genes and loci have been identified in relation to the predisposition of the disease, amongst which the C9ORF72 (Chromosome 9 open reading frame), has been associated with 40 percent cases of familial and 10 percent cases of sporadic MND. This mutation, which leads to a hexanucleotide repeat expansion, has also been found in cases presenting which Fronto-temporal dementia which has lead to a hypothesis that these neurological disorders exist as part of a dynamic spectrum of neurological syndromes.

While this particular locus has less than 30 repeats in healthy individuals, patients with C9 related ALS, have a c9orf72 expansion mutation that has hundreds to thousands of repeats.

TARDBP gene encodes the TAR DNA-binding protein 43, SOD-1 gene encodes for superoxide dismutase. In contrast, the FUS gene codes for the similarly named (Fused in sarcoma) RNA binding protein.

A study of population-based registries of ALS has led a degree of credibility to the hypothesis that ALS follows a complex genetic inheritance, where a variety of environmental factors interact with genetic mutations (present in “at-risk” variants), through a multistep process that decides the pattern of the disease manifestation. The occurrence of rare variants makes extensive genome-wide studies less suited for the study of this disease.

Dysregulation of micro RNA and variations in ion channels that predispose to cellular excitotoxicity has also been postulated as the etiology underlying motor neuron disease.

Familial forms of ALS are also characterized by penetrance of less than 50 percent and genetic pleiotropy (where a single gene can lead to the manifestation of multiple phenotypical traits). In contrast, sporadic forms have been associated with oligogenic (determination of a phenotypic trait by more than one gene) and polygenic inheritance.

Among environmental and lifestyle factors that have been associated with the development of ALS, cyanotoxins, and related compounds deserve mention. The association between the ALS and pre-morbid physical prowess is also an area where some research has been done. An increased incidence in athletes, who have been exposed to repetitive head trauma was proposed, and discarded subsequently, due to the absence of evidence.