Laboratory workup will include complete blood count, blood glucose, liver function, renal function, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, vitamin B12 levels, and thyroid-stimulating hormone.

Needle EMG is the most sensitive study. The motor response amplitude decrement begins around days 2–3 and is complete by day 6.

In a complete neurapraxia lesion, no motor unit action potentials (MUAPs) are elicited under voluntary control. EMG can differentiate if the cause of weakness is neuropathic or myopathic. In neurapraxic lesions, the muscle does not reveal any abnormal spontaneous activity (fibrillation and positive sharp waves). On follow-up, the presence of MUAPs indicates that reinnervation is taking place.

In neurapraxia, CMAP and sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) can be elicited distal to the injury. Proximal to the injury, stimulation shows a partial or complete conduction block with varying degrees of decreased CMAP and SNAP associated with reduced conduction velocity. Remyelination improves the changes partially or entirely. Electrodiagnostic studies done two weeks after the injury will show CMAP and SNAP with distal stimulation and will differentiate from a neurotmesis or axonotmesis injury.

Ultrasound can help to identify the continuity of the nerve and exclude neurotmesis injuries.

A computed tomographic scan of the affected area can be helpful to show unreduced fractures causing compression or misplaced hardware.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine and pelvis should be done immediately in traumatic and post-operative cases presenting deficits to rule out a compressive source of neuropathy. Diffusion tensor tractography with three-dimensional maps of fiber tracts showing the nerve fiber bundles within the tissue can be obtained using diffusion-weighted imaging and diffusion tensor imaging.