Before starting corticosteroid treatment, a history and physical exam are necessary to evaluate any risk factors or preexisting conditions that could be worsened by corticosteroid treatment. This workup includes diabetes, hypertension, congestive heart failure, hyperlipidemia, psychiatric disorders, and osteoporosis. Clinicians should use the lowest effective dose for the shortest duration of time to minimize the risk of adverse effects and consider once-daily dosing, morning dosing, and alternate-day dosing.

Checking baseline levels should be considered for the patient’s height and weight, blood pressure, bone mass density, ophthalmologic exam, blood glucose, and lipid panel. Children and adolescents merit special consideration because of the risk of growth suppression.

Clinicians should consider bone mineral density (BMD) testing at baseline and after one year of corticosteroid therapy along with height measurement and screening for any fragility fractures. Subsequent assessments can then be pushed out to every 2 to 3 years if stable at one year.

The healthcare team should be aware of the possibility of adrenal suppression in all patients on corticosteroids, particularly those on supraphysiologic doses, for more than two weeks.

Corticosteroid users on concurrent NSAID therapy or others at higher risk of ulcers or gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, including those with a history of ulcers or GI bleeding and those with severe comorbidities (e.g., advanced cancer), should receive proton pump inhibitor therapy. To help reduce the risk of striae, patients should follow a low-calorie diet. Additionally, some success has been noted with topical vitamin A cream, pulsed dye lasers, and a non-ablative radiofrequency device.

Corticosteroids have varying degrees of mineralocorticoid activity. The corticosteroids with higher levels of mineralocorticoid activity may lead to free water and salt retention in addition to potassium excretion. Thus, fluid and electrolyte levels should be monitored in patients on corticosteroids with higher mineralocorticoid activity.

Significant interactions between corticosteroids and other drugs also exist, so concurrent use of other medications should undergo an evaluation as changes in their management may be warranted. The effect of anticoagulants, such as warfarin, may increase, which would require closer monitoring and potential dosage change. This effect would likely be at 3 to 7 days after starting the corticosteroid.