Symptoms of infection with viruses in the Coxsackie B grouping include headache, fever, sore throat, gastrointestinal distress, extreme fatigue, chest pain, and myalgia. The severity of infection varies depending on the host's age, and immune status as well as the presenting disease syndrome and organ system attacked. The incubation period also varies within syndromes, and maximum transmission occurs within the first two weeks of infection.

- Exanthema presents as maculopapular eruptions surrounded by an erythematous halo. They appear on the face and neck and then spread to the trunk and extremities within twenty-four hours. The lesions spare the palms and soles. They can be associated with petechiae and cervical adenopathy.

- Aseptic meningitis presents as fever and irritability in infants and as fever, headache, stiff neck, nausea, and vomiting in children or adults.

- Encephalitis presents with confusion and or seizures. Severity can range from mild to fatal disease.

- Coxsackieviruses are known to be associated with epidemic pleurodynia or Bornholm disease. Pleurodynia is characterized by chest pain that worsens with breathing, and can often be confused with myocardial infarction. The pain can last from two days to two weeks. Many patients have associated fever, abdominal pain, and tender muscles of the trunk and extremities.

- Myopericarditis causes inflammation of the subepicardial myocardium and pericardium. Patients present with shortness of breath, chest pain, and an irregular heartbeat. The illness can last for a few hours up to a few months. Severity varies from asymptomatic to fulminant heart failure due to dilated cardiomyopathy and sometimes cardiac arrest.

- Pancreatitis presents with abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and elevated pancreatic enzymes amylase and lipase. Severe pancreatitis due to Coxsackie group B can lead to pancreatic beta-cell destruction and the development of type one diabetes mellitus.