**Image Acquisition**

The depth should be set so that the vertebrae can be visualized posterior to the aorta.

In the short axis, record a sweep of the entire length of the abdominal aorta spanning from the diaphragm to the bifurcation of the common iliac vessels. The widest portion of the aorta should be identified and measured from the anterior leading edge to the posterior leading edge of the vessel.

In the long axis, record a sweep of the entire length of the abdominal aorta spanning from the diaphragm to the bifurcation of the common iliac vessels. The widest portion of the aorta should be identified in the long axis. It should then be measured from the anterior leading edge to the posterior leading edge of the vessel.

Whenever an aneurysm is identified, its geographic relationship to the renal arteries (e.g., infrarenal or suprarenal) should be documented along with the distance from the renal arteries and the aneurysm’s diameter.

The right and left common iliac arteries should be visualized. Their greatest anterior-posterior diameter should be measured in the short and long axis from leading edge to leading edge.

Any pathological finding that the sonographer discovers, such as thrombi, flaps, should be recorded. If an endograft is present, its proximal and distal attachment points should be noted. The sonographer should also apply color and spectral doppler within the lumen of the graft and the aneurysmal sac.

**Additional Images of the Mesenteric Arteries, If Clinically Indicated**

The sonographer can attempt to obtain spectral doppler tracings of the mesenteric arteries. A doppler angle less than or equal to 60 degrees should be utilized to maximize the accuracy of the Doppler velocities.

**Additional Images of the Inferior Vena Cava (IVC), If Clinically Indicated**

The sonographer should identify the inferior vena cava in its short and long axes. In the long axis, the anteroposterior diameter should be measured 2 to 3 cm caudal from the vessel’s confluence at the right atrium. The diameter should be measured during both inspiration and expiration.

**Image Optimization and Accuracy**

Bowel gas can often preclude the sonographer from obtaining adequate images. The sonographer can apply steady pressure to the abdomen to attempt to displace bowel gas.

The sonographer should visualize and measure the aorta in both short and long axes to ensure that aneurysms are not missed and ensure accurate measurements. Measuring in the long axis can lead to the cylinder tangent effect, which refers to the possibility of underestimating the diameter of a cylindrical structure when accidentally measuring lateral to the vessel’s midline.

In settings where it is not possible to store video clips of sonographic images, still, images of the abdominal aorta should be obtained in two planes at the following levels: the celiac trunk, the superior mesenteric artery, and proximal to the iliac bifurcation.