A basic understanding of the anatomy of the ureters is essential to discuss the pathophysiology of ureteral injury further. The ureters are peristaltic tubular structures that are located in the retroperitoneum and transport urine from the kidneys to the bladder. They are divided into three segments. The proximal ureter is the segment that extends from the ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) to the area where the ureter crosses the sacroiliac joint. The middle ureter courses along the bony pelvis and iliac vessels. The pelvic or distal ureter extends from the iliac vessels to the bladder.

The ureter is close to numerous abdominal and pelvic structures, which puts it at risk during surgical procedures. The left UPJ is just posterior to the pancreas and duodenal-jejunal junction. The right UPJ is posterior to the duodenum and lateral to the inferior vena cava. As they course downward, the ureters lie on the psoas muscle and pass medially to the sacroiliac joints. They swing laterally near the ischial spines before passing medially to penetrate the base of the bladder. The left ureter is crossed anteriorly by the inferior mesenteric artery and sigmoid vessels. The right ureter is crossed by the right colic and ileocolic vessels. When the ureters descend into the pelvis, they course anterior to the iliac vessels and posterior to the gonadal vessels. In females, the ureter courses posterior to the ovary, lateral to the infundibulopelvic ligament, and medial to the anterior vessels. It passes posterior to the broad ligament and lateral to the uterus. The uterine arteries pass just anterior to the ureter at the ureterovesical junction. In males, the ureter is crossed anteriorly by the medial umbilical ligament and passes under the vas deferens before entering the bladder.

The mechanism by which bullets or other penetrating trauma injures the ureter is thought to not be by direct transection but most likely by disruption of the delicate intramural blood supply to the ureter. Patients with blunt trauma with a ureteral injury are subject to the extreme force applied over the entire body or larger surface area.