A simple nephrology office consultation may be insufficient in equipping patients with knowledge about CKD. Additional care provided by a pre-dialysis interprofessional team produces better biochemical results, more planned dialysis initiations with less hospitalization, with the possibility of improved survival rates. Unfortunately, 36% of new ESRD patients in the United States in 2015 had not received any nephrology care before starting. This led to a more extended initial hospital stay, complications, and death.

The timely creation of dialysis access; and, where feasible, preparation for renal transplantation pre-emptively (before initiating dialysis) provides the best potential rehabilitation since dialysis replaces only some of the kidney's filtration functions and not the endocrine and anti-inflammatory effects. In addition, consistent pre-dialysis care has been associated with better outcomes and lower healthcare expenditure. Therefore, the best approach is to transfer patients to a multidisciplinary team to identify a declining GFR at least 12 months before dialysis. The start date is determined by extrapolating a trend line of the eGFR until it reaches 10 ml/min/1.73 m^2.

All patients are referred for multidisciplinary and interprofessional care when the eGFR reaches 15 ml/min/1.73 m^2, as concurrent illnesses may cause a sudden drop in renal function, thus creating the need for emergent dialysis. Group education session allows fellow patients to educate new patients. Support groups provide much-needed reassurance to the patients and their families, helping them cope with the demands of ESRD. The team ideally includes a nurse educator, physical therapist, occupational therapist, dietician, social worker, pharmacist, and sometimes a trained peer-support volunteer. Each of these team members must contribute from their expertise but also include input and communication from other team members in helping to guide patient therapy. Having an interprofessional liaison for dialysis access has proven very effective in extending the patency of the fistula and reducing morbidity and mortality.

Pharmacists must help manage the patient's medication regimen, considering which drugs are dialyzable and which are not, and help guide the dosing of these drugs. They will work with both the nurse and prescriber to achieve safe medication therapy in the setting of dialysis.

A controlled trial in California highlighted the value of social worker inputs to the pre-dialysis program in improving gainful employment. These patients had a better quality of life, a more positive attitude to work, and greater self-esteem. National organizations like the National Kidney Foundation provide web-based patient information besides printed and audiovisual material. A cardiology referral for echocardiography is mandatory in all dialysis patients, 1 to 3 months after dialysis initiation, on an inter-dialytic day, and at 3-year intervals after that. Accurate LV systolic function assessment is a determinant of CVD and mortality.