The nephritic syndrome is a common presentation of most proliferative glomerulonephritides (GN). The nephritic syndrome can be due to acute proliferative glomerulonephritis (postinfectious and infection associated), crescentic glomerulonephritis, and proliferative lupus glomerulonephritis.

- In children, the most common cause of acute glomerulonephritis is post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis.Streptococci. These are identified by typing of the M protein of the bacterial cell walls.

- A similar form of glomerulonephritis (infection associated) may occur in association with certain infections, e.g., bacterial infections (meningococcemia, staphylococcal endocarditis, and pneumococcal pneumonia, etc.), viral infections (mainly hepatitis B, hepatitis C, mumps, HIV infection, varicella, and EBV causing infectious mononucleosis), and parasitic infections (malaria and toxoplasmosis).

- Crescentic or rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN) is characterized by the nephritic syndrome presenting with the clinical picture of sudden and severe acute renal failure. However, RPGN does not have a specific etiology. It may occur due to:

- Anti-GBM antibody-mediated disease (e.g., Goodpasture syndrome)
- Diseases caused by immune complex deposition, with granular deposits of antibodies and complement by immunofluorescence: This results from the complication of any of the immune complex nephritides and includes postinfectious glomerulonephritis, lupus nephritis, IgA nephropathy, and Henoch-Schönlein purpura.
- Pauci-immune crescentic GN may be associated with systemic or renal vasculitis.
- In systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), patients with focal or generalized proliferative glomerular inflammation can present with nephritic syndrome.