The elbow is among the most common large joints to dislocate. Dislocations may be isolated, involve damage to static supportive structures of the elbow, and may even cause fractures about the elbow. Because of this, it is important to recognize elbow dislocations and know the appropriate management to avoid any complications.

Simply put, the elbow is the articulation between the distal humerus with the proximal ulna and radius.

The anatomy of the ulna allows two articulations and serves as an area of attachment for many structures. The greater sigmoid notch of the ulna creates the ulnotrochlear joint, and the lesser sigmoid notch creates the proximal radioulnar joint. The proximal anterior surface of the ulna also contains the coronoid process. The anteromedial facet (called the sublime tubercle) creates the insertion point for the medial collateral ligament, specifically, the anterior bundle.

The elbow is generally stable due to the congruity articular surfaces. It is further supported by static supporting structures, including the collateral ligaments on the medial and lateral side of the elbow and the joint capsule.  Dynamic stabilizers of the joints are composed of the surrounding musculature.

The vascular anatomy of the elbow is composed of a few structures. The brachial artery is a central component of the anterior elbow and eventually divides into the radial and ulnar artery in the proximal forearm. The radial and ulnar artery, along with the brachial and the deep brachial artery, comprise an intricate anastomosis of vessels around the elbow, including the radial and ulnar collateral arteries and the radial and ulnar recurrent arteries.

There are many nerves that exist around the elbow, and whose function can be compromised by an elbow dislocation. The radial nerve runs in the posterior compartment of the arm in the radial groove of the humerus and wraps laterally to its position near the elbow, where it is anterior to the lateral epicondyle.