**Strain-Counterstrain (SCS) Technique for Anterior Cervical C1-C8 (AC1-8) TPs**

- With the provider at the head of the table, have the patient lay supine on the treatment table.

- The provider locates the TP.

- The provider establishes a pain scale with the patient at 10 out of 10.

- The provider gently and passively wraps the patient around the TP, taking them to a position-of-comfort by flexing, side-bending, and rotating the head away (FSARA) from the TP until the TP pain has reduced to at least a 3 out of 10 (70% tenderness reduction) or better (with the goal of 100% tenderness reduction).

- The provider reduces his/her palpating pressure at the TP and continues to monitor, maintaining the patient's position for 90 seconds (do not remove contact with the TP until the technique is complete).

- After 90 seconds has elapsed, the patient's head should be slowly and passively returned to a neutral position.

- Re-test for tenderness at the TP.

**Strain-Counterstrain (SCS) Technique for Posterior Cervical C1-C8 (PC1-8) TPs**

- With the provider at the head of the table, have the patient lay supine on the treatment table.

- The provider locates the TP.

- The provider establishes a pain scale with the patient at 10 out of 10.

- The provider gently and passively wraps the patient around the TP, taking them to a position-of-comfort by extending, side-bending, and rotating the head away (ESARA) from the TP until the TP pain has reduced to at least a 3 out of 10 (70% tenderness reduction) or better (with the goal of 100% tenderness reduction).

- The provider reduces his/her palpating pressure at the TP and continues to monitor, maintaining the patient's position for 90 seconds (do not remove contact with the TP until the technique is complete).

- After 90 seconds has elapsed, the patient's head should be slowly and passively returned to a neutral position.

- Re-test for tenderness at the TP.

*The exceptions to treating PC1-C8 TPs with "ESARA" are for PC1 midline and PC3 midline TPs, which are treated with cervical flexion only (no side-bending or rotation).