Evidence-based indications for the use of FDG-PET/CT for gastrointestinal tumors in the United Kingdom, as published by the UK Royal College of Radiologists in 2016, include the following:

For esophageal and gastroesophageal cancers, PET/CT is indicated for staging/ restaging if radical treatment is suitable, including for patients who have received neoadjuvant treatment. PET/CT is also indicated for evaluating suspected recurrence when other imaging is negative or equivocal. Further proposed indications include PET/CT in response assessment and radiotherapy planning.

For colorectal cancers, imaging with PET/CT is indicated for the staging of patients with synchronous metastases at presentation, for example, pulmonary and liver lesions. Further indications include restaging patients with recurrence, assessing treatment response, detecting recurrence with rising tumor markers, and/or clinical suspicion of recurrence with normal or equivocal findings on other imaging. Post-treatment, the evaluation of indeterminate presacral masses can also be done with PET/CT.

PET/CT is performed in anal cancer to stage selected patients for radical treatment. Further proposed indications include radiotherapy planning and response assessment.

For neuroendocrine tumors, FDG-PET/CT is indicated for the staging/restaging selected poorly differentiated tumors with normal or negative MIBG and octreotide scans. 68Ga-DOTA-NOC PET/CT  is indicated in the staging of well-differentiated NETs (grade 1 and 2), detecting unknown primary, and evaluating recurrence.