**Skills**

Teaching aids improve skill-based outcomes, patient safety, and overall team performance among physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other health professionals. Studies have shown that teaching aids can improve the rate of skill acquisition. Additionally, it appears that mentoring, coaching, and feedback, in addition to training aids, are the most efficacious.

**Strategy**

A cost-benefit-based approach to HVLA training amongst physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other health professionals appears to be best. There is a significant gap in the cost-to-benefit ratio, such that teaching aids might be most effective within a defined curriculum structure. Studies seem to suggest that early implementation leads to longer-lasting consistency. At the same time, downstream implementation enhances more technical aspects of manipulation. Timing is an important consideration when designing curricula for training programs. Using lower ratios of contact hours and teaching aids to augment practice may result in better performance gains when introduced later than if added early in the curriculum. Teaching aids and a hands-on approach may result in better performance gains when introduced later in the curriculum than earlier for programs with lower contact hours.

**Ethics**

To enhance the ethical aspects of HVLA in patient-centered care, clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other health professionals should consider the legality of HVLA techniques. One study summarized the various legal challenges. A survey of California disciplinary data showed a case rate of 4.5 per 1000 chiropractors a year compared to 2.27 per year for physicians, with fraud incidents nine times higher among chiropractors (1.99 per 1000) than among physicians.

**Responsibilities**

To enhance the role HVLA has in patient-centered care, physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other health professionals must strive for uniformity. A study investigated the significance of uniform standards. One study looked at the Gonstead technique in 81 simulated adjustments on a mannequin force plate. Analysis of over 800 thrusts showed wide variations in peak loads. Thrust rates are most consistent amongst clinicians. To improve the role HVLA has in outcomes, patient safety, and overall team performance, physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other health professionals should therefore focus on reproducibility. While reliability is relatively high for manual rotational HVLA thrust on C1-C2, reliability for flexion-extension and lateral bending remains low.

**Interprofessional Communication**

Clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other health professionals must also consider how the general public views manipulation and HVLA techniques. A paper described some of the views concerning cervical spine manipulation. HVLA is viewed unfavorably by mainstream medicine. Approximately 36% of respondents considered HVLA favorably.