**Examination Method**

Inspection, percussion, palpation, and auscultation are essential components of the chest examination. Adventitious sounds provide clues regarding the underlying respiratory disease. The patient should be auscultated in a quiet room with the chest piece of the stethoscope in direct contact with the skin; it is preferable to have the patient remove clothing. The anterior and posterior chest walls along with the axillary region are commonly auscultated. Assess for symmetry, quality, and intensity of breath sounds.

Normal or vesicular breath sound is a low pitched, soft sound with a rustling quality. It is characterized by a prolonged inspiratory and short and soft expiratory phase. Vesicular sounds are produced due to turbulent air flow through the alveoli, lobar and segmental airways (inspiratory phase), and central airways (expiratory phase). On the other hand, bronchial breath sounds are loud, hollow, and high pitched sounds that are normally heard over the sternal manubrium and posterior chest wall due to movement of air through the trachea and large airways. Bronchial breath sounds heard in other areas could be due to any of the following underlying pathologies:

- Consolidation (e.g., pneumonia)

- Pleural effusion (bronchial breath sound can be auscultated above the level of the effusion)

- Pulmonary fibrosis

- Atelectasis

- Tension pneumothorax

- Lung mass over a patent bronchus

**Voice sounds
**

Voice sounds are produced when air passes through vocal cords making them vibrate. In a healthy individual, these sounds are not audible. However, when consolidation or fluid replaces the air in the lung parenchyma, these sounds are better transmitted. Egophony is one type of a voice sound. The word "egophony" is derived from the Greek word "ego" which means "goat."

During auscultation, the patient is asked to say “Eee.” The “Eee” will be transformed into an “A” with the voice having a nasal or bleating quality (like the bleating of a goat). Egophony is seen in cases of consolidation, pleural effusion, and lung cavity.

**Other voice sounds
**

- **Bronchophony:**While auscultating the lung fields, the patient is asked to repeat "99." Bronchophony is present if the "99" appears louder and more distinct over certain areas, suggesting underlying consolidation.

- **Whispering pectoriloquy:**The patient is asked to whisper "1-2-3" or "99." Whispering pectoriloquy is present if the whisper is heard more clearly over certain areas, suggesting underlying consolidation.