The clinician starts the evaluation of suspected hyperprolactinemia with serum prolactin level, ideally with a fasting mid-morning sample. An increase in prolactin secretion is associated with sleep. However, it is not part of the circadian rhythm. The peak level of prolactin is usually between 4 AM and 7 AM. The ideal time to measure prolactin is during the midmorning hours and in the fasting state. Food has a minimal effect on the serum concentration of prolactin. So, fasting is not always an essential condition to measure serum prolactin levels except when there is a mild elevation on the initial value.

If serum prolactin is elevated, the next step is to determine the cause in the following order:

- Exclusion of physiological causes

- Exclusion of pharmacological causes

- Neuroradiological imaging of the hypothalamic-pituitary region.

An extensive history and physical examination are important to exclude causes of hyperprolactinemia and inquire about signs and symptoms of hyperprolactinemia.

**Laboratory Tests**

Following tests are generally needed depending upon gender, age, and clinical presentation:

- Serum prolactin

- Thyroid function test

- Renal function test

- Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1)

- Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)

- Luteinizing hormone (LH)

- Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)

- Testosterone/estradiol

- Pregnancy test

**Imaging Test**

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary with contrast is the preferred imaging study.

Visual field testing should be done in case of macroadenoma and tumor that is adjacent to/or compressing to optic chiasma.

**Pitfalls in Diagnosis**

Hook Effect: It is because of an artifact in the immunoradiometric assay giving a falsely low concentration of prolactin. Hook effect should be kept in mind with large pituitary adenoma with mild or moderate elevation in prolactin. When there is very high serum prolactin concentration, both the capture and tracer antibodies used in immunoradiometric assays become saturated, preventing the binding of the two, to create a sandwich. Then the test result will read low. This effect can be overcome by repeating the test using a 1:100 dilution of serum. This artifact is uncommon.

Macroprolactin represents large circulating aggregates of prolactin and antibodies of size about 150 kD; whereas, native prolactin in serum is 23 kD.