The overall mortality rate associated with D&C is low.

The rate is 0.6 per 100,000 legally-performed induced abortions. To put this in perspective, the risk of death associated with childbirth is 14 times this rate. However, the risk of morbidity and mortality increases with increasing gestational age.

Infection, bleeding, cervical lacerations, uterine perforation, and postoperative uterine adhesions are complications of D&C in pregnant and nonpregnant patients. Overall infection rates are low at 1% to 2%, and prophylactic antibiotic use is recommended in pregnant patients.

Uterine perforation is the most common immediate complication of a D&C in pregnant or nonpregnant patients. Uterine perforation is more likely to occur at the fundus of the uterus, and risk factors for uterine perforation are postpartum hemorrhage, postmenopausal status, nulliparity, and a retroverted uterus.

Cervical injury or lacerations to the lip of the cervix typically occur when too much traction is applied to the cervix during dilation or manipulation. Most lacerations can be managed with pressure, silver nitrate, or ferric subsulfate. Occasionally suture ligation is needed. If there is an injury to the endocervical canal, pressure or suture should be attempted first. If there is no response, then balloon tamponade or uterine artery embolization with further evaluation for abdominal or retroperitoneal bleeding should be considered.

Hemorrhage is extremely rare in nonpregnant patients undergoing D&C. The operator should consider uterine perforation or cervical injury as the most likely cause in this setting and manage it appropriately. Hemorrhage is more common in a pregnant patient undergoing D&C, and the risk increases with increasing gestational age and in the postpartum period. Retained products of conception, uterine atony, abnormal placentation, and injury to the cervix or uterus can potentially cause significant hemorrhage in pregnant or postpartum patients undergoing D&C.

Postoperative endometrial adhesions, or Asherman syndrome, is a rare complication of D&C and is most likely to occur in the setting of a septic abortion. These patients may have symptoms of infertility, menstrual cycle changes, or dysmenorrhea. Postoperative endometrial adhesions are definitively diagnosed with hysteroscopy; treatment can be complex depending on the severity of the adhesions.