Abusive head trauma is a difficult diagnosis to make. It is often misdiagnosed because of a misleading history, variable presentations, and a lack of consistent physical signs of injury. After shaking, infants and children may have findings ranging from nonspecific symptoms that do not require urgent care to acute life-threatening complications. Health care providers will initially misdiagnose a third of infants and children with abusive head trauma. Typically it takes as many as three visits to a health care provider for a correct diagnosis. By then, the initial insult may be compounded by recurrent episodes of shaking. Furthermore, delay in diagnosis often results in increased complications and reinjury.

The initial signs and symptoms of abusive head trauma include decreased interaction, lack of a social smile, poor feeding, vomiting, lethargy, hypothermia, increased sleeping, and failure to thrive. Often these signs and symptoms are mistaken for a virus or other minor illness.

**Signs and Symptoms of Abusive Head Trauma**

- Apnea

- Bulging fontanel

- Bradycardia

- Cardiovascular collapse

- Chills

- Decreased interaction

- Decreased level of consciousness

- Failure to thrive

- Hypothermia

- Irritability

- Increased sleeping

- Lack of a social smile

- Lethargy

- Microcephaly

- Poor feeding

- Vomiting

- Respiratory difficulty and arrest

- Seizures

The most severe cases of trauma will present with life-threatening signs and symptoms. The individual or individuals responsible may not bring the infant or child in for treatment out of fear of legal repercussions and in the hope that the infant or child will recover over time. Unfortunately, delayed care often has devastating effects on the short and long-term prognosis.

The infant or child may present with mild flu-like signs and symptoms or extreme illness, including apnea, severe respiratory distress, bradycardia, bulging fontanel, decreased consciousness, seizures, and cardiovascular collapse.

A lack of external injury should suggest the possibility of abusive head trauma. A careful physical exam, in some cases, can uncover signs of abusive injury. Exam findings include:

- Bruising anywhere in an infant younger than four months old

- Bruising on the ears, neck, or torso, especially in children younger than four years

- Bulging fontanel

- Cerebral atrophy

- Frenulum injuries

- Hydrocephalus

- Lack of external injury

- Ligature marks

- Retinal hemorrhages

- Long bone, metaphyseal, and rib fractures

- Subdural hematoma

Since many infants and children with abusive head trauma are initially asymptomatic or present with mild symptoms, universal neurologic screening for occult intracranial injury should merit consideration with all patients. Physical manifestations of abusive head trauma include cerebral atrophy, subdural and subarachnoid hemorrhages, retinal hemorrhages, hydrocephalus, and unexplained fractures. The primary neurological indicator of abusive head trauma is altered consciousness, developmental delays, seizures, nausea, and vomiting.

**Retinal Hemorrhages**

Retinal hemorrhages are usually more severe in abusive head trauma than an accidental blunt head injury. Retinal hemorrhage is also significantly more common in abusive head trauma than occurs in infants injured accidentally. Retinal hemorrhage in abusive head trauma involves most of the retina, from the ora serrata to the posterior pole of the eye.

Obtaining an ophthalmology consultation within the first 24 hours is important. Small-dot or superficial hemorrhages often resolve quickly. Less dramatic retinal hemorrhages are also found in children as a result of many other causes, such as accidental head trauma, anemia, birth trauma, coagulopathy, cerebral aneurysm, leukemia, and meningitis. As a result, healthcare providers should not use retinal hemorrhage alone to diagnose abusive head trauma. Further, the absence of retinal hemorrhage confined to the posterior pole also does not rule out abuse.

**Subdural Hematoma**

A subdural hematoma is a common finding in abusive head trauma. Acceleration-deceleration force causes the brain to move within the fixed venous channels and skull. Hemorrhages occur in the subarachnoid and subdural space if there is tearing of the superficial cortical veins.

**Rib Fractures**

Rib fractures in an infant are common with child abuse. They occur by squeezing the infant’s chest, which generates anterior-posterior compressive forces resulting in fractured ribs. Accidental rib fractures are very uncommon. Most caregivers will deny a history of trauma. The fractures are detected on routine chest X-rays or a skeletal survey. Rib fractures from CPR are also very rare. Essentially, any infant or child with a rib fracture and a history that does not strongly support legitimate trauma should induce further clinical investigation, which should include a chest X-ray and a skeletal survey.

**Skull Fractures**

Skull fractures are a result of a direct force applied to the head. They may be due to accidental or inflicted head trauma. Abusive head trauma should be considered when the fracture is complex, diastatic (width greater than 3 mm), multiple, occipital, and non-parietal. Any of these types of skull fractures should suggest the possibility of abusive head trauma.

**Other Fractures**

Long bone, posterior rib, or metaphyseal “corner” fractures are seen more often in abusive head trauma than in accidental head injuries.

Metaphyseal fractures involve the distal and proximal tibia, proximal humerus, and distal femur. They are known as “bucket-handle” fractures because they appear to have a curvilinear structure coming from the metaphysis when viewed from certain angles. They are seen in infants and children and are highly specific for child abuse. The mechanism is shearing and torsional strains of the metaphysic near the physis. This is caused by shaking, twisting, or pulling on the extremities.

Abusive head trauma does not always present with retinal or subdural hemorrhage or traumatic brain injury. Unexplained cervical spine injuries, seizures, or fractures should also lead the clinician to consider abusive head trauma.