Due to the risks of serious adverse effects such as toxicity, hepatic failure, and SJS/TEN, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors should be prescribed cautiously. It is essential for all interprofessional healthcare team members, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), nurses, and pharmacists, to know the contraindications and recognize the side effects of these medications. Effective communication between the team and the patient is essential to reduce adverse effects. There is no antidote for carbonic anhydrase inhibitors; therefore, medication use in patients with impaired renal and liver function requires close monitoring. Nurses can participate in patient counseling and serve as a contact point for clinicians. Pharmacists should verify appropriate dosing based on indication, perform medication reconciliation to check for drug-drug interactions, and can also counsel the patient on dosing, administration, and potential adverse events. When prescribing carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, this interprofessional approach to care will drive improved outcomes and reduce potential adverse events.

It is the job of the interprofessional healthcare team to ensure that the patient understands the difference in administration through oral or topical routes. In the setting of severe glaucoma, patients may be taking several topical and oral intraocular pressure-lowering drugs and should be careful to use the recommended dosages. Ophthalmic eye drop bottles with different cap colors may help avoid confusion and over administration. Many randomized-control trials and meta-analyses have confirmed the safety and efficacy of topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, such as dorzolamide and brinzolamide, combined with other glaucoma medications such as prostaglandin analogs or beta-blockers.