# Continuing Education Activity

Tocolysis is an obstetrical procedure to prolong gestation in patients, some of which are experiencing preterm labor. This is achieved through various medications that work to inhibit contractions of uterine smooth muscle. The main medications used are beta-adrenergic agonist receptors, calcium channel blockers, cyclooxygenase inhibitors, and magnesium sulfate. This activity reviews and evaluates tocolysis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and managing tocolysis.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for tocolysis.
- Summarize the different medications used for tocolysis.
- Review the risk factors for specific tocolysis medications.

# Introduction

Tocolysis is an obstetrical procedure carried out with the use of medications with the purpose of delaying the delivery of a fetus in women presenting preterm contractions. These medications are administered with the hope of decreasing fetal morbidity and mortality. Tocolysis is intended to prolong gestation for two to seven days and works by creating a quiescent environment in the uterus. This is important to allow transportation to a higher care facility, to administer a fetal lung maturity scheme with antenatal corticosteroids, and the additional time is also used to determine the group B streptococcus (GBS) status of the pregnant woman, and provide prophylaxis if she is either positive or the GBS culture status is unknown.

Tocolysis is not intended to increase gestation of the fetus to term but is focused on providing a window of time to support treatments that have been shown to improve outcomes for delivery. Currently, there are no United States Food & Drug Administration (FDA) approved medications for tocolysis. All medications are administered as off-label indications. However, these medications are still effective and should be used when clinically indicated. Historically, ritodrine and terbutaline had been approved for maintenance tocolysis. Ritodrine had been approved in 1977 but was removed by the FDA due to increased maternal mortality due to cardiovascular complications, is still used as a tocolytic internationally but has been associated with pulmonary edema.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Tocolysis is effective because it focuses on both delaying and weakening uterine contractions. The pharmacology targets the activity of the myometrium. The myometrium is the smooth muscle in the uterus.

From a physiologic perspective, the myometrium is responsible for the contractional effort of childbirth. Like all smooth muscle, this process is calcium-mediated. The start of a contraction does not require any nerve input nor hormonal stimulus. It begins with a spontaneous depolarization of the cell surface, which opens voltage-gated calcium channels.

Though the average gestation age for women to go into the labor is 40 weeks, some conditions will result in labor starting earlier. It´s believed that this switch to a contractional uterus is caused by an equilibrium change of proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines.

# Indications

Tocolysis is used in the setting of preterm labor. Preterm birth is delivery before 37 weeks gestation and after 20 weeks. To diagnose preterm labor, continued contractions happen during the gestational age range mentioned previously to produce cervical changes. Continued contractions are defined as greater than or equal to 4 contractions over 20 minutes. It is difficult to determine which patients undergoing preterm labor will progress to preterm delivery.

Tocolysis has also been used in the setting of external cephalic version, uterine tachysystole, and suspected fetal distress. For the external cephalic version, betamimetics are the most successful at increasing the rate of cephalic presentation and reducing the frequency of cesarean section.

Uterine tachysystole is defined as more than 5 contractions over 10 minutes averaged for 30 minutes.

# Contraindications

The contraindications for the procedure have been laid out in ACOG Practice Bulletin 171 in Box 1 and are the following:

- A gestational age above 34 weeks

- Intrauterine fetal demise

- Lethal fetal anomaly

- Nonreassuring fetal status

- Severe preeclampsia or eclampsia

- Maternal bleeding with hemodynamic instability

- Chorioamnionitis

- Preterm premature rupture of membranes (except when there are no signs of maternal infection and there is a need for transportation, steroid administration, or both)

- Specific contraindications to tocolytic agents

Relative contraindications also include if there´s already advanced cervical dilation over 5 cm, maternal heart disease, hyperthyroidism, uncontrolled diabetes, mild abruptio placentae, stable placenta previa, and intrauterine growth restriction. Studies have shown that there is no beneficial delay in delivery with tocolytics for patients with symptomatic abnormal placentation.

# Equipment

Tocolysis is achieved through different processes, all with the same eventual goal of quelling the smooth muscle activity in the uterus. Different tocolytic agents are preferred based on maternal medical history, current gestational age, and cost. There is no definitive first-line tocolytic agent by the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) but nifedipine and indomethacin are most commonly used. Furthermore, combination tocolytic therapy might be more effective than using a single tocolytic agent.

- Beta-Adrenergic receptor agonists

- Calcium channel blockers

- Magnesium Sulfate

- Nonsteroidal antiinflammatories

- Oxytocin inhibitors

Beta-Adrenergic receptor agonists specifically work on the beta-2 receptor. Activation of the beta-2 receptors causes an increase in cyclic AMP (cAMP) which is associated with increased smooth muscle relaxation. The most common medication in this class is terbutaline. Hexoprenaline, a beta-2 receptor agonist, is used in many countries but has yet to be approved by the US Food and Drug Administration. Ritodrine is also another medication in the category that is used internationally for tocolysis but is not approved in the United States. There has been a black box warning issued by the US Food and Drug Administration against the use of injectable terbutaline in the setting of prolonged preterm labor-management (over 72 hours) due to maternal cardiac complications. These complications are suggested from terbutaline's activity at beta-1 receptors, which are located in cardiac muscle. Studies have suggested the tocolytic agents in this family might confer a risk of the development of childhood asthma.

Calcium channel blockers specifically work on T-type calcium channels by inhibiting the entry of calcium into the uterine smooth muscle.

Magnesium sulfate has an unresolved mechanism of action regarding uterine contractions, but it has been described to inhibit the entry of calcium into the uterine smooth muscle.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories work through inhibiting cyclooxygenases (COX).

Oxytocin inhibitors work by competitively acting at the oxytocin receptor site. Oxytocin acts to increase the intracellular levels of inositol triphosphate. The medications currently in this class are atosiban and retosiban.

In addition to the above tocolytic agents, nitroglycerine has also been tested for effectiveness with preterm labor. Nitroglycerine works by inducing myometrial guanylyl cyclase to produce cyclic GMP (cGMP). Increases in cGMP inhibit the ability of intracellular calcium levels to rise. Furthermore, cGMP is also used to dephosphorylate myosin heads which halts the ability for contractions to proceed. The two routes for nitroglycerine are intravenous and transdermal. Though the side effect profile is better when compared to beta-adrenergic receptor agonists, transdermal nitroglycerine isn´t recommended for tocolysis.

# Technique or Treatment

Maintenance tocolysis is the procedure of providing tocolysis beyond 48 hours. Typically 48 hours of medication is sufficient to bridge the patient through the steroid window and transport her to a tertiary care center. There is no official stance by ACOG on the status of maintenance tocolysis. Evidence does not suggest that beta-adrenergic receptor agonists, calcium channel blockers, COX inhibitors, or magnesium sulfate are sufficient for maintenance tocolysis. Progesterone and hydroxyprogesterone caproate have limited data that might suggest they might be beneficial for maintenance tocolysis. They may be used in patients with a history of preterm labor but are not considered tocolytic agents.

# Complications

Complications from tocolysis are primarily medication specific. These agents are not guaranteed to prolong labor so medications might have to be substituted to achieve uterine quiescence.

# Clinical Significance

Tocolysis is clinically significant because it increases the amount of time to perform neonatal interventions. The WHO has shown that it is beneficial to delay delivery by up to 48 hours, allowing for antenatal corticosteroids to help fetal lung maturity in premature neonates.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Tocolysis is an emergent procedure indicated to prolong gestation to decrease fetal morbidity and mortality. In 2006, preterm birth was associated with over 36% of the neonate deaths.

When a patient presents potentially needing tocolysis or is already receiving tocolytic medication, the high-risk obstetrical team should be notified of the patient's presence. Neonatal and anesthesia teams should also be informed so they can be aware of an upcoming preterm delivery. It has been shown that nurses play a crucial role in the care of obstetric patients that are experiencing obstetrical emergencies.