Small interfering ribonucleic acid (siRNA) based therapies are newly approved therapeutics exerting their effects by RNAi on their target mRNA in the liver. To date, four agents (patisiran, givosiran, lumasiran, and inclisiran) are FDA-approved for managing adult patients with hATTR, AHP, reducing LDL-C in subjects with HeFH or ASCVD, and PH1 in adults and pediatric patients. Caring for patients with such rare metabolic ailments demands care coordination from a team of healthcare professionals. The team should include a primary care physician (PCP), a hematologist, a nephrologist, cardiologist, mid-level practitioners, genetic counselor, nurses, and a pharmacist.

The healthcare team should conduct a thorough clinical examination to assess if management with siRNA-based therapies is suitable for the patient. Before prompting treatment, the interprofessional team should determine the patient's laboratory values, such as renal and liver function (givosiran), lipid levels (inclisiran), and vitamin A levels (patisiran) at baseline and routinely thereafter. The PCP should regularly communicate with the other specialists taking care of such patients.

The healthcare team should administer the premedications mentioned above (corticosteroid, acetaminophen, H1 blocker, and H2 blocker) at least 60 minutes before the infusion to prevent an infusion-related reaction. The prescribing and administering clinician should be prepared and equipped for immediate adverse effects such as infusion-related hypersensitivity reactions. The healthcare team should look out for headaches, back pain, abdominal pain, dyspnea, and nausea during infusion. In the event of clinical signs such as hypotension, syncope, and anaphylaxis, the infusion should be discontinued immediately, and appropriate symptomatic management should be initiated.

The interprofessional team should educate their patients thoroughly on the probable adverse effects of siRNA-based therapies and counsel them regarding the appropriate measures in the event of such occurrences. Vitamin A levels require routine monitoring for patients receiving patisiran by the prescribing healthcare provider as the agent is reported to decrease its levels.

Childbearing females considering treatment with siRNA-based therapies during pregnancy should be evaluated to determine the benefits and risks before starting therapy. Although no studies and data involving pregnant women have been reported, pregnancy risks merit discussion. Patisiran reportedly decreases vitamin A levels and is essential for fetal development. Excess vitamin A levels may also cause adverse developmental consequences. Pregnant patients considering givosiran should be informed about unfavorable fetal developmental outcomes during organogenesis in animal models. Inclisiran should be discontinued during pregnancy. Communication among the primary healthcare team and specialists treating patients with siRNA-based therapies can reduce complications and improve patient outcomes and quality of life.