The sympathetic nervous system is composed of many pathways that perform a variety of functions on various organ systems. The preganglionic neurons of the SANS arise from the thoracic and lumbar regions of the spinal cord (T1 to L2) with the cell bodies distributed in four regions of the gray matter in the spinal cord bilaterally and symmetrically.

The functions of the sympathetic nervous system are expansive and involve many organ systems and various types of adrenergic receptors.

The effects in which SANS acts in direct contrast to the PANS function include the following:

- In the eye, sympathetic activation causes the radial muscle of the iris (alpha-1) to contract, which leads to mydriasis, allowing more light to enter. Furthermore, the ciliary muscle (beta-2) relaxes, allowing for far vision to improve.

- In the heart (beta-1, beta-2), sympathetic activation causes an increased heart rate, the force of contraction, and rate of conduction, allowing for increased cardiac output to supply the body with oxygenated blood.

- In the lungs, bronchodilation (beta-2) and decreased pulmonary secretions (alpha-1, beta-2) occur to allow more airflow through the lungs.

- In the stomach and intestines, decreased motility (alpha-1, beta-2) and sphincter contraction (alpha-1), as well as contraction of the gallbladder (beta-2), occur to slow down digestion to divert energy to other parts of the body.

- The exocrine and endocrine pancreas (alpha-1, alpha-2) decreases both enzyme and insulin secretion.

- In the urinary bladder, there is relaxation of the detrusor muscle and contraction of the urethral sphincter (beta-22) to help stop urine output during sympathetic activation.

- The kidney (beta-1) increases renin secretion to increase intravascular volume.

- The salivary glands (alpha-1, beta-2) work through small volumes of potassium and water secretion.

Actions of SANS which do not oppose those of the PANS include the following:

- There is strong constriction through the alpha-1 receptor in arterioles of the skin, abdominal viscera, and kidney, and weak constriction through the alpha-1 and beta-2 receptors in the skeletal muscle.

- In the liver, increased glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis (alpha-1, beta-2) occur to allow for glucose to be available for energy throughout the body.

- In the spleen, there is a contraction (alpha-1).

- Sweat glands and arrector pili muscles (muscarinic) work to increase sweating and erection of hair to help cool down the body.

- Lastly, the adrenal medulla (nicotinic receptor) increases the release of epinephrine and norepinephrine to act elsewhere in the body.