Leukocoria is a sign of an underlying ocular disease. The management of common ocular conditions causing leukocoria is as follows:

**Retinoblastoma:**Chemoreduction followed by adjuvant consolidative treatment (laser photocoagulation, thermotherapy, cryotherapy, chemotherapy) has replaced external beam radiotherapy as the primary mode of treatment for intraocular retinoblastoma.

- Enucleation: Treatment of choice for unilateral group E and D intraocular retinoblastoma and in all blind and painful eyes. This involves minimal manipulation with the ‘no-touch’ technique and excision of at least 10 mm of the optic nerve to prevent the intracranial spread.

- Chemoreduction: Six monthly cycles of vincristine (0.05mg/kg), etoposide (5mg/kg), and carboplatin (18.6mg/kg) (VEC) are used to reduce the tumor size.

- Thermotherapy: Heating up to 42 to 60 degrees C is indicated in tumors with a basal diameter of less than 3 mm without any vitreous seeding. It has a synergistic effect with chemotherapy.

- External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is indicated in Large tumors with vitreous seeding, salvageable eyes, multifocal tumors, and eyes that failed coagulation therapy. RB is a very radiosensitive tumor. A dose of 4000 cGy is used with 200 cGy fractions.

- Episcleral Plaque brachytherapy: Episcleral application of ruthenium-106 or iodine-125 plaque is made. This is indicated in single medium-sized tumors not involving the optic nerve or macula.

- Photocoagulation/Cryotherapy is used for small posteriorly located tumors, not involving the optic nerve or macula.

- Cryotherapy is used for small anteriorly located tumors.

- Intra-arterial chemotherapy using agents including melphalan, carboplatin, and topotecan has been used successfully in some RB cases.

**Coats disease:**Mild cases may be observed. Other management options include laser treatment of telangiectatic vessels, microaneurysms, capillary nonperfusion areas, cryotherapy for exudation with subretinal fluid, intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) agents, and retinal surgery for retinal detachment are other available therapy.

**PFV:**The anterior PFV is treated with observation, cataract, and glaucoma management. Treatment aims to prevent amblyopia and correct strabismus by treating cataracts and glaucoma. Severe intraoperative bleeding should be anticipated from persistent tunica vasculosa lentis. Retinal lesions of posterior PFV are managed by lensectomy, membranectomy, and vitrectomy through either anterior limbal or pars-plana approach.

**Pediatric cataract:**Cataracts operated between 2 months to 6 months yield good results. Emmetropization of an eye generally is achieved by nine years of age.

**Pediatric uveitis:**Corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment of noninfectious uveitis in children. Periocular or sub-tenon corticosteroid injections are used in pars planitis, especially in unilateral cases. Steroid-induced glaucoma and cataract are potential complications of corticosteroid therapy and should always be looked for. Methotrexate is the most commonly used first-line immunomodulatory drug in children with uveitis. Second-line agents are azathioprine, cyclosporine, and mycophenolate. Anti-TNF (tumor necrosis factor) agents like infliximab and adalimumab are successfully used to treat resistant pediatric uveitis.

**Toxocariasis:**Topical or systemic corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment in controlling inflammation. The role of anti-helminthic therapy in ocular toxocariasis is controversial and should always accompany steroids.

Astrocytic hamartoma should be observed. Glaucoma should be treated accordingly. Tuberous sclerosis should be ruled out.

**Retinopathy of prematurity:**Observation, retinal laser, cryotherapy, and retinal surgery are the different treatment modalities for ROP. Immature retinal vessels alone can be observed, and screening repeated. The cryo-ROP study showed positive results of cryotherapy for the entire avascular retina in the threshold ROP. Early treatment of the ROP study (ETROP) recommended the ablation of the peripheral avascular retina for type 1 ROP.

**Endogenous endophthalmitis:**Management depends on the causative organism and the severity of the infection. Empirical treatment includes intravitreal injection of vancomycin (1 mg/0.1 ml) plus either ceftazidime (2.25 mg/0.1 ml) or amikacin (0.4 mg/0.1 ml). Vancomycin covers gram-positive organisms, while ceftazidime and amikacin cover gram-negative organisms.

**Retinochoroidal coloboma:**Retinal detachment and cataracts are the most common associations of retinochoroidal coloboma. Poor vision, amblyopia, and strabismus may be noted. Prophylactic barrage laser along the coloboma margin creates a strong chorioretinal adhesion and reinforces the margins, thereby may reduce the occurrence of extra-colobomatous retinal detachment.

**Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy:**Stage 1 FEVR without exudation can be observed. Stage 2 with exudation is treated with a laser to the avascular retina. Surgery is indicated for stages 3 to 5 and is aimed at relieving traction by excision or incising the scar tissue, thereby encouraging reattachment of the retina.

**Retinal detachment:**Two surgical options for pediatric rhegmatogenous retinal detachments are a scleral buckle with or without an encircling band and the vitrectomy. This is the preferred surgery, even in Grade C proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR). Vitrectomy with or without encirclage is done in retinal detachment with more than PVR Grade C. In tractional retinal detachment, the scleral buckle may be sufficient if the break is in the periphery.

**Medulloepithelioma:**Enucleation is the standard treatment for advanced ciliary body tumors. Exenteration of the orbit is required when the orbit is involved. Local excision can be done for small tumors involving 3 to 4 clock hours.

**Incontinentia pigmenti:**Laser ablation of retinal non-perfusion areas and cryotherapy may be helpful.