**Thoracic Splanchnic Nerve:**

The greater splanchnic nerve helps with the motility of the foregut and provides sympathetic innervation to the adrenal medulla. Specifically, it supplies the alimentary canal, liver, gallbladder, pancreas, adrenal medulla, and the spleen.

**Lumbar Splanchnic Nerve:**

The lumbar splanchnic nerve supplies sympathetic innervation to the glands and smooth muscles of the hindgut and pelvic viscera. The large intestine and the kidneys are the main targets of this nerve, with the pelvic plexus getting contributions when the nerve terminates in the inferior mesenteric and hypogastric ganglia.

**Sacral and Pelvic Splanchnic Nerve:**

The sacral splanchnic nerve provides both motor and sensory innervation to the posterior thigh, part of the pelvis, and the majority of the lower leg and foot.

The pelvic splanchnic nerves provide parasympathetic innervation to the pelvic viscera and then joins with the inferior hypogastric vessels and provide branches that provide innervation to the fundus of the bladder, ductus deferens, and spermatic cord, all of which are supplied explicitly by the vesicle plexus, the forepart of the pelvic plexus. It also branches into the prostatic plexus, which supplies the prostate, corpora cavernosa of the penis and the urethra. This branch later goes on to supply the fibrous covering of the penis. In females, the pelvic splanchnic nerve provides branches to supply the walls of the vagina, clitoris, and the erectile tissue of the vestibule.