After the diagnosis of the yolk sac tumor has been established, many tests and evaluations should be done to decide if cancer has spread to the lymph nodes or any parts in the body.

**Testicular Tumors**

**Stage 0**is the earliest stage of testicular cancer (it is also known as neoplasia in situ). Stage 4 is not applicable to testicular cancer.

The TNM system is the most popular system for staging testicular cancer, and the system is based on four elements:

- **Tumor (T)**: size and location of the tumor.

- **Node (N)**: lymph node involvement.

- **Metastasis (M)**: number and site of spread of the tumor.

- **Serum tumor marker (S)**: Are the serum tumor markers AFP, beta-hCG, and LDH elevated? If so, how high are they?

**Stage 1**: there is no evidence of metastasis or lymph node involvement, divided into 1A and 1B depending on the tumor size, and 1S when tumor markers are elevated.

**Stage 2**: the cancer cells have spread to the lymph nodes, but there is no metastasis to other body parts. It is divided into 2A, 2B, and 2C depending on the number and size of lymph nodes involved.

**Stage 3**: cancer has metastasized to other organs, and this stage is divided into 3A, 3B, and 3C depending on metastasis location and level of tumor markers.

**Ovarian Cancer**

The **FIGO (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics) system**and**the AJCC (American Joint Committee on Cancer) TNM**staging system are the same, and they are the most used systems for staging ovarian cancers.

Both of the systems contain three elements:

- **Tumor (T)**: size and location of the tumor.

- **Node (N)**: lymph node involvement.

- **Metastasis (M)**: number and site of spread of the tumor.

**Stage 1:**the cancer is only in the ovary (IA) or both ovaries (IB).

**Stage 2:**cancer has spread to the pelvis (below pelvic brim) without lymph node involvement, and this stage is divided into 2A (spread to the uterus or the fallopian tubes) and 2B (other pelvic tissues).

**Stage 3:**cancer has spread to the lymph nodes and/or peritoneum outside the pelvis, and this stage is divided into 3A, 3B, and 3C depending on metastasis location and size.

**Stage 4:**cancer has spread to other tissues (distant metastasis excluding peritoneal metastasis), and this stage is divided into stage 4A (pleural effusion) and 4B (extra-abdominal metastasis).

Staging systems are essential to decide the next step in the management of any patient because each stage has a unique treatment plan.