A recent study examined the perception of drug utilization review (DUR) in 742 physicians from different specialties. The study indicated that DUR impacts treatment decisions by physicians and results in additional resource use by patients. Additionally, the survey suggested that the DUR policy may misalign with clinical practice guidelines. Further studies are required to address queries raised by this survey.

MUE can be simply informative, such as collecting data to guide decision-making or measuring the effect of interventions, such as adding a new agent to the formulary or implementing a new medication use policy. MUE activities can focus on any dimension of the medication-use process (from medication acquisition to patient monitoring), presenting an opportunity for improvement. While MUE often focuses on problem-prone, high-risk, or high-cost medications, MUE can be used to examine any aspect of medication use that is problematic to the institution conducting the evaluation.

A systematic plan to monitor, evaluate, and improve medication use should be established within the organization. Such a plan is an accreditation requirement for many organizations, such as the Joint Commission. MUE should be a part of the overall quality-improvement program of the organization. MUE activities should be conducted to examine the effect of medication use policy decisions, particularly those made without convincing evidence from the biomedical literature. Still, they can also be undertaken to inform decision-making, particularly when making policy decisions under conditions of uncertainty. Specific projects to evaluate medication use can involve assessing how an individual medication is used or evaluating medication management of a given disease state. All steps of the medication-use process should be assessed over time. The Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee, or its equivalent, should be involved in the MUE process.

Many government agencies, including CMS and NCQA, mandate that DUR be performed to ensure appropriate drug therapy. In the community pharmacy setting, DUR is mandated by Federal Law (OBRA-90) for those patients receiving drugs through Medicaid. A review for preventable problems (pro-DUR) is a required component of this process. In addition, there are federal mandates for resources to be used in creating the criteria. In this setting, the state agency administering Medicaid is also mandated to perform the quality review discussed above, called retro-DUR. DUR programs play a key role in helping managed healthcare systems understand, interpret, and improve medication prescribing, administration, and use.

Employers and health plans find DUR programs valuable because the results foster more efficient use of scarce health care resources. Pharmacists play a key role in this process because of their expertise in pharmaceutical care. DURs allow the managed care pharmacist to identify trends in prescribing within groups of patients, such as those with asthma, diabetes, hypertension, or depression.****Collaborating with other healthcare team members, pharmacists can initiate action to improve drug therapy for individual patients and covered populations.

The specific process addressed in medication use evaluation is based on the FOCUS-PDCA model as per ASHP.

- Find the process which requires improvement.

- Organize the healthcare team that comprehends the process.

- Clarify current knowledge with team members.

- Understand the causes of process deviation.

- Select process improvement.

- Plan and design a solution.

- Do execute improvements.

- Check and assess the results.

- Act on the modifications required and implement the changes.