A concise history can assist the clinician when determining whether a child presenting with a head injury has a high risk of a skull fracture or traumatic brain injury.

**Important Factors**

- Time and presentation of injury: A delayed presentation should trigger concern and further questioning to determine if a non-accidental injury is a possibility.

- Mechanism of injury: Fall, dropped,  collision, blow to the head, or motor vehicle accident (MVA).

- Whether the event was witnessed and if so by whom.

- Further details about the injury: In the case of a fall, note the height of the fall and landing surface. In the case of an MVA, ask if the patient was ejected from the car or was rolled over and whether another passenger was killed, indicating a high-risk injury.

- Condition immediately after the injury: Period of lost consciousness versus immediate cry.

- Condition since the injury occurred: Level of alertness, eating, vomiting, seizures.

- Past medical history: Bony disorders such as osteogenesis imperfecta, bleeding disorders such as hemophilia, or if the child is on any medications.

**Examination**

- A trauma protocol with the primary, secondary, and tertiary survey if major trauma is suspected.

- Glasgow coma scale (GCS) to assess the level of alertness. GCS may be less accurate in younger age groups, and a modified score should be used.

- Examination of the head to palpate for a boggy swelling (may indicate an underlying fracture), a palpable fracture line, or lacerations. Head circumference should be measured if the fontanelle is open as an increasing head circumference can indicate intracranial bleeding or swelling.

- Ear, nose, and throat examination to look for signs of basal skull fracture including haemotympanum, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or bloody otorrhoea or rhinorrhoea, Battle sign (ecchymosis on the mastoid process), or raccoon eyes (periorbital ecchymosis). Ring sign can be used to assess for CSF rhinorrhoea/otorrhoea that is mixed with blood. When the fluid is dropped onto filter paper, the CSF separates as a ring around the blood (central blood with a clear ring around it). However, the ring sign is not specific to CSF as blood mixed with water, saline, and other mucous also will produce a ring sign.

- Neurological and cranial nerve examination for signs of raised intracranial pressure including fundoscopy. Cranial nerve abnormalities such as visual defect, anosmia, hearing defect, facial numbness, or paralysis also can indicate a skull base fracture.

- Head-to-toe examination assessing for bruising or other injuries in case of other traumatic injuries, or if suspicious, of non-accidental injury.

As a safeguarding procedure, the clinician always needs to carefully consider whether the described mechanism of injury is consistent with the developmental age of the child and the clinical findings.