Routine examination of serum nevirapine levels in patients on this medication is crucial because different levels of nevirapine present indicate the medication’s effectiveness, or lack thereof, in suppressing the targeted viral infection. Previously conducted clinical research has found that a plasma trough concentration of nevirapine greater than 4000 ng/mL correlates highly with the medication’s ability to suppress the viral load of HIV such that it is undetectable. A plasma trough concentration of nevirapine less than 3000 ng/mL strongly correlates with the probability of virologic failure in patients receiving ART involving nevirapine.

It is also critical to conduct routine checks of liver function in patients treated with nevirapine, as it is known to have potentially severe hepatotoxic side effects.

Beyond monitoring nevirapine singularly, it is essential to understand its pharmacokinetic interaction with enzymes and other drugs. Patients seeking treatment for HIV may present with a prior list of medications that they already take, and being aware of those medications’ potential interactions with nevirapine and the side effects of nevirapine can prevent unpredictable interactions. For example, nevirapine is a known inducer of cytochrome P450 enzymes, which means that this effect will impact any medication metabolized by this enzyme. Its dosing and administration will have to be adjusted accordingly for any given patient.

Another significant interaction is that of nevirapine and methadone.