**Active Moderate to Severe Thyroid Eye Disease**

Teprotumumab received fast track designation in April 2015 and Breakthrough Therapy designation in July 2016. Teprotumumab was granted orphan designation for the treatment of active thyroid eye disease on June 19, 2019 (12-3878/DRU201203878).

Teprotumumab was approved by the US FDA in 2020 for thyroid eye disease based on efficacy and safety evaluation of two randomized,  double-masked,  placebo-controlled, multicenter trials, which showed that teprotumumab was superior to a placebo in a combined total of 170 patients with active, moderate to severe thyroid orbitopathy, defined as having a Clinical Activity Score (CAS) of 4 or more out of 7 points and < 9 months of symptoms onset, over 24 weeks.

In phase 2 randomized controlled trial (NCT01868997), Smith et al. demonstrated that 69% of patients in the teprotumumab group compared to 20% in the placebo group had a positive response at 24 weeks.

Phase 3 teprotumumab trial (NCT03298867) validated the results of the phase 2 trial. In the phase 3 (OPTIC) trial, Douglas et al. showed that 83% of patients in the teprotumumab group, compared with only 10% in the placebo group, had a reduction of proptosis (≥ 2 mm) at 24 weeks.

In the OPTIC trial, six patients who received teprotumumab underwent orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at baseline and week 24. Imaging showed volume reduction either in extraocular muscle, orbital fat, or both, with a mean reduction in extraocular muscle and orbital fat volumes of 35% and 17%, respectively.

In a separate retrospective study using orbital echography pre- and post-teprotumumab treatment, Tran et al. found a mean reduction of extraocular muscle diameter from 27.4 mm to 23.4 mm, with inferior recti showing the greatest reduction.

**Pooled and Extended Outcome Analysis in Active Moderate to Severe Thyroid Eye Disease**

The extended outcome of the two teprotumumab randomized controlled trials was reported, with up to 18 months of follow-up (72 weeks). By pooling the intention-to-treat population from the phase 2 and phase 3 teprotumumab randomized controlled trials, significant efficacy for teprotumumab was revealed where numbers-needed-to-treat were 1.6 for proptosis response, 2.5 for diplopia response, 1.7 for the overall response, and 2.5 for disease inactivation.

Proptosis reduction of at least 2 mm was achieved in 77% (65 of 84 patients) treated with teprotumumab, compared to 15% (13 of 87) in placebo at 24 weeks. By 51 weeks post final drug infusion, the maintenance of proptosis response was 67% (38 of 57 patients) in patients with long-term data. Diplopia score improvement by one grade or more was reported in 70% (46 of 66 patients) of the teprotumumab group, compared to 31% (18 of 59 patients) in the placebo group at week 24, with reports of complete resolution of diplopia in 53% in the teprotumumab group compared with 25% in the placebo group. By 51 weeks, 69% (33 of 48 patients) had maintained their diplopia response.

An extension of the OPTIC trial, as an open-label study (OPTIC-X) (NCT03461211), examined the treatment responses in patients who did not have a proptosis response, either from the placebo group with TED of longer duration or from the teprotumumab treated group, or who had a flare-up (≥2 mm increase in proptosis, ≥2-point increase in CAS, or both) from either of the two groups in the initial OPTIC trial.

The non-responders subsequently received eight additional infusions of teprotumumab in OPTIC-X over 24 weeks. The OPTIC-X study showed patients with a longer duration of TED (mean of 12.3 months) still respond favorably to teprotumumab treatment, with 89.2% of placebo-treated OPTIC patients becoming proptosis responders, 60.9% showing improvement in diplopia score and 56.5% achieving complete resolution of diplopia at week 24. The proptosis response appeared durable in patients with a longer duration of thyroid eye disease, with 89% maintaining proptosis reduction by week 48 and 64% still showing a diplopia response by week 48. Of the five OPTIC teprotumumab non-responders, re-treatment led to a modest response (40% proptosis responders, with a mean reduction of -1.5 mm).

Of the OPTIC trial teprotumumab arm, 34 responded with proptosis reduction at week 24. Of note, 10 (29.4%) of 34 patients experienced flare-up, either showing proptosis increase (5 patients), both proptosis and CAS flare (4 patients), or isolated CAS flare (1 patient), mostly at week 48, with few at week 60 and week 72.

In the absence of a head-to-head comparison between teprotumumab and intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) at the time, a meta-analysis of non-randomized studies compared the use of teprotumumab with IVMP in patients with moderate to severe thyroid orbitopathy.

In the matching-adjusted indirect comparisons (MAICs) between teprotumumab, IVMP, and placebo, teprotumumab showed a significantly greater change in proptosis from baseline compared with IVMP (MD -2.31 mm), while proptosis change for IVMP compared with placebo was modest and statistically not significant (MD -0.16 mm). Teprotumumab diplopia response was greater when compared with IVMP (OR 2.32), while IVMP also showed increased odds of diplopia response compared with placebo (OR 2.69).

This meta-analysis suggested teprotumumab was correlated with greater improvements in proptosis and maybe twice as likely to have a 1 grade or greater reduction in diplopia than IVMP. As the MAICs method cannot correct for confounding factors between different arms of the comparator, further studies, in particular, masked randomized controlled trials, are warranted to compare teprotumumab with IVMP.

A recent paper reported on the proptosis and diplopia response with teprotumumab and placebo vs. the recommended treatment regimen with intravenous methylprednisolone in moderate to severe thyroid eye disease. They showed an association with small improvements in proptosis from baseline for IVMP vs. placebo (-0.16 mm); associated proptosis improvements were statistically significantly greater with teprotumumab vs. IVMP (treatment difference, -2.31 mm). For diplopia response, IVMP was not favored over placebo, while teprotumumab was favored over IVMP.

**Chronic, Low CAS Thyroid Eye Disease**

Given the positive responses to teprotumumab in patients with thyroid eye disease of prolonged duration from the OPTIC-X trial and an exploratory study showing an increased IGF-1R expression in the orbital fat tissue of patients with both inflammatory and non-inflammatory thyroid orbitopathy when compared to normal controls, increasing attention was given to the role of teprotumumab in inactive, chronic thyroid eye disease.

Early studies suggest teprotumumab has also shown promising results in treating chronic, non-progressive thyroid eye disease. In a retrospective series, nine patients with chronic thyroid orbitopathy (> 9 months) and low CAS (≤ 1) were treated with eight infusions of teprotumumab and had a clinical and statistical improvement in proptosis.

Ozzello et al. reported one of the earliest cases of large proptosis response (5 to 6 mm proptosis reduction) in a chronic thyroid orbitopathy patient of 3 years duration.

The follow-up duration post-completion of treatment was 16 weeks for 5 of the nine patients. The mean proptosis reduction was 4mm in all patients immediately post-treatment and 4.2 mm in the worse eye at 16 weeks, while the better eye proptosis reduction was 3 mm.

In another retrospective review of 31 consecutive patients with chronic stable thyroid eye disease > 2 years, Ugradar et al. demonstrated a mean reduction of proptosis (3.5mm), CAS response (90%) with a mean reduction by 1.8 points, diplopia improvement (67%), resolution of diplopia (47%) and a mean reduction of orbital muscle (2011mm^3), and fat volume (2101 mm^3) following ≥3 infusions of teprotumumab.

**Dysthyroid Optic Neuropathy (DON)**

More recently, case reports and series have been published showing that teprotumumab is effective in treating DON secondary to thyroid orbitopathy. Sears et al. described a case of a 45-year-old man with active progressive thyroid orbitopathy despite weekly pulsed intravenous steroids and right orbital radiation and represented with worsening left DON.

Teprotumumab was used as an intravenous corticosteroid, and orbital decompression was contraindicated for medical reasons. After two infusions of teprotumumab, the patient's visual acuity, relative afferent pupillary defect, Humphrey visual fields, proptosis, and extraocular muscle size improved. Slentz et al. reported a case of a 62-year-old man with right-sided optic nerve hemorrhages, edema, and visual field defects. The patient improved after a single teprotumumab infusion. With sustained improvement at 25 weeks following the initial dose, he completed all eight inputs.

Chiou et al. presented two patients with active thyroid orbitopathy and mild DON with corresponding visual field defects failing to improve with intravenous corticosteroid therapy.

The patient declined conventional treatment with intravenous corticosteroids or orbital decompression and proceeded with teprotumumab infusions. She showed an early vision response after two infusions. Visual acuity improved from 20/100 in the right eye and counting fingers in the left eye to 20/40 in the right and 20/30 in the left eye, with mild residual field defect after the eighth infusion.

Teprotumumab is indicated for DON when conventional therapies have failed, and patients are considered poor surgical candidates for orbital decompression. In a multicenter observational case series, patients were treated with teprotumumab who either had acute or chronic thyroid orbitopathy, as they had failed to respond to oral and intravenous corticosteroid, orbital radiation, and/or prior orbital decompression and progressed to DON.

Ten patients with DON were eligible for inclusion in this study. Seventy percent of patients treated with teprotumumab had an objective improvement in DON after two infusions, measured as significant improvement in visual acuity, resolution of RAPD, or both.

**Asymmetric Thyroid Eye Disease**

Teprotumumab may also improve asymmetric thyroid eye disease. Post-hoc analysis of the combined phase 2 and 3 teprotumumab trials (NCT01868997 and NCT03298867) showed the reduction in proptosis and CAS was significantly greater in the worse affected orbit, from 4.6 mm baseline asymmetric proptosis to 1.8mm in the treated group, while no significant reduction in asymmetry was noted in the placebo group.

**Cosmetic Facial Changes**

Thyroid eye disease may result in swelling and soft tissue expansion. Using 3D facial imaging, Ugradar et al. demonstrated a reduction in the mean volume of the upper face, periorbital region, temples, midface, and lower face, as well as mean reflex distances, after using teprotumumab in 23 patients with thyroid orbitopathy.