# Continuing Education Activity

Acrodynia is a rare disorder caused due to chronic mercury poisoning or idiosyncrasy to mercury. It is a Greek term that means 'painful extremities.' This activity outlines the role of the interprofessional team in the evaluation and management of acrodynia.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the etiology of acrodynia.
- Describe the presentation of acrodynia.
- Outline the typical presentation and differential diagnosis of a patient with acrodynia.
- Review the diagnosis and management of a case of acrodynia.

# Introduction

Acrodynia is a manifestation of chronic mercury poisoning or idiosyncrasy to mercury. This symptom complex includes dermatological and systemic manifestations of exposure to various forms of mercury.

# Etiology

Acrodynia is related more often to the elemental form of mercury (quicksilver) inorganic salts than the organic forms.

# Epidemiology

There is no exact data regarding the present prevalence of acrodynia. The disease is mostly seen in infants and young children. Newborn babies and adults are less vulnerable. The condition was prevalent in the first half of the 20 century in Europe, America, and Australia.

In the present, only rare cases of acrodynia with varied presentations are reported in the literature, most of which are related to accidental exposure to mercury in non-occupational settings. Mercury-containing preservatives (thiomersal), calomel containing diaper powders, plant fungicides, anthelmintics, mercury ointments, certain bactericidal agents, alternate, medicine drugs, folk medicines, and interior latex paints pose a hazard of causing mercury toxicity in domestic settings.

# Pathophysiology

Mercury, in its various forms, has an affinity for the ubiquitous sulfhydryl groups in the tissues by forming covalent bonds. The interaction of mercury with many intracellular moieties results in the dysfunction of enzymes, membrane transportation, and structural proteins. Locally, mercury can produce corrosive actions due to its oxidizing and corrosive action. Mercury absorption can manifest in varied forms due to its vast systemic involvement. The involvement of the immune system in the form of delayed hypersensitivity has been proposed in the causation of acrodynia. There can be genetic variation in the idiosyncratic sensitivity of individuals due to the toxic effects of mercury.

The mechanism of acrodynia may also involve adrenocortical hyperfunction, sympathetic vasomotor dysfunction, and catecholamine dysfunction. The inactivation of  catecholamine-0-methyl transferase can explain arterial hypertension associated with mercury, which in turn increases serum and urinary epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine.

# Toxicokinetics

**Absorption**

The toxic effects of mercury depend on the form of mercury, age of the individual, route of exposure, biotransformation, accumulation in the target organs, and comorbidities. The vaporized form of elemental mercury is more readily absorbed as compared to the oral or intravenous route. The elemental mercury can be volatile at room temperatures, and the volatility increases with the rise in temperatures and aerosolization.

**Distribution and Biotransformation**

After absorption, mercury gets widely distributed in the various body tissues, mainly the kidneys, liver, kidney, and central nervous system. The vaporized form of elemental mercury has a high affinity of accumulation in the nervous system due to its lipid affinity. The toxicity of elemental mercury eventually depends on its conversion to ionic mercury by catalase enzyme.  The inorganic forms of mercury have an affinity for renal tissue, in particular the renal tubules.

**Elimination**

The elemental and inorganic forms of mercury are primarily excreted by glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. Lungs, skin, and feces eliminate a small amount of elemental and inorganic forms of mercury. The biological half-life of both these forms is estimated at nearly 30 to 60 days.

# History and Physical

The initial history can be vague and mimic other conditions. The common presenting signs in an affected child are irritability, peevishness, poor appetite, unexplained drowsiness, weight loss, apathy, painful extremities, and increased sweating. The parents may complain of decreased playfulness owing to muscle atrophy and pain. The initial signs are followed by redness of toes, fingers, and tip of the nose. Photophobia, conjunctivitis, and keratitis are often coexistent.

Other important signs include pruritis, pyrexia of unknown origin, drooling of saliva, degeneration of nails and teeth, swollen gums intention tremors, alopecia, miliaria, generalized weakness, sleep disturbances, and secondary skin infections.

The skin of palms and soles may show vesicular eruption and subsequent desquamation. The palms and feet may be found swollen and shows dusky discoloration. A morbilliform, scarlatiniform, or rubelliform exanthem can be seen along with hemorrhagic puncta. The repetitive scratching of hands may cause lichenification, excoriation, and ulcerating pyoderma. The cutaneous features have been described as ‘puffy, pink, painful, paresthetic, perspiring, and peeling hands’ by one author.

A cutaneous biopsy may show non-specific findings of chronic dermatitis along with hyperplastic sweat glands.

# Evaluation

A thorough clinical history, along with an evaluation of the possible exposures in the domestic surroundings and the workplace, is crucial before commencing the workout. The laboratory evaluation should include the demonstration of mercury levels in the blood, urine, and body tissues. The initial exercise should consist of radiological evaluation, toxicological screening of blood and urine, basic metabolic panel, liver function tests, and complete blood profile. Spot urine collections can be used for creatinine estimations, but the urine mercury concentrations should be estimated by a 24-hour urine sample.

Gas chromatography and thin layer chromatography techniques are useful to differentiate the organic and inorganic salts of mercury. A toxicology screening should be done to rule out other heavy metal poisonings. Estimations of the urinary levels of vanillylmandelic acid, homovanillic acid, and 17-ketosteroid should be done in patients with concurrent hypertension and endocrinological involvement.

While making inferences, it is essential to note that there is no established correlation between the symptomatology of mercury toxicity and its concentrations in the body fluids.

# Treatment / Management

Elimination of the source of exposure is the first crucial step in initiating the treatment. The initial therapy should aim to correct the fluid and electrolyte imbalances. All cases of inhalational toxicity of elemental mercury need monitoring of vital organs. Whole-bowel irrigation by polyethylene and gastric decontamination by activated charcoal can be rarely indicated but can be attempted.

Meso 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid (succimer, DMSA) is an FDA-approved water-soluble analog of BAL (British anti-Lewisite) and forms the mainstay of treatment. WHO recommends succimer therapy to be initiated in children with urine mercury levels of 50 μg/mL or more creatinine, even if the child is asymptomatic.

Antihypertensive drugs like tolazoline, amlodipine, and labetalol can be used to treat coexistent hypertension. Hemodialysis should be reserved for the refractory cases of renal failure secondary to mercury toxicity. The role of peritoneal dialysis and plasma exchange has also been described.

# Differential Diagnosis

Diagnosis of acrodynia can be difficult for clinicians due to the nonspecific systematic manifestations of mercury toxicity and the rarity of the disease in the present times. The dermatological findings can be confused with other skin conditions like postviral acral desquamation, Kawasaki disease, juvenile plantar dermatosis, erythromelalgia, etc.

The involvement of other systems like the nervous, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and respiratory systems can complicate the diagnosis of acrodynia. The common systemic diseases confused with the diagnosis of acrodynia are pheochromocytoma, idiopathic hypertension in the pediatric age group, and Kawasaki disease.

# Prognosis

The prognosis depends on age, idiosyncrasy, dose, and duration of exposure. The prognosis can be variable but is often favorable. In the vast majority of cases, the symptoms get alleviated with chelation therapy. Elder children seem to have a better recovery. In earlier times, the fatality of deaths was as high as 10 to 33%. Infertility (Young disease), bronchiectasis, mental retardation, and permanent neurological deficits have been reported in the survivors. A high prevalence of autism spectrum disorders among descendants of survivors of pink’s disease is also documented.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Unfortunately, despite treatment, some patients are disabled and have a poor quality of life. The organic damage suffered from mercury is often irreversible and patients. The patients often have marked changes in intelligence and cognition. Patients with a short exposure to mercury can recover fully if mercury exposure is discontinued.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis and management of acrodynia involve a high suspicion based on exposure and a multidisciplinary approach. Although various jurisdictions have imposed policies to curtain the exposure of mercury, the practitioners can encounter cases of acrodynia. There is a growing trend of intake of herbal and ayurvedic medicines, which may contain an abnormally high amount of mercury and its variants. The diagnosis of acrodynia can be challenging, given various conditions mimicking the clinical presentation. The health care professional should emphasize an environmental survey, regular follow-up, and proper choice of the chelating agents for better treatment outputs.