The most critical stain for diagnosing ALK(-) ALCL is the diffuse and strong positivity for CD30. It is usually membranous and in the Golgi staining region, although diffuse cytoplasmic positivity is also common. Usually, at least one T-cell antigen is expressed such as CD2, CD3, CD5, and CD7. If there is a loss of T-cell antigens (“null-cell phenotype”), CD43 may be useful to establish the lesion as hematolymphoid. CD45 is not reliably positive. CD4 is typically positive, and CD8 is negative. Many express the cytotoxic molecules TIA-1, Granzyme-B, perforin, and clusterin. Vimentin may be positive and should not be interpreted as evidence of mesenchymal origin. EBV-latent membrane protein type 1 and EBER in situ hybridization are negative in ALK(-) ALCL

Until recently, the genetics of ALK(-) ALCL has been unknown. Recent studies have shown that 30% of ALK(-) ALCL have chromosomal rearrangements of DUSP22 and 8% have chromosomal rearrangements of TP63

Gene expression profiling is also useful as a diagnostic tool to distinguish peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS) and cutaneous ALCL from ALK(-) ALCL. IRF4 (interferon regulatory factor-4) translocations are suggestive of cutaneous ALCL over other CD30 positive lymphoproliferative disorders. Systemic ALCL tends to have other IRF4 abnormalities but no translocations TNFRSF8, BATF3, and TMOD1) whose co-expression could potentially separate ALK(-) ALCL from peripheral T-cell lymphomas. The study found that when these three genes are expressed, ALK(-), ALCL could be distinguished from PTCL-NOS with an overall accuracy near 97% in unrelated groups of patients