Disorders of the hypothalamus frequently pose a diagnostic dilemma. One of the main functions of the hypothalamus is to maintain homeostasis by controlling the endocrine and autonomic functions. The hypothalamus participates in other functions such as body temperature regulation, appetite and weight, childbirth, growth, breast milk production, sleep-wake cycle, sex drive, and even emotions and behavior. Because of this wide variety of physiologic roles, a lesion or disease of the hypothalamus can produce different signs and symptoms, depending on the particular affected area.

Clinical manifestations vary, depending on the affected hypothalamic nuclei and their function. Patients with disorders of the hypothalamus may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms such as vomiting, nausea, hypernatremia, hyponatremia, and diuresis. The cause of disorders of the hypothalamus may be due to a myriad of disorders, including tumoral, trauma, surgery, inflammatory, infectious, and genetic etiologies. The cause is difficult to know without proper imaging studies.

While the endocrinologist is almost always involved in the care of patients with disorders of the hypothalamus, it is often essential to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that include a neurosurgeon, pediatrician, and neurologist.

Nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional group as they will monitor the patient and assist with the education of the patient and family. For those patients that require surgery in the postoperative period for hypernatremia, seizure prophylaxis, pain, and wound infection, the pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the appropriate antibiotics, analgesics, antiemetics, antiepileptics, and antidiuretic medications. The neuroradiologist also plays a vital role in determining the etiology. Women of childbearing age may experience problems during labor and later with breastfeeding.

The care provided to the patient must use an evidence-based approach for evaluation and management. The outcomes of disorders of the hypothalamus depend on the cause. An interprofessional team provides an integrated approach to achieve the best possible outcomes. Collaboration and communication are crucial elements for better results.