The indications for phlebotomy can be numerous. For simplicity and effective organization, this review will distinguish the clinical scenarios into diagnostic and therapeutic.

**Diagnostic**

There are endless medical conditions that can be diagnosed based on results from a blood draw. Listed are a few ways to acquire information from analyzing blood.

Laboratory values: bilirubin, which is a breakdown product of red blood cells, circulates in the bloodstream in two forms - conjugated and unconjugated.

Peripheral blood smear (PBS): Peripheral blood smears are essential in the diagnosis of anemia. By analyzing a thin layer of blood under a microscope, accurate analysis of RBC shape, color, size, and other morphologies can help establish a differential for the various causes of why a patient can be anemic.

**Therapeutic**

Therapeutic phlebotomy is the practice of bloodletting passed down through generations. It is beneficial for certain conditions where removing red blood cells or serum iron improves clinical outcomes.

Polycythemia Vera: Polycythemia vera is a myeloproliferative disorder resulting in the excess production of red blood cells. Symptoms of this disorder, such as plethora, splenomegaly, pruritus after showering, and redness, are due to the hyperviscosity of the blood predisposing patients to thrombosis.

Hemochromatosis: Hemochromatosis refers to a condition of iron overload. The human body does not have the ability to get rid of iron in any amount of significance. In this condition, there is an irregular absorption of iron due to gene mutations resulting in excessive buildup.

Porphyria: Porphyria encompasses a list of conditions that involve the disruption of heme synthesis. Hemoglobin can be broken down into heme, the iron carrying component, and globin chains. Heme is a porphyrin ring that holds an iron ion. Each type of porphyria is associated with a specific enzyme deficiency in the heme synthesis pathway. While the list of conditions has varying symptoms, it is thought that the production of certain enzymes in the heme synthesis pathway is inhibited by the body's own iron. Thus, research shows that phlebotomy is an excellent treatment option by reducing iron stores.

Various other conditions have been linked with phlebotomy as an appropriate treatment option. These include Hemoglobin SC disease due to the reduction in blood viscosity and sickle cell disease resulting in a potential decrease in the frequency of vaso-occlusive crisis events.