Treatment of stress urinary incontinence subdivides into behavioral, pharmacological, and surgical management. Regardless of whether the patient desires any of the three options, all patients should receive counseling on lifestyle modifications. Bladder irritants to avoid include caffeinated beverages (coffee, tea, sodas) alcohol, citrus fruits, chocolate, tomato, spicy foods, and tobacco.

Behavioral methods include:

- **P****elvic muscle exercises**such as Kegel exercises – three sets of ten pelvic musculature contractions held for ten seconds three times a day

- **Bladder retraining**(timed voiding) - regularly scheduling urination leading to an empty bladder for longer periods throughout the day

- **Biofeedback**- visual or audio signals can provide feedback to properly contract pelvic floor muscles

- **Electrostimulation**- via acupuncture needles for 30 minutes weekly for 12 weeks followed by monthly maintenance sessions

- **Pessaries**– the most common pessaries used for SUI are the ring and Gellhorn pessary
- Pessaries aid in elongating and elevating the urethrovesical angle
- Proper fitting is necessary
- If the pessary is too tight, it may cause urinary obstruction with subsequent urinary retention, and if the pessary is too small, it usually will fall out soon after placement

Pharmacological options include:

- **Oxybutynin**- anti-cholinergic that blocks the muscarinic receptor in the smooth muscle of the bladder inhibiting detrusor contractions

- **Tricyclic anti-depressants**- have alpha-adrenergic effects that aid in urethral contraction and closure

- **Estrogen**- applied topically to increase urethral blood flow and sensitivity of alpha-adrenergic receptors

The goals of surgery for stress incontinence include reinforcing the pubourethral ligaments and the paraurethral connective tissue at the mid-urethra. Surgical treatment generally divides into abdominal procedures (open or laparoscopic), vaginal procedures, and urethral bulking agents.

Abdominal procedures include

- **Marshall Marchetti Krantz**(MMK) - retropubic approach elevating and fixating the anterolateral part of the urethra to the posterior pubic symphysis and adjacent periosteum of the pubic bone

- **Burch colposuspension**– the bladder neck is supported with a few stitches placed on either side of the urethra and the iliopectineal (Cooper's) ligament

- **Pubovaginal sling**-  a strip of rectus fascia or fascia lata is placed directly under the bladder neck via the retropubic space and secured at the level of the rectus abdominis fascia

An abdominal approach is indicated if there is a large uterus compressing the bladder necessitating concomitant hysterectomy, no vaginal prolapse, adnexal pathology, or failed vaginal incontinence surgery. Vaginal surgery should be considered when vaginal prolapse is present, a history of failed abdominal surgery, or the patient is high risk for abdominal surgery (multiple abdominal incisions, morbid obesity).

Vaginal procedures include

- **Modified Pereyra Procedure**(MPP) - elevation of paraurethral tissue to the abdominal wall creating a significant elevation of the urethrovesical angle

- **Mid-urethral sling procedures**- polypropylene mesh is placed under the mid-urethra, the more critical continence zone - the open-weave mesh stabilizes and promotes ingrowth of the collagen over time
- **TVT- retropubic**- the mesh insertion is through the retropubic space and exits out the abdominal wall suprapubically
- **TVT-O**- "inside-out" placement of the mesh from the vagina through the obturator foramen out through the skin of the groin

MPP and MMK can be considered as primary or secondary treatment and may be an adjunct with vaginal vault repair for prolapse.  Urethral slings have become the most common type of surgery to correct SUI. Advantages of the TVT sling include procedure completion in as little as 30 minutes with same day discharge, no post-operative urinary catheterization, short recovery time, and minimal pain. A benefit of the TVT-retropubic compared to TVT-O is avoidance of bleeding from the medial branches of obturator vessels while TVT-O decreases the risk of bladder injury.

If significant uterine procidentia exists, a vaginal hysterectomy should be performed followed by retropubic suspension. If pelvic pressure symptoms exist with SUI, check and correct for cystocele, enterocele or rectocele with an anterior repair, enterocele repair or posterior colpoperineoplasty, respectively.

Urethral bulking is the injection of synthetic materials (i.e., collagen) into the urethral mucosal layer to provide support and tighten the bladder neck’s opening. This procedure is done in an office setting with local anesthesia. Two to three injections may be required to improve symptoms.

There is no single surgical procedure for the treatment of all patients with SUI. The surgery must be tailored for the patient, not the reverse. Prophylactic incontinence procedure should be considered for patients with prolapse without SUI since post-operative voiding dysfunction may occur with an anterior colporrhaphy.