# Continuing Education Activity

Phenobarbital is included in a class of drugs called barbiturates. This drug can be used for anti-seizure management, treatment for status epilepticus, insomnia, as well as benzodiazepine and alcohol withdrawal treatment. This activity reviews phenobarbital's indications, mechanism of action, toxicity, contraindications, administration, adverse effects, monitoring, and how to enhance clinical outcomes. This activity will provide information for the interprofessional team in the management of a patient presenting with a phenobarbital overdose. Phenobarbital overdose is an emergency and requires efficient teamwork from the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of phenobarbital.
- Describe the possible adverse effects of phenobarbital.
- Explain appropriate monitoring for the toxicity of phenobarbital.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for enhancing care coordination and communication to advance phenobarbital overdose management and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Phenobarbital is one of the sedative-hypnotic agents which belongs to the barbiturates class of drugs. Phenobarbital offers a wide array of clinical uses that commonly include anti-seizure management.

Phenobarbital can also be used to relieve insomnia and apprehensiveness, although addiction is a point of concern when using phenobarbital for insomnia. This drug is also useful for benzodiazepine and alcohol withdrawal treatment due to its anti-seizure properties and sedative effect. The syndrome resulting from alcohol withdrawal has a better clinical outcome when treated with benzodiazepines, according to significant evidence-based studies.

# Mechanism of Action

Phenobarbital increases the amount of time chloride channels are open, consequently depressing the central nervous system. This action occurs by acting on GABA-A receptor subunits. When phenobarbital binds to these receptors, the chloride ion gates open and stay open, allowing a steady flow of these ions into neuronal cells.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption: Rapid and complete absorption occurs after oral or IV administration.

Time of Peak Plasma Concentration: 30 minutes to 1 hour for oral formulations; 5 minutes for IV injection

Distribution: Rapidly distributed to all tissues and fluids

Metabolism: Metabolized primarily via acetylation in the liver (hepatic microsomal enzyme system)

Excretion: About 25 to 50% of unchanged drug is excreted in the urine. It is important to remember clearance rates vary with patients and their specific presentations. For instance, terminally ill cancer patients on phenobarbital may need dose adjustments due to reduced clearance of this drug.

# Administration

Phenobarbital administration is via a variety of routes. These include

- **Oral Elixir:**20 mg/5 mL

- **Oral Tablets:**15 mg, 16.2 mg, 30 mg, 32.4 mg, 60 mg, 64.8 mg, 97.2 mg, 100 mg

- **Intramuscular (IM)/Intravenous (IV) Solution:**65 mg/mL , 130 mg/mL

When phenobarbital is given intravenously, it should be for emergency cases. If possible, other routes of administration should be accessed first. When given IV, check for any indurations. Studies have shown that an induration at a site of infusion results in a decreased bioavailability of phenobarbital.

**Specific Patients Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment. However, phenobarbital may induce liver microsomal enzyme activities. Therefore, it should be taken with caution in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with renal impairment. However, approximately 25 to 50% of phenobarbital is eliminated in the urine, so the drug should be used with caution in patients with severe renal impairment.

- **Pregnant Women:**It is considered a pregnancy Category D medicine. There are no systematic and well-controlled studies reported for pregnant women. In animal studies, there has been no evidence of any harm to the fetus or any fertility impairments due to phenobarbital. This drug should be used with caution only if clearly needed during pregnancy.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**The manufacturer recommends exercising cautions for phenobarbital therapy in nursing mothers as the drug presents in breast milk. It is also recommended to limit or discontinue phenobarbital if excessive drowsiness and poor weight gain are observed for infants.

- **Pediatric Patients:**It is reported that phenobarbital is associated with cognitive deficits in pediatric patients who were taking it for complicated febrile seizures. It is recommended to use dose as per manufacturer label.

- **Geriatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of phenobarbital are not systematically studied in geriatric patients. However, it is recommended to use the drug cautiously as it may cause excitement, depression, or confusion in some geriatric patients.

# Adverse Effects

Complications associated with phenobarbital use are coma, decreased effort to breathe, and low blood pressure.

When used long-term, adverse events of irritability, loss of appetite, achiness in the bones, joints, or muscles, depression, and liver damage, although liver damage is a rare complication, are recorded.

**Nervous System:**Agitation, somnolence, confusion, CNS depression, hyperkinesia, ataxia,  nervousness, nightmares, psychiatric disturbance,  thinking abnormality, insomnia, anxiety, hallucinations, dizziness

**Respiratory System:**Apnea, hypoventilation

**Cardiovascular System:**Hypotension, bradycardia, syncope

**Digestive System:**Nausea, vomiting, constipation

**Dermatologic Reactions:**Exfoliative dermatitis,  toxic epidermic necrolysis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome (rare complication)

**Other Reported Reactions:**Headache; hypersensitivity reactions, including but not limited to angioedema and skin rashes; injection site reactions; fever; liver damage and megaloblastic anemia in chronic users.

# Contraindications

Phenobarbital is contraindicated in patients with known barbiturate sensitivity. Barbiturates, including phenobarbital, are contraindicated in a patient with a history/manifest or latent porphyria, liver impairment, and large doses in patients with nephritic syndrome. Phenobarbital should not be given to persons with a known history of addiction to sedative-hypnotic medicines. Injectable preparation should not be given via intraarterial or subcutaneous routes.

Phenobarbital is a cytochrome P450 inducer, so careful consideration is necessary when given concurrently with other medications. For instance, a woman with epilepsy who takes oral contraceptive pills and phenobarbital at the same time must be fully aware of the possible interaction between the medications. Phenobarbital is known to induce the liver's cytochrome p450 enzyme. The induction of this enzyme speeds up the metabolism of estrogens and progestins. Thus, a woman taking both antiepileptic medication and oral contraceptive pills can have an unexpected pregnancy due to the decreased efficacy of her oral contraceptive pills.

Patients with underlying obstructive lung disease will have an increased risk of complications.

It is imperative not to use alcohol while taking barbiturates because of the danger of severe respiratory depression when both drugs are in the patient's system. When taken simultaneously, both drugs' individual effects on GABA-A are additive, potentially resulting in a life-threatening scenario.

# Monitoring

The range of phenobarbital deemed effective without causing issues to an individual is between 10 to 40 mcg/mL. Once blood levels increase above 40 mcg/mL, the patient is in a lethal range and at substantial risk.

# Toxicity

Barbiturate toxicity is noticeable at 1 gram via the oral route, although this varies depending on the individual. Doses above 2 grams can result in death, but the deadly dose usually is between 40 and 80 mcg/mL.

- Cognitive impairment

- Decreased heart rate

- Incoordination

- Nausea

- Muscle weakness

- Polydipsia

- Below normal urine output

- Decreased body temperature

- Mydriasis

Deaths have resulted from marked respiratory depression, hypotension, and coma.

**Management**

Phenobarbital overdose is a healthcare emergency and requires teamwork from the entire healthcare spectrum to help the patient. It is imperative to implement the management of cardiac and respiratory status quickly.

Treatment of phenobarbital toxicity is supportive, comprising maintenance of airway function (through endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation), correction of bradycardia, and hypotension (with IV fluids and vasopressors, if necessary).

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Phenobarbital is a class C-IV control substance, and it is used for its sedative and anti-seizure properties in patients with status epileptics and alcohol withdrawal management. It is known for being highly addictive and, in prior years, found to be a common agent of choice for suicide attempts.

Although restrictions on access to barbiturates have caused the number of overdoses to decline, it is still crucial to assess and treat patients with a phenobarbital overdose expeditiously.

While in recovery, the patient requires proper counsel about barbiturates and proper/improper use.

In summary, the management of therapy with phenobarbital is the responsibility of the entire interprofessional team, including clinicians, specialists, PAs and NPs, nurses, pharmacists, and mental health practitioners, operating as a cohesive unit to optimize treatment outcomes and prevent mortality and morbidity from misuse of the drug. [Level 5]