# Introduction

Extraocular muscles are crucial for ocular movement. The four rectus muscles, superior oblique, and inferior oblique work in conjunction to move the eyes in every direction. The inferior oblique muscle is primarily responsible for external rotation. The secondary and tertiary actions are elevation and abduction, respectively.

# Structure and Function

The inferior oblique is the shortest of all the eye muscles, measuring approximately 37 mm long.

Because of their course, the superior and inferior oblique muscles are the only muscles that can depress or elevate the eye, respectively when the eye moves in adduction.

# Embryology

The inferior oblique, along with the superior, inferior, and medial rectus muscles, is derived from prechordal mesoderm. A unique feature to the inferior oblique, compared to the superior oblique, is that it is almost entirely muscular, rather than both muscular and tendinous.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The inferior oblique muscle receives its blood supply by a medial muscular branch of the ophthalmic artery and a branch of the infraorbital artery.

# Nerves

The inferior division of cranial nerve III, also known as the oculomotor nerve, runs inferolaterally along the inferior rectus to innervate the inferior oblique muscle. The nerve is approximately 27 mm long, running from orbital apex to the inferior oblique muscle.

Interestingly, the nerve accompanies an artery, vein, and a fibrous tissue component. The terminal 8 mm of the nerve remains encased in this fibrous component. Hence, innervation of the inferior oblique occurs through a neurofibrovascular bundle. The neurofibrovascular bundle is unique to the inferior oblique muscle. It is of particular anatomical importance in anterior transposition surgeries. After transposition, the neurofibrovascular bundle acts as the origin of the inferior oblique. The neurofibrovascular bundle serves as an ancillary origin for the posterior fibers of the inferior oblique.

The inferior division of the oculomotor nerve also carries parasympathetic fibers along the optic nerve to the ciliary ganglion. These fibers innervate the sphincter pupillae and ciliary muscles.

# Muscles

Extraocular muscles classify as specialized skeletal muscle. They possess both slow tonic and saccadic type muscle fibers. Unlike other muscles, extraocular muscles have a large ratio of nerve fibers to skeletal muscle fibers. The ratio is 1 to 3 through 1 to 5; other skeletal muscles are 1 to 50 through 1 to 125.

# Physiologic Variants

Though rare, anatomical variations of extraocular muscles include absence or duplication of muscles and anomalies of innervation or insertions.

# Surgical Considerations

The inferior oblique muscle externally rotates, elevates, and abducts the eye. Any injury to this muscle may result in strabismus, which can be a noticeable extraocular defect. Though the patient may find ways to compensate for the extraocular movement disability, cosmetic repair requires surgical intervention.

Inferior oblique overaction exists in 70% of patients with esotropia and 30% of patients with exotropia.

Surgical correction of inferior oblique overaction includes disinsertion, extirpation and denervation, recession, myectomy, and anterior transposition of the muscle.

The anterior transposition approach of the inferior oblique muscle is an option with patients who have inferior oblique overaction with dissociated vertical deviation.

A myectomy is conducted when a patient presents with vertical hypertropia, without dissociated vertical deviation. Patients with inferior oblique overaction are at increased risk for retinal holes and tears. Hence a myectomy is both a prophylactic measure in addition to a cosmetic correction. In inferior oblique overaction, the muscle pulls on the thin sclera and is more likely to form a tear or hole in the retina.

The inferior oblique muscle is transected and often used to provide traction to the globe during enucleation (see figure).

# Clinical Significance

Diagnosis of inferior oblique dysfunction is often discovered by parents and pediatricians, allowing an early referral to an ophthalmologist. In the early stages, patching the dominant eye can force the eye with the injury to compensate and strengthen. However, later on, the patching technique may not be successful, and surgical intervention is the recommended option.

# Other Issues

In lower blepharoplasty resection, the inferior oblique muscle is susceptible to injury. Patients will present with symptoms ranging from transient diplopia to permanent strabismus.