HLAs are identifiable via multiple different types of detection methods.

**Molecular Testing**

Sequence-specific primer polymerase chain reaction: this method makes use of various primers that are complementary to specific HLA DNA sequences. The DNA is plated into a multi-well plate with different primers. If the DNA extracted from that cell is complementary to the primer, it will be amplified, and the product can be run on a gel via electrophoresis. The band can be identified as a particular primer and matched to candidate HLA alleles that are known.

Sequence-specific oligonucleotide probes

One way to detect the high polymorphism seen in these genes is via polymerase chain reaction paired with sequence-specific oligonucleotides. This method involves amplifies the gene via PCR and then probing DNA with a fluorescent tag. The HLA type is determined using known HLA alleles as a reference, and that gene may undergo sequencing.

Direct DNA sequencing

Another technique is to use sanger sequencing or next-gen sequencing to sequence the entire gene of a specific HLA variant after amplification via PCR. Once the sequence is known, it can be compared to previously published know HLA alleles.

**Serological Testing**

Serological testing generally uses a recipient's lymphocytes obtained from their sera and incubated with anti-sera containing antibodies against various HLA class 1 subtypes. The solution is then incubated with rabbit sera, providing a source of complement; a dye is also added, which allows the identification of dead cells. This assay progresses serially with different HLA antibodies put into each well of a tray. Through the elimination of those wells with a positive result allows for the determination of the HLA type. This method provides a relatively quick and easy way to determine general subtypes of HLA's present but does not offer an in-depth analysis of the true molecular identity of the HLA's. This method is less common today because of its inability to detect small changes in HLA types that may make an immunological difference and cause a transfusion reaction.

**Antibody Testing**

Cytotoxic cell-based antibody testing can also be an effective way to measure the recipient's risk of having a positive crossmatch. In this method, a set of 30-40 donor cell lymphocytes are mixed with dye and complement with the serum of the recipient. If the serum of the recipient contains a high enough level of HLA specific antibodies against a particular donor lymphocyte complement will be activated, the cell will die, and the dye will be taken up, and that well in the plate will be visually identifiable as a positive result. This test yields a value known as a percentage panel reactive antibody. Its result measures the recipient's risk of a positive crossmatch in a similar population of donors. This test does lack the ability to take race and different HLA frequencies in a population into account, weakening its value.