Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) transports the majority of plasma cholesterol and binding to the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) cell membrane through two ligands on LDL, apolipoprotein B-100 (apoB-100) and apoE. The complex of LDL and LDLR enters the cells, then LDL is released, and LDLR recycles to the cell membrane.

The liver secretes the proprotein PCSK9 that extracellularly binds to LDLR and inhibits the recycling of LDLR to the cell membrane. Therefore, PCSK9 leads to a decrease in LDLR and increases serum LDL.

**LDL Receptor Genetic Defects**

The impairment of LDLR results in decreased LDL clearance from the plasma and an elevation of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C ), which causes increased uptake of oxidase LDL or other modifications by macrophages and resulting in foam cell formation.

- Class 1 – Null, due to defect in the synthesis of LDLR

- Class 2 – Transport defective, in which impairment in the transport of LDLR from the endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi in the cells.

- Class 3 – Binding defect, in which ability dysfunction of LDLR to bind with LDL.

- Class 4 – Internalization defect, in which the LDL receptors do not cluster in the clathrin-coated pits, so minimizing LDL internalization by the hepatocyte.

- Class 5 - Recycling defect, in which LDLR is not recycling to the cell membrane.

**Familial Defective Apolipoprotein B-100**

This disorder is related to a defect in the apoB-100 ligand on the LDL. Therefore, it reduces the LDL clearance from plasma and subsequently causes a high level of serum LDL.

**Mutations in the PCSK9 Gene**

Mutations that cause increased activity of PCSK9 lead to increased degradation of the LDL receptor and subsequently elevation of plasma LDL. However, mutations that inactivate PCSK9 cause lower plasma LDL levels and reduce coronary heart disease (CHD).