Influenza viruses express two types of antigens; hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA). Influenza A virus has 18 HA and 11 NA subtypes, and these antigens are critical for the organism's virulence. The trimeric hemagglutinin glycoprotein acts by promoting attachment of the virus to the host cell surface resulting in fusion and thereby releasing virions into the cytoplasm.

Differently combined H and N antigens are seen in influenza A, which in turn undergo antigenic drifts and shifts resulting in antigenic variation and, thereby, the necessity for vaccine strain types to vary accordingly. Antigenic drifts are genetic changes occurring in the virus due to various actions of polymerases leading to gradual antigenic changes in both HA and NA, producing new variant strains. An antigenic shift occurs when the currently circulating virus disappears and is replaced by a new subtype with novel glycoproteins, to which antibodies against the previously circulating subtype do not cross-react.

The influenza vaccine conveys immunity against the influenza virus by stimulating the production of antibodies specific to the disease. Antibodies to NA act by effectively aggregating viruses on the cell surface and reducing the amount of virus released from infected cells. Regarding the induction of immunity, the surface HA protein of the influenza virus contains two structural elements, head, and stalk, wherein the head is the primary target of antibodies that confer protective immunity against influenza viruses.

Flu shots offer protection against three or four strains of the flu virus. Trivalent flu vaccines provide protection against two influenza A strains, H1N1 and H3N2, and one influenza B strain. Quadrivalent flu vaccines protect against the same strains as the trivalent vaccine as well as an additional strain of influenza B.

- In the US, mainly, three types of influenza vaccines are available, Inactivated Influenza Vaccine (IIV), Recombinant Influenza Vaccine (RIV), and Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine (LAIV).

- Numerals after letters indicate valency (the number of influenza viruses represented), i.e., 3 for trivalent vaccines and 4 for quadrivalent vaccines.

- While prefixes are sometimes used to refer to specific IIVs: a for adjuvanted IIV (e.g., aIIV4) and cc for cell culture-based IIV (e.g., ccIIV4).

The mechanism of immune protection is more complicated, as while primarily humoral, cell-mediated immunity also plays an essential role in immunity to influenza. After vaccination, it takes two weeks to build up an immune response against the flu. The effectiveness of a vaccine depends on several host factors such as age, underlying health status, genetic status, and antigenic matches between the vaccine and circulating viruses.