# Continuing Education Activity

Tuberculosis is the leading cause of death from an infectious agent worldwide, causing even more deaths in patients with HIV/AIDS. A third of the world's population is said to have contracted the bacteria responsible for tuberculosis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, with estimates of ten million new infections globally each year. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of primary pulmonary tuberculosis.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the etiology of primary pulmonary tuberculosis.
- Outline the evaluation of patients presenting with primary pulmonary tuberculosis.
- Review the management options available for primary pulmonary tuberculosis.
- Describe some interprofessional team strategies that can result in better care coordination for patients presenting with primary pulmonary tuberculosis.

# Introduction

Discovered in 1882 by Robert Koch, tuberculosis (TB), one of the oldest known infections, is a major global health problem and one of the top ten causes of death worldwide. It is a disease of humans, as it does not affect animals naturally.

Tuberculosis is the leading cause of death from an infectious agent worldwide, causing even more deaths in HIV/AIDS patients. A third of the world's population is said to have contracted the bacteria responsible for tuberculosis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, with estimates of ten million new infections globally each year.

The major pathology in tuberculosis is necrotizing granulomatous inflammation, with the lungs being the primary organs of involvement of the disease in up to 87% of the cases. Having that said, almost any bodily organ could be a site for the disease.

The worldwide incidence has been steadily decreasing, but it is still a common problem in regions such as Sub-Saharan Africa. It is still a major medical cause of mortality as the global death toll reaches up to 1.5 million deaths a year.

# Etiology

Mycobacterium species include a variety of organisms with different genomic structures, morphology, and tropism.M. tuberculosis is a gram-negative bacteria. It is a small, aerobic, and nonmotile bacillus. It is characterized by a complex wall structure that is rich in long-chain fatty acids. The genus is divided into two groups: fast-growing and slow-growing organisms. M. tuberculosis belongs to the slow-growing group.M. tuberculosis cell wall is rich in peptidoglycan and complex lipids. These structures are major factors for pathogenesis.

M. tuberculosis is a facultative intracellular bacterium. It acts as an inhibitor of macrophages, proliferates within the macrophages, causing the eventual death of invaded macrophages and the release of the bacillus to the alveolar space.Mycobacterium tuberculosis is a very slow-growing organism, taking up to 24 hours to grow.

# Epidemiology

Tuberculosis is a reportable disease in almost all world countries. This facilitates more accurate disease tracking and epidemiological studies. The incidence of tuberculosis was slowly decreasing until the surge of HIV infection, which led to this trend reversal.

The WHO estimated that it infected 10 million individuals in the year 2017. Among world countries, India and China are leading in TB deaths.

Several other medical conditions and certain medications also increase the risk of developing TB infection. This includes diabetes, chronic corticosteroid use, and the use of anti-TNF biologics. A unique group at risk are patients who underwent gastrectomy, which appears to be due to certain nutritional deficiencies.

Tuberculosis transmits via aerosolized microdroplets. This is classically generated from a coughing patient with active tuberculosis. Other means of generating aerosolized droplets include singing, shouting, and sneezing.

# Pathophysiology

Tuberculosis pulmonary inflammation is characterized by lung tissue destruction and necrosis, unlike other lung infections that affect mainly the airways.M. tuberculosis include cell wall mycolic acid glycolipids, lipoarabinomannan (LAM), sulfatides, and trehalose dimycolate.

M. tuberculosis cell wall also contains different kinds of mycolic acids that are integral to the organism growth inside macrophages.

Unlike most gram-negative bacteria, the main virulence factor of tuberculosis evolves around "survival" within its human host, rather than actively attacking the host or evading its defenses. The main example is when it develops cholesterol uptake mechanisms from the host to enhance its survival.

# Histopathology

The main pathological feature of tuberculosis is "granuloma formation," a rounded collection of macrophages surrounded by lymphocytes. The unique feature differentiating tuberculous granulomas from other infectious granulomatous conditions (such as Histoplasma and Leishmania) is "caseation" or central necrosis.

# History and Physical

After primary infection, the majority of patients remain asymptomatic. Most of these asymptomatic individuals clear the infection. However, a portion enters a "latent" phase with the potential "reactivation" in the future.

Latency is a unique aspect of tuberculosis infection. The majority of infected individuals who get infected do not actually develop symptoms until months to years after their initial exposure. This is known as latent tuberculosis.

The physical exam is usually normal in mild disease or shows nonspecific lung findings such as crackles or tubular breath sounds. Absent breath sounds are noted over consolidation areas. Extrapulmonary findings include clubbing and other signs of distant organ involvement.

# Evaluation

The workup of suspected TB cases begins with a chest radiograph. The workup should be initiated in any patients with more than three weeks of cough and additional symptoms such as fever, night sweats, hemoptysis, or weight loss. The workup should also be initiated in at-risk groups with prolonged unexplained illnesses. These at-risk groups include the following: HIV-positive patients, individuals with known recent exposure to a case of active tuberculosis, low socioeconomic status, chronic illnesses (such as diabetes, chronic kidney disease, malignancy, or patient on immune suppressive), and IV drug users.

If imaging is suggestive of infection three sputum samples should be collected and sent for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) staining with one sample tested with nucleic acid amplification (NAAT). If both AFB culture and NAAT are positive, TB is likely and treatment should be initiated. Tuberculin skin test (TST) and interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA) should be added to the workup as they support the diagnosis, however, negative results don't exclude the infection.

**Radiological Findings**

Early in the disease, chest radiographs are usually normal. Hilar lymphadenopathy is a hallmark of radiological findings in tuberculosis. Other common findings include perihilar and right-sided infiltration and pleural effusion.

# Treatment / Management

In 2016, international guidelines were developed to treat drug-susceptible tuberculosis, led by the Americal Thoracic Society and Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) with the participation of various US and international organizations.

The preferred regimen is the combination of INH, RIF, PZA, and EMB for the intensive phase for 8 weeks (56 doses) and INH and RIF for the continuation phase for 18 weeks (126 doses). The medications are given daily, 7 days a week. If there is a concern about compliance or difficulty achieving DOT, the dosing for the continuous phase could be modified to 3 times weekly. When drug sensitivity is available, and the bacterium is susceptible to both INH and RIF, EMB could be stopped.

Treatment of tuberculosis in HIV-positive patients constitutes a unique challenge due to potential drug interaction with antiretroviral therapy. In general, it is still recommended to use the same duration of treatment for both intensive and continuation phases (two and four months) in HIV-positive patients who are infected with drug-susceptible tuberculosis. The exception is an unusual situation when the patient is not receiving antiretroviral therapy. In this situation, it is suggested that the continuation phase is continued for 3 additional months.

Latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI) is treated with fewer medications for a shorter period of time. 2020 LTBI treatment guidelines include the NTCA- and CDC-recommended treatment regimens that comprise three preferred rifamycin-based regimens and two alternative monotherapy regimens with daily isoniazid. These are only recommended for persons infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis that is presumed to be susceptible to isoniazid or rifampin. A regimen of 3 months of once-weekly isoniazid plus rifapentine is a preferred regimen that is strongly recommended for children aged more than 2 years and adults. Another option is 4 months of daily rifampin for HIV-negative adults and children of all ages. Three months of daily isoniazid plus rifampin is a preferred treatment that is conditionally recommended for adults and children of all ages and for patients with HIV. Regimens of 6 or 9 months of daily isoniazid are alternative recommended regimens.

In general, severe treatment side effects that warrant cessation of medications occur in 4% to 9% of patients receiving conventional drug therapy.

**Drug-resistant Tuberculosis**

Drug resistance is a major problem in treating tuberculosis.

Mono-resistant TB: Resistance to one of the drugs of standard first-line medications.

Polydrug resistance: Resistance to more than one first-line medication (except the combination of INH and RIF).

Multidrug resistance (MDR): Resistance to both INH and RIF

Extensive drug resistance (XDR): MDR plus resistance to a fluoroquinolone and injectable second-line medications.

There are multiple settings where drug resistance could develop. Nonstandardized treatment protocols among countries or medication shortages in resource-limited countries lead to incomplete treatment.

There are multiple second-line drugs for MDR, but unfortunately, the cure rate is much lower than drug-susceptible tuberculosis. The global cure rate is variable between countries. Surveys reported cure rates between 20 to 48%.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis can be broad, especially with respiratory involvement, but can include the following:

- Sarcoidosis: Mainly differentiated from tuberculosis by the presence of non-caseating granuloma.

- Fungal infections: Such as  Histoplasmosis, Aspergillosis, Actinomycosis, Blastomycosis, and Nocardiosis. Epidemiological history aid in determining the risk of developing these infections.

- Nontuberculous mycobacterial infections (NTM): such as Mycobacterium kansasii.

- Lung malignancy and lymphoma: Tissue biopsy is needed to role out this diagnosis if suspected

- Lung abscess

# Treatment Planning

Patients with active tuberculosis undergoing medical treatment should undergo organized monitoring and follow-up. Sputum sampling and culture with drug susceptibility testing should be done at the third and fourth months into treatment to verify negativity. A sample should also be obtained at the end of treatment. Chest X-rays or equivalent imaging should be obtained two months after treatment initiation and at the end of therapy. Vision assessment should be done monthly, starting the third month till the end of therapy. Screening for hepatitis B and C should be done at baseline for patients at risk (such as IV drug users). Monthly laboratory assessment should start after one month of therapy for blood cells (CBC), liver enzymes, and creatinine. CD4 and RNA viral load should be assessed monthly for HIV-positive patients.

# Prognosis

Tuberculosis prognosis is variable as it could be a multi-system disease and is affected by many factors. Patient characteristics such as age, immune status, comorbidities, time of treatment initiation, and compliance have a significant impact on the outcome. In general, treatment is successful in about 85% of cases. The World Health Organization estimates the mortality rate to be at 15 percent.

# Complications

Pulmonary tuberculosis has a variety of complications. Bleeding from bronchial, pulmonary, and intercostal arteries lead to hemoptysis. This bleeding is usually minimal and rarely leads to massive blood loss.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The most effective approach for tuberculosis disease prevention is identifying cases and effective treatment. Medical therapy considerably decreases bacterial load transmission within communities.

Using the FAST approach seems to effectively reduce the burden of nosocomial transmission in a hospital setting. This consists of Finding undiagnosed tuberculosis infections Actively through rapid molecular testing, Separating them safely, and initiating appropriate treatment.

Identifying and mapping "hot sport" within a geographical area and providing preventative INH therapy seems to decrease disease burden within communities.

Socioeconomic development (such as improving public transport settings) and improving nutritional health within communities reduce crowdedness and minimize close contact or prolonged exposure. This reduces the risk of community transmission and decreases the disease burden.

Several vaccine candidates have shown efficacy in animal models compared to the old BCG vaccine. However, none so far have shown efficacy in humans. One trial examined a vaccinia virus-produced M. tuberculosis vaccine has failed to elicit an adequate immune response in human hosts.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A national detection program should be implemented to help curb the disease burden in communities. These programs are responsible for sample processing and result feedback to treating healthcare professionals. Infection control is another integral part of improving the disease outcome. It requires coordination between public health, treating facilities, and the local community. Drug administration under directly observed therapy (DOT) requires feedback pathways between patients, observers, and treating healthcare professionals. In most countries, the patients are assigned a "Case Manager" usually by public health. Communication between the patient and treating professional helps the case manager solve treatment problems and help achieve treatment goals.

Effective patient education about tuberculosis infection, treatment objectives, medications, and their side effects, appropriate infection-control measures vastly improve chances of treatment success and prognosis. Healthy educators and pharmacists play crucial roles here and must be utilized where available.

All these different medical disciplines need to function as a cohesive, collaborative interprofessional healthcare team to improve patient outcomes.

Drug-resistant TB is a major problem now. Communication between clinical pharmacists and treating health professional help in selecting appropriate therapy and minimizes unnecessary drug exposure.