# Continuing Education Activity

Nelson syndrome or post adrenalectomy syndrome was first reported in 1958 by Dr. Don H. Nelson, an endocrinology fellow at the time. This clinical syndrome was initially called a postadrenalectomy syndrome, but later it was named after Dr. Nelson as "Nelson syndrome." This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of Nelson syndrome and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of Nelson syndrome medical conditions and emergencies.
- Summarize the evaluation of patients with Nelson syndrome.
- Review the management options available for Nelson syndrome.

# Introduction

Nelson syndrome or post adrenalectomy syndrome was first reported in 1958 in one patient by Dr. Don H. Nelson, an endocrinology fellow at the time.

# Etiology

Nelson syndrome cases are seen as a result of bilateral adrenalectomy for the treatment of Cushing disease.

Another view is that the corticotropic cells that initially led to the Cushing disease's adenoma are stimulated, which then causes tumor progression.

Risk factors for developing Nelson syndrome have been studied in an attempt to achieve early detection and treatment. High levels of plasma ACTH one year after bilateral adrenalectomy have the strongest predictive capabilities.

If a tumor is not detected, then a brain MRI should be performed at regular intervals. High levels of 24-hour urinary cortisol before the bilateral adrenalectomy is also a predictive factor.

# Epidemiology

Nelson syndrome is a rare clinical manifestation after bilateral adrenalectomy and is not prevalent in the general population.

According to the University of California Los Angeles group, the incidence is 15% to 25%, occurring approximately one to four years after the bilateral adrenalectomy.

# Pathophysiology

Patients presenting Nelson syndrome originally suffered from Cushing disease. In Cushing disease, the corticotropic cells in the pituitary adenoma over-express ACTH leading to increased cortisol production. Management of Cushing disease via surgical resection of the pituitary adenoma has a high rate of success, and in many patients, it is the only treatment used. However, refractory cases of Cushing disease may require bilateral adrenalectomies, which provide over 85% success rate for endocrinological control.

Cortisol is produced in the adrenal glands. When patients with Cushing disease are treated with bilateral adrenalectomy, the cortisol production is absent, and the hypothalamus receives the signal to increase the CRH production and the corticotropic cells in the pituitary gland will respond to CRH secreted by the hypothalamus with the secretion of ACTH in large amounts due to the absence of feedback inhibition. This increase in CRH produces an effect on the corticotropic cells, which may hypertrophy and create a new tumor or enlarge the original tumor.

The hyperpigmentation results from the elevation of CRH, which increases proopiomelanocortin production in the anterior pituitary's corticotropic cells, which is the precursor of the melanocyte-stimulating hormone and ACTH.

# Histopathology

Histopathology in Nelson syndrome is similar to the pituitary adenomas seen in Cushing disease, but with corticotropic cells showing mitosis and pleomorphism.

# History and Physical

Hyperpigmentation of the skin is the most common visible manifestation of the syndrome and is unique to this pituitary tumor. Hyperpigmentation in Nelson syndrome is very dark and different from other hyperpigmentation disorders. A prominent linea nigra from the pubis to the umbilicus is noted. Scars, areolae, gingivae, and scrotum may show excessive pigmentation. Other manifestations will include bitemporal hemianopia and progressive visual loss in large tumors. Pituitary dysfunction may occur as the tumor can inhibit the release of other pituitary hormones. Patients may complain of headache, weakness, and fatigue.

A positive history of Cushing disease and bilateral adrenalectomy is confirmed in history.

# Evaluation

Fasting plasma ACTH levels are very high. Diagnosis can be confirmed with an ACTH increase greater than 30% of the initial result after bilateral adrenalectomy on three consecutive samples.

Visual fields may show bitemporal hemianopia if the tumor is compressing the chiasm.

The diagnosis of Nelson syndrome is confirmed with a brain MRI showing a new pituitary tumor or the enlargement of a previously known tumor.

Screening of patients with bilateral adrenalectomy is done with fasting plasma ACTH levels and brain MRI performed at regular intervals.

# Treatment / Management

The initial recommended treatment for Nelson syndrome is the surgical removal of the tumor.

Radiotherapy in the form of fractionated radiotherapy or stereotactic radiosurgery can be given to the tumor.

A preventative measure for the development of Nelson syndrome that can be utilized is prophylactic radiotherapy when bilateral adrenalectomy is planned.

Medical treatment is limited, but some results have been found with somatostatin-analogs (octreotide and pasireotide), dopamine agonists (bromocriptine and cabergoline), sodium valproate, and temozolomide.

Patients need permanent glucocorticoid replacement, as they do not produce cortisol. Hydrocortisone is usually given at a dose of 20 mg in the morning and 10 mg in the afternoon. Mineralocorticoids are also required. Fludrocortisone acetate 0.1 mg is generally used.

# Differential Diagnosis

Nelson syndrome is a pituitary adenoma; therefore, any other pituitary adenoma can radiographically present as a Nelson tumor. However, the hyperpigmentation of the skin will be pathognomonic of it. Differentials include:

- Sellar tumors

- Primary adrenal insufficiency

- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia/hypoplasia

- Hypothalamic tumor secreting CRH

- Addison disease (autoimmune)

- Ectopic secretion of ACTH

- Glucocorticoid therapy

# Prognosis

Nelson syndrome can be a deadly disease. If surgically treated, the prognosis is good. In some cases, persistent elevation of ACTH is found secondary to residual tumor predominantly in the cavernous sinus. Radiation will also have good results but are delayed and can cause permanent hypopituitarism. Patients undergoing gamma knife radiosurgery or radiotherapy for Nelson syndrome need to continue on pharmacotherapy until they achieve endocrinological control.

# Complications

Complications include:

- Skin hyperpigmentation

- Hypopituitarism

- Visual loss

- Addison crisis

# Consultations

Consultations would be required from an endocrinologist, ophthalmologist, neurosurgeon, and radio-oncologist.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients and relatives need to know the importance of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement. Patients should use a bracelet identifying their need for these medications.

A patient diagnosed with Nelson syndrome requires prompt evaluation as chances of cure are better with earlier management. Surgery is the first line of treatment. Excellent results are obtained in smaller tumors. Those with cavernous sinus extensions may require additional treatment with medication or radiotherapy. The goal is to achieve normal ACTH levels to improve the symptoms.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Early diagnosis and management of Nelson syndrome are crucial for patient safety. Thanks to advanced techniques and diagnostic tools, such as brain MRI, the historical complications associated with Nelson syndrome have significantly reduced. A multidisciplinary approach is crucial in treating conditions such as Cushing disease and Nelson syndrome to improve patient adherence to treatment and positive outcomes. Coordination between the endocrinologist and the neurosurgeon will provide the patient with the best managing strategies to achieve the best outcome. For patients with suprasellar tumors, the neuro-ophthalmologist will be involved in the evaluation and follow up.