Wait for at least three weeks post-surgery or around 4-6 weeks after stopping levothyroxine from attaining an adequate TSH level before therapy. When exogenous TSH administration is necessary, 0.9 mg of rhTSH is injected intramuscularly on two consecutive days, followed by RAI after 24 hours.

Radioiodine is commonly administered orally in pill form. The patient’s identity should be verified before therapy. In patients with a low risk for recurrence, a dose of around 30 mCi can attain adequate ablation. In moderate and high-risk patients, the administered dose has to be escalated accordingly to a maximum of around 250 mCi. Written informed consent should be obtained from the patient. Before administration, the dose should be verified by an authorized user. After therapy, the administration area should be surveyed to detect any contamination. Radioactivity released from the patient should be checked with a survey instrument before the patient’s discharge from the hospital. The calculation should stipulate an effective dose of ≤5 millisieverts to caregivers and family members for patient discharge.

The patient should drive straight home after therapy. If possible, drive home alone. If it is not possible to drive alone, choose a seat that keeps maximum distance from others in the vehicle. For 3-4 days following treatment, patients should be advised to restrict contact with others, sleep in a separate room, avoid kissing, use a separate bathroom, avoid sweat and urine cross-contamination, flush the toilet twice after use, wash their clothes and utensils separately and not to come in contact with children and pets. Check for the potential for extended leave from work if the patient works for food service or childcare.

The long half-life of 8.04 days of RAI helps in acquiring images after several days of therapy, permitting the tracer to adequately concentrate in the metastatic lesions and thus improving the sensitivity of the whole body therapeutic scan. After RAI therapy, the patient can return to the Nuclear Medicine department in 3 to 10 days to obtain a whole-body image. The patient is advised to follow up with an endocrinologist for long-term hormone replacement therapy and other related issues.

Radiation detection devices could be triggered for several weeks after treatment. Hence, patients having plans to travel should be given adequate written records of treatment and contact information of the treatment facility.