Ibuprofen therapy benefits highly from interprofessional team collaboration. There is an abundance of well-reviewed, large studies detailing ibuprofen’s indications for usage in various clinical scenarios. Successful medication use in clinical practice will include knowledge of the latest clinical research, a thorough understanding of the patient, and realistic treatment goals based on current evidence for support. The patient’s primary clinician (both physicians and mid-level practitioners like NPS and PAs), nursing staff, and pharmacist, all collaborating and ensuring the highest quality of care in a patient for which ibuprofen is part of the treatment regimen, will lead his team in a collaborative effort to ensure successful usage of the medication through these principles:

- Administer ibuprofen for the recommended FDA-approved and off-label indications while keeping in mind contraindications or risk factors that may lead to adverse effects.

- Make a note of any stated over-the-counter ibuprofen use by a patient during a clinical encounter, and exercise diligence in asking for frequency and dosage of usage. Nursing can play a crucial role in obtaining this information and reporting it to the physician.

- Ask about ibuprofen use in patients with suspected gastritis or ulceration, anemia, or thrombocytopenia.

- Include ibuprofen as a potentially toxic agent when treating patients who have overdosed on an unknown substance.

- Use ibuprofen for mild to moderate pain control in patients with pain as a primary diagnosis or symptom control.

- NSAIDs, including ibuprofen, have shown potential as anticancer agents and should be considered in cancer treatment regimens when appropriate and supported by current research.

- The use of aspirin and NSAIDs is recommended to prevent colorectal cancer and cardiovascular disease.

- Appropriate monitoring of a patient’s pain level, emerging GI complaints, blood pressure, and renal function will reduce the risk of adverse effects of medication.

- In pediatric patients, alternating acetaminophen and ibuprofen therapies can be more effective in reducing refractory fever than ibuprofen monotherapy alone.

- Usage of ibuprofen to close PDA in neonates is equally as efficacious as indomethacin, with less renal toxicity and systemic vasoconstriction.

- Intravenous Ibuprofen is physical and chemically compatible with specific formulations of total parenteral nutrition and can be given simultaneously in neonates with PDA.

- Ibuprofen or aspirin should be given with colchicine to effectively relieve acute pericarditis and reduce recurrent pericarditis.

All interprofessional team members must be aware of the activities of the other team members and have access to the complete patient record, updating it with any data they add or become aware of. Being aware of these current evidence-based principles of ibuprofen use can help increase health outcomes for the patient in a collaborative, interprofessional healthcare environment. The typical patient who will need to be prescribed ibuprofen and monitored for use will benefit from enhancing collaborative efforts, as will patients who interact with the healthcare system in multiple settings regularly. Just because ibuprofen has been around for many years does not mean an interprofessional approach is unnecessary to optimize therapy and minimize adverse reactions. [Level 5]