**PERIOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT**

The perioperative period divides into three phases-

- Preoperative

- Intraoperative

- Postoperative

**1. Preoperative**

A) History

It is essential to obtain a detailed account regarding

- Diabetes mellitus (DM) – the type of diabetes, management (lifestyle modifications and medications), current glycemic control, related complications (nephropathy, neuropathy, retinopathy, cardiovascular disease), and susceptibility to hypoglycemia including hypoglycemic unawareness. If on antidiabetic drugs, it is imperative to know the details of the regimen and about medication adherence.

- Surgery - ambulatory/inpatient, elective/time-sensitive/emergent, the anticipated duration of surgery and fasting.

B) Glycated Hemoglobin A1c

A preoperative hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) should be checked, if not tested in the preceding three months. Multiple studies have looked at the association of HbA1c and surgical outcomes, and based on existing literature, it is controversial whether elevated HbA1c is linked to poor postoperative outcomes or is just a marker of poor perioperative glucose control.

C) Oral Antihyperglycemic & Non-Insulin Injectable

There is concern regarding the safety and efficacy of oral antihyperglycemic and non-insulin injectable in perioperative or hospital settings. Metformin can lead to the development of lactic acidosis in cases of renal dysfunction or with the use of intravenous contrast, sulfonylureas and other insulin secretagogues risk hypoglycemia, sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors carry the risk of euglycemic ketoacidosis in fasting, or acutely ill patients, glucagon-like-peptide-1 receptor (GLP-1) agonists can worsen nausea and vomiting by delaying gastric emptying. Furthermore, the delayed onset and prolonged duration of action make it challenging to titrate these medications to achieve optimal glycemic control over a short period. Currently, the recommendations are for holding these medications on the day of surgery except for SGLT-2 inhibitors

Recent evidence from randomized controlled trials such as the SITA-HOSPITAL trial demonstrated that dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors are both safe and efficacious in medical and surgical patients with mild to moderate hyperglycemia; however some such as saxagliptin predispose to heart failure.

D) Insulin Therapy

Patients who are on home insulin therapy should reduce the dose of long-acting basal insulin (glargine, detemir) by 20-25% the evening before surgery.

During the fasting state, nutritional (or prandial) insulin is held, and subcutaneous correctional insulin initiated with blood glucose (BG) monitoring every 4 to 6 hours.  Most institutions have standardized correctional insulin scales based on different insulin sensitivities.

In critically ill patients, continuous intravenous infusion (CII) using regular insulin is the preferred regimen. In the setting of hemodynamic instability/hypothermia/peripheral vasoconstriction, subcutaneous insulin is absorbed poorly, and intravenous insulin is preferable due to more predictable pharmacokinetics. Furthermore, intravenous insulin allows for easy dose titration due to a shorter duration of action (10 to 15 minutes) and omits the need for multiple injections. The use of CII should always be governed by a validated institutional protocol that includes a standardized approach for infusion preparation, initiation, titration, and monitoring.

Diabetic patients should preferably be scheduled for surgery early in the day. It is recommended to check the blood glucose in the preoperative area. Hypoglycemia (BG less than 70 mg/dl) treatment is with glucose tablets/gels or intravenous dextrose solutions. In cases of severe hyperglycemia (BG greater than 250 mg/dl) or metabolic decompensation (diabetic ketoacidosis or hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome), it is prudent to postpone surgery by a couple of hours for better glycemic control.

**2. Intraoperative**

Hyperglycemia (over 180 mg/dl), in surgeries of shorter duration (<less than 4 hours) with expected hemodynamic stability and minimal fluid shift,  can be managed with 2-hourly subcutaneous correctional insulin (preferably rapid-acting insulin) and BG checks. In surgeries that may involve hemodynamic fluctuations, massive fluid shifts, or last longer than 4 hours duration, BG greater than 180 mg/dl should be managed with intravenous insulin infusion, and BG monitored every 1 to 2 hours.

**3. Postoperative**

In the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU), it is imperative to review the intraoperative hyperglycemia management and continue close glucose monitoring with either intravenous or subcutaneous insulin.

A) Ambulatory

After recovery in the PACU, ambulatory surgery patients who are stable and tolerating oral intake can be discharged home on the previous antihyperglycemic regimen.

B) Non-critically Ill

Non-critically ill patients who require hospitalization are admitted from PACU to the surgical/medical ward on subcutaneous (SC) insulin. In the case of poor or no oral intake, basal plus correctional insulin is preferred

- Basal insulin: Controls hyperglycemia when a patient is not eating (at night, in between meals, or when fasting) and can be given as long-acting insulin (glargine or detemir) once or twice daily.

- Nutritional insulin: Also referred to as meal-time or prandial insulin, helps control hyperglycemia related to carbohydrate intake (meals, enteral, or parenteral nutrition), with either rapid-acting insulin (lispro, apart, or glulisine) or short-acting insulin (regular).

- Correctional insulin: Is used to counteract hyperglycemia that is above the goal, with either rapid-acting or short-acting insulin. When correctional insulin is given in addition to nutritional insulin, then the same formulation is combined into one single dose.

The insulin regimen can be dosed based on weight or pre-hospitalization regimen. Patients on home insulin regimen with good glycemic control should have their basal insulin reduced by 20 to 25% if the oral intake is inadequate. For weight-based dosing; in an average patient, the starting total daily dose (TDD) of insulin is 0.4 to 0.5 U/Kg/day; in insulin-sensitive patients (type 1 DM, insulin naïve, elderly, malnourished, renal/hepatic insufficiency, frequent hypoglycemia) starting dose should be reduced to 0.2 to 0.3 U/Kg/day and in insulin-resistant (obese, on high-dose steroids) starting dose should be increased to 0.6 to 0.7 U/Kg/day. If a patient has features belonging to both insulin sensitive and resistant categories, then it is safer to dose as insulin-sensitive. Once the TDD is determined, half of TDD is administered as basal insulin, and 1/6 of TDD will be administered as nutritional insulin with each of the three meals.

C) Critically Ill

Critically ill patients should be managed in a medical or surgical intensive care unit with continuous insulin infusion (CII) with regular insulin, with BG monitoring every 1 to 2 hours, as dictated by institutional protocol. The transition from CII to long or intermediate-acting SC insulin is done once these patients are hemodynamically stable with no vasopressor requirement, have optimal glycemic control with minimal variability, and a steady infusion rate in the past 6 to 8 hours. Due to the extremely short half-life of intravenous insulin and delayed onset of action of long/intermediate-acting insulin, it is essential to overlap IV and SC insulin by 2 to 3 hours. Premature discontinuation of IV insulin creates a hiatus in the basal insulin supply, which risks rebound hyperglycemia or metabolic decompensation (especially in type 1 diabetes).

Subcutaneous basal insulin at the time of transition is dosed based on either (a) the rate of insulin infusion, or (b) weight, or (c) home insulin dose. When using the rate of infusion to calculate the basal insulin dose, the average rate of infusion over the last 6 to 8 hours gets extrapolated to 24 hours. Seventy to eighty percent of this extrapolated dose represents TDD. In a patient with minimal or no caloric intake, 100% of the calculated TDD is administered as basal. In contrast, in patients with optimal caloric intake, 50% is given as basal, and 50% as nutritional insulin. For the weight-based method, TDD is calculated similarly to non-critically ill patients, half of which is a basal dose and the other half as nutritional insulin.  In patients with good glycemic control on home insulin therapy, 70 to 80% of the home basal insulin dose can be administered at the time of transition. After the transition, similar to non-critically ill patients, hyperglycemia is managed with correctional insulin every 4 to 6 hours in a fasting patient and four times a day (before meals and at bedtime) in a patient who is eating.

Due to unpredictable glycemic fluctuations, the sole use of correctional insulin is not recommended.

The insulin dosing explained in this article is just a starting point, and nearly all patients will require ongoing adjustments to their insulin regimen based on blood glucose, nutritional intake, and changes in clinical status. Moreover, glucose trends are more important than individual BG readings when making adjustments to the regimen.