Almost all providers experience some symptoms of second victim syndrome over the course of their careers. These symptoms can be imagined as a continuum of emotions and symptoms rather than the binary presence or absence of a defined syndrome. This more nuanced understanding of a collection of symptoms leads some to use the term second victim phenomena rather than the term syndrome, which connotes a binary pathology. In this article, we use the term second victim symptoms (SVS) to denote symptoms that can comprise a true "second victim syndrome" in their extreme form but are experienced in a more mild range by almost all medical providers throughout their career. These symptoms can be present even if they don’t meet the full definition of a syndrome.

**Prevalence of SVS in General and by Medical Specialties**

The majority of providers experience SVS at some point in their career as the trauma of witnessing a serious patient adverse event (or even a near-miss event) carries emotional ramifications for the witnesses.

As expected, fields with higher burdens of unexpected and sometimes catastrophic patient events such as emergency medicine, surgery, and intensive care have increased provider SVS and their attendant psychological ramifications. Approximately 25% of emergency physicians, 27% of emergency nurses, 22% of ICU nurses, 22% of surgery residents, 15% of trauma surgeons, and 17% of anesthesiologists report extreme and pervasive distress. These severe SVS can lead to true "second victim syndrome," which, if unchecked, can lead to the diagnosis of true posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

**Event Characteristics**

Not all SVS triggering experiences carry equal psychological weight, and providers may suffer more or less depending on both event characteristics as well as other surrounding factors. Though any event can lead to SVS, certain event characteristics are more likely to trigger severe or pervasive SVS. These events include the death or near-death of a patient, an event affecting a patient known to the provider (i.e., coworker, relative, friend), or untoward morbidity and mortality secondary to systems issues out of the control of the provider (i.e., a pandemic, a local crisis such as an earthquake or adverse events due to system overcrowding such as emergency department inpatient boarding).

The literature also suggests that SVS last much longer after events involving significant harm or death from a medical error. In the presence of permanent harm or death, providers were 8 times more likely to be symptomatic for more than 1 month and 9 times more likely to have symptoms lasting longer than 6 months compared to events in which the patient was not harmed (i.e., a "near miss" event).

A sudden unexpected patient death universally triggers intense emotion, and doctors, in particular, have been taught to essentially “stuff these feelings." Until recently, permitting oneself time to outwardly express the loss contradicted the required stoic exterior of a "good" doctor. Ken Doka labeled this phenomenon disenfranchised grief and defined it as “Grief that individuals experience when they incur a loss that is not or cannot be openly acknowledged, socially sanctioned, or publicly mourned.”

In reality, expressing and processing such grief is not only human but it is required to move on emotionally and maintain healthy compassion.