An annular fissure or tear can be symptomatic or asymptomatic.  Symptomatic annular fissures can occur with or without intravertebral disc protrusion or herniation. Each entity is discussed separately below.

**Asymptomatic Annular Tear**

If the annular tear or fissure is identified incidentally, most commonly on MRI imaging, then no treatment is warranted. Such annular fissures may resolve spontaneously over time and are frequently due to the stresses applied to the spine. It is posited that some asymptomatic annular tears may become symptomatic with time, but there is currently no definitive evidence that the treatment of asymptomatic annular tears provides any benefit or prevents any future issues.

**Symptomatic Annular Tear without Disc Protrusion or Herniation**

An annular fissure or tear can be symptomatic without disc protrusion or herniation. It is suspected that local inflammatory reactions from the annulus fibrosus tear or fissure lead to irritation of adjacent nerve fibers or traversing nerve roots. The mainstay of treatment for such situations is non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications as well as low-impact physical therapy. The non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications may help decrease the inflammatory reaction at the annular fissure which decreases stimulation or irritation of adjacent nerve fibers or traversing nerve roots. The low-impact physical therapy may help strengthen core muscles to mitigate the forces which may have originally led to the annular fissure or tear.  Some have suggested local transforaminal steroid injections may alleviate the symptoms more quickly.

Some have argued that long-standing annular fissures or tears may lead to granulation tissue formation at the site of the annulus fibrosus tear or fissure. This local granulation tissue can either irritate or compress the traversing nerve root and lead to a radicular pattern of symptoms. The first-line treatment for such situations is non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications and low impact physical therapy as discussed above with or without transforaminal steroid injection.  In longer-standing cases or instances with weakness or progression some suggest decompression of the nerve with a foraminotomy may prevent further deterioration and improve the symptoms. Some have suggested resecting the granulation tissue itself.

**Symptomatic Annular Tear with Disc Protrusion or Herniation**

If there is disc protrusion or herniation, it is usually the protruding or herniated disc material itself which causes the clinical symptoms. In such cases, the patient is treated for the disc protrusion or herniation and not the annular fissure or tear. Treatment options for disc protrusion or herniation including conservative measures of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, physical therapy, and local injections. If symptoms fail to improve, symptoms progress or the patient develops weakness surgical treatment options should be considered including laminotomy, laminectomy, foraminotomy, discectomy, fusion, or some combination thereof. If a discectomy is performed there has been no convincing evidence that closure of the annular fissure, tear, or annulotomy significantly affects the long-term outcome for the patient.