A multidisciplinary approach medically and from a psychosocial standpoint represents the best outcomes for patients with spina bifida. A team approach involving several specialists and therapy staff can holistically address the spectrum of disease. In an article by Dicianno, the “specialty medical home” is proposed as the ideal management method of spina bifida patients as a variation of the often referenced “medical home model”. In the medical home model, the primary care physician serves as a central hub with all compiled medical information and acts as the referring physician managing the team dynamic between specialists. However, in certain conditions, it has been suggested that the specialty physician act as the medical home as most of the comorbidities being managed stem from the underlying condition. Dicianno recommends this specialty medical home model for spina bifida to encourage teamwork driven by a subspecialist well versed in spina bifida and its sequelae.

This team-based medical care should follow the patient through adulthood but many patients find barriers to a seamless transfer of care into adulthood. It is important to involve parents, caretakers, the transitioning youths, and both the pediatric and adult providers in the transition. Early preparation is key to a smooth transition and should be considered early in the process. Transition to adult care can be difficult for patients, caretakers, and providers as patients usually spend several years of their lives with a specific physician team. The timing of transition should take into account not only the patient’s age but also their cognitive level to ensure the patient is ready to transition out of pediatric care. This transition requires significant cooperation between the pediatric provider, the new specialty provider, and all other possible consultants on the team.

This team-based approach involves physicians, physical therapists, occupational therapists, speech therapists, and neuropsychologists to help navigate the disease and its sequelae. A randomized controlled trial by Kahn et al showed that high intensity, multidisciplinary rehabilitation with incorporated cognitive behavioral therapy had significantly improved outcomes in cognitive function, mood, independence, and bowel/bladder dysfunction.