One of the primary complications following PIVH is posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus; this can be a communicating or non-communicating type that occurs as a result of impaired cerebrospinal fluid reabsorption or by obstruction of the foramen of Monroe. Posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus should be suspected in any preterm infant with IVH that presents with rapidly increasing head circumference. Clinically infants should be monitored by daily head circumference measurement and examining anterior fontanel. Hydrocephalus can be monitored by measuring either the Evans ratio (the ratio of bifrontal horn diameter to the biparietal bone diameter) or the frontal and occipital horn ratio (FOHR), which is the average of the frontal and occipital horn dimensions divided by the biparietal diameter.

Periventricular leukomalacia (PVL): It is an ischemic white matter injury, frequently diagnosed by ultrasound or MRI. IVH may contribute to the development of PVL. There is a correlation of impaired cognitive function in infants with PVL. Production of free radicles following IVH, ischemic insult after large IVH, and release of iron from ventricular blood contributes to white matter injury and occurrence of PVL. Although not specific, cranial ultrasound before discharge or at 36 weeks PMA is important to screen for PVL.

PIVH may also lead to periventricular leukomalacia, which is composed of multiple cystic foci in the periventricular space produced by coagulation necrosis. Periventricular leukomalacia may be the primary cause of neurodevelopmental delay following PIVH.

Cerebral palsy incidence is increased in premature children with severe PIVH, especially those weighing below 1000 grams.

Seizures and neurodevelopmental impairment are long-life sequelae after PIVH, especially in severe cases.