# Continuing Education Activity

Dissociative identity disorder (DID) is a rare psychiatric disorder diagnosed in about 1.5% of the global population. This disorder is often misdiagnosed and often requires multiple assessments for an accurate diagnosis. Patients often present with self-injurious behavior and suicide attempts. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of dissociative identity disorder and explains the role of an interprofessional team in caring for patients diagnosed with dissociative identity disorder (DID). This activity also reviews the association between DID and suicidal behavior.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the constellation of behavioral symptoms that lead to a diagnosis of dissociative identity disorder.
- Review risk factors for the development of a diagnosis of dissociative identity disorder.
- Explain the different modalities of evidence-based treatment for dissociative identity disorder.
- Outline some interprofessional strategies that can improve patient outcomes in patients with dissociative identity disorder.

# Introduction

Dissociative identity disorder (DID) is a rare disorder associated with severe behavioral health symptoms. DID was previously known as Multiple Personality Disorder until 1994. Approximately 1.5% of the population internationally has been diagnosed with a dissociative identity disorder.

Of note, DID has been observed and described in several countries and has been associated with terms such as "outer world possession" and "possession by demons."

# Etiology

Dissociative identity disorder is typically associated with severe childhood trauma and abuse.

Several prominent psychologists such as Kluft have broken down the theory behind DID-in-sum. The theory describes predisposing factors for dissociation, which include an ability to dissociate, overwhelming traumatic experiences that distort reality, creation of alters with specific names and identities, and lack of external stability, which leads to the child's self-soothing to tolerate these stressors. These four factors must be present for DID to develop.

# Epidemiology

Dissociative disorders show a prevalence of 1% to 5% in the international population. Severe dissociative identity disorder is present in 1% to 1.5% of this population. Patients may spend up to 5 to 12.5 years in treatment before being diagnosed with a dissociative identity disorder.

# Pathophysiology

The DID person, per the International Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation, is described as a person who experiences separate identities that function independently of each other and are autonomous of each other. The International Society describes alternate identities or alters as independent identities which have their own distinct behaviors, have memories that are distinct from others, and even may differ in language and expressions used. Signs of a switch to an altered state include trance-like behavior, eye blinking, eye-rolling, and changes in posture.

The major hypothesis by Putnam et al. is that “alternate identities result from the inability of many traumatized children to develop a unified sense of self that is maintained across various behavioral states, particularly if the traumatic exposure first occurs before the age of 5 “.

# History and Physical

The way to diagnose dissociative identity disorder is via detailed history taken by both psychiatric practitioners and experienced psychologists. Often persons with DID are misdiagnosed with other personality disorders, most commonly borderline personality disorder, as elements of dissociation are prominently seen and even amnesia. Often longitudinal assessments over long periods and careful history taking are required to complete diagnostic evaluations. History is often gathered from multiple sources as well. Often neurological examinations are required as well to rule out autoimmune encephalitis, often requiring electroencephalograms, lumbar punctures, and brain imaging.

Dissociative Disorders are classically characterized as a disruption of normal consciousness/memory/identity and behavior. The disorders are classically broken down into "positive " and "negative " symptoms -positive symptoms are often associated with "new personalities, derealization," and negative symptoms are symptoms such as autism and paralysis.

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-5)criteria for DID include at least two or more distinct personalities. Each personality varies in behavior, sense of consciousness, memory, and perception of the outside world. Persons with DID experience amnesia, which essentially are distinct gaps in memory and recollections of daily and traumatic events. They cannot be directly related to substance use or part of cultural norms or practices. Importantly, these symptoms must cause a notable lack of functioning in day-to-day life.

# Evaluation

As explained above, a detailed history from multiple sources and multiple longitudinal assessments over time is of the essence. However, some evaluation tools have been developed to diagnose DID. Some of these are below:

- Dissociative Experiences Scale -28-item self-report instrument whose items tap the absorption of outside information, use of imagination depersonalization, derealization, and amnesia primarily.

- Dissociation Questionnaire -63 questions that measure-measures identity confusion and fragmentation, loss of control, amnesia, and absorption.

- Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS)- 36-question subjective questions around challenges in goal-directed work, impulsivity, emotional responses to situations, ability to self regulate emotions, etc.

# Treatment / Management

Some treatment approaches for dissociative identity disorder include basic structures from work with personality disorders in a three-pronged approach:

- Establishing safety, stabilization, and symptom reduction;

- Confronting, working through, and integrating traumatic memories

- Identity integration and rehabilitation.

The first step focuses on the safety of patients with DID as many patients present with suicidal ideation and self-injurious behavior.

The most common approach is via psychodynamic psychotherapy steps which are broken down above. Recent approaches include the use of trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and dialectical behavioral therapy (DBT).

Another mode of treatment is the use of hypnosis as therapy. DID patients are more hypnotizable than other clinical populations according to literature.

Another mode of treatment has been the use of Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR). The guidelines however advocate for EMDR to be used as part of integrative treatment. EMDR processing is recommended only when the patient is generally stable and has adequate coping skills.EMDR interventions for symptom reduction and containment, ego strengthening, work with alternate identities, and, when appropriate, the negotiation of consent and preparation of alternate identities.

Psychopharmacology is not the primary treatment for DID. Medications may be used to target certain symptoms reported. Most commonly used medications include medications for mood disorders and PTSD (post-traumatic stress disorder).

# Differential Diagnosis

As mentioned above, the most common differential diagnosis includes borderline personality disorder, histrionic personality disorder, and even primary psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorders. As mentioned, patients with DID often present with symptoms of dissociation and amnesia, which are also seen in patients with borderline personality disorder. Often patients' symptoms are considered symptoms of psychosis as alters as mistaken as hallucinations and which often precipitate the use of antipsychotic medications. Given that trauma is a focus, Post Traumatic Stress Disorder is also a differential diagnosis.

The most common differential diagnosis is borderline personality disorder.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

There have been case studies and case reports formerly reported in the '90s and early 2000s. Some more treatment interventions have been described in naturalistic and longitudinal studies that continue to inform outcomes.

# Prognosis

Dissociative identity disorder is, unfortunately, a medical condition that is often diagnosed later in life. Often patients are misdiagnosed with other diagnoses as described above and treated with medications and even therapies that may not directly address DID. Once in treatment, this tends to be lifelong as DID patients continue to require reality-based and grounding interventions. Safety planning with DID patients is lifelong. The prognosis without treatment and correct diagnosis are poor.

# Complications

The patients remain at increased risk of self-injurious behavior given the presence of alters as well as latent trauma.

Inpatient hospitalizations and day treatment programs may also be recommended for patients who struggle with thoughts of self-injurious behavior, poor impulse control, or acute mood dysregulation. Medications may be added for mood stabilization.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education must focus on informing patients on the correct diagnosis when it is determined. Family members are encouraged to be educated about the nature of this illness, including the presence of alters as well as safety and grounding techniques. Another vital aspect continues to maintain a strong therapeutic alliance with the treatment team and engage in maintaining safety techniques.

Education may be done with multiple alters that do not communicate with each other, and this must be recognized. On the other hand, DID patients often do not want their diagnosis shared publicly, and their privacy must be respected.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Dissociative identity disorder requires treatment by an interprofessional healthcare team - this will often consist of medical specialists such as a psychiatrist, mid-level practitioners, nursing staff, specialized therapists, trauma counselors, peer counselors, and therapists who all communicate and collaborate with each other. A psychiatrist and primary care physician complete the team. Maintaining a strong therapeutic alliance with both patient and involved family members continues to be of utmost importance. DID patients require frequent check-ins and follow-up appointments and an almost daily focus on safety planning and reality-based interventions.