In the healthcare setting, lack of data in specialty settings and for females is one of the biggest hindrances for ergonomic implementation. Continued efforts are needed to establish sound data for the ergonomic needs and implications for both areas, especially as more females continue to enter the healthcare field in recent years. This is particularly important not only for the health of the individual clinicians but also due to the economic burden resulting from WMSDs.

WMSDs have been cited as the most expensive work-related disability. As females are already at an increased risk of sustaining WMSDs coupled with a lack of current recommendations specific to their stature and physical ability, the need for ongoing research and recommendations is critical.

Moreover, SPHM programs that are established require constant updating and review to monitor retention of knowledge and monitor burnout, which is often a factor in the healthcare workers' satisfaction, which they do not mention or report willingly.

The home healthcare sector faces extensive ergonomic limitations due to the fluidity of the work environment, including lack of control and ability to set up an ergonomic workstation, increased physical and mental stress of travel to the patient's location, and difficulty in staffing shortages which increase demand on the individuals. Continued focus on worker and patient safety, including prioritizing adequate time to complete physically demanding tasks over productivity, is critical, especially in the home setting.