Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) is the net pressure gradient that drives oxygen delivery to cerebral tissue. It is the difference between the mean arterial pressure (MAP) and the intracranial pressure (ICP), measured in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). Maintaining appropriate CPP is critical in managing patients with intracranial pathology, including traumatic brain injury, and with hemodynamic distress, such as shock. Normal CPP lies between 60 and 80 mm Hg, but these values can shift to the left or right depending on individual patient physiology. As CPP is a calculated measure, MAP and ICP must be measured simultaneously, most commonly by invasive means. Maintaining adequate CPP in clinical situations of intracranial pathology with deranged ICP or hemodynamically unstable conditions will decrease the risk of ischemic brain injury.

- CPP = MAP - ICP

**Physiology**

CPP and ICP: The CPP, at its most basic, is dependent on the ICP and mean arterial pressure, and its normal range is 60 to 80 mm Hg. Under normal conditions, the ICP is between 5 and 10 mm Hg and thus has less of an impact on CPP than MAP for clinical situations not involving intracranial pathology. ICP is usually directly measured via intracranial pressure transduction. Physiologically, ICP is a function of intracranial compliance. Intracranial compliance is the relationship between ICP and volume in the intracranial cavity, including cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), brain tissue, and arterial and venous blood volume.   As the skull is a fixed and rigid anatomic space, ICP will increase as intracranial volume increases and intracranial compliance decreases. As the ICP increases (or intracranial compliance decreases), CPP will decrease.

Several mechanisms ensure that ICP remains in the normal range for as long as possible during periods of changing intracranial volume and compliance. As volume adds to the intracranial space, CSF can move into the spinal subarachnoid space, leaving the ICP relatively unchanged. As volume increases (a growing space-occupying lesion, brain tissue edema, or blood), this mechanism becomes overwhelmed, and ICP increases sharply.

Cerebral blood flow (CBF) is also a critical factor in ICP homeostasis. Cerebral auto-regulation ensures a steady flow of blood to the brain over a wide range of physiologic changes and disturbances. When blood pressure decreases, auto-regulation causes cerebral vasodilation and an increase in CBF and cerebral blood volume, thus maintaining ICP and CPP. When blood pressure increases, auto-regulation causes cerebral vasoconstriction and a decrease in CBF, resulting in a decrease in cerebral blood volume and maintaining ICP and CPP. Too much alteration outside of normal CBF ranges can lead to brain ischemia and injury.

CPP and MAP: As ICP in normal ranges is a relatively small number, the CPP is much more dependent on the mean arterial pressure. MAP is the average blood pressure during one cardiac cycle and can be directly measured through invasive hemodynamic monitoring or calculated as the systolic blood pressure, plus two times the diastolic blood pressure, divided by three. The normal range of MAP is 70 to 100 mm Hg.

The mean arterial pressure is much more likely to change during day-to-day activities such as exercise, rest, and stress. However, if ICP remains constant, the mean arterial pressure can change across its relatively wide range of normal without dramatically decreasing or increasing CPP. In fact, CPP and CBF will remain relatively unchanged across a wider range of MAP (50 to 150 mm Hg) than normal due to cerebral auto-regulation and vasoconstriction or vasodilation of cerebral vasculature.

For patients with hypertension, the auto-regulation setpoint shifts; therefore, a lower mean arterial pressure relative to the patient’s normal mean arterial pressure will cause vasodilation to increase CBF. Patients who have lower than normal mean arterial pressure at baseline will have auto-regulatory vasoconstriction in response to an increase in their relative normal MAP to return CBF to baseline. Thinking about CBF and CPP in the context of the patient’s normal MAP is clinically relevant regarding the management of intracranial pathology and hemodynamic derangements.