Following are the differential diagnoses:

- Follicular lymphoma (FL)

- Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, Leg type (PCDLBCL-LT)

- Reactive lymphoid hyperplasia (RLH)

- Primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL)

Systemic/nodal Follicular Lymphoma can secondarily involve the skin. Histology can be identical to PCFCL, but a strong expression of CD10 and BCL-2 should raise suspicion for secondary involvement of FL. Another clue to systemic FL is clinical presentations such as B symptoms and lymphadenopathy. Cytogenetics is also helpful, as t(14;18) that is usually identified in FL is not found in most cases of PCFCL.

PCDLBCL-LT is another lymphoma of large B-cells that classically involves the skin of the lower extremities of older women. However, 10-15% of cases present with non-leg lesions. [14] PCDLBCL-LT carries a much worse prognosis than PCFCL and requires a different treatment approach with multiagent chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy.

Skin biopsies of the head with RLH will have multiple follicles and can mimic PCFCL. Follicles in RLH will carry more of the traditional architecture with polarized germinal centers with light and dark zones, well-defined mantle zones, and tingible body macrophages. Immunohistochemistry can sometimes aid in diagnosis as BCL-6 positive cells will be well confined within the meshwork of the follicle defined by CD21/23.

PCMZL with reactive follicles can also morphologically mimic PCFCL. Overall, PCMZL has a more heterogenous look with smaller, centrocyte-like, and monocytoid lymphocytes and light chain-restricted plasma cells. By immunohistochemistry, PCMZL will be positive for BCL-2 and sometimes CD43. It will be negative for BCL-6 and CD10.