**Preclinical Disease**

Several studies have demonstrated preclinical stages for rheumatoid arthritis several years before they fulfill the diagnostic criteria for rheumatoid arthritis. In patients with genetic risk factors, rheumatoid arthritis specific autoantibodies become positive 10-15 years before a patient develops clinical features of rheumatoid arthritis during which the patient is asymptomatic.

This asymptomatic seropositive preclinical stage may then be followed by many years of symptoms such as palindromic rheumatism or arthralgia before a patient fulfills the diagnostic criteria for rheumatoid arthritis. There is ongoing research involving individuals in the preclinical stages of rheumatoid arthritis who are at higher risk of future development of the clinically apparent disease.

**Disease Patterns**

The hallmark of RA is chronic bilateral symmetric inflammatory arthritis (synovitis) involving the small joints of the hands and feet. More than 50% of the cases of RA have an insidious onset of the disease, while abrupt onset can be seen in up to 25% cases. Monoarticular joint involvement, especially that of larger joints such as knee or shoulder that eventually progresses to polyarticular involvement, has been seen. In the elderly population, the onset of RA may mimic symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica with arthralgias, myalgias, and stiffness of the shoulders and hip girdles with elevated ESR and constitutional symptoms such as fever and fatigue.

Regardless of the pattern of onset, most patients experience gradual progression of the disease if left untreated, although some patients may experience episodic/palindromic pattern or a brief self-remitting pattern. Although the severity of RA may fluctuate over time, spontaneous remission in RA is uncommon, especially if left untreated after the first 3-6 months.

RA tends to involve small joints of bilateral upper and lower extremities. In the hands, the most commonly involved joints are the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints and the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints, especially the 2nd and 3rd MCP and PIP joints. Distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints are usually spared, and involvement of the 1st carpometacarpal joint is less common. In the feet, the most commonly involved joints are the metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints. The involvement of the wrist, elbow, shoulder, the knee has, and hip joints are also frequent. Axial involvement includes C1-C2 synovitis, erosion, and subluxation, although the rest of the spine and sacroiliac joints are spared.

**History**

The patients present with history typical for that of inflammatory arthritides, including joint pain, joint swelling, decreased strength, limited range of motion, and stiffness of the affected joints. The swelling is typically noted by the patients along with the metacarpophalangeal joint areas in the hands. The morning stiffness (gelling phenomenon) is usually experienced after prolonged periods of sleep (morning stiffness) or rest and lasts for more than 1 hour. The involvement of the small joints of the hands leads to an inability to perform daily activities such as opening a jar or wringing a washcloth. Due to the decreased strength, patients may report symptoms such as “frequently dropping a coffee mug.” Patients may experience difficulty in performing usual activities of daily living, such as taking a shower, combing hair, dressing, or using handgrips to unlock doors.

Patients usually experience constitutional symptoms such as fatigue and malaise. Weight loss and low-grade fevers may also accompany the onset of rheumatoid arthritis and flares of rheumatoid arthritis. A Positive family history of inflammatory joint disease or other autoimmune collagen vascular disease is usually present in up to 50% of cases, especially among first-degree relatives.

**Physical Examination**

The most commonly involved hand joints in RA are the MCP and PIP joints. The DIP joints are usually spared. Wrist joint involvement is also very common.

**Synovitis**

The key clinical finding in RA is that of palpable synovial hypertrophy or synovitis. On inspection, the joints appear swollen with fusiform /spindle-shaped appearance of the PIP joints. The range of motion can be evaluated by the assessment of handgrip and hand curl, which is usually compromised due to synovitis. Grip strength may be reduced, and a sphygmomanometer can be used to objectively measure the strength. Contrary to the hard bony feeling of osteoarthritic changes, the RA synovitis has a soft “doughy” feeling. Other changes of inflammation such as erythema and warmth may or may not be present, although tenderness is usually present.

In the wrist joints, synovitis can easily be palpable using the two thumb technique by applying pressure at the radiocarpal joint line, which is about 1 cm distal to the lister’s topical. The range of motion of the wrist joint can be evaluated by flexion/extension and pronation/supination of the wrists.

**Tenosynovitis**

The flexor tendons of the hands are frequently involved by the tenosynovitis leading to swelling and thickening of these tendons. This can cause triggering and locking of the fingers. The tendons may be nodular and thickened on palpation. The presence of flexor tenosynovitis suggests a poor prognosis.

A common feature of rheumatoid arthritis involving the wrist joints includes the presence of tenosynovitis involving the extensor tendons. Extensor carpi ulnaris is frequently involved, and synovial proliferation around the ulnar styloid can be associated with erosions of the ulnar styloid. Extensor tendon compartment tenosynovitis can lead to swelling extending up to the metacarpal joints, which gets accentuated with the extension of the fingers. Tenosynovitis and tenosynovial effusions of the flexor tendons at the wrist joint can lead to compression of the median nerve at the carpal tunnel leading to symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome.

**Hand and Wrist Deformities**

Irreversible damage is the sequelae of ongoing synovitis. Several deformities have been described as secondary to rheumatoid arthritis.

Boutonnière deformity: There is hyperflexion of the PIP joint and hyperextension of the DIP joint, occurring due to damage to the central extensor tendon due to tenosynovitis. The weakening of the extensor tendon leads to dorsal displacement of the PIP joint, which causes the lateral and volar displacement of the lateral bands of the extensor tendon. The shortening of the lateral bands leads to hyperextension of the DIP joint.

Swan-neck deformity: There is hyperextension of PIP and hyperflexion of the DIP joint, secondary to dorsal subluxation of the lateral bands of the central extensor tendon along with volar displacement of the PIP joint and dorsal displacement of the DIP joint. As with the Boutonnière deformity, the shortening of the tendon leads to hyperextension of the PIP joint and hyperflexion of the DIP joint.

Subluxation of the MCPs: Dorsal displacement of the head of the metacarpal and volar and proximal displacement of the proximal head of the proximal phalanx gives an appearance of chronically swollen MCP joints. This happens due to the contraction of the flexors (intrinsic muscles) of the MCPs, with flexion contracture of the corresponding MCP joint.

Ulnar drift or ulnar deviation: this deformity develops as a complication to weakening with laxity or erosion of the extensor carpi ulnaris tendon overlying the ulnar styloid process. This promotes the antagonist muscle on the radial side to take the upper hand with radial deviation at the wrist and ulnar deviation of the fingers supported by gravity.

Hitchhiker thumb or the Z deformity: Hyperextension of the interphalangeal joint of the thumb with flexion of the MCP along with exaggerated adduction of the 1st metacarpal leads to a flail thumb with the inability to flex the interphalangeal joint leading to inability to pinch using the thumb.

Piano key sign or floating ulnar styloid: Damage to the radioulnar ligament leads to this deformity where the ulnar styloid moves up and down on applying pressure.

Subluxation of the wrist: Erosions and chronic synovitis can lead to the volar subluxation of the distal wrist.

Vaughan-Jackson deformity: Extensor tendon rupture involving the 3rd, 4th, and 5th digits leads to the inability to extend these fingers. Chronically tenosynovial inflammation at the wrist joint and chronic rubbing of these tendons, along with the damaged ulnar styloid, needs to their rupture at the wrist. This is considered a surgical emergency.

**Subcutaneous Nodules**

Usually seen in seropositive RA, subcutaneous rheumatoid nodules, which are an extra-articular manifestation of RA, developed most commonly on pressure areas such as the dorsal aspect of the finger joints. They can be seen in the wrists, more commonly along the dorsal and medial aspect. On palpation, they are firm, contender, and not freely mobile. They may or may not regress with treatment for RA. On the contrary, methotrexate-induced accelerated rheumatoid nodulosis has been well described. The presence of subcutaneous rheumatoid nodules early in the course of the disease is a poor prognostic marker and is considered a higher risk for the development of other extra-articular manifestations of RA.