The United States is currently in the midst of an opioid epidemic with increased opioid use over the last two decades. In 2016, prescription opioid misuse was found in at least 4% of the United States adult population.

**Treatments**

**Exercise, Physical Activity, and Physical Therapy**

Physical activity and exercise can reduce the severity of pain and improve function, quality of life, and mental health. World Health Organization (WHO) in 2015 defined physical activity as any body movement involving skeletal muscles that leads to energy expenditure. Whereas exercise was referred to, by WHO, as a subset of physical activity that “is planned, structured, repetitive, and aims to improve or maintain one or more components of physical fitness.”

A more recent Cochrane review in 2017 found that the body of evidence evaluating the efficacy of exercise and physical activity in chronic pain is of low quality. The review concluded that these interventions are likely safe and may improve the severity of pain, function, and quality of life.

**Transcutaneous Electric Nerve Stimulation (TENS)**

Transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation (TENS) involves the application of adhesive skin surface electrodes to the painful area. TENS uses modifiable low-voltage electric currents, which are usually powered by a battery. This modality has been used to treat multiple pain problems. A central as well as a peripheral mechanism of action has been proposed.

A 2017 Cochrane review studied the efficacy of TENS therapy in neuropathic pain but was not able to make any firm conclusions due to a very low level of evidence.

**Medications**

Multiple classes of non-opioid medications are routinely used to treat pain, including over-the-counter and prescribed non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, steroids, antidepressants, anticonvulsants, and topical medications.

**NSAIDs**

NSAIDs are one of the most common treatments for low back pain.

A 2013 metanalysis found that the risk of cardiovascular events with the use of non-selective NSAIDs such as diclofenac and ibuprofen was similar to that of selective NSAIDs. But among all NSAIDs, naproxen seemed to be safest from a cardiovascular standpoint.

A 2016 Cochrane review of the efficacy of NSAIDs in chronic low back pain found that out of the 13 randomized clinical trials (RCTs) included, 6 found NSAIDs to be more effective than placebo in reducing pain intensity. But due to the low level of evidence, no firm conclusions could be drawn.

The results of the SPACE RCT were published in 2018, which compared the efficacy of opioids to that of non-opioid medications on pain-related function in subjects suffering from chronic back pain, hip or knee osteoarthritis pain. Non-opioid medications included both NSAIDs and acetaminophen. Opioids were not found to be superior to non-opioids in improving function at 12 months, and thus results argue against the use of opioids for such conditions.

**Acetaminophen**

Acetaminophen is an over-the-counter antipyretic and analgesic. Several mechanisms of action have been suggested, including central serotonergic inhibition. But the exact mechanism of action is still uncertain.

**Corticosteroids**

Oral corticosteroids are commonly used for the management of acute pain and acute flare-ups of chronic pain conditions. Both direct and indirect mechanisms of action have been described. Corticosteroids directly reduce inflammation by inhibiting the phospholipase A2 enzyme and the production of arachidonic acid. Corticosteroids also reduce inflammation indirectly by attenuation of pro-inflammatory and enhance expression of anti-inflammatory genes.

A 2017 systematic review found with a moderate level of evidence that systematic corticosteroids do not cause any significant improvement in pain intensity and minimal to no improvement in function when used for radicular low back pain.

**Antidepressants**

Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) are the most common classes of antidepressants used to manage chronic neuropathic pain. These pharmacologic agents augment descending central inhibition of pain.

**Anticonvulsants**

Gabapentin and pregabalin are the most common antiepileptics used for the treatment of chronic pain. These pharmacologic agents inhibit the alpha-2-delta subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels, which are involved in releasing nociceptive neurotransmitters.

**Topical Medications**

A recent systematic review of neuropathic pain treatments gave a weak recommendation for the use of high-dose capsaicin topical patch. They concluded with moderate quality of evidence that the efficacy of topical lidocaine was also weak.

**Interventions**

**Joint Injections**

Corticosteroids are injected into joints to reduce inflammation-related pain.

In 2019, the Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI) published guidelines based on a metanalysis for non-surgical management of knee, hip, and multi-joint arthritis. They made a Level 1B/2 recommendation for the use of both corticosteroid and hyaluronic acid knee joint injections for the management of knee osteoarthritis but did not find them effective in the treatment of osteoarthritis-related pain in other joints.

**Peripheral Nerve Blocks**

Peripheral nerve blocks can be used as both diagnostic and therapeutic agents in the management of chronic pain.

**Trigger Point Injections**

Trigger point injections may be used for the treatment of myofascial pain syndrome.

**Epidural Steroid Injections**

Epidural steroid injection is the commonest intervention performed for spine-based pain.

**Radiofrequency Ablations**

Radiofrequency ablation is a denervation procedure that involves the thermocoagulation of nerves.

**Sympathetic Nerve Blocks**

Sympathetic nerve blocks (SNBs) are routinely used in the treatment of complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS), where sympathetic hyperactivity is an underlying pathophysiologic mechanism.

**Spinal Cord Stimulation**

In spinal cord stimulation (SCS) therapy, electrodes are placed in the spine to stimulate the dorsal aspect of the spinal cord. The electrodes are then connected to an implanted pulse generator, but some devices use an external pulse generator. The pulse generator serves as the power source for the electrodes. Reversal of cortical neuroplastic changes, attenuation of spinal cord nociception, vasodilation, and adrenergic inhibition are a few of the proposed mechanisms of action of SCS.

**Dorsal Root Ganglion and Peripheral Nerve Stimulation**

Dorsal root ganglion (DRG) stimulation allows for even more targeted delivery of stimulation and is a newer treatment modality. A pooled analysis study concluded that DRG stimulation is safe and effective for multiple chronic pain problems, including FBSS and CRPS.

**Behavioral Therapy**

Chronic pain can be associated with maladaptive or negative thinking and behavior related to painful stimuli. Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) reduces such catastrophizing and maladaptive thinking. CBT leads to the development of pain coping skills and overall improved functioning.