Our understanding of the role of the PFC was serendipitously advanced in 1848 when Phineas Gage had a rare accident in which an iron tamping rod pierced through what now is known as the orbitofrontal lobe. Phineas, a once respectable loving husband and father, became short-tempered, brash, and prone to devise and then immediately abandon any plans he made.

The PFC is unique because it is not a purely sensory nor purely motor component of the brain. Instead, the PFC receives input from multiple cortical regions to process "in the moment" information. Through connections to other cortical areas, the PFC processes higher-order executive functions. These reciprocal connections make it possible to adapt to different situational surroundings and control reactions based on a person's perception at a particular moment. Its ability to properly integrate incoming information is crucial for survival during interactions in the social world, and as such, pro-social skills are more highly developed in humans versus other primate and non-primate animals.

Through observing humans and other primates with specific PFC lesions, certain locations are associated with particular deficits. In this roundabout way we have begun to understand some of its functions; for example, the dorsolateral PFC tends to be associated with planning, strategy, and executive decisions while the orbitofrontal region is related to inhibiting primal survival responses arising from the primitive limbic system. The PFC also is believed to play a role in our emotional state through its extensive connections to areas controlling the release of the mood-altering neurotransmitters dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin. Therefore, PFC dysfunction has been implicated in neuropsychiatric disorders as imaging reveals decreased PFC activity in depressed patients and those with schizophrenia.