Evaluation of a potential calcaneus fracture should include the following:

- Complete neurovascular examination as well as evaluation of all lower extremity tendon function. Loss of ipsilateral dorsalis pedis or posterior tibial pulse compared to contralateral limb should raise suspicion of arterial injury and prompt further investigation with angiography or Doppler scanning.

- Initial bony evaluation with AP, lateral, and oblique plain films of the foot and ankle is needed. A Harris View may be obtained which demonstrates the calcaneus in an axial orientation.

- Noncontrast computed tomography remains the gold standard for traumatic calcaneal injuries. CT scan is used for preoperative planning, classification of fracture severity, and in instances where the index of suspicion for a calcaneal fracture is high despite negative initial plain radiographs (2 to 3-mm cuts are recommended).

- Mondor's Sign is a hematoma identified on CT that extends along the sole and is considered pathognomic for calcaneal fracture.

- Stress fractures such as those seen in runners would be best evaluated with a bone scan or MRI.

- Bohler's Angle may be depressed on plain radiographs. Defined as the angle between two lines drawn on plain film. The first line is between the highest point on the tuberosity and the highest point of posterior facet and the second is the highest point on the anterior process and the highest point on the posterior facet. The normal angle is between 20-40 degrees.

- The Critical Angle of Gissane may be increased. Defined as the angle between two lines drawn on plain film. The first along the anterior downward slope of the calcaneus and the second along the superior upward slope. A normal angle is 130-145 degrees.

- Normal Bohlers and Gissane angles do not rule out a fracture.

- Abnormalities of either of these findings should prompt a CT scan for further classification and evaluation of the fracture.

**Calcaneal fractures can be classified into two general categories.**

- Extraarticular fractures account for 25 % of calcaneal fractures. These typically are avulsion injuries of either the calcaneal tuberosity from the Achilles tendon, the anterior process from the bifurcate ligament, or the sustentaculum tali.

- Intraarticular Fractures account for the remaining 75%. The talus acts as a hammer or wedge compressing the calcaneus at the angle of Gissane causing the fracture.

**There are two main classification systems of extraarticular fractures.**

**Essex-Lopresti:**

- Joint depression type with a single verticle fracture line through the angle of Gissane separating the anterior and posterior portions of the calcaneus.

- Tongue type which has the same verticle fracture line as a depression type with another horizontal fracture line running posteriorly, creating a superior posterior fragment. The tuberosity fragment may then rotate superiorly.

**Sanders Classification**: Based on reconstituted CT findings.

- Type I fractures: 1 nondisplaced or minimally displaced bony fragment

- Type II fractures: 2 bony fragments involving the posterior facet. Subdivided into types A, B, and C depending on the medial or lateral location of the fracture line.

- Type III fractures: 3 bony fragments including an additional depressed middle fragment. Subdivided into types AB, AC, and BC, depending on the position and location of the fracture lines.

- Type IV fractures: 4 comminuted bony fragments.