In addition to maintenance of the endometrium during pregnancy and vascularization of the endometrium during ovulation, progesterone also plays a role in bone formation. The process of resorption and building of new bone requires hormones such as estradiol and progesterone, as well as bone-forming cells, such as osteoblasts. Progesterone increases the process of bone formation by stimulating P-4-receptor mediated osteoblastic growth during the initiation of bone modeling.

Progesterone additionally plays a crucial element in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis. During the luteal phase, the hypothalamus releases gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which acts on a gland called the anterior pituitary. In response to this release of GnRH, the anterior pituitary will release FSH and LH, which will subsequently act on the gonads. In the female ovary, this release of FSH and LH on the gonads causes the release of progesterone. Excess amounts of progesterone will cause negative feedback inhibition on each prior organ, resulting in the cessation of the release of hormones. This process allows for regulated control of hormone levels. Abnormalities of this axis results in dysregulation of hormone levels affecting numerous organ systems and downstream hormones within the body.

Although progesterone is primarily associated with the reproductive system, it also plays a functional role in the neuroendocrine axis. Progesterone may demonstrate neuroprotective factors in both the central as well as the peripheral nervous system, affecting myelination processes and regulation of astroglial plasticity. Additionally, progesterone functions to aid neuron survival in the setting of neurodegenerative diseases, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. These effects are due to the expression of progesterone receptors located throughout the nervous system.