Before commencing treatment, the American Urological Association (AUA)Guidelines recommend educating the patient about the disease's complex nature and the need for multimodal therapy, as patient education about interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome is a critical part of the treatment plan.

For the majority of patients, no single treatment exists to cure the condition or permanently relieve the symptoms. Patients should also be aware that multiple treatment options in combination may be needed for optimal symptom control and that the condition is chronic, often with periodic exacerbations and remissions.

As the underlying pathophysiology is still largely unknown, treatment is based on the management of the symptoms.

Treatment should be evaluated periodically, and therapies that are ineffective should be discarded. If simple pain management techniques are not adequate, additional therapy should be used, and consideration given to a pain management consultation as a multidisciplinary approach is recommended. Failure of multiple modalities of therapy suggests a possible misdiagnosis.

**Conservative Measures**

Initial treatment for IC/BPS should be based on dietary and lifestyle modifications. The determination of specific dietary adjustments is based on known common irritants. Elimination diets are used to identify additional exacerbating dietary factors. The final recommended diet should be individualized, with a diary to record which foods, beverages, additives, or substances cause symptoms to flare.

Generally, a number of common foods are known to irritate sensitive bladders, cause pain, and exacerbate urinary symptoms. A complete list can be found at the website for the Interstitial Cystitis Association at  www.ichelp.org.The prevailing theory is many foods contain substances or chemicals that are inherently irritating to the bladder, such as a high acid content, potassium, or capsaicin. Indian, Mexican, and Thai food is not recommended. Specific foods known to cause bladder irritation include:

- Alcohol

- Benzyl alcohol

- Caffeine

- Carbonated beverages

- Coffee

- Chili

- Chocolate

- Citric acid

- Citrus

- Cranberry juice

- Horseradish

- Hot peppers

- "Hot" sauces such as Tabasco

- Ketchup

- Pickles

- Pizza

- MSG

- Sauerkraut

- Spices

- Sweeteners (particularly artificial sweeteners such as saccharin)

- Tea

- Tomato juice

- Tomato sauce

- Tomatoes

- Vinegar

- Worcester sauce

Myofascial release and pelvic floor trigger point manual therapy provided by a skilled practitioner has shown significant symptom relief in 70% of patients.

Specific behaviors and activities that can help mitigate symptoms include:

- Avoidance of known dietary irritants (see list above).

- Bladder training with urge suppression.

- Cognitive-behavioral therapy.

- Dietary aids for bladder discomfort (calcium glycerophosphates, nutraceuticals, phenazopyridine).

- Increasing fluid intake to minimize urinary concentration.

- Manual physical therapy for pelvic floor tenderness to relieve tender muscle points, contracture lengthening, and/or scars.

- Meditation and imagery techniques for pain management.

- Neuromodulation (can help urinary frequency/urgency but is not effective for pain control).

- Pelvic floor muscle relaxation training.

- Stress management and reduction techniques.

- Support groups.

- Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS).

- Use of elimination diets to help determine which additional specific foods should be avoided.

- Use of heat or cold to bladder and/or perineum for symptomatic relief.

- Avoidance of behaviors and activities that are known to exacerbate bladder irritability, such as:

- Pelvic floor muscle strengthening exercises (Kegel's)
- Prolonged or untreated constipation
- Sexual intercourse
- Tight clothing

**Pain Management**

Most patients do not respond to a single agent, and a complex multidisciplinary option with expert guidance under a pain specialist or clinic should be sought. Treatment should be introduced slowly, with the lowest possible dose and a minimal number of drugs used as possible, in line with the WHO pain ladder. Non-opioid treatments are much preferred over opioid therapy.

- Acetaminophen

- Amitriptyline

- Gabapentin

- Hot sitz baths

- Intravesical "cocktail" therapy

- Meditation and imagery

- NSAIDs (ibuprofen, naproxen)

- Opioids

- Pregabalin

- Stress reduction

- Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)

- Trigger point manual therapy

**Pharmacological Therapy**

Oral therapy has been used with moderate success for IC/BPS. Oral overactive bladder (OAB) medications, such as oxybutynin, have minimal efficacy in controlling the symptoms from IC/BPS, except possibly for some decrease in urinary frequency. Overactive bladder patients who fail to improve on OAB medications should be evaluated for possible IC/BPS.

The most effective oral agents for treating IC/BPS appear to be amitriptyline, cyclosporine A, and pentosan polysulfate.

**Amitriptyline**is a tricyclic antidepressant that has shown activity in reducing chronic pelvic pain, including discomfort from IC/BPS.

**Cimetidine**is an H2 blocker normally used for reducing gastric acid secretion, but it has also shown activity in reducing pain, frequency, and nocturia in about 60% to 70% of IC/BPS patients.

**Cyclosporine A**, an immunosuppressive that blocks cell-mediated immune reactions, has shown superior efficacy compared to pentosan polysulfate, particularly in patients with Hunner ulcers who do not respond to triamcinolone injections or electrofulguration.

While cyclosporine A has shown good efficacy in controlling pelvic and bladder symptoms, it has only been used in relatively small numbers of IC/BPS patients. There are serious potential complications with regard to increased blood pressure, neurotoxicity, immunosuppression, and decreased renal function.

Experimentally, low-dose (1.5 mg/kg or less) cyclosporine A daily therapy has shown efficacy in providing long-term symptom relief when used immediately after Hunner ulcer fulguration. The lower dose limits side effects. Further studies are necessary until this approach's long-term safety and efficacy have been conclusively determined.

**Gabapentin**has shown some activity in reducing pain and other symptoms of IC/BPS.

**Hydroxyzine**is an antihistamine and mast cell stabilizer that has shown effectiveness in providing significant symptom relief in some IC/BPS patients.

**Overactive bladder (OAB) medications**(oxybutynin, mirabegron, etc.) are usually insufficient when used alone in managing the symptoms of IC/BPS. These medications may be of some benefit in reducing symptoms of bladder overactivity, but they do not help with pain where a multimodal approach is usually needed.

**Pentosan polysulfate**is the only FDA-approved oral medication approved for IC/BPS.

A worrisome retinal pigmentary maculopathy has now been clearly associated with the long-term, cumulative use of pentosan polysulfate.

For those who choose to use the medication, a retinal examination prior to initiating treatment is recommended, as well as a recheck at 6 months and periodically thereafter.

**Sacral neuromodulation**has been shown in the majority of studies to be a reasonably effective treatment for control of intractable bladder overactivity and chronic pelvic pain.

- Analgesics, e.g.: paracetamol and ibuprofen.

- Antihistamines (cimetidine)

- Antidepressants (amitriptyline)

- Pentosan-polysulfate

- Oxybutynin and gabapentin

**Intravesical Instillations**

A variety of medications have been found to be effective in IC/BPS when oral medications and dietary measures alone are insufficient.

**Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO)**is an effective agent for symptom control when used as an intravesical instillation in patients with IC/BPS.

Bladder instillations of dimethylsulfoxide plus triamcinolone were found to be superior in symptom relief by about 50% to a cocktail of bupivacaine, heparin, and triamcinolone in newly diagnosed women with IC/BPS.

**Heparin**acts as a synthetic glycosaminoglycans layer to help protect the bladder mucosa from urinary irritants when used for intravesical therapy in IC/BPS patients.

**Lidocaine**is a local anesthetic that has demonstrated usefulness in reducing short-term (< two weeks) bladder pain and symptoms when used for intravesical therapy.  Lidocaine reduces histamine release from mast cells, exerts an anti-inflammatory effect on eosinophils, decreases leukocyte adherence, and is bactericidal.

**Hyaluronic acid**alone or with chondroitin sulfate has shown efficacy in treating IC/BPS.

**Bladder Cocktail Formulas for Intravesical Instillation**

Alkalinized Lidocaine Cocktail

- Gentamicin 80 mg in 5 mL

- Heparin 10,000 IU in 10 mL

- Lidocaine 2% solution: 25 mL

- Sodium Bicarbonate 8.4%: 5 to 10 mL

- Schedule: 

- Weekly as needed in office/clinic.
- Should be mixed immediately before intravesical instillation to avoid precipitation.
- Increase the interval between instillations as symptoms improve.

DMSO (Dimethylsulfoxide) Cocktail

- Gentamicin 80 mg in 5 mL

- Heparin 10,000 to 20,000 IU

- Rimso-50 (DMSO) 50 mL

- Sodium Bicarbonate 8.4%: 10 mL

- Triamcinolone 40 mg

- Schedule:

- Weekly as needed in the office/clinic.
- Increase the interval between instillations as symptoms improve.

Robert Moldwin, MD—Smith Institute for Urology & Long Island Jewish Medical Center

- Bupivacaine (Marcaine) 0.5% and Lidocaine jelly 2% in a 1:1 mixture: Total of 30 to 40 mL.

- Heparin 10,000 to 20,000 IU

- Gentamicin 80 mg

- Triamcinolone 40 mg (Increase to 80 mg in patients with documented Hunner’s ulcer.)

- Schedule:

- Weekly instillations in the office/clinic.
- May also be self-administered by patients at home up to three times weekly.
- Increase the interval between instillations as symptoms improve.
- Maximum symptom improvement is expected by twelve weeks.
- If no longer effective, switch to “DMSO Cocktail.” May resume the above bupivacaine combination cocktail later if symptoms return.

Christopher Payne, MD “Payne Cocktail 1”

- Bupivacaine (Marcaine) 0.5%: 10 mL

- Heparin 10,000 IU

- Schedule:

- Weekly instillations in the office/clinic.
- May also be self-administered by patients at home as often as daily.
- Increase the interval between instillations as symptoms improve.

Christopher Payne, MD “Payne Cocktail 2”

- Bupivacaine (Marcaine) 0.5%: 10 mL

- Heparin 10,000 IU (Optional. May be reserved as separate instillation treatment.)

- Hydrocortisone (Solu-Cortef) 100 mg

- Rimso-50 (DMSO): 50 mL

- Sodium Bicarbonate 8.4%: 5 mL

- Schedule:

- Weekly instillations of 30 to 50 mL for six to eight weeks.
- Increase the interval between instillations as symptoms improve.
- Use B&O suppositories if patients are unable to hold the solution for at least 30 minutes.

Kristene Whitmore, MD—Drexel University College of Medicine

- Bupivacaine (Marcaine) 0.5%: 20 mL

- Gentamicin 80 mg: 5 mL of Normal Saline. (Add for patients with a documented UTI within three months.)

- Heparin 10,000 IU in 10 mL

- Hydrocortisone 100 mg: 5 mL of Normal Saline

- Sodium Bicarbonate 8.4%: 40 to 50 mL

- Schedule:

- Six weekly instillations. Should be administered during a premenstrual flare when possible.
- Appropriate for patients who are able to self-catheterize and administer at home.

Trials are looking at improved efficacy of intravesical preparations when a low voltage is applied to drive the preparations into the bladder tissue. This is achieved by using probes in the bladder and abdomen to create a voltage gradient known as electromotive drug administration (EMDA). A randomized prospective trial demonstrated improved short-term efficacy. The main issue with the study is the low sample size (n=31).

**Cystoscopy Guided Treatment**

- Cystoscopy is done to rule out other diagnoses and to look for Hunner ulcers.

- If Hunner lesions are present, they can be treated using direct fulguration with electrocautery or laser, and/or injection of triamcinolone.

- If no Hunner ulcers are found at cystoscopy, short-duration, low-pressure hydrodistension under anesthesia distension can be performed. This offers substantial pain relief to some patients but risks a temporary symptom flair.

- High-pressure hydrodistension under anesthesia is not recommended due to inconsistent symptom improvement and an increased risk of sepsis and bladder rupture.

**Intra-detrusor Injection (with Botulinum toxin type A)**

- This is quoted as a 4th line treatment option by the AUA, and current recommendations are that the patient should be warned that there may be a need for intermittent self-catheterization in the future.

**Systemic Immunosuppression**

Currently, only cyclosporine A is recommended for clinical use. A mutual decision between the doctor and patient is needed after a full and frank review of the risks and benefits. The patient needs to be made fully aware of the risks of systemic immunosuppression, such as vulnerability to infection and the development of malignancies. This is the last non-surgical option available currently.

A recent meta-analysis done in July 2020 looked at 81 randomized, controlled trials and compared the effectiveness of treatment of all the options, but focused on three main groups, namely antidepressants, pentosan polysulfate, and neuromuscular blockade, which is achieved by Botulinum injections. They found improved outcomes compared to control for antidepressants and neuromuscular blockade. However, the former is of very low certainty. There was no difference in pain relief, daytime frequency, or nocturia. Pentosan polysulfate did not show any improvement compared to control in all domains. However, the authors did not have a separate analysis for the mode of delivery.

**Surgical Treatment**

This has recently seen a fall in popularity, especially after the introduction of intra-detrusor injections of Botulinum toxin A. However, surgery remains the last resort option for patients with intractable disease as a final resolution of symptoms. A summary of possible options are:

- Cystoplasty only

- Cystoplasty with supra-trigonal resection

- Cystoplasty with sub-trigonal resection

- Urinary diversion, with or without cystectomy and urethral resection. This may be in the form of a urostomy.

Furthermore, multiple sources in addition to the American Urological Association, such as the National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE) and the European Association of Urology (EAU), do not currently recommend prolonged oral antibiotics, prolonged oral steroids, intravesical BCG, intravesical chlorpactin, or prolonged high-pressure hydrodistention as treatment options.

Hyaluronic acid instillations

**Investigational Therapies**

Monoclonal antibody therapy has shown some promise, but much additional research needs to be done to find the ideal antibody mix.

Certolizumab pegol is an investigational pharmacologic therapy under development for the treatment of IC/BPS.

**Mesenchymal stem cells**may potentially be of some value in the treatment of IC/BPS as they have been shown to minimize bladder tissue injury and inflammation.

**Platelet-rich plasma**(PRP) is widely used to promote wound healing.

IC/BPS symptoms correspond to the severity of bladder wall inflammation, which causes poor basal cell proliferation, defective umbrella cell integrity, and decreased barrier function [1,18,45]. The defective urothelium in IC/BPS is similar to an unhealed wound in the bladder mucosa. Therefore, the use of PRP to promote mucosal wound healing and eradicate residual inflammation in the bladder is rational [44]. Urothelial cell proliferation, cytoskeleton markers, and barrier function protein expression increase after PRP treatment in IC/BPS bladders [46].e conducted a study to determine the therapeutic efficacy of intravesical PRP injections in IC/BPS patients [47]. Forty patients received four monthly PRP injections and follow-up visits. Global response assessment scores improved after the first PRP injection, and the therapeutic effect persisted up to three months after the fourth PRP injection; the success rate was 67.5%. IC symptom scores and bladder pain scores decreased. Bladder capacity increased, but PVR did not change after PRP treatment, and no UTIs or dysuria occurred. Thus, repeated autologous PRP injections may be effective in patients with IC/BPS refractory to conventional therapy.

After four PRP injections in patients with IC/BPS, urinary levels of NGF, MMP-13, and VEGF decreased, and PDGF-AB levels significantly increased in responders, suggesting that PRP injections decrease inflammation, resulting in improvements in bladder pain and frequency episodes [48]. In addition, the expression of the urothelial barrier function protein and the urothelial cell proliferation protein increased after repeated PRP injections [49]. Thus, intravesical PRP injections may improve urothelial regeneration and differentiation to recreate a healthy urothelial barrier in IC/BPS bladders [50]. Repeated PRP intravesical injections improve IC/BPS symptoms by promoting the recovery of urothelial ultrastructural defects [51].

Botulinum toxin A (BoNT-A) has been widely used in several urological functional disorders including neurogenic detrusor overactivity (NDO), overactive bladder (OAB), lower urinary tract dysfunction, and interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome (IC/BPS). Chronic inflammation is found in a large proportion of patients with OAB and IC/BPS. The chronic inflammation activates sensory afferents which resulting in central sensitization and bladder storage symptoms. Because BoNT-A can inhibit the sensory peptides released from the vesicles in sensory nerve terminals, the inflammation can be reduced and symptom subsided. Previous studies have demonstrated that the quality of life improved after BoNT-A injections, both in neurogenic and non-NDO. Although the use of BoNT-A in treatment of IC/BPS has not been approved by FDA, intravesical BoNT-A injection has been included in the AUA guideline as the fourth line therapy. Generally, intravesical injections of BoNT-A are well tolerated, though transient hematuria and urinary tract infection can occur after the procedure. In order to prevent these adverse events, experimental trials have been conducted to test if BoNT-A can be delivered into the bladder wall without intravesical injection under anesthesia such as using liposomes encapsulated BoNT-A or application of low energy shock wave on the bladder to facilitate BoNT-A penetrating across the urothelium and treat OAB or IC/BPS. This article reviews current clinical and basic researches of BoNT-A on OAB and IC/BPS.

Experimentally, low-energy shock wave therapy has shown a benefit in reducing bladder pain, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and nerve growth factor (NGF) in IC/BPS patients.