Treatment should be targeted to a specific pathogen that is suspected based on information obtained from history and physical exam. Supportive and symptomatic management is key and includes supplemental oxygen for hypoxia, antipyretics for fever, and fluids for dehydration. This is especially important for non-infectious pneumonitis and viral pneumonia for which antibiotics are not indicated.

If bacterial pneumonia is suspected, treat empirically with antibiotics, keeping in mind significant history and bacterial pathogens that are common to specific age groups.

Neonates should receive ampicillin plus an aminoglycoside or third-generation cephalosporin

Atypical pneumonia is common in infants 1 to 3 months old, and this group should have additional antibiotic coverage with erythromycin or clarithromycin.

For infants and children over 3 months old, S. pneumoniae is the most common, for which the drug of choice is high-dose oral amoxicillin

In children older than 5 years old, atypical agents have a more important role, and macrolide antibiotics are usually first-line therapy.

Special attention should be given to children with chronic illnesses, as these might alter choices for antibioticsCytomegalovirus, ganciclovir and gamma globulin are the preferred agents. If methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is suspected, clindamycin or vancomycin may be given.

It is important to have a high index of suspicion for complications, especially in patients returning for repeat evaluation. For patients sent home with symptomatic or supportive management for suspected viral pneumonia, consider a secondary bacterial infection or other diagnoses upon re-evaluation.

Neonates and infants younger than 90 days old should be hospitalized for treatment, in addition to children who are immunocompromised or have other underlying chronic diseases like sickle cell anemia or cystic fibrosis.

Admission is often required for patients with respiratory distress and low oxygenation. In most cases, the presence of a parapneumonic effusion requires admission. Children with severe respiratory distress may require chest therapy, CPAP, or even mechanical ventilation. A large pleural effusion requires drainage for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. In patients with empyema, early video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) correlates with decreased mortality, hospital stay, and ionizing radiation from CT scans.

It is essential to ensure that clear discharge instructions and return precautions are given to parents or caregivers of children being discharged home in addition to close pediatrician follow-up.