Orbital pseudotumor is diagnosed by excluding other orbital diseases with similar presentations. Thus, systemic diseases such as sarcoidosis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, Sjogren syndrome, IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD), lymphoproliferative and histiocytic disorder, xanthogranulomatous disease, or metastatic disease may be elicited through a careful history-taking and a review of previous medical conditions.

**Signs and Symptoms**

Idiopathic orbital inflammation has highly variable clinical features ranging from a diffuse process to a specific focal target like the lacrimal gland and extraocular muscles.

Another typical presentation is that of a patient with an acute onset of orbital pain and headache. In adults, there may be eyelid and periorbital erythema and edema, conjunctival congestion, proptosis, ptosis, diplopia, light sensitivity, decrease in eye motility, and pain on eye movement.

Dacryoadenitis accounts for 50% of all IOI’s. It typically presents with a painful, firm, mass with edema in the lateral upper eyelid, and S-shaped ptosis. It may be bilateral. Some patients with idiopathic dacryoadenitis have gotten relabeled as having immunoglobulin G4-related ophthalmic disease (IgG4-ROD).

Orbital myositis may be acute, subacute, or recurrent. It may involve one or multiple ocular muscles. The most commonly involved muscles are the medial rectus, followed by the superior, lateral, and inferior recti muscles.

Systemic disorders have correlations with orbital pseudotumor. There are reports of immunologic diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn's disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, and scleritis, causing orbital inflammatory disease. Implications also point to sinusitis. Concurrent systemic diseases such as flu, asthma, colitis, and severe anemia are also reportedly correlated with NSOI, as are hepatitis C, rheumatoid arthritis, and xanthogranuloma.