The Sylvian fissure can be identified at 12 to 14 weeks of gestation as shallow depression on the lateral surface of the brain. It is formed by the convergence of the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes over the insula. The difference in the pattern of migration between these four lobules gives origin to the Sylvian fissure. The cells of the insula originate from the pallial/subpallial boundary and migrate around the basal ganglia in an oblique migration pattern. The cells of the frontal, parietal and temporal lobes originate in the ventricular and subventricular zones and migrate in a radial pattern. This radial pattern of migration creates the gyri of the brain.

**Sylvian Fissure - Developmental Milestones**

The cerebral cortex development during fetal life has been researched using anatomical and imaging studies (magnetic resonance imaging, sonographic studies). In anatomical studies, the Sylvian fissure has been identified by gestational week 14th as a shallow depression between the frontal and temporal lobes. By the 19th week, the fissure is grooved, creating the Sylvian fossa with a base formed by the insula. By week 18th, the insula appears initially as a conical and smooth-surface region surrounded by the circular sulcus. After gestational weeks 28 to 29, the frontoparietal and temporal opercula start to override the insula. Insular gyri are recognizable by the 34th to 35th weeks. The superior temporal gyrus becomes recognizable by gestational week 23, creating a fissure between the gyrus and the insula (the superior temporal fissure). The Heschl's gyrus appears by week 31st.

**Yakovlevian Torque**

Early anatomical studies of the development of the Sylvian fissure in fetuses noticed an asymmetry of the superior temporal fissure, with a larger anteroposterior length on the left side.