Thyroid eye disease cases are clinically evaluated as the activity and severity of the disease. The activity represents the grade of active inflammation and defines the progression of the disease. The severity reflects the spectrum of functional and cosmetic deficits. Numerous classification systems have come up over the last century to assess and grade the clinical manifestations of TED.

The most well-known system – is the NO SPECS classification.

In 1981, Von Dyek proposed the RELIEF variation of the NO SPECS classification.

The NO SPECS system only grades the clinical severity of TED. It doesn't include the activity of the disease. This classification system dictates the treatment strategies without considering the status of active inflammation. This system is now obsolete.

A new system – **Clinical Activity Score (CAS),**was proposed in 1989, considering the classic signs of inflammation – pain, swelling, redness, and impaired function. The European Group on Graves Orbitopathy (EUGOGO) later amended the CAS system. As per the amended CAS, active TED has a score of > 3/7 at the first visit or > 4/10 at subsequent visits.

- Spontaneous orbital pain

- Gaze-evoked orbital pain

- Lid edema

- Lid erythema

- Conjunctival congestion (involving > 1 quadrant)

- Chemosis

- Caruncular edema

- Increase of > 2 mm in proptosis

- Diminished uniocular excursion in any direction of > 8 degrees

- Decrease of visual acuity equivalent to > 1 Snellen line

The **EUGOGO**proposed a severity assessment protocol to grade the severity of TED into mild, moderate-to-severe, and sight-threatening categories as summarised below:

**Soft Tissue Assessment (Pain not included)**

**Eyelid Swelling**

- Absent

- Mild: none of the features defining moderate or severe categories

- Moderate: definite swelling, no lower eyelid festoons OR angulation of the upper eyelid skin fold in downgaze

- Severe: lower eyelid festoons OR upper lid fold becomes rounded at 45 degrees downgaze

**Eyelid Erythema**

- Absent

- Present

**Conjunctival Redness**

- Absent

- Mild: equivocal or minimal

- Moderate: <50% of definite conjunctival involvement

- Severe: >50% of definite conjunctival involvement

**Conjunctival Edema**

- Absent

- Present: separation of conjunctiva from sclera present in >1/3 of the total height of the palpebral aperture OR the conjunctiva prolapses anterior to the grey line of the eyelid

**Inflammation of Caruncle or Plica Semilunaris**

- Absent

- Present: plica prolapses through the closed eyelids OR inflammation of caruncle or plica

**Lid Margin Assessment (at the mid-pupillary line)**

- Palpebral aperture (mm)

- Upper/lower lid retraction (mm)

- Levator function (mm)

- Lagophthalmos - Absent or present

- Bell's phenomenon - Absent or present

**Proptosis Assessment**- using Hertel exophthalmometery to record the intercanthal distance

**Ocular Motility Assessment**

- The prism cover test

- Monocular ductions

- Head posture

- Torsion

- Binocular single vision

**Corneal Integrity Assessment**

- Normal

- Punctate keratopathy

- Ulcer

- Perforation

**Optic Nerve Assessment**

- Visual acuity (LogMAR or Snellen)

- Afferent pupil defect (present/absent)

- Colour vision

- VF analysis

- Optic disc assessment - normal/atrophy/edema

One or more of the following:

- Minor lid retraction < 2mm

- Mild soft-tissue involvement

- Exophthalmos < 3mm above the normal (for the gender and race)

- Transient or no diplopia

One or more of the following:

- Lid retraction > 2mm

- Moderate-to-severe soft-tissue involvement

- Exophthalmos > 3mm above normal (for the gender and race)

- Inconstant or constant diplopia

A novel classification – the **VISA**system, was proposed in 2006 with four parameters – Vision, Inflammation/congestion, Strabismus/motility restriction, and Appearance/exposure. The International Thyroid Eye Disease Society (ITEDS) 2018 defined separate parameters for the assessment at the first and subsequent visits.

**Inflammation (I) score**< 4/10, is an inactive disease -  manage conservatively. Score > 5/10 with evidence of progression of inflammation - manage aggressively

The clinical assessment and scoring are similar to CAS-EUGOGO recommendations except for the following changes.

**Chemosis**: +1 point if the conjunctiva lies behind the grey line of the lid, +2 if the conjunctiva extends anterior to the grey line

**Lid edema**: +1 if no overhanging of tissues, +2 if upper eyelid skin folds or lower lid festoons are present

**Strabismus/motility restriction**: Ductions - measured to the nearest five degrees in all four gazes, using the corneal reflex method. Any change in the ductions of > 12 degrees in any direction suggests progression.

Clinical assessment protocols given by the VISA and EUGOGO teams are not interchangeable. Hence only a single system is used for a specific patient.

All the scoring systems focus on a qualitative assessment. They give an equal weightage to all the symptoms, regardless of their diagnostic significance. This undermines the accurate monitoring of the disease progression. The arbitrarily chosen cut-off points (3/7 or 4/10 in CAS scoring) may not accurately reflect the extent of the disease.

**Orbital Imaging******

Orbital imaging provides valuable insights into the diagnosis and management of TED.

**Computed Tomography (CT) Scan**

- Characteristic fusiform enlargement of EOM - enlarged muscle belly with relative sparing of tendons. Long-standing cases show significant EOM changes - the "coca-cola sign." Orbital imaging in unilateral TED cases confirms the presence of asymmetric bilateral EOM changes.

- Barrett's index – for quantitative measurement of EOM thickness and apical crowding.

- Imaging in DON - soft tissue signs like apical crowding, enlarged superior ophthalmic vein, enlarged EOM (especially MR), Barrett's muscle index >67%, orbital fat prolapse across the superior orbital fissure, perineural fat effacement, and enlarged lacrimal gland. The bony orbit signs - the increased angle of the orbital apex and an increased angle of the medial wall. Coronal CT scan of orbital apex shows a narrow clear ring of low density around the optic nerve due to bulging adipose tissue. Stretch neuropathy is diagnosed by "taut nerve" in severe proptosis cases.

- Classification of orbitopathy – type 1: lipogenic variant, type 2: myogenic variant, and type 3: mixed variant. Accurate coronal images aid the detection of soft tissue remodeling – EOM and fat enlargement.

- CT exophthalmometry - is the gold standard. It is accurate, reproducible, and unaffected by periorbital tissue edema. The interzygomatic line (IZL) connects the ventral zygomatic borders bilaterally in axial view. The various techniques using IZL are:

- The perpendicular distance between the anterior surface of the cornea and IZL corresponds to the Hertel exophthalmometry value.

- The distance between IZL and the posterior sclera (normal value = 9.9 + 1.9 mm).

- The observation of less than 1/3rd of the globe lying behind IZL.

This technique is not feasible in patients who underwent lateral wall decompression surgery. A novel method uses the posterior clinoid (PC) process as a landmark and measures the distance between the PC and the anterior corneal surface

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scan**

Better for disease activity assessment. The MR parameters - T2 signal intensity ratio, T1 signal intensity ratio following gadolinium administration, and apparent diffusion coefficient correlate positively with CAS. In T1 weighted images, EOM appears isointense to facial muscles in inactive TED, with enhancement on Gadolinium contrast.

**Orbital Color Doppler Imaging (CDI)**

Evaluates the hemodynamic changes in orbit, secondary to increase in orbital volume. The primary vessels imaged are the ophthalmic artery, central retinal artery, and superior ophthalmic vein. The peak systolic velocity, end-diastolic velocity, and resistivity index are important indicators of ocular perfusion.