While oxygen should never be withheld to someone with dyspnea, before initiation of further treatment, the need for differentiation of other etiologies is prudent. Previously in literature, there was a large concern for COPD patients losing their respiratory drive with prolonged supplemental oxygen at high levels. Recent studies have shown this to be of little concern in the initial 24 hours of treatment. You are unlikely to alter the hypercarbic respiratory drive of an acutely decompensating patient during the duration of standard care. However, treatment guidelines indicate a titration to the effect of supplemental oxygen, which means goal SpO2 92% or better, do not attempt to reach 100% and stay there, titrate down. Before positive pressure ventilation (PPV) or nebulized medication therapy, you must ensure your diagnosis of COPD without other underlying pathology.

Before PPV ensure there is no pneumothorax, auscultate lung sounds bilaterally for diminished unilateral sounds, look for equal rise and fall of the chest, and ensure a midline trachea. Abnormalities here, especially after trauma are concerning for pneumothorax and PPV will acutely worsen the prognosis. Instead, treat appropriately with needle decompression if pneumothorax is suspected.

Before nebulized albuterol, ipratropium, or lev-albuterol assess for cardiac etiology. Obtain an ECG to rule out ST elevation or dysrhythmias. Assess fluid status and auscultate lungs, wet lungs, pitting edema, white sputum, and worsening orthopnea, especially in a patient with known CHF is highly suspect. You can also assess for jugular venous distention or hepatojugular reflex to indicate fluid overload and a pump (cardiac) problem. If your unit has the equipment to monitor waveform capnography, this is the perfect opportunity. This can be performed in-line with PPV if necessary and depending on your model either as a nasal cannula underneath or on the mask itself. ‘Shark Fin’ with hypercarbia is the classic pattern produced by bronchiolar constriction and CO2 retention in COPD exacerbation and indicate the patient would benefit from bronchodilator (albuterol) therapy. However, if a normal pattern is visualized and the patient is a normocarbia concern for congestive heart failure (CHF) is greater, as this indicates a perfusion pathology with normal functioning ventilation. Albuterol and stimulants should be avoided in acute coronary syndromes, acute myocardial infarctions, and congestive heart failure exacerbations as the increased stress demand on the heart coupled with decreased filling time from tachycardia can worsen the strain and subsequent damage. Conversely, the treatment for cardiac and perfusion pathology is commonly sublingual nitroglycerin which may decrease perfusion while failing to improve ventilation in the COPD patient.