**Prepping and Draping**

Typically, the patient shaves the scrotum before or has it shaved at the time of the procedure. Then, the scrotum is washed and prepped with an antimicrobial solution, and the surgical field is isolated with a fenestrated drape. The scrotum is exposed through the opening of the drape, with the penis isolated underneath. We generally ask the patient if they would like a narration of the procedure. Some men prefer narration, but others prefer silence. Music is often a distraction technique.

**Procedure**

Note: There are numerous ways to perform vasectomies – the two basic requirements are the isolation of the vas deferens and occlusion of the vas lumen. This procedure description is very general and represents just one of many ways to perform a vasectomy, and any method is acceptable, as long as it accomplishes isolation and occlusion.

The vas is identified manually and held with the thumb of the left hand underneath and stabilized between the first two fingers of the left hand.  This makes the vas close to the anterior surface of the scrotum.  A local anesthetic is then injected into the skin and optionally into the peri-vasal space.

The skin is opened either with a scalpal or the tip of a sharp dissector. Our preference is to use a scalpel, then use the local anesthetic again to infiltrate the area around and immediately underneath the vas.  If using a direct puncture technique, then the infiltration of the per-vasal tissues is recommended before incising the skin.

A small hemostat or the tips of the dissector may be used to open the skin incision and create space around the vas.  The vas deferens is then grasped with the vas tenaculum or a sharp towel clip. An additional anesthetic may be added as needed at this point.

The vas deferens and peri-vasalar tissue are grasped with the vas tenaculum to provide traction as the sharp dissector is used to remove the peri-vasal tissue; this is done by again spreading the tips of the sharp dissector while within the peri-vasal tissue. There are times when the vas tenaculum is used to regrasp the vas deferens because as more tissue has been released, the vas deferens becomes more isolated. Generally, a length of about 2 cm of vas deferens is exposed through the puncture wound. At this point, the vas deferens has been ISOLATED from the peri-vasal tissue.

The vas sheath can now be opened. This is done by using the scalpel longitudinally along the exposed vas sheath. A small hemostat can then be used to separate the vas from the sheath.  Once this is done, the vas can easily be pulled to give more length. Our preferred technique is to place the hemostat under the vas for traction and then to place clips.  We prefer clips because sutures may cut through or slip off more often.  We place two clips on either side, then a hemostat on one of the clips on either side as a precaution.  At this point, a portion of the vas can be removed; typically abou 1 cm in length. The ends or tips may cauterized but the hemostats remain in place to control both ends.

One end is allowed to retract while the other end is maintained using forceps or the hemostat which allows for a fascial interposition, if desired. The vas sheath may be reapproximated with either a clip or suture but we usually just leave it alone. Hemostasis requires review and possible cautery; especially to the vasal artery which runs in the sheath.  After a careful evaluation, the vas is allowed to retract into the scrotum by removal of the tenaculum first, then the remaining hemostat.

The surgeon then performs the same procedure on the opposite side. The dartos and skin are reapproximated with electrocautery, suture, or nothing if small enough and hemostatic. The wound gets covered with antibiotic ointment or possibly some Dermabond, and gauze is placed over the ointment to prevent the fouling of undergarments. We usually prefer to use a small bunch of gauze pads and a scrotal support to provide mild compression to the surgical site immediately after the procedure.

The patient is slowly cleaned up and prepared to discharge. We generally have patients stay for a short time following to ensure they are not feeling faint or experiencing any significant bleeding or scrotal swelling.

**Post Vasectomy Semen Analysis (PVSA)**

A semen analysis is generally performed 8 to 16 weeks following vasectomy. PVSA is necessary within 2 hours of ejaculation. The sample should be moved at room temperature and kept undiluted and uncentrifuged. Microscopic evaluation hopes to reveal azoospermia or rare non-motile sperm. Rare non-motile sperm has been defined as fewer than 100000 per ml,

**Post-procedure**

Post-procedure care will require discussion and written instructions. Following the procedure, patients will experience some pain. Pain should be controlled in a multimodal way, utilizing ice, supportive undergarments, acetaminophen, ibuprofen, and possible narcotics. Patients may have some blood from the wound and local erythema, but after 2 days, this should improve. The recommendation is to limit activity and aggressive sexual activity for approximately 3 to 5 days. Showering can resume post-procedure, day 0, but the patient should delay submerging incision with bathing or swimming for 5 to 7 days. Generally, no follow up is required except for the semen analysis or if complications or patient concerns arise.

Many practices will require a post-vasectomy semen analysis or sperm count before they will certify that the vasectomy is working.  We typically will request this at about 3 months post-vasectomy and then call the patient with the results.