Anytime there is an elevation in ICP, there is the risk of subsequent injury from direct brainstem compression or from a reduction in cerebral blood flow. Clinically, cerebral blood flow is evaluated via measurement of cerebral perfusion pressure where:

Cerebral perfusion pressure = Mean arterial pressure - Intracranial pressure

Cerebral perfusion pressure in simpler terms is the pressure of blood flowing to the brain and is the driving force for the delivery of oxygen necessary for neuronal functioning. Normally, this is a constant value of 50 to 100 mm Hg due to autoregulation. The impact that cerebral perfusion pressure holds is in the concept that blood flow will occur from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration. When ICP becomes elevated, cerebral perfusion pressures decrease, and the net driving force of blood flow to the brain becomes decreased. The physiologic autoregulatory response to a decrease in cerebral perfusion pressure is to increase mean arterial pressures systemically and to vasodilate cerebral blood vessels. This results in increased cerebral blood volume that further increases ICP. Paradoxically, this further reduces cerebral perfusion pressure producing a feedback cycle that results in the total reduction of cerebral flow and perfusion. The result of this feedback loop is cerebral ischemia and brain infarction with neuronal death. In cases where intracranial hypertension is the result of hemorrhage, increased blood pressure will worsen intracranial bleeding, thus worsening intracranial hypertension.