Generally, global functioning is more or less preserved as compared to other disorders. Impairment can be significant in one's occupation. There may be social isolation. A unique finding is apparent normal psychological functioning and appearance when not discussing the specific delusion.

- Persecutory type: This is one of the most common types of delusions and patients can be anxious, irritable, aggressive, or even assaultive - some patients may be litigious.

- Jealous type: Also known as “ Othello syndrome” this type is more common in males; it can sometimes correlate with suicidal or homicidal ideations, and hence safety is an important consideration in evaluation and management.

- Erotomanic type: Also known as “ psychose passionelle” this type of delusion involves a belief that a person usually of higher stature is in love with the patient.

- Somatic type: Also called monosymptomatic hypochondriacal psychosis and the reality impairment is severe. The patient is unarguably convinced of the severity of the symptoms. The most common type of somatic delusions is that of infestation example with parasites, body dysmorphic delusion, and of body odor or halitosis. These patients also have anxiety and nervousness.

- Grandiose type: Also known as megalomania are notable for increased self-importance.

- Mixed type: Patients have two or more delusional themes.

- Unspecified type: Sometimes a predominant delusion cannot be identified. Capgras syndrome is a delusional syndrome where there is a belief that a known person has been replaced by an impostor.

Delusional disorder in the partner of an individual with the delusional disorder: This is also known as a shared psychotic disorder.