Here we will discuss commonly tested areas in regard to the pathophysiology of clotting factors.

**Hemophilias**

Hemophilia A is an X-linked recessive coagulopathy that results in dysfunctional XIII. From our earlier discussion, we can see how dysfunctional VIII will result in coagulopathy and prolonged PTT. Patients with this disorder will often present with easy bruising, bleeding after dental procedures or from operations in general, and hemarthrosis. Hemophilia A can be treated with desmopressin and recombinant factor VIII. Desmopressin causes endothelial cells to release vWF, which stabilizes XIII.

Hemophilia B, sometimes referred to as Christmas disease, is an X-linked recessive coagulopathy that results in dysfunction of IX. As with hemophilia A, hemophilia B will also cause a prolonged PTT. The difference is hemophilia A is a cofactor deficiency while hemophilia B is a protease deficiency; therefore, desmopressin will not be a good treatment option as these patients require recombinant factor IX. Hemophilia B will present with the same symptoms as hemophilia A. It is important to note that hemophilia A and B will have a normal PT/INR.

**Von Willebrand Disease**

vWF disease is the most commonly inherited coagulopathy. vWF can be differentiated from hemophilias in several ways. First, vWF mode of inheritance is autosomal dominant. Secondly, vWF disease is a disease of platelet dysfunction and will manifest primarily as mucosal membrane bleeding, such as epistaxis and prolonged menstrual cycles. Thirdly, bleeding time is normal in hemophilia, whereas it is prolonged in vWF disease. Since vWF increases the half-life of XIII, you can expect to see a prolonged PTT in this disorder as well. Desmopressin can be used as a treatment option; however, certain subtypes of vWF disease do not warrant this treatment option.

**Vitamin K Deficiency**

Previously, we discussed the importance of vitamin K and its clotting factors II, VII, IX, X, protein C, and S. The effects of vitamin K deficiency can be observed in both the extrinsic and intrinsic pathways and directly measured via PT and PTT, which will be prolonged. The etiology of vitamin K deficiency is extensive but commonly arises on test questions in regards to patients with poor diet, pancreatic insufficiency, liver disease, intestinal flora imbalances, neonates, or mimicked by patients on warfarin therapy.

**Warfarin**

Vitamin K assists in the carboxylation of clotting factors II, VII, IX, X, protein C and S. The enzyme responsible for gamma-carboxylation is vitamin K epoxide reductase, which is inhibited by warfarin. As mentioned previously, patients on warfarin will have the coagulation status measured via INR. In emergency clinical settings, warfarin’s therapeutic effects are negated by the administration of fresh frozen plasma. In a less urgent clinical setting, patients may be administered vitamin K. Rarely; patients may experience warfarin-induced skin necrosis within the first few days of beginning warfarin. This is due to protein C having the shortest half-life of vitamin K dependent clotting factors, and therefore a patient enters a prothrombotic state. However, this rare complication is more common in patients with protein C deficiency. To help eliminate this complication, patients are often co-administered heparin while beginning warfarin therapy as heparin’s onset is immediate while warfarin’s onset takes 2 to 3 days.