The most common cause of Cushing syndrome is the use of corticosteroids for a long time. Because these drugs are prescribed by many clinicians, it is important to manage Cushing syndrome with an interprofessional team; if the diagnosis is missed, the mortality is very high.

When patients are prescribed corticosteroids, all clinicians including the pharmacist must educate the patient about the side effects of these hormones and the need for close follow-up. The pharmacist should educate the patient on the prevention of peptic ulcer disease, diabetes, and weight gain.

At the time of discharge, the patient should have a dietary consult and how to prevent osteoporosis.

The nurse should educate the patient on the risk of infections and when to follow up with the healthcare provider.

Patients should be warned that they should not take any medication without first speaking with the primary care provider. More importantly, they should not stop the corticosteroids on their own.

All patients diagnosed with Cushing syndrome need long-term follow-up until the syndrome has been cured or eradicated. Finally, clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists should educate patients about the potential adrenal crisis if the corticosteroid is stopped abruptly. An ID bracelet should be worn by patients taking corticosteroids.

**Outcomes**

Prolonged exposure to corticosteroids is not a benign event and associated with high morbidity and mortality. Individuals diagnosed with Cushing syndrome are at a higher risk of death compared to the general population. The morbidity and mortality of Cushing syndrome are primarily due to the effects of related conditions such as diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, obesity, and osteoporosis with fractures. The prognosis is worse if the patient has an unresectable tumor secreting the hormones. In addition, the high doses of endogenous glucocorticoids may mask some abdominal signs and symptoms leading to a missed bowel perforation. Finally, it is important to be aware that sudden removal of glucocorticoids can also precipitate adrenal crises, hence the withdrawal has to be tapered over a few weeks or months.