As mentioned, pyoderma gangrenosum is a diagnosis of exclusion both clinically and histologically. In addition to nonspecific histologic features, there are no specific lab markers that aid in its diagnosis.

In 2004, diagnostic criteria were proposed but have not been confirmed. According to this proposal, both major criteria and two of the minor criteria are required to make the diagnosis.

**Major Criteria**

- Rapid progression of a painful, necrolytic cutaneous ulcer with an irregular, violaceous, and undermined border

- Other causes of cutaneous ulceration have been excluded

**Minor Criteria**

- History suggestive of pathergy or cribriform scarring

- Systemic diseases associated with pyoderma gangrenosum

- Histopathologic findings (sterile dermal neutrophilia, +/- mixed inflammation,  +/-  lymphocytic vasculitis)

- Treatment response (rapid response to systemic steroid treatment)

A number of syndromes include pyoderma gangrenosum in the clinical criteria and are named with acronyms for these criteria. These include syndromes like PAPA syndrome which includes pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, and pyogenic sterile arthritis and PASH syndrome which includes pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, and hidradenitis suppurativa. A helpful way to organize these disorders is by remembering that they all include pyoderma gangrenosum and acne but are distinguished by the addition of hidradenitis suppurativa, colitis, and certain types of arthritis. These disorders share the common factor of immune system dysregulation with aberrant interleukin-1 signaling.

The pathergy skin test involves poking the skin and observing for an exaggerated reaction.