Pharmacologic recommendations for women who are lactating should include discussing the benefits of breastfeeding, the risks of antidepressant use during lactation, and the risks of untreated illness. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is a treatment that may provide an alternative option for women who breastfeed and are concerned about their babies being exposed to medication. There is the most data for the use of sertraline for the prevention and treatment of postpartum depression. The risk of breastfeeding while taking a serotonin reuptake inhibitor is relatively low, and women can be encouraged to breastfeed while on antidepressants. After 12 weeks, CBT mono-therapy was found to be remarkable in both sertraline mono-therapy and combination therapy. The CBT mono-therapy group found the most accelerated initial gains after treatment startup. An important factor in the duration of postpartum depression is delayed treatment.

Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) is a procedure that is non-invasive and uses magnetic waves to stimulate and activate nerve cells. These cells are underactive in people with major depression. It is usually done five times a week for 4 to 6 weeks to be effective. It is done in patients who are not responding to anti-depressants and psychotherapy. Generally, TMS is safe and well-tolerated, but there can be some side effects which include headaches, lightheadedness, scalp discomfort, and facial muscle twitching. Some serious side effects are rare, including seizures, hearing loss if ear protection is not adequate, and mania in people with bipolar disorder.

Patients with severe postpartum depression may not respond to psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy. For patients refractory to four consecutive medication trials, ECT is recommended. ECT is particularly useful in patients with psychotic depression, with intent or plans on committing suicide or infanticide, and refusal to eat, leading to malnutrition and dehydration.

For patients with severe postpartum depression that decline or do not respond to ECT, intravenous brexanolone is recommended. Brexanolone received FDA approval in March 2019, and it is the first drug to be specifically approved for postpartum depression. Brexanolone is an aqueous formulation of allopregnanolone, a progesterone metabolite. Brexanolone is only recommended if patients do not improve on antidepressants or ECT due to its restricted availability and limited clinical experience. In the United States, Brexanolone is only available at certified healthcare facilities, and patients are required to enroll in the Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy Program. Through this program, patients are continuously monitored by a clinician during their IV infusion for increased sedative effects, sudden loss of consciousness, and hypoxia. Brexanolone is administered intravenously as a continuous 60hr infusion, which lasts approximately 2.5 days. Multiple clinical trials demonstrate that brexanolone is usually well-tolerated in women with moderate to severe postpartum depression and can provide a rapid beneficial response.