It is pertinent to discuss spinal TB in this section due to certain overlapping neurological presentations. Spinal TB is part of skeletal tuberculosis and may occur as spondylodiscitis or spondylitis without disc involvement.

In adults, intervertebral disc involvement occurs secondary to the spread from the contiguously infected vertebra. In children, the disc may be involved hematogenously due to a rich blood supply leading to TB discitis. Pott's disease consists of osteomyelitis and arthritis, typically involving more than one vertebra. It comprises progressive vertebral destruction leading to gradual anterior collapse and kyphotic or gibbous deformity (thoracic vertebrae), paraspinal cold abscess formation, and spinal canal narrowing culminating in multiple neurologic deficits, the most devastating being paraplegia.

Early-onset paraplegia may occur due to mechanical compression by tuberculous debris, bone or disk sequestrum, tuberculomas or granulomas or abscess in extradural, intradural, or intramedullary regions, myelitis with cord edema, meningeal inflammation and anterior spinal artery thrombosis leading to cord infarction. However, since the smaller end-arteries are involved, frank infarction is rare.

Late-onset paraplegia could occur due to transection of the cord by a transverse bony ridge in severe kyphosis or dural fibrosis and cord encasement and, infrequently, the formation of a syrinx. The paraspinal abscess may cause mechanical compression depending on its location. In the cervical region, it may present as a retropharyngeal abscess causing dysphagia and respiratory distress; in the mediastinum, it may track down and enter the trachea, esophagus, or pleural cavity. In the thoracic region, it may manifest as fusiform or bulbous paravertebral swelling. In the lumbar area, it may appear as swelling in the groin or the medial aspect of the thigh.

CT of the spine provides bony detail, while MRI is required to evaluate the soft tissue component. Points in favor of TB spine are the relative sparing of the intervertebral disc, rarefaction of the vertebral endplates, anterior vertebral wedging, and paravertebral abscesses. Neuroimaging-guided needle biopsy from the involved vertebral body is the gold standard for diagnosis. Patients with Pott's spine are managed with standard ATT, although the continuation phase may need to extend up to 18 months. Surgery for Pott's disease is indicated when patients present with neurologic deficits, large paravertebral abscesses, and spinal instability.