# Definition/Introduction

Pharmaceutical formulation is the multistep process where the active drug is mixed with all other components by considering the factors of particle size, polymorphism, pH, and solubility and becomes the final beneficial medicinal product. Benefits and constraints of the active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), valuable excipients, associated interactions, and manufacturing procedure are the four basic components for a successful pharmaceutical formulation. The formulation often functions in a way that includes different dosage forms. The dosage form is the pharmaceutical drug product as marketed for use with a specific mixture of active ingredients and inactive components. It has to be a particular configuration(capsule shell, for example) and distributed into a particular dose.

Pharmaceutical formulation is the formation of a pharmaceutical product, including a drug's chemical properties, formulation, and details of the treatment protocol to be implemented in the clinical application.

# Issues of Concern

With the significant amount of money invested annually, the list of medications aspires to grow each year.

The development of pharmaceutical formulations is currently dependent on trial and error methods. Trial and error methods help predict optimal formulations. This process is time-consuming and expensive and involves a significant amount of labor to develop and monitor. There is pressure on the pharmaceutical industry to decrease the cost of healthcare and the number of new active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs). To combat this, determining the desired formulations is necessary for the industry to determine efficient ways to develop drugs.

API must be safe and efficacious, but the excipients, primary packaging materials, devices need to be safe as well.

# Clinical Significance

The clinical relevance of pharmaceutical formulation is that they have a significant impact on one’s quality of life, disease outcomes, and adherence to the treatment protocol. Additionally, the effectiveness of a pharmaceutical treatment depends on a multitude of factors, including a medication’s chemical properties, formulation, and mode of administration.

Developed medications have maximized efficiency when used properly. More complex regimens show decreased patient compliance; thus, it is necessary to develop a low complexity regimen for maximum effectiveness.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

It is important to develop a formulation with a regimen that is not complex for a patient to follow to improve patient outcomes through adherence to developed pharmaceutical formulations.

Not only is patient compliance essential, but the collaboration of all healthcare professionals involved in health care is also crucial in ensuring proper implementation of pharmaceutical formulations. The physician has to understand why and how the medication interacts with the human body. It is also imperative that nurses, pharmacists, and other essential team members maintain good communication and display accountability in administering medications to ensure patient safety.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

All the health workers, including the nurse, allied health worker, and the interprofessional team, have the contributory role for the improvement of drug compliance. It is possible by sharing knowledge, information, open communication, and collaborative decision making. Good communication among all the above health care professionals can lead to better patient compliance and provide the perfect and optimal dosing by using the population and patient-specific pharmacokinetic parameters, thereby promoting medication safety through interprofessional collaboration in patient-centered care.

Correlation among the pharmacokinetics of the drug with the medical diagnosis, physical parameters, and laboratory findings can give the original information about the effectivity and compliance of the drug.