The cutdown procedure begins with sterile preparation and draping of the anteromedial ankle with the medial malleolus visible as a bony landmark. Traveling 1 cm anterior and 1 cm superior to the medial malleolus approximates the location of the GSV where a 3 cm transverse skin incision is made with a scalpel. Curved hemostats are then used to longitudinally dissect through the subcutaneous tissue while being cognizant of the rather superficial location of the vessel. Dissection continues circumferentially around the vessel and extends a length of about 2 cm to allow passage of permanent suture material such as 3-0 silk around the proximal and distal ends of the exposed vessel. Care must be taken to dissect off and avoid damage to the saphenous nerve which runs parallel with the vein. These sutures will aid in proximal and distal control as well as act as a sling to gently lift the vessel into the surgical field. A hemostat may be used to apply distal traction in preparation for venous entry. Venous access is gained by either a formal venotomy with a No. 15 scalpel to accommodate a larger IV cannula or by an introducer needle using Seldinger technique. If using a scalpel, place a hemostat behind the mobilized vein to aid in dividing 40% of the transverse diameter. Importantly, this venous access is secured by tying down the permanent suture encircling both the vein and cannula hub tightly. The distal vein is also ligated with a silk suture. The cannula or IV tubing should also be secured to the skin with suture or tape to prevent it from being dislodged.