**Management of Malignancies**

There are multiple clinical scenarios in which brachytherapy can be utilized. It can be used as definitive therapy alone or in conjunction with external beam radiotherapy. Several treatment guidelines exist, but the American Brachytherapy Society Guidelines provide a comprehensive overview of treatment indications, technical requirements, and current evidence for the most common disease sites.

**Gynecological Brachytherapy**

**Cervical Cancer**

Brachytherapy in cervical cancer is an essential part of treatment. It is typically delivered as a boost with external beam radiotherapy and would be appropriate for patients with Stage IB3-IVA disease. However, brachytherapy alone may be considered for very early-stage disease in patients unable to undergo surgery. It is typically delivered using HDR, and there are several applicators that can be used depending on the clinical scenario. These include tandem and ring, tandem and ovoid, cylinder with tandem, and Syed-Neblett template. When used as a boost, the typical dosing assumes that the patient has already or will receive 45 Gy to the pelvis. Fractionation schemes include 7 Gy x 4, 6 Gy x 5, 5.5 Gy x 5, and 5 Gy x 6.

Treatment planning is typically CT based, although MRI planning may also be performed as it offers superior soft tissue delineation.

**Uterine Cancer**

Vaginal cylinder brachytherapy has established itself as a mainstay of adjuvant treatment in patients with endometrial cancer. Adjuvant treatment of high and intermediate-risk endometrial cancer with radiotherapy has been extensively studied over several decades. Initial trials with whole pelvic radiotherapy were found to reduce the risk of local recurrence in the pelvis by approximately 10%.

The vaginal cylinder applicator is typically a single channel with various predetermined lengths and diameters (range 2.0-4.0 cm).

Several dose fractionation schemes can be utilized. In the adjuvant setting, the most common schemes are 7 Gy x 3 prescribed to 5 mm depth or 6 Gy x 5 to the vaginal surface. If it is used with external beam treatments, then 6 Gy x 3 or 6 Gy x 2 prescribed to the surface can be used. Although HDR is the most common, LDR can be employed as well and is typically delivered at 100 cGy/hour to the vaginal surface.

Medically inoperable endometrial cancer is another challenging area that may also benefit from brachytherapy. The Rotte-“Y” applicator is a two-channel applicator placed along the wall of the uterus and can be used in conjunction with external beam radiotherapy. Radiation delivery is usually performed with HDR to a dose of 20 Gy in 5 fractions when used with external beam radiation and 35 Gy in five fractions when used alone.

**Breast**

Accelerated partial breast radiation (APBI) allows for a shorter course of treatment with excellent rates of local control in patients with early-stage breast cancer compared to conventional external beam radiotherapy. Mammosite® and SAVI®. These applicators are implanted after the breast-conserving surgery and placed in the surgical cavity. APBI using brachytherapy delivers a dose of 34 Gy in ten fractions given twice a day 6 hours apart. Local control rates are around 4.6% at ten years, comparable to external beam methods.

The ASTRO consensus guidelines provide detailed selection criteria for appropriate APBI candidates.

**Genitourinary Cancers**

**Prostate Brachytherapy**

Prostate brachytherapy features prominently in the treatment of prostate cancer. It may be used as monotherapy in low and favorable intermediate-risk prostate cancer or as a boost when combined with external beam radiotherapy in high-risk disease. In addition, some centers have used brachytherapy for salvage therapy in recurrent cases. LDR and HDR modalities have both been utilized with excellent outcomes. Contraindications to prostate brachytherapy include distant metastasis, unacceptable operative risk, large prostate urethral defects, ataxia telangiectasia, absence of rectum, and limited life expectancy.

The procedure requires the placement in interstitial needles into the prostate using a transperineal approach under trans-rectal ultrasound guidance (TRUS). Ultrasound imaging serves not only as a guide for needle placement but also as a means of treatment planning. This technique is used for both LDR and HDR brachytherapy. LDR typically uses a Mick applicator ® which is used to manually load loose radioactive seeds in the prostate or preloaded needles with seeds attached to a ribbon. HDR uses a remote after loader in a shielded room to protect staff from higher levels of radiation exposure.

Dosing varies depending on the dose delivery technique. When using HDR, monotherapy doses include but are not limited to 9.5 Gy x 4 and 12-13.5 x 2.

As monotherapy, the biochemical control rates range from 85 to 97% at five years for low and intermediate-risk prostate cancer.

Treatment-related toxicity includes urethritis, urinary retention, erectile dysfunction, prolonged use of an indwelling catheter, and rectal urgency. Some of these symptoms will lessen with time, but certain side effects such as erectile dysfunction may persist. Late toxicity such as rectal fistulas and urinary incontinence are extremely rare.

**Penile Cancer**

Penile cancer represents 1% of all male malignancies with squamous cell carcinoma being the most common histology. Surgical techniques typically consist of a partial or total penectomy with or without an inguinal lymph node dissection. Penile preservation techniques are preferred due to the adverse psychological impact of a penectomy. The implant is typically an interstitial implant. Indications include T1-T3 tumor without penile shaft involvement and <4c m in size. It may also be employed post-operatively if there are positive margins. This can be accomplished with PDR or LDR to a total dose of 60 Gy. The 5-year penile preservation rate was 86% with an overall survival rate of 78%.

**Urethral Cancer**

Brachytherapy can be used to treat males and females with urethral cancer. Multiple techniques have been described in the literature, including interstitial implants, intracavitary, and intraluminal. The dose can be delivered with LDR to 60-70Gy over a 3-5 day period or as a boost 20-25Gy with an external beam. Seven-year overall survival was found to be 41%.

**Ocular Cancers**

**Ocular Melanoma**

Vision-sparing treatments in the setting of ocular malignancies were studied extensively with the Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study (COMS). The COMS “Medium trial” (height 2.5 - 10.0 mm and diameter <=16 mm), which randomized patients that received enucleation or episcleral plaque brachytherapy to a dose of 85 Gy with I-125 demonstrated no statistical difference in overall survival (59% vs. 57%) or distant metastasis (17% vs. 21%).

**Retinoblastoma**

Plaque brachytherapy may also be used in retinoblastoma treatment, typically as a secondary option after failure of systemic therapy or other focal therapies.

Treatment complications include cataract formation, iritis, uveitis, retinal detachment, optic neuropathy, retinal hemorrhage, scleral necrosis, intraocular vasculopathy, painful eye, and dry eye.

**Central Nervous System Cancers**

Recurrent gliomas are particularly challenging to treat as therapeutic options are limited, and the prognosis is generally poor. There are several brachytherapy options that have emerged in the last two decades to allow for additional radiation to be given for surgically operable recurrent gliomas. The GliaSite ® system is an inflatable catheter that can be inserted into a resection cavity and inflated with a solution of I-125 or Cs-131 allowed to dwell in the cavity over several days.

GammaTile ® is a more recent development in brachytherapy. It is a permanent Cs-131 implant embedded in a resorbable collagen matrix that can be placed within a surgical cavity.

**Head and Neck Cancers**

**Recurrent Nasopharyngeal cancers**

Nasopharyngeal cancers are typically treated with radiotherapy +/- chemotherapy. Local recurrence rates range from 3 to 7% at five years.****When they recur, the patient may require salvage surgery which can be extensive and morbid. In some cases, the tumor may not be adequately accessible for resection, and other techniques may be needed. Since the majority of these patients would have received radical radiotherapy previously, re-irradiation would need to be exceptionally conformal to minimize doses to normal structures, which likely received doses close to their tolerances. The Rotterdam Applicator, developed in the mid-nineties, is to be used with an HDR afterloader system and placed into the nasopharynx via the nasal cavity.

**Oral Cavity Cancers**

Brachytherapy has been used in the oral cavity as both a boost and a monotherapy. External beam is limited by the dose delivered to the mandible, and brachytherapy can allow for a more conformal dose. Implants are typically performed freehand with interstitial needles placed under anesthesia. The most common sites are oral tongue, lip, and floor-of-mouth tumors. It can be delivered using LDR or HDR. LDR dosing is typically given as monotherapy to 60-70 Gy or 20-35 Gy as a boost after 50 Gy of external beam radiotherapy.

**Sarcoma**

Brachytherapy for sarcoma treatment is typically utilized in the post-operative setting. Interstitial free needle implants are placed in the surgical bed at the time of resection. Brachytherapy in this setting carries the advantage of being able to deliver higher doses than with an external beam and can shorten treatment times. Both LDR and HDR have been used in this setting. Indications include positive margins, close margins, and local recurrence.

**Skin Cancers**

Superficial brachytherapy is one of several treatment modalities available to treat non-melanoma skin cancers in patients that refuse or are unable to undergo surgical removal. Generally, this is utilized for relatively small tumors (T1-T2) on the face or areas that would require extensive surgery to remove. Several radiation delivery devices have been introduced for superficial radiotherapy including electron beam radiation, superficial X-rays, orthovoltage x-rays, and HDR brachytherapy. For brachytherapy, there are several applicators available, including Valencia applicators, Leipzig applicators, and Freiberg flaps that can deliver superficial radiation. Custom applicators may be made as well. More recently, HDR electronic brachytherapy has emerged that allows for HDR treatments to be delivered without the need for dedicated treatment vaults, shielding, or for radioactive isotopes. Electronic brachytherapy can treat lesions up to 5mm in thickness. However, long-term data on the efficacy of electronic surface brachytherapy is lacking.