The exact mechanism by which topical tretinoin functions are not completely understood, but current evidence suggests mediation through binding of retinoic acid receptors (RARs) alpha, beta, and gamma along with retinoid X receptors (RXRs) by blocking inflammatory mediators. By doing this, the production of procollagen increases to augment collagen type I and III formations.

RAR-gamma effects are associated with mucocutaneous tissues and bone. Tretinoin's effectiveness as an acne medication is because of its ability to modify the abnormal follicular formation that comes from excessive keratinization of epithelial cells. Tretinoin promotes cornified cell detachment and enhances shedding. Tretinoin increases mitotic activity, thereby increasing loosely-adherent corneocytes turnover. By doing so, the comedo contents can be expelled, with a reduction of microcomedo precursor lesion of acne vulgaris.

RAR-alpha and -beta has presented in associated with APL and squamous cell malignancies, respectively.

Retinoic acid binds to retinoic acid receptor alpha, a member of the steroid-thyroid hormone receptor superfamily. RARα forms heterodimers with RXR and binds to retinoic acid response elements that are present in genes involved in cell differentiation.

Again, like topical tretinoin, the exact mechanism of systemic tretinoin is unclear but is hypothesized to include the following:

- Apoptosis and degradation of PML-RAR alpha protein occur by both caspase-mediated cleavage and proteasome-dependent degradation;

- PML-RAR alpha conversion from a transcription repressor (CoR) to an activator (CoA)

- Coordinated gene expression induced by ATRA committed to the differentiation of APL cells.

Systemic tretinoin produces complete remission by inducing an initial primitive promyelocyte maturation followed by bone marrow and peripheral blood repopulation occurring by normal, polyclonal hematopoietic cells.