Regardless of the nature of the stricture, patients typically present with one or all of the following symptoms: dysphagia, food impaction, odynophagia, chest pain, and weight loss.**progressive dysphagia**to solid food, and this sometimes progresses to involve semisolid and liquid foods. The rate and type of symptom progression correlate with the underlying type of stricture. Physical examination findings are usually not significant in these patients.

Benign stricture follows a slow and insidious course, while malignant stricture develops rapidly. Sometimes dysphagia is combined with pain in the presence of acute esophagitis. Food impaction requires instant recognition and prompt management to avoid severe complications like aspiration or perforation. Patients presenting with such clinical symptoms have an underlying stricture in about 45% of cases diagnosed at endoscopy.

A careful clinical evaluation, including a directed history and physical examination, can suggest information about the underlying cause of a suspected or endoscopically diagnosed stricture. The physician should gather information about dysphagia pertaining to its nature, duration, onset, severity, and associated symptoms such as heartburn, vomiting, pain while swallowing, any upper respiratory symptoms, or chest pain. Sometimes the patient may report having water brash, morning soreness of throat, or asthma-like wheezing, which may be due to severe regurgitation. In the case of peptic stricture, weight loss is uncommon, and a good appetite is usually present. Weight loss and anorexia, along with long-standing weakness, are more associated with malignant strictures or refractory strictures.

- Known medical history of GERD, Barrett esophagus, hiatal hernia, or medication use that could cause peptic ulcers and GI irritations; any of these are risk factors for peptic stricture.

- The patient has a history of recent caustic product ingestion.

- A prior history of endoscopic treatment or esophageal surgery for any esophageal pathology. Such patients are at risk for developing anastomotic or iatrogenic stricture.

- There is a history of radiation therapy for any prior head & neck or chest malignancy.

- A history of medication use, including alendronate, tetracycline or other antibiotics, NSAIDs, and many others that predispose one to pill-induced esophagitis.