Lymphedema is quite common, but the diagnosis and treatment are complex. The majority of patients with lymphedema first present to the primary care provider. These professionals should be aware of the diagnosis of lymphedema and know the causes. While most cases are benign, the condition may be caused by an underlying malignancy.

An interprofessional team is recommended to achieve the best lymphedema management and care. The first step is recognition and early diagnosis, often by a primary care physician or nurse practitioner. Since most cases are related to neoplasm and post-surgical issues, surgeons and oncologists with a solid foundation in lymphedema recognition, prevention and, treatment are essential. The addition of a certified lymphedema therapist rounds out the team.

The pharmacist should educate the patient on compression stockings or garments. Irrespective of treatment, compression stockings make a major difference in the swelling. Many patients do become anxious or depressed because of poor aesthetics, and hence, a mental health nurse should counsel them.

There is no cure for lymphedema, and treatment is lifelong. Depending on which extremity is involved, the condition can affect function and quality of life. Rigid adherence to compression stockings is mandatory to obtain relief from the pain and swelling. In addition, skin dryness and pruritus also need to be addressed. All patients should be seen by a wound care nurse if there is tissue breakdown. At this point, the chances of healing are small, and daily wound dressings are necessary.