Fuchs uveitis syndrome usually occurs in the third to the fourth decade of life. Due to the insidious nature of this condition, coupled with a mild chronic course, most patients will be unaware of the subtle changes in their eyes. Patients are usually asymptomatic, with most FUS diagnoses detected during a routine ocular examination. Lightening of the iris of the affected eye is a unique complaint by patients. Occasionally, both eyes will be affected. Another pertinent finding in a patient’s history will consist of decreasing visual acuity primarily caused by cataract formation. Patients may also complain of floaters, one of the more common presenting symptoms. Some patients may also experience symptoms of increased intraocular pressure (IOP), such as blurry vision, mild pain, and colored haloes around lights.

On slit-lamp examination, minimal inflammatory signs are present, with quiet conjunctiva and no ciliary injection. Even though heterochromia is a unique feature in FUS, many factors affect this finding. The factors include anterior stromal atrophy, iris color, and the amount of pigment present in the iris’ epithelium. This unique clinical finding is caused by the irreversible and progressive atrophy of the anterior stroma. Individuals with darker-colored irises may not manifest heterochromia, while others may experience a lightening of the iris of the affected eye. However, those with a lighter iris will experience a deepening of the color. The more consistent finding consists of white stellate keratic precipitates being distributed throughout the endothelium, described as sharply circumscribed and small to medium in size.

The trabecular meshwork and iris will display abnormal vessels with variable vitreous inflammation. Some cases have patients with iris nodules in the pupillary margin known as Koeppe’s nodule or on the iris’ surface known as Busacca nodules. The iris sphincter can also atrophy, leading to an irregularly shaped pupil exhibiting poor light reflex. Due to the insidious nature of the disease, many patients with FUS will present to the clinic with advanced disease. These patients often have a posterior subcapsular cataract, eventually evolving into total opacification and increased intraocular pressure.