The vast majority of infectious endocarditis cases stem from gram-positive streptococci, staphylococci, and enterococci infection. Together, these three groups account for 80% to 90% of all cases, with Staphylococcus aureus specifically responsible for around 30% of cases in the developed world.Haemophilus, Actinobacillus, Cardiobacterium, Eikenella, and Kingella) can less frequently be the culprit bacteria. Numerous other bacteria have been previously identified as well but comprise only about 6% of total cases. Finally, fungal endocarditis represents only about 1% of cases but can be a typically fatal complication of systemic Candida and Aspergillus infection in the immunocompromised population.

Risk factors and the environmental setting of bacterial acquisition, healthcare versus community, provide hints towards the underlying infectious etiology. The definition of nosocomial infections remains controversial, but in general, healthcare-related cases emerge in the setting of early prosthetic valve endocarditis (typically defined as occurring within the first 60 days since surgery) or following recent vascular catheterization, hemodialysis, hospitalization, or extra-cardiac operative procedures. In these situations, S. aureus represents the predominant pathogen, responsible for around 50% of nosocomial infections. The less virulent coagulase-negative staphylococci, such as S. epidermidis, stereotypically stem from indwelling vascular devices or recently implanted prosthetic valves. Enterococcal infection emerges with similar frequency in both nosocomial and non-nosocomial infections, comprising about 15% and 18% of cases, respectively.

Community-acquired infections tend to develop in the setting of immunosuppression, intravenous drug use, poor dentition, degenerative valve disease, and rheumatic heart disease. Intravenous drug use, which underlies almost 10% of infectious endocarditis cases, suggests repeated inoculation with skin flora such as S. aureus and S. epidermidis, with S. aureus demonstrating a predilection for healthy, native tricuspid valves. While fairly uncommon in healthcare-related infections, viridans group streptococci underlie about 20% of community-acquired infections.Streptococcus gallolyticus (bovis) organisms should raise suspicion for underlying colon carcinoma.