# Introduction

Simulation is a technique that allows one to experience and interact with mock scenarios based on real-life situations.

# Function

Surgical education has undergone significant recent changes. The apprenticeship model described as Halsted’s “see one, do one, teach one” model, has been the foundation of surgical training for over a century.

These factors highlight the need to optimize surgical training worldwide. In the United Kingdom (UK), for example, the context of trauma and orthopedic training has shifted from a time-based to a competency-based system of training as laid out by the Royal College of Surgeons and Health Education England. Defining clinical competency is essential to allow validated training, which permits benchmarking of clinical knowledge and skills; this, in turn, helps to meet ever-growing patient expectations.

# Issues of Concern

Trainees currently have reduced training opportunities in the operating room (OR) due to service provision demands and arduous on-calls. Simulation shortens the learning curve in surgical training and improves knowledge retention and transference of skills through DP.

Although improved access may increase the uptake of simulation resources for DP- this strategy is based on the premise that the rota will permit simulation training time. Another key area of improvement is the provision of structured simulation training time within the working week. Finally, feedback is essential in supporting behavioral change and preventing internalization of erroneous skills and behaviors; therefore, feedback should be provided by trainers and sought by trainees promptly.

# Curriculum Development

A range of simulation modalities exists, from low-fidelity  ‘bench models’ to high-fidelity virtual reality simulators.****Fidelity is defined as the accuracy with which a simulation modality represents reality. High fidelity models have been shown to be effective learning tools.

Formative simulation training may be enhanced through self-regulatory learning (SRL); this would also offer a practical strategy to tackle a lack of expert availability. SRL comprises self-awareness, proactiveness to obtain information that will fill gaps in knowledge and internal motivation to monitor and reflect on self-performance, overlapping with key adult learning principles. Increasing the availability of low-fidelity models with high psychological fidelity, such as sawbones, will allow junior orthopedic trainees to practice basic skills such as instrument handling, drilling, and screw insertion in a cost-effective manner.

Current trainee progression is based on an annual review of competence progression (ARCP) following evaluations from colleagues and trainers via Work-Based Assessments (WBAs). WBAs facilitate the provision of regular feedback; however, they have been shown to have a potentially adverse effect on training opportunities due to time taken to carry out and a negative or no overall impact on training.

# Clinical Clerkships

**Scheduled Teaching Days**

Orthopedic registrars (residents) receive regular teaching; this is often didactic teaching led by senior colleagues or consultants (attendings). To improve learning, we must consider engaging training methods that encourage active participation. Effective simulation-based DP requires structure, and trainees must be facilitated in developing well-defined goals.

**On-the-job Training**

Trainees should plan educational activities or learning events with trainers well ahead of the training activity such as theatre lists or clinics; this will avoid a top-down approach and stop WBAs being considered summative (rather than a formative) based assessment tool. Also, this will manage trainee perception and reduce the likelihood of WBAs being completed as a tick-box activity.

# Procedural Skills Assessment

WBAs are tools used for both formative and summative assessment of trainee performance. Modernising Medical Careers (MMC) brought WBAs into practice in 2007, intending to shift training towards a competency-based model. Formative assessments allow learning through feedback and highlight areas of development, whereas summative assessments determine competence using measurable terms.

Simulation should be incorporated into the early stages of training, such as at the Core Surgical Trainee (CST) level, to evaluate surgical competency and allow more challenging procedural skills development in the OR. Assessment of competence may be achieved through the use of global rating scales or task-specific checklists; the former may be a more reliable method of evaluation; however, the latter may be more appropriate for novices for formative training.

# Medical Decision Making and Leadership Development

Peyton’s four-step model is an effective tool in non-technical skills development as well as the transference of technical skills; it comprises of four steps: demonstration, deconstruction, comprehension, and performance.

Simulation can also be carried out in a team setting to evaluate and improve communication skills, for example, urgent assessment of a patient who has potentially developed acute compartment syndrome may be ‘played out’ in a simulated setting without the need for any advanced technology, and the scenario would include the orthopedic registrar, ward nurse, patient actor and Orthopaedic consultant who the registrar may need to contact. Through observing, conceptualizing, practicing, and performing learned material, trainees are more likely to gain meaning from the learning experience resulting in an increased likelihood of knowledge retention.

# Continuing Education

Courses such as the Training Orthopaedic Trainers (delivered by the British Orthopaedic Association), Training the Trainers (delivered by the RCSEng, and RCSEd) set out learning outcomes which include the need for trainers to employ technology-enhanced learning (TEL) and simulation where possible. In light of the recent COVID-19 global pandemic, educators have taken to TEL solutions and online platforms, including webinar-based teaching, to educate trainees remotely. The use of such technologies is ideal for adult learners and should be incorporated into training in the post-COVID-19 era. Faculty development days and supervisor training should reflect the use of TEL solutions to enhance locally delivered training. Reflection is already utilized as a learning tool in the current surgical e-portfolio in the UK (Intercollegiate Surgical Curriculum Programme or ISCP); however, faculty should be made aware of newer tools such as online discussion boards which can be implemented to provide a more informal platform for peer and expert discussion and feedback. Training days will be the best way for faculty to practice and learn how to use simulation models. Familiarity with assessment checklists and required competency on simulation models may be achieved through eLearning.

Awareness of educational theory that is relevant to surgical training is invaluable for the delivery of effective teaching. Both faculty and trainees should be aware of a universal model to provide structure to opportunistic clinical teaching. The Briefing, Intraoperative Teaching, Debriefing (BID) model is one such tool which makes operative teaching more deliberate and emphasizes the importance of timely, unambiguous feedback to prevent internalization of erroneous skills and behaviors.

# Clinical Significance

Simulation in training is already of enormous value in the context of healthcare education, however, unlike other high-risk industry training, the use of simulation training in surgery remains confined to courses which often exceed trainee study budgets and have long waiting lists due to immense demand. High-fidelity modalities such as ‘Sim-man’ are routinely used for Advance Life Support (ALS) courses. Low-fidelity models such as a box-trainers are often used in laparoscopic skills courses; these allow the practice of instrument handling and special awareness.

To optimize orthopedic training using simulation, educators must provide instruction to trainees and implement the need for a level of proficiency in the simulated setting before progression into the OR. Protected time in a simulated environment as part of the trainees’ teaching program with the aim to encourage participation in simulation-based education and engagement with the Dreyfus model of skills development will ensure competence before carrying out skills on a real patient. The Dreyfus model shares the characteristics of trainees at various stages of skills development and highlights the need for trainee assessment from ‘novices’ to ‘advanced beginners.’

Drop-in sessions for clinical skills learning are often offered to medical students to allow DP and experiential learning.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Simulation-based education and technology-enhanced learning need to be integrated into the surgical training curriculum.

- Simulation-based proficiency should be incorporated into formative assessments to guide trainees’ level of competence and level of autonomy in the OR.

- Employing simulation to enhance the trainee experience has the potential to improve trainee and public confidence as well as restore public trust.

- Trainers should be suitably qualified in delivering simulation and technology-enhanced training to ensure high-quality training is delivered.

- Provision of structured and timely feedback in all aspects of surgical training is fundamental to trainee development; tools such as the BID model should be considered in all clinical settings.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

We must make more use of the extended surgical team to reduce some of the service provision pressure on surgical trainees and allow training time.