Treatment options for gram-negative MDR infections are limited, and the results are generally disappointing because of drug resistance. MDRs are still evolving, which provides resistance to novel antimicrobials. Thus, as new drugs' availability progresses slowly, some previously abandoned options have reappeared, such as polymyxins and colistin, which have high toxicity (nephrotoxicity and neurotoxicity). Furthermore, resistant genes to these drugs have been reported, such as mcr-1 - which causes additional concern. But it is known that combining these drugs with carbapenems may have an improved synergistic action.in vitro activity against MDR; however, there are limitations in its use as high doses are required, and tissue penetration is often poor, which impairs its action in vivo.

Fosfomycin, an old drug used to treat urinary tract infections, has also resurfaced as a potential agent for treating these MDR infections. However, monotherapy with this drug also results in resistance, and its use is appropriate in conjunction with other agents such as carbapenems and polymyxin. This drug has moderate absorption, restricting its use only for urinary tract infections.

The carbapenems are used for severe infections secondary to ESBL-producing organisms; however, the appearance of carbapenemases has made treatment difficult. Monotherapy can be effective. Combination therapy with these drugs is often effective because of the high affinity of carbapenemases for ertapenem, making it a "bait" for the action of other carbapenems.

New drugs such as ceftazidime-avibactam and meropenem-vaborbactam have emerged; the first is an antipseudomonal cephalosporin associated with a beta-lactamase inhibitor, while the second is a carbapenem with b-serine and has anti-lactamase activity. Early results are encouraging.

Cefiderocol is a novel injectable siderophore cephalosporin that combines a cephalosporin core and a catechol-type siderophore with side chains similar to ceftazidime and cefepime. This structure and mechanism of action confer increased stability against numerous β-lactamases, including ESBLs such as CTX-M and carbapenemases such as NDM, KPC, VIM, IMP, OXA-23, 48-like, 51-like, and 58. It is active against both lactose-fermenters and non-fermenters.