Nitroglycerin is most commonly administered as a tablet that is absorbed sublingually. It is given in hospitals as well as prescribed for outpatient use. Patients may be prescribed nitroglycerin as prophylaxis for anginal chest pain prior to an event that may provoke anginal symptoms. They must be instructed to allow the nitroglycerin to dissolve in their mouth and allow their oral mucosa to absorb the drug. There currently are three doses available: 0.3 mg, 0.4 mg, and 0.6 mg. The dose is repeatable every 5 minutes until the achievement of relief. If anginal pain persists after three doses, prompt medical attention is required. After administration, the onset of vasodilatory effects occurs within 1 to 3 minutes, with a max effect occurring within 5 minutes. Nitroglycerin is primarily eliminated via metabolism in the liver and has a mean half-life of approximately 2 to 3 minutes.

There are intravenous (IV) routes of administration for nitroglycerin used most commonly in emergency rooms and intensive care units (ICU). It is administered as a 5% dextrose in drip and is indicated when sublingual nitroglycerin has failed to provide symptomatic relief or if rapid and continued relief of symptoms is necessary. Intravenous nitroglycerin is frequently used to treat acute coronary syndromes, hypertensive emergency, and acute congestive heart failure (CHF) exacerbations.

Transdermal methods of nitroglycerin administration are also commonly administered in emergency rooms during acute angina attacks. It is a 2% ointment applied directly to the patient's skin and allowed to absorb. It is typically for patients that cannot tolerate the sublingual administration of nitroglycerin or have a previous adverse reaction to the sublingual tablet. Absorption takes about 5 to 10 minutes for full effect.