Reviewing the anatomy of the anterior abdominal wall will result in a greater understanding of the neurovascular anatomy within the TAP block. The anterolateral abdominal wall has four muscles: the rectus abdominis, external oblique, internal oblique, and transversus abdominis muscles. The TAP anatomical compartment is a plane that is located between the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles and contains the T6–L1 thoracolumbar nerves.

The sensitive innervation of the anterolateral abdominal wall results from the spinal nerves, anterior rami. Immediately after exiting from their respective intervertebral foramina, spinal nerves divide into anterior and posterior rami. The anterior rami split into two branches, the anterior and lateral cutaneous nerves. The anterior cutaneous nerve from the T6–T11 segments gives rise to intercostal (IC) nerves, which supply sensitivity to the skin and muscles of the anterior abdominal wall. The T9–T11 IC and T12 subcostal (SC) nerves penetrate the transversus abdominis plane compartment posterior to the midaxillary line.

The lower thoracic intercostal and subcostal nerves innervate the skin of the infra-umbilical area between the midline and midclavicular lines.

The first description of the transversus abdominis plane block is accredited to Rafi in 2001, who advocated the performance of this block by anatomical landmarks at the level of the lumbar triangle of Petit.

Traditionally, these landmark blocks have blind endpoints (pops), making their success unpredictable. In 2006, O'Donnell introduced the term transversus abdominis plane block and modified Rafi's original description by advocating a double pop technique. In 2007, Hebbard et al. advocated the use of ultrasound guidance to identify the intermuscular planes and the use of the midaxillary line (lateral approach) instead of the triangle of Petit. In 2010 Lee et al. demonstrated that the subcostal approach covered an increased number of dermatomes (4 vs. 3 by the lateral approach) and yielded a higher sensory blockade (T8 vs. T10).