The patients with SIADH have a combination of ADH-induced water retention and secondary solute loss. The overall solute loss is more prominent than water retention in patients with chronic SIADH. SIADH treatment involves correction and maintenance of corrected sodium levels and correction of underlying abnormalities such as hypothyroidism or pulmonary or CNS infection. The goal of sodium correction is more than 130 mEq/L.

The choice of treatment depends essentially upon the severity of symptoms at presentation. A mild but rapid fall in sodium levels can cause severe symptoms like delirium, confusion, and seizures, while chronic but significant hyponatremia (less than 125 mEq/L) may produce mild or no symptoms. So, in patients with mild to moderate symptoms, the mainstay of the treatment is the restriction of oral water intake with the goal of less than 800 mL/day. If hyponatremia is persistent, sodium chloride in the form of oral salt tablets or intravenous saline can be given. Loop diuretics such as furosemide (20 mg twice daily) can also be added to salt tablets as it helps decrease the urine concentration and thereby increase water excretion, particularly among the patients whose urine osmolality is much higher than serum osmolality (greater than 500 mOsm/kg).

To correct sodium levels, it should be known that urine osmolality in such patients is usually twice the amount of serum osmolality, i.e., greater than 500 mOsm/kg. So, the fluid needed to correct the sodium levels must have an osmolality that is more than urine osmolality. Isotonic saline may not correct hyponatremia in such patients, or it may even worsen hyponatremia and symptoms. Therefore, a solution with an electrolyte concentration greater than the urine electrolyte concentration must be used.****Three percent hypertonic saline (osmolality 513 mOsm/kg) is used for this purpose in patients with severe symptomatic or resistant hyponatremia. Also, the rate of correction is an important factor. It should not exceed more than 8 mEq/L per 24 hours or 0.5 to 1 mEq/L per hour. More rapid correction can result in osmotic demyelination of the CNS, leading to severe lethal complications such as osmotic demyelination syndrome ("locked-in" syndrome), causing quadriplegia.

Patients presenting with severe symptoms such as seizures, confusion, or delirium need urgent initial correction with hypertonic saline infusion for the first few hours rather than just water restriction. A 100 mL bolus of 3% hypertonic saline is given in the first 3 to 4 hours, and sodium levels are measured within 2 to 3 hours so that further doses can be adjusted to avoid correcting too rapidly. A rise of 3 to 4 mEq/L within the first few hours in such distressing conditions can be justified. If the patient's mental status does not improve, more boluses of 100 mL hypertonic saline can be given in the same way as above until symptoms get better.

Vasopressin receptor antagonists such as conivaptan (IV) or tolvaptan (oral) are also available and approved for severe persistent SIADH. These drugs prevent ADH-mediated free water retention by antagonizing V2 receptors and correct hyponatremia. Tolvaptan is hepatotoxic and should not be given to patients with liver disease. Intravenous conivaptan is very effective in correcting hyponatremia and baseline mental status in hospitalized patients. Other therapies, like lithium or demeclocycline, are also effective in SIADH, but both drugs are nephrotoxic and have other potential side effects; therefore, they should only be used when other therapies fail.