Tumor lysis syndrome is an oncologic emergency that is life-threatening. It is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes the oncologist, nephrologist, internist, intensivist, and ICU nurses. Because this condition is very lethal, it is imperative to identify patients at high risk for developing tumor lysis syndrome and start early preventative therapy. Quick and early recognition of the renal and metabolic derangement associated with tumor lysis syndrome and initiation of treatment can save a patient's life. ICU and oncology nurses play a key role in the management of these patients.

**Prevention**

Tumor lysis syndrome is best prevented rather than managed. The most important factor considered for the management of tumor lysis syndrome is the ability to prevent its development based on anticipation. Some guidelines stratify the risk of developing tumor lysis syndrome based on the histology of the primary tumor. Multiple clinical trials have not demonstrated the superiority of any particular prophylactic regiment for tumor lysis syndrome. For tumors with a high risk of releasing situation amount of intracellular substances after the initiation of chemotherapy, it is recommended to start aggressive hydration before initiation of treatment. At least 3 liters per day is recommended. Since an adequate glomerular filtration rate promotes the excretion of potassium, phosphorus, and uric acid, a generous amount of fluid is necessary to prevent the development of AKI from tumor lysis syndrome and also to promote solute excretion.

It is also advisable to avoid substances that can potentially cause vasoconstriction of the renal vasculature, like non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and iodinated contrast.

Patients with moderate to high risk of developing tumor lysis syndrome should be prophylactically started on xanthine oxidase inhibitors.

For a patient with a high-risk tumor, the overall consensus is to start prophylactic urate oxidase inhibitor therapy before the initiation of chemotherapy. It is advisable to start rasburicase on patients in which hyperuricemia from tumor lysis syndrome might delay the initiation of chemotherapy. These patients need full monitoring in an ICU setting, and any deviation in vital signs should be quickly communicated to the clinician. Only with open communication between the ICU nurses and the clinicians can the morbidity and mortality of this disorder be lowered.

Outcomes

The mortality rates for patients with tumor lysis syndrome have improved, but the prognosis still remains guarded.