Dextromethorphan (DM) misuse and overdose have increased significantly since its introduction to its over-the-counter market. Diagnosis and management of DM overdose require an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, and any witnesses or family members. Careful documentation of past medical history and current medications is crucial in diagnosing one of its major overdose complications. Treatment for serotonin syndrome includes hydration, withdrawing the drugs, managing body temperature, and seizures. Without proper management, serotonin syndrome and DM overdose may be fatal.

The paramedics have a crucial role in identifying any witnesses or empty pill bottles at the scene. The triage nurse has an essential role in suspecting a possible drug overdose and must guide patient admission accordingly. A careful history is necessary to initially distinguish the time of onset as well as later on when more serious effects may occur or when the condition of the patient deteriorates. The emergency department physician is responsible for ordering appropriate lab work when suspecting a drug overdose, including drug levels in the blood and/or urine. When appropriate, consultation must occur with pharmacists, toxicologists, radiologists, and hospitalists.

There are two grades of recommendation. Grade D includes patients with suicidal ideation, intentional abuse, or malicious intent; all should obtain a referral to the nearest emergency department. Grade C includes patients who show more than mild effects of DM overdose or after acute drug ingestion. These patients should get referred to the nearest emergency room. Patients who have ingested 5 to 7.5 mg/kg should follow poison control center-initiated treatment and follow up every 2 hours up to 4 hours. If more than mild symptoms continue or develop, they should be immediately sent to the emergency room. Any amount of drug ingested more than 7.5mg/kg should be sent to the emergency room right away.