Patients who survive an acute episode of TTP are at risk of relapse and long-term morbidity. Thus TTP should be seen as a chronic disease with acute episodes. Many patients experiment a reduced quality of life. Also, their concentration, information processing, rapid language generation, and memory show a significant reduction. These can be related to diffuse subcortical microvascular disease, sequel related to an acute episode. Furthermore, in long-term follow-up, patients, show a higher prevalence of arterial hypertension, depression, and mortality; however, the origin of these conditions remains unclear, and other comorbidities could be related. The long-term following should include determination of ADAMTS-13 activity and titles of autoantibodies to identify patients at risk of relapse timely for preventive therapy. There is evidence that the presence of immune complexes and the low activity of ADAMTS-13 are highly predictive of recurrence in the next 2 years of disease onset. Nevertheless, some patients do not develop acute events for years even if undetectable activity persists for a long period. The decision to treat a patient to prevent relapses should consider the severity and frequency of previous episodes. Only patients at high risk should be included in an effort to reduce overtreatment (because some patients never will relapse). In the case of USS, the relapses could be frequent, and patients need regular plasma infusions to avoid new acute episodes, the development of recombinant ADAMTS-13 could change this practices in the next years.