Chlordiazepoxide, a prototype for the benzodiazepine compounds, has been in use since its development in 1960. Like other medications in this group, it has been widely used all around the world, in and out of the hospital. Because of its serious side effects, all healthcare professionals involved in prescribing, administering, and distributing this drug must educate patients on how to use the drug. Patients should be informed about addiction potential, suicidal ideation in depression, respiratory depression, fetus malformation during pregnancy, sedation, fatigue, dizziness, ataxia, slurred speech, weakness, confusion, forgetfulness, nervousness, and hyperexcitability. Patients should be informed about life-threatening side effects if combined with opiates, alcohol, and other CNS depressant medications. Furthermore, patients should understand the need to refrain from driving a car or operating heavy machinery.

After the clinician makes the therapeutic decision to prescribe chlordiazepoxide, the other interprofessional healthcare team members must also have involvement in the therapy regimen. Nursing can counsel the patient, answer questions, monitor for signs of adverse effects, and verify patient compliance. The pharmacist should verify the dosing is appropriate for the condition, check the medication profile for drug interactions, and be available to counsel the patient. Both pharmacy and nursing need to have a clear communication channel to the prescriber. This type of interprofessional teamwork ensures the optimal therapeutic benefit and minimal adverse events from chlordiazepoxide therapy, leading to better patient outcomes. [Level 5]