During the embryonic period in gestation, limb territories are first determined in the right positions along the cephalocaudal axis. The limb bud grows out from the body as a mesenchymal cell mass covered by ectoderm. The identity, position and cell masses depend on the expression of Hox genes.

The first category of limb malformations is a failure of formation, which is arrestment of development of a particular portion of the limb. Transverse deficiencies include all congenital amputations, such as shoulder, arm, forearm, carpals, metacarpals, and phalangeal clinical entities. Longitudinal deficiencies include all the skeletal limb deficiencies not included in the transverse, such as phocomelias. These may range from partial to complete absence. The second category of limb malformation is a failure of differentiation, which is defined as the basic unit of the limb has developed, but its final form is incompletely developed. An example of this is syndactyly or incomplete separation of the adjacent digits. The third category is duplication, which results from an insult to the apical ectodermal ridge during development. An example of this is polydactyly. The fourth category is known as overgrowth, which is a nonhereditary congenital enlargement. This commonly presents in the digits. The fifth category is denoted as hypoplasia or undergrowth, where there is incomplete growth during the fetal period. The last category is included but is considered a separate entity. It is congenital constriction of a limb due to bands, which leads to subsequent loss of the part.