**Laboratory Findings**

Findings in sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic shock are as follows

- Hyperglycemia (glucose more than 120 mg/dL)

- Leukocytosis (WBC more than 12,000/mm3) or leukopenia (WBC less than 4000/mm3)

- Bandemia (more than 10%)

- C-reactive protein or procalcitonin more than 2 SD above normal

- Mixed venous saturation of more than 70%

- PaO2: FiO2 less than 300

- Pre-renal azotemia

- Coagulopathy, INR more than 1.5 or PTT more than 60 sec

- Thrombocytopenia (platelets less than 100,000/mL)

- Hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin more than 4 mg/dL)

- Lactic acidosis (more than 2 mmol/L)

Patients should be placed on continuous cardiopulmonary monitoring to allow close observation of vital signs. A thorough assessment of end-organ function and peripheral perfusion should be undertaken to determine where along the pathophysiologic continuum of sepsis they may fall. This should include a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) or mental status assessment, urine output measurement, or lactate/mixed venous saturation determination (with central lines). Regardless of where along the continuum patients are, all patients should have drawn a complete blood count with differential (CBC-d), source cultures (blood, urine, tracheal (if intubated), wound), and a urinalysis. Depending on the severity of presentation and age of the patient a lumbar puncture may be indicated, for example, patients with signs of encephalitis or meningitis or febrile pediatric patients under six weeks of age. The addition of C-reactive protein or procalcitonin, both acute-phase proteins, may be helpful in distinguishing viral from bacterial sepsis, with the latter showing steeper elevations in these proteins. A complete chemistry panel with liver function tests, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) panel, and an arterial blood gas are additional labs that may provide important information on the severity of sepsis syndrome in a patient.

At least two sets of blood cultures are recommended prior to administration of antibiotics. However, less than 40% of blood cultures are positive.

A chest x-ray may reveal signs of pneumonia or ARDS. Plain x-rays of the extremities may reveal the presence of gas in tissues if the patient has necrotizing fasciitis. Ultrasound may be used to evaluate the gallbladder. CT scan is used to assess the abdomen for abscess, bowel perforation, or ischemia.