**The Tensor of the Vastus Intermedius**

The tensor of the vastus intermedius can be classified into four morphological types based on the position of the aponeurosis.

- The first type, or independent form, originates from the upper portion of the intertrochanteric line and the anterior portion of the great trochanter. Its origin is separated from the origin of the vastus intermedius in about 33% of the population. The fascia or aponeurosis remains separated from the vastus lateralis and the vastus intermedius.

- The second type originates together with the vastus intermedius; the aponeurosis is separable from the vastus lateralis. This morphology involves about 8% of the population.

- In the third type, the muscle originates from the vastus lateralis, while the aponeurosis is separable from the vastus intermedius. The percentage is around 30%.

- The typology of type four, or common typology, originates from the vastus lateralis, with the aponeurosis separable from the lateral vastus and the vastus intermedius. The finding is about 27%.

**Vastus Medialis**

According to some authors, the vastus medialis can be divided into vastus medialis obliquus and vastus medialis longus, based on the orientation of the fibers. The first portion is more innervated than the second portion.

**Vastus Lateralis**

In the literature are not reported important changes in the vastus lateralis. Its origin and insertion remain constant, as studies on cadavers confirm.

**Vastus Intermedius**

This portion of the quadriceps muscle may exhibit variations in its insertions or origin. It may present with a smaller area of the femur or wider attachment; it can involve the vastus lateralis in its origin, forming a single origin of the two vasti.

**Rectus Femoris**

The rectus femoris may have accessory muscles. A muscle slip could result from the acetabulum and fit directly into the vastus lateralis. Two distinct muscular districts could constitute the rectus femoris. Its origin may vary from deriving from the upper anterior iliac spine to deriving only from the lower anterior iliac spine in the absence of the acetabular origin. The vastus could fit directly into the vastus intermedius.