The procedure can be done under tourniquet ischemia in an exsanguinated or unexsanguinated arm or without the tourniquet at all. Some surgeons prefer to perform this procedure on an exsanguinated arm under a tourniquet set to 250 mmHg for no more than two hours. If desired, the arm can be exsanguinated with an Esmarch wrap prior to tourniqet inflation.

The skin paddle is designed around the radial artery. The distal incision of the skin paddle is placed proximal to the head of the radius (typically, for a fasciocutaneous radial forearm free flap, the distal incision will be placed in a transverse wrist crease, distal to the head of the radius). The skin paddle is placed on an island by cutting through the skin and subcutaneous fat around it in order to identify the fascia of the muscles of the forearm. Medially, the flexor carpi radialis and palmaris longus are identified. Subfascial or suprafascial dissection can be carried out to just short of the lateral border of the flexor carpi radialis muscle belly. Laterally, the brachioradialis muscle is identified; also encountered are the distal cephalic vein and the superficial branch of the radial nerve. Incisions made along the proximal edge of the skin island are also made down to the flexor carpi radialis and brachioradialis muscles; care should be taken during this step, as the cephalic vein is likely to be encountered again. Preservation of the vein may provide a secondary drainage system for the flap. The final incision around the skin paddle is on the distal forearm. The incision is made through the skin and subcutaneous fat. The distal pedicle is found amongst the deep fibrous band of tissue in the distal forearm.

A lazy-S incision is made from the proximal aspect of the skin paddle to the antecubital fossa, through the skin and subcutaneous fat. The fascia of the brachioradialis and the flexor carpi radialis are identified. Medially, flaps are elevated over the flexor carpi radialis muscle fascia. Laterally, flaps are elevated over the brachioradialis muscle fascia. The superficial drainage system generally runs over the brachioradialis; it is dissected out and followed proximally where it can commonly be seen diving to join the deep venous system just distal to the antecubital fossa in the so-called "rat's nest" of venous anastomoses. The septum between the flexor carpi radialis and brachioradialis muscle bellies is opened to expose the radial artery and the venae comitantes that provide inflow and primary outflow to and from the flap, respectively. The vascular pedicle is then isolated by ligating its branches and tributaries along its length. As the skin island is approached, care is taken to preserve deep branching tributaries that may be periosteal feeding vessels to the radius.

At this point, the skin island of the flap can be elevated off the muscles of the forearm. If there is any concern at the start of the procedure of a non-viable distal extremity, an intraoperative Allen test can be performed by placing an Acland clamp on the radial artery at the distal wrist and releasing the tourniquet. This test demonstrates the conditions of ulnar-only artery flow to the hand. If there is a clinical suggestion of ischemia, the flap is aborted. Of course, this test can be done at any time during the procedure, based on the surgeon’s preference. If the surgeon is otherwise confident about the hand’s ability to perfuse the ulnar artery alone, the procedure can be continued by ligating the distal venae comitantes and the radial artery. A silk suture is used to ligate the radial artery with a long tail placed on the flap side to facilitate observation of pulsations in the distal flap after the tourniquet is released and after microvascular anastomosis is completed. With the pedicle, the distal skin island is elevated off the tendons of the brachioradialis and flexor carpi radialis, taking care to maintain the integrity of the paratenons in order to prevent the tendons from adhering to the skin graft postoperatively.

Along the lateral aspect of the skin island, the distal cephalic vein is ligated. The superficial branch of the radial nerve is identified and preserved as much as possible. Some of the nerve branches may be seen diving into the flap and may need to be sacrificed. Along its proximal course, the nerve will be seen diving underneath the brachioradialis muscle. Dissection is then performed along the medial aspect of the brachioradialis muscle with the recruitment of the soft tissues of the lateral intermuscular septum. Paratenon should be preserved during this step to reduce the risk of postoperative tendon complications. The brachioradialis is laterally retracted, and the fibrofatty tissue deep to the muscle belly and tendon is recruited into the flap. It is within this fibrofatty tissue that periosteal feeding vessels are located. Care is taken not only to preserve this drape of fibrofatty tissue but also to preserve the deep course of the superficial branch of the radial nerve. The radius and the deep muscles of the forearm should be in view at this time. The pronator teres muscle defines the proximal limit of bone that can be harvested. Along the medial aspect of the radius, the flexor digitorum superficialis, flexor pollicis longus, and pronator quadratus are transected, each muscle being divided close to the bone. The tourniquet is released. Hemostasis is obtained and attention is then turned to the osteotomies.

How the osteotomies are performed depends upon the surgeon's preference. It is the author's preference to perform right-angle cuts to remove a rectangular block of bone through the distal and proximal limits of the osteotomies, as opposed to a “canoe boat” or “keel-boat” which is often described. When exposing the bone for osteotomy, care is taken to preserve the periosteum over the bone. The length of the bone to be harvested is delineated. The limits of the bone harvest are the head of the radius distally and the insertion of the pronator teres muscle proximally. Roughly 50% of the height of the radius is identified by visual inspection and palpation with the arm pronated and supinated. A scalpel can be used to incise the periosteum and mark the planned osteotomies. Osteotomies can then be made with the saw along the incised periosteum. Care should be taken during the completion of the vertical osteotomies to avoid pass-cutting into the residual radius.  Doing so can weaken the bone that remains after graft harvest. Once the osteotomies are complete, the flap can be elevated out of the forearm, pedicled by the vascular bundle feeding it.

The proximal venous and arterial anatomy is then defined prior to ligation and start of flap ischemia time. The deep (primary) and superficial (secondary) venous systems often come together to create a single, large-caliber vein for anastomosis. The radial artery is followed distally to proximally, where two bifurcations can be observed. The more distal bifurcation is between the radial artery and the recurrent radial artery; the more proximal bifurcation is between the radial artery and the ulnar artery at the termination of the brachial artery. This point is the uppermost limit of where the radial artery can be taken. Injury to the proximal ulnar artery creates an elevated risk of distal ischemia. Often times, taking the radial artery just distal to the branching point of the recurrent radial artery provides ample length and vessel caliber for microvascular anastomosis. It also avoids the risk of injury to the ulnar artery. Once the flap is ready to be transferred, the donor vein and artery are ligated, and the flap becomes ischemic. The flap is then inset according to the reconstruction planned, and microvascular anastomosis is performed.

Prophylactic plating of the radius is strongly recommended, because the radius is significantly weakened by the partial thickness ostectomy. Though the reconstructive surgeon may perform the plating of the forearm, many prefer to have an orthopedic surgeon plate the forearm, if one is available.

For closure, a suction drain is placed in the proximal forearm. The lazy-S is incision is closed in layers according to the surgeon's preference. The plate can be covered by advancing the remaining muscle bellies of the transected flexor digitorum superficialis and the flexor pollicis longus muscle to the brachioradialis tendon. A skin graft is harvested from the thigh and inset to the skin island defect. Negative pressure therapy or a bolster is placed in order to improve the chance of skin graft survival. The wrist is then wrapped and immobilized in a cast for 7 days.