The current belief is that nonspecific thalamocortical connectivity, particularly involving the intralaminar nuclei, have involvement in the control of cortical arousal and consciousness. Several studies have found that the lack of consciousness of patients in a vegetative state is linked directly to a disruption of thalamocortical function and connectivity.

There is ongoing research into the relationship between thalamocortical radiations and attention and arousal. Studies have found that the thalamocortical system is involved in the epileptic loss of consciousness. In absence seizures, the ability of thalamocortical-corticothalamic feedback loop to regulate the flow of information to the cortex suffers transient loss because large numbers of corticothalamic loops are engaged in strong, low-frequency oscillations of excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSP)/inhibitory post-synaptic potentials (IPSP). These EPSP/IPSP sequences generate specific electroencephalographic patterns called spike-and-wave discharges (SWDs). The thought is that the enhancement of corticothalamic feedback during SWDs may inhibit the discrete feedback which normally selects distinct thalamocortical circuits for conscious perception and motor reaction. As such, the increase in SWD activity within the thalamocortical network can disrupt normal sleep-wakefulness rhythms and ultimately cause absence seizures.

The thalamocortical radiations that extend to the motor cortex and comprise the motor circuit are implicated in movement disorders such as Parkinson disease. The signs and symptoms may result from abnormalities in one of the many basal ganglia thalamocortical circuits. Evidence from current literature suggests that various movement disorders result from the abnormalities of the basal ganglia thalamocortical circuit, due to the dysfunction disrupting downstream network activity in the brainstem, thalamus, and cortex.

Dysfunction of frontal thalamocortical circuits may be involved in juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. While the routine MRI in patients with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy typically appears normal, subtle structural and functional deficits in the frontal thalamocortical circuits have been demonstrated.

The length of anterior thalamic radiations has been found to be negatively correlated with thalamic choline levels in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder, indicating that abnormalities in thalamocortical radiations play a role in the pathophysiology and symptomology of the disorder.