**Seidel's Test**

In cases with blunt or penetrating trauma, it is always necessary to perform the Seidel and forced Seidel tests to determine the aqueous leak. In case of an aqueous leak, it is mandatory to suture the tear.

**Anterior chamber Tap**

An anterior chamber should be performed to pinpoint the microorganism from the aqueous aspirate. An aqueous tap can be performed from the paracentesis with a 25 G needle, and 0.1 ml of aqueous can be aspirated for analysis.

**Smear Analysis**

The lens material can also be taken on KOH smear, Gram stain, and Giemsa stain to determine whether it's a bacterial cause or a fungal cause.

**Culture of Lens Aspirate**

In cases with the anterior capsular breach and cortical disturbance, the lens material can be removed by either lens aspiration by bimanual irrigation and aspiration or extracapsular cataract extraction approach or by manual small incision cataract surgical approach. Some of the lens material should be sent for culture, which can reveal colonies of a microorganism after 72 hours of growth. The most common culture media used are blood agar, chocolate agar, MacConkey agar, and Sabround Dextrose agar incubated in bacteriological indicator for 16 hours overnight at 37 degrees Celsius.

**B Scan Ultrasonography**

This is a valuable investigation to rule out vitritis, vitreous membrane, exudates, endophthalmitis, and vitreous hemorrhage. When there is a defect in the posterior capsule, the lenticular matter can be seen extruding through the posterior capsule in the vitreous cavity as a dumbbell. This is called a "dumbbell sign" of lens abscess.

**Anterior Segment Optical Coherence Tomography**

ASOCT is a vital tool for looking for lens abscesses. It appears as heterogenous lenticular opacity on ASOCT.

**Ultrasound Biomicroscopy**

UBM has also been listed as a vital tool for delineating lens abscesses.

**Computed Tomography**

CT scan is vital to localizing any occult foreign body and bony defects.