The management of atrial fibrillation in the acute setting depends on hemodynamic stability and risk stratification. In cases where the patient is hemodynamically unstable, it is recommended to carry out immediate cardioversion with anticoagulant therapy. Although TEE is recommended before any cardioversion; however, if the patient is hemodynamically unstable due to a rapid ventricular response, cardioversion may be indicated without prior TEE. If there is evidence of rapid ventricular response, a beta-blocker or calcium-channel blocker should be commenced for rate control. These options can be used in the intravenous (IV) form for rapid response. Usually, a bolus is administered to the patient and then started on a drip if symptoms do not resolve. Digoxin can be considered for rate control but is not advised as a first-line agent pertaining to its adverse effects and tolerance. Amiodarone can also be given as a rhythm control agent but is also not a first-line option in the acute setting. In any case, if the decision to start amiodarone is made, cardiology should be consulted before its administration.

In the case of preexisting atrial fibrillation, the patient should be risk-stratified using the CHADs-2-Vasc score, which is helpful in estimating the risk of stroke per year. If the patient receives a 0 score, it is considered "low-risk," and anticoagulation is not recommended in such cases. If the patient receives a score of 1, it falls in the "low-moderate" risk category; the providers should consider anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy. If the patient receives a score of greater than 2, they are in the "moderate-high" risk category, and anticoagulation therapy is indicated.

Non-pharmacological therapy includes ablation therapy. Pacemaker placement is considered in severe cases resulting in heart failure in atrial fibrillation.

**Current guidelines**

- In patients with AF and elevated CHA2DS2-VASc score of 2 or more, oral anticoagulation is recommended.

- Females with the absence of AF risk factors and males with CHA2DS2-VASc of 1 or 0 have a low stroke risk.

- Non-vitamin K oral anticoagulants (apixaban, dabigatran, edoxaban, and rivaroxaban) are recommended over warfarin, except for patients with moderate to severe MS with a mechanical heart valve in place.

- In all patients with AF, the CHA2DS2-VASc score is recommended to assess stroke risk.

- Obtain renal and liver function before initiating non-vitamin K oral anticoagulants.

- Aspirin is not recommended in patients with low CHA2DS2-VASc scores.

- Idarucizumab is recommended for dabigatran reversal if there is an urgent procedure or bleeding. Andexanet alfa is recommended for the reversal of rivaroxaban and apixaban associated bleeding.

- Percutaneous left atrial appendage occlusion is recommended in AF patients with a risk of stroke who have contraindications to long term anticoagulation.

- If the duration of AF is more than 48 hours or if the time is unknown, start anticoagulation and maintain INR between 2-3 or commence a factor Xa inhibitor for at least three weeks before and at least four weeks after cardioversion.

- Catheter ablation is an option in patients with a low ejection fraction.

- Recommend weight loss in obese patients with AF.