While hemangiomas of the head and neck are relatively common, the presence of these lesions in the oral cavity is rare and can thus lead to clinical uncertainty. OHs will most often involve the lips, tongue, buccal mucosa, and palate. Patients, or their parents, may note changes in these structures over time as they proliferate, stabilize, and (possibly) regress. During the first three to nine months of life, OHs can demonstrate rapid growth, followed by a period of stabilization at about one year-of-age. Most OHs will then enter into a phase of spontaneous involution, with 85% to 90% of lesions resolving within the next four years.

Hemangiomas of the lower lip have been noted to show lower rates of involution than lesions located elsewhere. Also, if patients have more than one OH, the behavior of one structure is not predictive of the rates of progression or involution of another. Most OHs are painless and asymptomatic and are diagnosed on routine physical examination. However, patients with central (intraosseous) or intramuscular hemangiomas may present with gingival bleeding (spontaneous or post-traumatic), excessive bleeding after dental procedures, or increased mobility of the teeth.

OHs are soft, compressible masses that can present with significant variation depending on location and depth. Superficial lesions may demonstrate a prominent red hue and be described as lobulated, sessile, or pedunculated. Deeper lesions are often more difficult to visualize and may appear as a soft blue or violent discoloration distinct from surrounding mucosa. Diascopy, the blanching of an oral lesion following compression with a finger or glass slide, is a physical examination maneuver that can be used to distinguish vascular lesions (blanching) from purpura (non-blanching). OHs are also noted to become more prominent and darken when lowering the head and/or compressing the abdomen.