**Strategies to Minimize Patient Safety Risks of Medical Imaging**

**Ionizing Radiation-Producing Medical Exams: Justification, Optimization, and ALARA**

To reduce the risk of patient harm from ionizing radiation, the International Commission of Radiological Protection described several fundamental principles.

Justification is the principle that physicians should explain how the potential medical benefit outweighs the potential harm before recommending a scan. This justification should include analyzing a patient's cumulative ionizing radiation exposure history and associated increased risk for cancer when considering CT, fluoroscopic, and nuclear imaging. Healthcare administrators should require HCPs to use a defined method (protocols) for justifying imaging requests. A term for this concept from the medical insurance industry is that medical imaging exams pass scrutiny for medical "necessity."

The American College of Radiology Appropriateness Criteria (ACRAC), available as a free internet-based resource, specify which imaging test is most appropriate for a given clinical scenario and whether a lower radiation-producing exam can be substituted for a radiation-producing exam. A similar resource, the American Board of Internal Medicine's Choosing Wisely Initiative, provides evidence-based recommendations regarding when medical imaging tests should be delayed or not performed for specific clinical scenarios. The ACR Contrast Manual (ACRCM) serves as a national level standard for recommendations on selecting contrast type, dose, threshold, alternatives, and adverse reaction prevention and management.

The justification should be performed in the medical record. Among many reasons for this, it aids communication among HCPs and may at times be prudent to have for medicolegal and insurance coverage justification. Some institutions enforce policies that clinicians provide written justification for specific situations, such as performing CT on children or administering IV contrast in persons with low glomerular filtration rates.

Optimization is a multicomponent principle. It dictates that (1) HCPs monitor the parameters and outcomes of their medical imaging exams to correct problems and improve quality to match that of industry leaders, and (2) medical imaging exam protocols should retain some flexibility to allow HCPs options to best meet the needs of the individual patient and the clinical question being addressed. As an example of (1), the International Commission on Radiological Protection and the European Society of Radiology recommends using diagnostic reference levels (DRLs) to identify when an estimated patient radiation dose is unusually high or low for a given procedure.

In some situations, shielding parts of patients' bodies during diagnostic procedures continues to be performed to optimize radiation dose. Shielded body parts receive no primary (directly from the X-ray tube) radiation or external scattered radiation but still receive radiation from internal scatter. Shielding was introduced in the US Code of Federal Regulations in 1976 but is of questionable or no benefit when used in conjunction with modern imaging systems with automatic exposure control technology. With this technology, which is now widespread, when a highly attenuating object (i.e., a lead shield) within the machine's field of view reduces the number of detected photons by the image receiver, the machine automatically increases radiation until a threshold number of photons are detected resulting in overall increased patient dose. Therefore, as reviewed elsewhere, radiologic HCPs should refer to up-to-date studies and practice guidelines that discuss whether shielding for each scenario has been associated with increased or decreased average exposures.

Proper performance of the justification and optimization processes should result in the administration of radiation and contrast doses that are ALARA while still resulting in a clinically valuable procedure. Many institutions accord special attention to achieving ALARA for fetal and childhood exposures. The greatest fetal risk of organ malformation and intellectual disability from radiation exposure is between gestational weeks 7 and 15.

In general, CT should not be used to image biologically immature humans or pregnant women unless the estimated benefits outweigh the estimated risks. Relevant estimated benefits may include preventing a potentially dangerous intervention, such as a risky surgery, or diagnosing a condition that could result in death to the mother and/or child. MRI is not always a straightforward alternative in children, as it may necessitate the administration of anesthesia to keep the child still during the scan, which carries its own inherent risks.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging**

Implementing geographic zones that allow different levels of permission for entry around MRI scanners under-trained personnel's supervision can help prevent a combination of persons and dangerous objects in areas where the electromagnetic fields pose a safety risk.

- Remove external objects, such as jewelry and watches, due to the risk of both their magnetic properties and thermal injury.

- Change into clothing that lacks buckles or any possible micro-metal components.

- Be screened for any implants or foreign bodies that may interact with the magnetic field. Many medical implants are designed to be MRI-safe. However, each device should be individually checked against a database of device safety levels, and MRI should be delayed until obtaining device safety clarification.

**Ultrasound**

Epidemiological studies have yet to show any evidence of harm caused by ultrasound used for medical diagnosis, including pregnancy.

**Contrast Agents**

Before procedures in which contrast agents are planned, screening patients include reviewing patient charts for allergies, renal function, medications, and outcomes from prior exposures to contrast agents (if any) and optimizing the imaging plan. Responsibility for collecting and assessing this information in most institutions falls on the entire healthcare team, including the referring physician, radiologist, radiologic technologist, and any nurses involved.

Radiologic HCPs must confirm the patency of peripheral venous access points before providing a bolus of intravenous contrast agents. Severe injuries from contrast extravasation are more likely to occur from attempted injections in smaller, more peripheral vessels than in larger, more central vessels.

**Communicating Medical Imaging Exam Risks: Non-Legal Aspects**

Ethics provide a starting point for deciding the purpose of risk communication. Ethics can be applied objectively, as reviewed elsewhere.

To best enable safety and quality in medical imaging exams, pre-exam communication has two primary goals. First, the members of both the radiology and referring health care teams should reach a consensus that a particular imaging exam is the most appropriate next step in a patient's care. Second, the patient should be part of that consensus through discussion with a limited number of the teams' individuals in the process of obtaining a patient's IC.

Many patients and HCPs cannot factor or balance short-term costs and benefits data with long-term cost and benefit data. Nevertheless, if HCPs enable patients to make informed decisions, HCPs should be ready to operate at that level of sophistication for a given clinical scenario, especially when published evidence-based guidelines do not already establish a clear course of action.

Furthermore, patients periodically seek answers to such questions from medical imaging personnel who can do better than shrug their shoulders or make paternalistic or non-data-supported claims. The International Patient Decision Aid Standards (IPDAS) Collaboration states that the most meager effort of HCPs should be to review with patients written documentation that cites "up to date reviews of clinical evidence." per se can still review with patients up-to-date guidelines from relevant clinical and national policy-making organizations. Decisions regarding selecting information from such organizations should consider any financial biases that may underlie the recommendations.

When it comes to sharing data about the risks of imaging exams, staff medical physicists and multiple publically available calculators can be used to estimate cancer risks from ionizing radiation based on a patient's particular history of exposure.

HCPs are often poor at recognizing when a patient has a low level of health literacy and can present information using technical terms that confuse patients.

Furthermore, many patients can more accurately understand the risk after viewing a graphical representation of the results.

Healthcare team administrators and other members should create an environment where patients interested in knowing their risks can obtain patient-specific answers.

**Communicating Medical Imaging Exam Risks: Legal and Other Policy-Based Aspects**

The information presented should be tailored to the patient during shared decision-making while meeting the legal requirements discussed below. These requirements have been set to preserve patients' legal rights to make informed decisions regarding HCP treatment of patients' property (their bodies).

**Legal Obligations of Specific HCPs to Patients in Explaining Risks**

Courts and statutes place legal responsibility for obtaining IC on physicians; other HCPs are deemed inadequately trained to discuss the breadth of issues pertinent to IC (such as alternative next-step options) and rarely are held liable in courts based on theories of negligence for IC. However, other HCPs can facilitate IC, particularly with patient education regarding the nature and risks of medical imaging aspects performed mainly by non-physicians. Furthermore, radiology technologists and nurses can be sued for negligence for improper performance of healthcare functions, such as for adverse reactions from the injection of contrast agents or administration of other drugs, and it is possible that radiology technologists and nurses could still reduce their legal liability risks by establishing good patient communication.

**Consent for Medical Imaging in Life-Threatening Situations**

Situations can occur when a patient could lose their life in a short time frame (minutes to hours). When mere minutes could separate life from death or when the patient is unconscious and in acute peril, unless the patient previously has specifically refused it, medical imaging should be carried out based on decisions by the attending clinicians as they deem to be in the best interest of preserving the patient's life. Because time is essential in emergencies, a medical imaging service should have written protocols for common emergencies that specify the most appropriate imaging exam for plausible situations. Such protocols should be reviewed and agreed upon by the radiology department leaders and leaders of the emergency, surgical, or other medical teams requesting emergency medical imaging exams and should be readily available for review by the members of these teams to minimize the frequency of "incorrectly" ordered and performed exams.

If a member of the medical imaging team is aware that a different approach to imaging than what has been requested could offer information that could lead to a life-saving medical decision, then the medical imaging team member faces an ethical dilemma. This dilemma involves a decision to perform an imaging exam that will have diminished, absent, or misleading ability to provide potentially life-saving information and cost valuable time or to try communicating with the requesting clinician and/or radiologist to correct the request and enable the more appropriate imaging exam.

**Determination of Decision-Making Autonomy**

Other situations in which laws dictate that IC need not be obtained from the patient are situations involving the imaging of:

- Young persons not having obtained legal autonomy,

- Persons of the age of autonomy (which in most American jurisdictions is 18 years old) who have an appointed legal guardian, and

- Persons of the age of autonomy lack mental capacity (usually referred to simply as "capacity").

In each situation, IC for medical imaging should be obtained from the legal guardian or "appropriate" surrogate health care decision-maker. The process of identifying the appropriate surrogate health care decision-maker should be known by radiology technologists, nurses, and physicians for their particular legal jurisdiction, which is beyond the scope of this article.

Medical imagers must consider the patient's capacity (and, if necessary, the surrogate decision-maker) to determine if the IC can be obtained from that person. Capacity refers to a patient's ability to decide on proposed medical treatment. To have the capacity, a patient must understand their situation, appreciate the consequences of their decision, and communicate a decision (and, if necessary, a reason for the decision) that is logically consistent with the patient's stated values. Capacity is specific to each decision and must be considered for every medical encounter, as capacity can fluctuate during the course of a given day.

Further discussion of laws and clinical practice parameters regarding capacity assessment is beyond the scope of this article. The rest of this discussion pertains to situations in which the patient has the capacity, and there is no immediate threat to life. For the rest of this section, the words "patient's appropriate surrogate healthcare decision-maker" can be substituted for the word "patient" for theoretical situations in which the patient lacks capacity.

**Legal Standards for Minimum Disclosure of Information About Medical Imaging Exams**

Meeting the legal minimum threshold for information disclosure (e.g. of material risks) in most states (as well as in some other countries such as the United Kingdom (Montgomery v. Lanarkshire Health Board, 2015)) means providing information that enables a patient to act as a "reasonable person." The term reasonable person has a specific legal meaning, which can be found in legal manuscripts (the first applying the term specifically to a medical context being: Jon R. Waltz & Thomas W. Scheunemann, Informed Consent to Therapy, 64 Northwestern University Law Review 628, 640 (1970)). In brief, the term connotes a person who understands each of the following factors before performing a particular action in general non-mathematical terms:

- What the action being considered entails.

- Foreseeable costs and benefits their action could cause

- The extent and the likelihood of costs vs. benefit

- Any alternatives of lesser risk or extent and the costs of those alternatives

Although a reasonable person can be defined as a person who makes an effort to obtain information necessary to understand these factors in some cases, in medical malpractice cases using the reasonable person standard, the HCP who allowed harm to occur to the patient is expected to have made an effort to supply all of that information. As determined by some states' supreme court precedence, a minority of state courts still observe the older "reasonable physician" doctrine (Natanson v. Kline, 1960, Kansas Supreme Court). This doctrine requires that a physician only disclose what a reasonable physician would be expected to divulge to the patient.

Withholding information about the possibility of such risks so that the patient can understand constitutes negligence and can result in a conviction for medical malpractice. Salgo v. Leland Stanford Jr. University Board of Trustees (1957, District Court of Appeal of San Francisco) established the precedent that a "physician violates his duty to his patient and subjects himself to liability if he withholds any facts which are necessary to form the basis of an intelligent consent by the patient to the proposed treatment. Likewise, the physician may not minimize the known dangers of a procedure or operation to induce his patient's consent."

Cobbs v. Grant (1972, California Supreme Court) established a precedent thereafter applied in many other states that the level of information shared with patients depends on the complexity of the procedure, as reviewed elsewhere.

However, courts recognize that it is not possible to provide all information for every exam or treatment. Thus, approaching IC at a systems level is sometimes referred to as a sliding scale.

**Additional Patient Rights in Decisions About Whether or Not to Undergo Medical Imaging Exams**

Patients have the right to decline any medical examinations, be they radiological or otherwise, in addition to the right to refuse any medical treatments, as reviewed elsewhere.

As supported by the 2016 AMA Code of Medical Ethics Opinion 1.1.3, HCPs should give patients reasonable time to process information when not limited by situations involving possible rapidly occurring severe medical outcomes. In contrast, HCPs should not subject patients to pressure to agree to medical imaging exams by placing them in situations that simulate or outright demand that the patient decide immediately when that is not the case based on the patient's medical status.

Patients have the right to seek help from a patient-chosen advocate to make decisions regarding their medical imaging.