Managing patients with chronic, life-limiting illnesses can be challenging and complex and require the coordination of care across multiple disciplines. These patients invariably require a patient and family-centered interprofessional approach focused on managing complex symptoms of severe illness and addressing the physical, emotional, psychosocial, and existential components of suffering.****Multiple large medical societies, including the World Health Organization (WHO), The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN), the European Society of Medical Oncology (ESMO), and the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) have all recognized the benefit. They recommend the integration of palliative care early in the disease trajectory.

**Evidence-Based Approach**

In the last two decades, there has been an emphatic shift in medical literature towards investigating the healing power of art in the realm of palliative care patients. Although the role of art therapy as an alternative treatment in these patient populations has expanded, and results are encouraging, the amount of quality evidence is sparse. Despite the literature implying the positive effects of art therapy on quality of life, coping mechanisms, and mental well being in patients with serious illness, results require cautious interpretation. Collectively the vast heterogeneity amongst the studies patient populations, clinical profiles, definition of art therapy, methods of randomization, sample sizes, study design, and indices measured yields low-quality evidence. Further research and extensive, high-quality studies are warranted to expand on the benefit of a holistic approach and utilization of creative art therapy to enhance patient-centered care and improve patient outcomes. [Level 2]