Patients who have received chemotherapy, radiation therapy or both are at increased risk of cardiovascular disorders as well as secondary malignancies.  They should also be monitored for possible hypogonadism.

The histology, presence or absence of visceral metastasis, and serum tumor marker levels (following orchiectomy) are used to classify patients with testicular germ cell tumors into low, intermediate, and high-risk groups with significantly different progression-free and overall survival rates.

A low-risk prognosis is associated with a good outcome. Fifty-six percent of non-seminomatous germ cell tumors have a good prognosis with a 5-year progression-free survival of 89% and 5-year overall survival of 92%. The low risk would be defined as limited testicular or retroperitoneal primary disease without non-pulmonary visceral metastases and with low tumor markers such as the following:

- AFP < 1000 ng/mL and

- HCG < 5,000 IU/L (1,000 ng/mL) and

- LDH < 1.5 x upper limit of normal).

Intermediate risk malignancies constitute 28% of all non-seminomas germ cell tumors. They will have a 5-year progression-free survival of 75% and 5-year overall survival of 80%. Intermediate risk tumors are defined as having a testicular or retroperitoneal primary without non-pulmonary visceral metastases and intermediate markers such as any of the following:

- AFP≥ 1,000 and ≤ 10,000 ng/mL or

- HCG ≥ 5,000 IU/L and ≤ 50,000 IU/L or

- LDH ≥ 1.5 x N and ≤ 10 x normal).

High-risk tumors are associated with a poor prognosis. Sixteen percent of non-seminomas have a poor prognosis with a 5-year progression-free survival rate of only 41% and 5-year overall survival of only 48%. The definition of a high-risk tumor is one that is associated with a mediastinal primary without non-pulmonary visceral metastases or****poor tumor markers such as any of the following:

- (AFP > 10,000 ng/mL or

- HCG > 50,000 IU/L (10,000 ng/mL) or

- LDH > 10 x upper limit of normal).

**Survival Statistics by Stage**

Stage I disease: 5-year disease-free survival - 98%.

Stage IIA and IIB disease: 5-year disease-free survival - 92%.

Stage IIC disease: 5-year overall survival - 92%.

Stage III disease:

- Low risk: 5-year overall survival - 92%

- Intermediate risk: 5-year overall survival - 80%

- High risk: 5-year overall survival - 48%