The standard way to detect rejection is a renal allograft biopsy, which serves to accurately grade the severity of rejection, differentiate between different types, and guide the treatment.

There are two major classifications for the histopathological diagnosis of renal allograft biopsy: The Banff classification system and the Cooperative Clinical Trials in Transplantation (CCTT). Later, both were incorporated into the Banff 97 classification to standardize the histopathological diagnosis of renal allograft biopsy. Subsequently, Banff has had updates at regular intervals; the last one was in 2017.

When performing a kidney biopsy, it should have adequate tissue to give a definitive interpretation. Adequate core biopsy must contain ten glomeruli and two arteries and section thickness of 3 to 4 microns (marginal if 7 to 10 glomeruli and one artery; unsatisfactory if less than seven glomeruli or no arteries).

The histological characteristics of each type of rejection are as follows:

- **Hyperacute Rejection**: The transplanted kidney turns mottled, dusky, and black as soon as it is revascularized. Severe endothelial injury, polymorphonuclear (PMN) infiltration, whispered thrombosis, and ischemic tissue necrosis will appear on biopsy.

- **ABMR**: Histological features of ABMR include arteriolar fibrinoid necrosis, fibrin thrombi in glomerular capillaries, glomerulitis, peritubular capillaritis, and interstitial hemorrhage. Also, the presence of peritubular capillary linear staining for C4d, which is a degradation product of the complement pathway that binds covalently to the endothelium, is highly suggestive of ABMR.

- **Acute T Cell-Mediated Rejection**: Characterized by diffuse lymphocytic infiltration in the tubule, interstitium of the kidney, and in severe cases, vessels of the allograft

- **Chronic Rejection Lesions:**These include interstitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy, vascular fibrous intimal thickening, glomerular basement membrane double contouring (transplant glomerulopathy), arteriolar hyalinosis, and hyaline arteriolar thickening.

The Banff system uses scores to assess the presence and the degree of histopathological changes in the different compartments of renal transplant biopsies. It focuses mostly, but not exclusively, on the diagnostic features seen in rejection. According to the scoring of the various lesions described above, the staging is as below.

- Category 1: Normal biopsy or nonspecific changes

- Category 2: Antibody-mediated rejection - AMR: depending on the features of the lesion, further divided into acute AMR, chronic AMR, or active chronic AMR

- Category 3: Suspicious (borderline) for acute T cell-mediated rejection - TCMR.

- Category 4: TCMR. Depending on the score of chronic lesions, it further divides into acute TCMR, chronic TCMR, or acute chronic TCMR

- Category 5: Interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy - IFTA

- Category 6: Other changes not considered to be the result of acute or chronic rejection