**Equipment**

The gag reflex can be elicited using a tongue blade or soft cotton applicator. However, a suction device may be most convenient for testing in an intubated patient.

**Technique**

The examiner stimulates the posterior pharynx using a tongue blade or cotton applicator. After doing so, the patient will produce a gagging reaction, which may lead to vomiting in some individuals. Additionally, the elevation of the bilateral posterior pharyngeal muscles requires examination. In a study among 104 medical students assessing the gag reflex, researchers noticed that stimulation of the posterior pharynx was more likely to elicit a gag reflex when compared to stimulation of the posterior tongue.

An asymmetric response or absence of response when stimulating one side indicates the presence of pathology and warrants further assessment.

- **Alternatives:**The soft palatal reflex can help to assess the function of CN IX and CN X, as this reflex may be intact in the absence of the gag reflex. The voice is evaluated by looking for hoarseness and dysphonia to determine CN X pathology. Research has also found that the cough reflex was better reproduced in intubated patients than the gag reflex to test for brainstem function.

- ****Embracing healthcare team options:****As there are a variety of techniques used to assess the gag reflex, there is poor inter-observer agreement. Hence, a standard method of examining patients for specific determined clinical scenarios is warranted. However, the gag reflex remains imperative in assessing brainstem function, especially in the setting of brain death.

**Contraindications**

During airway assessment for intubation in an obtunded patient, the gag reflex should not be performed due to the risk of vomiting and subsequent aspiration.