There are multiple treatment options for patients diagnosed with condyloma acuminata. Treatment can be delayed in children, adolescents, and young, healthy adults, as lesions often resolve spontaneously over months to years. Treatment should be pursued with lesions that persist for more than two years if the lesions are symptomatic, or for cosmetic purposes.

Podophyllotoxin 0.5% solution and 0.15% cream can be used to treat the fleshy papules. Podoxophyllin toxin is applied twice daily for three days, followed by a four-day break. Lesions can resolve after four weeks. Imiquimod cream 5% is another topical treatment, with lower rates of recurrence than with podophyllotoxin. Imiquimod is applied three times per week, every other day with resolution seen in sixteen weeks. Another available topical treatment is sinecatechins 15% ointment, which is used three times daily for up to sixteen weeks.

Patients can also receive treatments in the clinic for condyloma acuminata. Cryotherapy is inexpensive, minimally painful, and safe during pregnancy. Liquid nitrogen is applied to the margin of the lesion three to five times for twenty seconds each application. These applications take place weekly for six to ten weeks. Trichloracetic acid (TCA) 80 to 90% is an available treatment for smaller lesions. After application, a small ulcer will form that heals without scarring. TCA is applied once per week for eight to ten weeks. Finally, surgical excision may be performed for lesions refractory to treatment and also for advanced disease. Surgical options include electrosurgery, curettage, scissors excision, and laser therapy. Only surgical therapies have clearance rates near one hundred percent.

Application of 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) with photodynamic therapy is an emerging treatment for condyloma acuminata. This treatment modality was found to be more effective, simpler, and have lower recurrence rates than CO2 laser treatment. Photodynamic therapy with ALA may be a useful adjuvant to other traditional treatment modalities.