Even though the low cholesterol diet and its health benefits have a very good overall awareness in the general population, due to more recent studies showing new evidence, there is a need for a more dynamic role from all the healthcare teams. Due to the complexity of cholesterol metabolism and various effects on the disease process, proper education, and clear indications about the current guidelines and recommendations are essential in current-day medicine. Current dietary guidelines recommend that saturated fats should be limited to less than 10 percent of daily calories, replacing them with polyunsaturated fatty acids. But in patients with predisposing conditions, it is recommended to aim for less than 5 to 6 percent of daily calories from saturated fat. The main sources of saturated fatty acids are animal products, such as butter, dairy, meat, salmon, and egg yolks, and some plant products such as chocolate and cocoa butter, coconut.

Essential to note while providing comprehensive dietary intake goals are, not to focus on restricting total fat intake; instead, replace trans fat and saturated with mono and polyunsaturated fat. Caution should is advisable as many foods marketed as “low-cholesterol” may have high levels of saturated fat or trans fat. Emphasis should also be to increase the consumption of bioactive foods like fruits, nuts, seeds, vegetables, legumes, whole-grain products, and plant-oils, which are linked to lower risk of cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and obesity. Reduce consumption of processed meats, which are high in trans fat, which in turn contribute to the high serum cholesterol levels.