The Papanicolaou smear is an effective screening test that detects cervical cancer as well as cellular changes that have the potential to develop into cervical cancer. Any diagnosis of an atypical pap smear results in more frequent and/or further testing. Below are the current recommendations from ACOG for each abnormal result.

- **ASC-US**: This management plan depends on the age of the patient. For patients between 21 and 24, repeat Pap smear in 1 year if the status of the HPV is positive or unknown. It is also acceptable to perform a reflex HPV test on the same pap smear sample. HPV status will determine future pap smear frequencies. If HPV is negative, then the patient is recommended for follow up in three years. If the follow pap smear continues to show ASC-US, then an additional pap smear in 1 year is recommended. For patients between 25 and 29, screening is still the same if they have negative HPV. However, if they have positive HPV, colposcopy is recommended instead of waiting one year for a follow-up pap smear. If at the follow-up pap smear, ASC-US is still present, the next step is colposcopy. For patients between 30 to 65 years of age, there is a more significant concern for the progression of cervical cancer. If ASC-US is documented on a pap smear and they are HPV negative, they will follow the same process as the other age groups. If HPV status is positive or unknown, then a repeat pap smear is recommended within four months.

- **LSIL**: Repeat Pap smear in 1 year.

- **ASC-H**: Further test the patient immediately with colposcopy.

- **HSIL**: Further test the patient immediately with colposcopy.

- **AGC**: Further testing can include endocervical sampling and an endometrial biopsy to source the location of the cells. It is essential to ask for pointed family history at this time. The patient should have her HPV status evaluated.

- **AIS**: Immediate diagnostic excision procedure along with an endocervical and endometrial biopsy. The diagnostic excision will help confirm diagnosis as well and understand the extent of invasion.

- **Squamous Cell carcinoma**: Immediate excision and further workup are necessary.

Guidelines for recommendations can vary when looking at different societies and groups.