In primary mitral regurgitation, there is a pathological disruption in the integrity of the mitral valve apparatus, causing regurgitation, whereas, in secondary MR, the problem arises due to structural changes in the left ventricle (LV), causing failure of coaptation of mitral leaflets due to annular dilatation.

The popular classification defined by Carpentier has given a surgeon's perspective for the corrective approach towards MR based on the leaflet motion of the valve.

- Type I - normal leaflet motion with normal coaptation (leaflet perforation, cleft)

- Type II - abnormal coaptation with excessive leaflet motion (either due to excess of tissue/excess of motion- mitral valve prolapse)

- Type IIIa - abnormal apposition of leaflets due to restricted leaflet motion both in systole and diastole (mostly from organic leaflet issues such as rheumatic heart disease)

- Type IIIb - abnormal apposition of leaflets due to restricted leaflet motion in systole (from LV remodeling)

**Primary MR**

Myxomatous degeneration with excessive thickening of mitral valve leaflets causes redundant lengthening of leaflets and prolapse in younger patients, and fibroelastic deficiency leading to chordal rupture causes primary MR in the older population. Barlow disease is in the same spectrum as thickened leaflets and redundant motion.

**Secondary MR**

Secondary mitral valve insufficiency is the continuum of the underlying myocardial disease process- either as a result of acute or chronic myocardial ischemia or nonischemic cardiomyopathy. Ischemic MR typically arises from obstructive coronary artery disease. Acute ischemic MR happens due to acute myocardial infarction causing disruption in subvalvular apparatus such as ruptured chords or rupture of a papillary muscle. Chronic ischemic MR is a sequela of altered LV geometry, causing displacement of papillary muscles and functional disintegration of the mitral apparatus.

Ischemic MR being the largest contributor to secondary MR, nonischemic cardiomyopathy from various reasons also leads to remodeling of LV cavity with progressive dilatation, dyssynchronous contractility, alteration in systolic annular movements, and decreased LV function, eventually causing functional MR. The vicious cycle of MR causing LV dilatation, which leads to further annular dilatation, causes progressive worsening of MR.

It is very important to understand the complex exchange of causes and mechanisms of MR for accurate prediction of outcomes after surgical intervention because a significant overlap exists between causes and mechanisms of MR. Another recommended approach to evaluate the mechanism of MR is if the issue is leaflet apposition or leaflet coaptation.