Endometrial carcinoma incidence is increasing worldwide as a direct result of an aging population and the rising incidence of obesity. There is a consensus that premalignant lesions develop several years before invasive endometrial carcinoma develops.

- The age of the patient (>35 years)

- Caucasian race

Other predisposing factors may also include a family history of endometrial hyperplasia or carcinoma, features of early menarche, prolonged perimenopause, or late menopause and postmenopausal status. Associated comorbidities that may play a role in predisposing to EH are obesity, diabetes mellitus type 2, and earlier or present diagnosis of granulosa cell tumor of ovary or HNPCC (hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer). In addition to this, exposure to tamoxifen therapy, hormone replacement therapy (especially estrogen-only), and any form of exogenous hormonal exposure also increase the risk of developing EH. Environmental factors like smoking and certain genetic mutations may also predispose to the development of EH.

On the other hand, endometrial intraepithelial carcinoma (EIC), the precursor lesion of type 2 ECs, tends to be estrogen-independent and progresses to the clinically aggressive ‘serous’ and ‘clear cell’ histological subtypes. Type 2 ECs are more often associated with endometrial atrophy in the postmenopausal woman as compared to endometrial hyperplasia (EH) seen in type 1 EC.

The tumor progression model suggests that loss of PTEN occurs in sporadic glands in the normal endometrium, but this loss is insufficient to drive atypical glandular proliferation and progression. The PTEN negative glands need to acquire additional molecular ‘hits’ which contribute to the formation of AH/EIN.

Longstanding molecular observations implicate PTEN inactivation, and it is seen in over 70% of the lesions. Thus, PTEN appears to be an early driver of atypical endometrial hyperplasia.

TP53 inactivation as a major driver of most serous carcinomas (type 2), some high-grade endometrioid carcinomas (type 1), and many uterine carcinosarcomas; and inactivation of either gene as drivers of some clear cell carcinomas.PPP2R1A, FBXW7, SPOP, CHD4, and TAF1; amplification and/or overexpression of ERBB2, MYC, and CCNE1 (cyclin-E); and overexpression of p16 and synuclein-γ.