Sjogren syndrome is a systemic disorder that affects many organs. There is no cure for the disorder. The management revolves around decreasing the morbidity of the symptoms. Besides physicians, both the pharmacist and nurse play a vital role in patient education.

- The patient should be educated on prevention of dental caries, using fluoride-containing toothpaste and using sugar-free chewing gums and lozenges to promote saliva production.

- For dry eyes, the pharmacists should educate the patient on changing the diet and eliminating medications that cause reduced secretions.

- In addition, the pharmacist should educate the patient on proper use of artificial tears and gels.

- Avoiding contact lenses, using warm compresses and seeing an ophthalmologist is the next step.

- Since these patients are also on a number of drugs to prevent arthritis pain, the pharmacist should educate the patient on compliance and what adverse reactions to anticipate.

- The patient should also be referred to a physical therapist to regain joint function and build on muscle strength.

- Finally, the disorder can affect mood and a referral to a mental health counselor may be required.

**Outcomes**

Mild Sjogren disease has a good prognosis but those with moderate to severe disease have a very poor quality of life. The dry mouth and eyes often cause irritable symptoms which are not well tolerated. In addition, many of these patients develop moderate to severe arthritis and ambulation can be difficult. With advancing age, as the function of the exocrine glands subsides, the symptoms also tend to worsen. In the long run, there is a risk that patients with Sjogren syndrome will develop a lymphoproliferative disorder which can lower the life expectancy.

Women with Sjogren syndrome are also at a high risk for developing complications during pregnancy. Premature deliveries and spontaneous abortions are not uncommon. Finally, patients with Sjogren syndrome who have antiphospholipid antibodies are at risk for developing vascular thrombotic disorders and fetal demise.