The clinician should determine if there has been any recent or remote thyroid or other types of head and neck surgery, the age of onset, and family history of hypocalcemia. If there is evidence of severe immune deficiency, the patient likely has DiGeorge syndrome, while autoimmune problems such as adrenal insufficiency or mucocutaneous candidiasis would suggest the etiology is polyglandular autoimmune syndrome, type 1. Hypomagnesemia may be the cause if the patient is malnourished, recovering from diabetic ketoacidosis, abuses alcohol, has diarrhea, or has been exposed to drugs that cause renal magnesium wasting. Significant hypocalcemia can cause numbness, paresthesias, muscle cramps, and carpopedal spasms. When severe, it can be life-threatening with laryngospasm, tetany, and seizures.

Hypocalcemia causes positive Chvostek’s and Trousseau's signs.

- Chvostek’s sign is elicited by tapping over the facial nerve as it exits from the parotid gland. The increased neuromuscular irritability leads to the ipsilateral twitching of the upper lip and side of the mouth.

- Trousseau’s sign is sought by inflating a blood pressure cuff from 10 mmHg to 20 mmHg over systolic blood pressure. A positive sign is the development of carpal spasm with flexion of the thumb and adduction of the finger within three minutes. This can be quite painful, so the time should be noted and the cuff deflated once the test is positive.

- Ophthalmologic and neurological examinations are essential since longstanding hypoparathyroidism places patients at a high risk of developing cataracts and calcifications in the brain, primarily in the basal ganglia.

- Some patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism (Type 1a) have an unusual phenotype known as Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy, characterized by short stature, round face, and shortened fourth metacarpal bones. The etiology is an inactivating mutation of the G-alpha subunit of the parathyroid hormone receptor. Due to the resistance to parathyroid hormone, patients have hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia but increased serum levels of parathyroid hormone.