The indications for a colposcopy to be performed are risk-based. Women referred for colposcopy have a variety of underlying risks for cervical pre-cancer based on their cytological results, the HPV testing if it was performed, and personal history of cervical dysplasia. Each can be triaged accordingly, but when colposcopy is indicated, it is used to diagnose if dysplasia is present and its severity.

Indications for colposcopy:

- Evaluation of women with an abnormal Pap test:

- To localize the lesion.
- To map out the extent of the lesion.
- To select the biopsy site/s

- Evaluation of women positive for high-risk HPV DNA

- Evaluation of VIA positive women

- Evaluation of a suspicious appearing cervix, and postcoital/postmenopausal bleeding, even if the Pap smear is normal.

- Unexplained abnormal lower genital tract bleeding.

- Persistent inflammatory/unsatisfactory cervical cytology despite appropriate treatment, especially with high-risk factors for carcinoma cervix

- Evaluation of persistent abnormal vaginal discharge or pruritus vulvae

- Identification and management of subclinical papillomavirus infection

- History of in utero diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure

- Conservative management of intraepithelial neoplasia

- Identification and management of vaginal extension of cervical neoplasia

- Post-treatment follow-up

- After treatment of intraepithelial and invasive carcinoma
- Post-irradiation follow-up

Therefore, not all Pap tests must be followed by a colposcopy, though many of them are. Low-risk Pap tests, i.e., low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) or atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance (ASCUS) with negative HPV, are not as likely to have significant colposcopic findings leading to severe dysplasia. Therefore, immediate colposcopy is not indicated, and the patient can follow up the next year with a repeat Pap test. However, if the following year, the Pap test remains abnormal with LSIL again or ASCUS positive for HPV, then colposcopy is recommended. Some Pap test findings are more closely associated with severe cervical dysplasia. These include high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL) and atypical squamous cells– cannot exclude high-grade intraepithelial lesions (ASC-H). When there is suspicion of high-grade lesions being present, there is a possibility that invasive cervical cancer could be present. Immediate colposcopy is the recommendation in patients with initial Pap test findings more closely correlated with severe cervical dysplasia.