The function of the inferior rectus muscle can be assessed along with the other extraocular muscles during the clinical exam. The movement of the extraocular muscles can be assessed by having the patient look in nine directions starting with a primary gaze, followed by the secondary positions (up, down, left, and right) and the tertiary positions (up and right, up and left, down and right, down and left). The clinician can test these positions by having the patient follow the clinician's finger tracing a wide letter "H" in the air.

Further testing of ocular alignment can be accomplished via several methods, including cover tests, corneal light reflex testing, dissimilar image tests, and dissimilar target tests. Since many patients with extraocular muscle abnormalities are young children, the clinician may need to employ various and clever means of testing, such as using toys or other objects to elicit the child's cooperation.

Strabismus, or ocular misalignment, can be caused by abnormalities in binocular vision or abnormalities of neuromuscular control. Weakness, injury, or paralysis that involves the inferior rectus muscle can be involved in strabismus.

Because the inferior rectus is near the orbital floor, orbital floor fractures may involve this muscle. Inferior rectus muscle paresis can result from trauma to the inferior rectus muscle or nerve. This can occur either at the time of initial injury or during surgical repair of the orbital floor. If inferior rectus muscle paresis is present without entrapment, the patient may display hypertropia in the primary position. If paresis is present with entrapment, the patient may have a slight deviation or hypotropia, which decreases with downgaze. The initial management of inferior rectus paresis is observation for six months. Muscle surgery may be recommended if there is no improvement during this time.