The frequency of many adverse events remains undefined. Adverse effects can be categorized depending on severity. The following adverse effects have been documented with the use of digoxin immune fab:

**Severe Adverse Effects**

- Rare allergic reactions in patients with a past medical history of asthma or other allergies.

- Withdrawal of digoxins' negative dromotropic effect on the atrioventricular node worsens atrial fibrillation (7%). It can lead to the re-development of rapid ventricular response (ventricular tachycardia), leading to a risk of compromising cardiac output compromised cardiac output.

- The worsening of underlying heart failure (13%), pulmonary edema, bilateral pleural effusion, and renal failure is due to the withdrawal of the inotropic effect of digoxin.

**Moderate Adverse Effects**

- Hypokalemia (13%): Reversal of digoxin by digoxin immune fab leads to reactivation of sodium/potassium pumps. Therefore, a shift in potassium from the extracellular space to the intracellular compartment can result in life-threatening hypokalemia. Furthermore, hypokalemia can present as confusion, increased thirst, and muscle weakness. It is also a common side effect of therapy.

- Moderate postural hypotension

- Phlebitis of the infusion vein

- Wheezing

- Hypotension

- Serum sickness

- Fever with the use of greater than ten vials

- Reports exist of the formation of antibodies to immune fab products in patients with prior fab treatment; this carries a risk of reduced drug efficacy.

**Mild Adverse Effects**

- Pruritis

- Rash

- Utricaria

- Injection site reactions such as erythema