Typically ovaries are found close to the fallopian tubes within the ovarian fossa. The ovarian fossa is composed of the bifurcation of the external iliac artery and the internal iliac artery. Anterior to the ovary is the medial umbilical ligament. Posteriorly is the ureter and internal iliac artery. Superior to the ovary is the infundibulum of the uterine tube along with the suspensory or infundibulopelvic ligament, which is the posterior extension of the broad ligament of the uterus and is also called the mesovarium. The ovary is connected to the body wall by the suspensory ligament of the ovary. Inferior to the ovary is the angle of the body and the uterine tube via the proper ligament of the ovary. The ovary has two ligaments. The suspensory ligament carries both of the ovarian artery and vein as well as the sympathetic and parasympathetic plexuses. The proper ligament of the ovary is the remnant of the gubernaculum and does not contain any vessels.

The normal ovary is 2.0 cm in width, 3.5 cm in length and 1.0 cm in thickness; this is comparable to the size of a golf ball. The volume of the ovary changes as females age. One study found that 69% of changes in ovarian volume may solely be due to age. At two years old, the volume of the ovary averages 0.7 ml. At 20 years of age, the volume will peak at 7.7 ml. After this, the volume will slowly decrease until menopause, where the average volume is 2.8 ml.

The microanatomy of the ovary begins with the outer epithelium; this layer is made of simple cuboidal and is called the germinal epithelium. Underneath this layer is a connective tissue made of collagen and called the tunica albuginea. The next zone contains the ovarian follicles and is called the cortex. Here follicles of different sizes and maturity can be seen.  The most central zone is the medulla. It is made of loose connective tissue and contains major blood vessels; this region is also called the hilus.

There are two primary functions of ovaries.

The first function of the ovary is hormone production, which changes at puberty. The ovaries will begin to secrete increasing levels of hormones, including estrogen, testosterone, inhibin, and progesterone; in response to rising levels of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). This activity creates the hypothalamus-pituitary-ovarian (HPO) axis.

Secondly, the ovary houses the egg cells, or oocytes, which begin developing in utero and pause development until puberty. The ovum mature and are released when the surge of luteinizing hormone gets secreted by the pituitary gland, which is ovulation. The average antral follicle measures between 2 to 9 mm. The average number of follicles is below 25 follicles (when using optimal resolution). Antral follicles enlarge during the menstrual cycle until a dominant follicle forms, while the others degenerate.