# Continuing Education Activity

A glycol ether (GE) is a compound similar to a glycol. However, unlike glycols, GEs possess one or more hydrocarbon chains attached to the hydroxyl group. They are often used for their solvent properties in paint, cleaning products, and cosmetics. Although rapidly absorbed, the bioavailability of these compounds is variable. Glycol ether toxicity can occur via multiple routes and cause neurologic impairment, metabolic derangements, kidney injury, and reproductive side effects. This activity reviews the toxicokinetics and chemistry of glycol ethers and highlights the toxicologist's role in evaluating and managing its toxicity.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of glycol ether toxicity.
- Review the toxicokinetics and toxicodynamics of glycol ether toxicity.
- Outline the typical presentation of glycol ether toxicity.
- Summarize the critical steps in diagnosing and managing glycol ether toxicity.

# Introduction

Glycol ethers (GE) are a group of compounds used for their solvent properties and are produced from either ethylene oxide (E-series) or propylene oxide (P-Series). Unlike their parent compounds, glycol ethers have two different hydrocarbon substituents attached to the oxygen molecule, one of which carries a hydroxyl group. The distinction between the two groups is essential to their industrial application. The E-series is used in cleaning solutions and brake fluid, whereas the P-series is found in cosmetics, sunscreen, and pharmaceuticals.

The chemical name for a GE can vary based on the hydrocarbon chain and orientation of the substituents. Common examples include 2-methoxyethanol (EGME), diethylene glycol (DEG), and 2-butoxyethanol, also known as ethylene glycol butyl ether (EGBE). Please note that Cellosolve®, EGME, and ethylene glycol butyl ether are essentially the same compound. For brevity, the remainder of this article will use the term GE unless otherwise specified. Finally, like other organic toxins carrying hydroxyl group(s), GEs are broadly classified as toxic alcohols.

# Etiology

Glycol ether (GE) toxicity can occur through various routes; the two primary ways are via inhalation of volatile flumes or ingestion. There have been multiple reports of occupational exposures when the compound was first produced in the 1960s.

Upon entering the body, the glycol ethers quickly distribute throughout the body. Upon metabolism of alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), an organic acid is formed. The accumulation of organic acids is generally responsible for causing renal, neurologic, and reproductive side effects.

Studies of occupational exposure to ethylene glycol monobutyl ether (EGME) and ethylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate (EGMEA) were conducted in Europe and the United States and expressed as time-weighted averages. The concentration that considers both the quantity and duration of exposure to a hazardous substance in the air during a designated work period is the time-weighted average concentration.

US air sample analysis showed 0.4 to 7.4 ppm for EGME and 0.2 to 0.4 ppm for EGMEA. A Belgian study found high concentrations of both substances in air samples, primarily during printing and painting. The presence of MAA in urine samples indicated exposure in paint fabrication and furniture painting. A French study found the highest EGME exposure in the electronic industry.

# Epidemiology

There is limited epidemiological data regarding the effects of glycol ethers (GE). Most information is from case reports, animal studies, and a few epidemiological studies. Given glycol ethers (GE) have a ubiquitous industrial role, occupational exposures are the majority of presentations. Animal models first displayed the toxic reproductive effects in the 1970s, which prompted investigations in the United States a decade later. France partially regulated the compound in 1992, but the first complete ban on using GEs in drugs and cosmetics occurred in 1999.

Men and women working in semiconductor factories had increased reproductive defects. For example, an American retrospective cohort study from 1996 reported an increased relative risk of spontaneous abortions among female workers in semiconductor manufacturing facilities.

Diethylene glycol (DEG) is of critical historical significance as it was the responsible compound that resulted in the 1937 elixir sulfanilamide incident. The Elixer was prepared with sulfanilamide, an early sulfa-based antimicrobial, and DEG. Unfortunately, due to the lack of premarket testing regulations, the incident resulted in over 100 deaths.

A similar tragedy occurred in Haiti between 1995 and 1996, when DEG was identified in acetaminophen preparations, resulting in acute renal failure in 86 children.

Recently, a French study in 2020 demonstrated a widespread detection of glycol ether metabolites in 6-year-old children undergoing neurodevelopmental evaluation.

# Pathophysiology

Upon metabolism, a glycol ether (GE) is broken down to its respective acetoacetates or organic acids, which mediates the pathogenesis. This section separates the various pathological process by system.

**Renal**

Diethylene glycol (DEG) is metabolized by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) to 2-hydroxyethoxyacetic acid (HEAA) and diglycolic acid (DGA). HEAA is thought to be the toxic metabolite producing metabolic acidosis. DGA accumulates in the renal cells, resulting in delayed renal failure after 2 to 6 days. The proposed mechanism is that DGA enters the nephron via the sodium-dicarboxylate-1 transporter.

Additionally, it is thought that DGA selectively inhibits succinate dehydrogenase without directly affecting other isolated processes in the citric acid cycle. Ultimately, by lowering the available intermediates for the citric acid cycle, DGA disrupts oxidative phosphorylation, which reduces ATP production and general energy, thus producing proximal tubal necrosis.

**Neurological**

DEG also results in severe neurological disturbances such as peripheral neuropathy and encephalopathy that resemble ethanol intoxication. The exact pathophysiology of DEG-associated neurotoxicity is not well elucidated. However, spinal fluid analysis in patients with DEG toxicity suggests that it may be DGA mediated. Also, neurotoxicity is more common in patients who develop nephrotoxicity.

Case reports demonstrated demyelinating peripheral neuropathies in patients with DEG toxicity. Animal studies on ethylene glycol monobutyl ether (EGBE) exposures suggest that neurotoxicity is caused by reduced antioxidant activity and increased lipid peroxidation in the frontal cortex and hippocampus. A study found that GEs with lipophilic properties decreased antioxidant capacity, increased lipid peroxidation and caspase-3 activity, and induced oxidative stress in rat frontal cortex and hippocampus. In contrast, the hydrophilic GEs showed no adverse effects.

**Hepatic**

Glycol ethers are hepatically metabolized to their respective toxic metabolites. Hepatic injury is primarily through mitochondrial damage, production of reactive oxygen species, and decreased cellular metabolism. It is believed that oxidative stress upon exposure to a GE is not a direct effect of the compound or its metabolite but is caused by the induction of hemolysis and iron deposition in the liver. Kupffer cells promote this process upon activation by the Fenton/Haber-Weiss reactions, which result in TNF-alpha production.

Studies have shown that di-ethylene glycol monomethyl ether (DiEGME) and ethylene glycol monomethyl (EGME) increase microsomal protein concentrations and induce hepatic enzymes. Specifically, DiEGME increased cytochrome P-450 but not cytochrome b5 or NADPH-cytochrome c reductase.

EGME, on the other hand, had the opposite effect. It is unclear why particular glycol ethers are specific for certain hepatic enzymes, like their nephrotoxic effects and glycol ether hepatotoxic effects correlated with the concentration of DGA. These biochemical changes may manifest as hepatic steatosis and abnormal aminotransferases due to the accumulation of toxic metabolites in the liver. Some studies have concluded that patients with underlying liver disease would have less functional ADH to produce toxic metabolites, creating a less severe clinical presentation.

**Reproductive**

Furthermore, glycol ethers can also cause reproductive and neurodevelopmental toxicity. Numerous animal studies demonstrated changes in testicular weight, edema, and tubular atrophy. Routine exposure to glycol ethers resulted in a reduction in sperm maturation steps.

Daily administration of the GE, 2-Methoxyethanol (2-ME) to pregnant mice resulted in delayed neurogenesis and morphogenesis, specifically neural tube close and limb and digit formation. Researchers determined that the metabolism of the GE to its acetic acid was a pivotal step in causing teratogenicity. The organic acid 2-methoxyacetic acid (MAA) gets incorporated into the metabolic pathways involved in embryogenesis. During this process, MAA gets converted into a thioester by Coenzyme A, a similar step to acetate, turning into acetyl CoA, an intermediate in the TCA cycle.

Researchers found that when carbon labeled MAA was added to embryonic cultures, carbon labeled CO2 was excreted.

**Hematology**

Glycol ether toxicity has been identified as a potential cause of hematological injury, mainly due to acute exposure to butoxyethanol (BE). Studies have indicated that animal glycol ether exposure has led to hemolysis, associated with hemoglobinuria, leukopenia, and decreased bone marrow cellularity. Further investigation has revealed that beta-aminolevulinic acid (BAA) production is a critical factor in the induction of hemolysis.

In addition, in vitro animal studies have demonstrated a time- and concentration-dependent hemolytic effect, preceded by a decrease in adenosine triphosphate (ATP) levels and swelling of erythrocytes. Although the underlying mechanisms remain fully understood, the erythrocyte membrane may be the site of damage. Another possibility is that reactive oxygen species generated by the parent glycol ethers cause lipid peroxidation.

**Lymphatics**

Early animal studies investigated the immune system of male rats after four-day exposure to EGME through dermal application at doses of 150 to 1200 mg/kg/day. The results revealed a decline in thymus weight across all amounts and spleen weight at higher doses. In addition, lymphoproliferative responses were enhanced at 1200 mg/kg/day. However, after oral administration of EGME for four days, the antibody response was diminished at 300 and 600 mg/kg/day. This immunosuppressive response was blocked with the administration of fomepizole, suggesting that MAA is primarily responsible for mediating this process.

In a follow-up study, the impact of low and high-dose MAA on the immune system was explored, and it was discovered that immune suppression occurred only at lower doses, not higher doses. This suggests that MAA availability might not cause immune suppression in rats at high doses.

**Dermatology**

Glycol ethers are a type of solvent easily absorbed through the skin. Several factors, including molecular weight, influence the rate of this absorption. Lower molecular weight glycol ethers have resulted in higher absorption levels, with a lag time of 1.5 to 2 hours observed in human experiments.

The presence of other additives and mixtures may also impact the absorption of GEs. For example, a study showed that an aqueous mixture of BE was absorbed six times more efficiently than a pure GE solvent, with a corresponding increase in apparent permeability coefficient as the GE concentration in water decreased.

The concentration of these enzymes is generally higher in dermatomal skin compared to generalized skin. Additional research is required to understand the dermatological toxicity of GEs better.

# Histopathology

Renal failure secondary to glycol ether toxicity is a condition that often results in morphological alterations of the renal tubular epithelium. Postpartum biopsy findings included thinning the tubular epithelium, sloughing cells, and cellular debris presence.

Additionally, ballooning of the tubular cells was observed in some cases. The detachment of tubular epithelium and tubular necrosis was also noted. The histological examination of liver samples showed centrilobular degeneration, necrosis, and ballooned hepatic cells. These findings highlight the significant morphological changes in patients with renal failure secondary to glycol ether toxicity.

# Toxicokinetics

Glycol ethers (GE) can be absorbed by ingestion via the gastrointestinal tract, inhalation, and transdermally.

Similarly, GEs are also excreted in the same fashion. This is in comparison to methanol which is hepatically eliminated.

Note that the half-life of the GE and its respective organic acid may vary. For example, the half-life of ethylene glycol monobutyl ether (EGBE) is about 1 hour, but the half-life for the resulting organic acid, butoxyacetic acid, is about 4 hours.

# History and Physical

**History**

A detailed past medical and social history is essential in elucidating glycol ether (GE) toxicity. Occupational history is a crucial example. Workers in various industries such as electronics, printing, paint and coating, textiles, adhesives, cleaning, and personal care products may have been inadvertently exposed.

Additionally, workers in industries that use GE solvents or as product components, such as laboratory technicians, janitorial, and construction workers, may also be at risk.

Inquiring about using commonplace household items such as surface cleaner, all-purpose cleaner, window cleaner, paint, laundry detergents, and cosmetics is also essential. Remember that GE toxicity may resemble toxicity from toxic alcohols such as methanol and exacerbated medical conditions such as diabetic ketoacidosis. Obtaining a psychiatric history is also important because there have been reports of intentional ingestion with suicide attempts. Of note, patients with severe presentations may be unable to provide history, highlighting the importance of collateral information from emergency medical services.

**Physical**

The physical examination of a patient who has ingested a GE can vary based on several factors, including the amount consumed, the time since ingestion, and individual patient characteristics. As a result, examination findings can be classified into three categories: acute, subacute, or chronic, and there may also be some overlap in presenting signs and symptoms.

- **Acute Toxicity**
- Patients who might have ingested a large amount may present with neurologic signs and symptoms ranging from stupor, drowsiness, headaches, and even coma.
- Due to the resulting metabolic acidosis, patients may exhibit tachypnea or hyperventilation.
- One case report describes cardiac side effects such as heart block, refractory shock, and various metabolic derangements.
- Acute exposure can also cause hemolysis, which may present as weakness, pallor, and syncope if severe enough.
- Electronic cigarettes use diethylene glycol (DEG) as a solvent for the smoking fluid, which has been reported to cause lung injury.
- Patients may also present with severe dehydration and volume loss due to osmotic diuresis (early presentations will likely have a high osmol gap and low anion gap; see evaluation section).

- **Subacute**
- Neurological signs predominate after 5 to 10 days, including progressive lethargy, bilateral facial paralysis, dysphonia, and nonreactive pupils.
- Reports of peripheral neuropathies impacting specific nerve groups, including the 6th, 3rd, 5th, and 9th through 12th nerves, exist in the medical field.
- Focal central nervous system involvement has also been described bilaterally in the left partial lobe and occipital and cerebellar regions.
- Localized skin erythema, dryness, and in some cases, allergic reactions are possible, depending on the duration and frequency of exposure.

- **Chronic Toxicity**
- Chronic toxicity may present with central and peripheral nervous system impairment and can progress to coma. In addition, although the spectrum of long-term neurological injury is variable, impaired respiratory function is possible.
- Repetitive chronic exposure can also cause weakness, drowsiness, anisocoria (irregular pupils), and hypersomnolence.
- The resulting pancytopenia can present as a myriad of symptoms related to anemia and immunodeficiency; however, this is little research regarding the long-term sequelae in bone marrow suppression from GE toxicity.
- Patients may also report a longstanding history of infertility, decreased testicular size, spontaneous abortions, and congenital malformations in offspring.

# Evaluation

**Laboratory Tests**

- Basic labs, such as a complete metabolic panel (CMP) and complete blood count (CBC), are recommended to assess for various electrolyte arrangements and anemia.

- Hypocalcemia may be noted in the case of ethylene glycol toxicity. 
- Also, note that the onset of renal failure with diethylene glycol (DEG) poisoning is delayed.

- Metabolite Testing

- Metabolite testing (i.e., organic acid) is of little utility, especially in the acute setting, due to the time it takes for the test to result. Many hospitals also do not routinely test for metabolites. Please refer to your institution for further information regarding metabolite testing.
- Serum Osmolarity

- 

- It is essential to recognize the limitations of utilizing the osmol gap when evaluating for toxic alcohol poisoning. 

- Clinicians should be vigilant of overtly elevated osmol gaps (i.e.,>30 mOsl/L) in the presence of altered mental status or other signs to suggest toxic ingestion.
- Patients who present early may have a normal anion gap and elevated osmol gap, as the parent compound has not metabolized to its respective organic acid.
- On the other hand, patients who present late will have had the time to metabolize the glycol ether into its organic acid and will have a high anion gap. In addition, since the parent compound is metabolized, it will be lower in quantity with late presentation and, therefore, may have a normal osmolarity gap.

- Additional Tests

- Lactate 
- Arterial Blood Gas (ABG) 
- Acetaminophen, ethanol, ethylene glycol, isopropyl alcohol, methanol, and salicylates to evaluate for co-ingestions 
- Urinalysis

**Imaging**

- A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head may help rule out other causes of altered mental status. Still, it may be of low value to asses for radiographic signs of neurological damage, particularly in the acute setting.

- The utility of obtaining magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is unclear, as evidence of neurologic injury may not have manifested. A case series by Yahi et al. reports that initial head CT scans in patients with GE toxicity were without abnormality; two patients initially had unrevealing MRIs, but a third demonstrated edema and herniation. These initial MRI findings may hold a poor prognosis.

- However, other reports showed regular MRIs in patients with fatal outcomes. Yahi et al. also mention brain atrophy in two of their surviving cases, but with typical MRS, questioning the true etiology of these findings. Using. Brain imaging to evaluate GE toxicity requires further investigation.

- Chest imaging may also be considered to evaluate for pneumonitis from exposure to GE vapor or aspiration in the setting of altered mental status.

- An abdominal ultrasound may help identify changes in size, texture, and even necrosis in the kidney and liver.

**Electrocardiography (EKG)**

- An EKG is also essential for detecting conduction abnormalities which can be a byproduct of various electrolyte arrangements and acidosis.

**Electroencephalogram (EEG)/Electromyography (EMG)**

- Nerve conduction studies may also be beneficial to evaluate for neuropathy. From a neurological perspective, a case study reported that most patients with elevated CSF protein, without pleocytosis, developed a neurological injury.

- An EEG may be helpful in patients with repeated seizures, although there are limited reports of this initial presentation.

# Treatment / Management

The initial treatment for glycol ether toxicity involves addressing the patient's airway, breathing, circulation, and metabolic derangements. After addressing the primary survey, additional therapies depend on the severity of the presentation. The severity is often determined by which glycol ether was ingested, the route, and the time elapsed since ingestion.

GE exerts toxicity primarily through its alkoxyacetic acid metabolite produced by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH). Exception for diethylene glycol (DEG), where further metabolism through aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) yields the toxic metabolites 2-hydroxyethoxyacetic acid (HEAA) and diglycolic acid (DGA). Treatment aims to inhibit the production of the toxic metabolite and subsequent removal of the parent compound.

Fomepizole monotherapy may be considered if the toxic compound has a short elimination half-life (i.e., less than the half-life of fomepizole) in a patient with normal renal function. More importantly, these treatment strategies would benefit most during the early stages of toxicity. As such, early suspicion of GE toxicity is paramount.

Note that fomepizole carries a half-life of about 12 hours and is therefore started at 15 mg/kg every 12 hours.

Propylene glycol, a secondary alcohol, is structurally similar to glycol ethers but is generally less toxic. Both toxic alcohols are metabolized by ADH and produce toxic metabolites. However, ADH does not as readily metabolize propylene glycol because it is a secondary alcohol. Nonetheless, treatment for propylene glycol toxicity follows the same principle as for GE toxicity: inhibition of ADH with fomepizole and removal of the toxic alcohol with hemodialysis.

In addition to ADH inhibition and hemodialysis, other supportive measures may be helpful. Electrolyte management (i.e., hyperkalemia) and intravenous sodium bicarbonate for severe metabolic acidosis may also be beneficial. Intubation and mechanical ventilation may also become necessary if the patient is no longer protecting their airway due to drowsiness. Blood transfusions may also be needed if hemolysis results in severe anemia.

The use of gastric decontamination has not been closely studied. Although some authors suggest gastric lavage or nasogastric decontamination, if the ingestion is within the last 1 to 2 hours, the benefits of this have not been studied. Obtaining an accurate history is another limitation of using gastric lavage. Moreover, as neurotoxicity is a common finding, gastric decontamination may increase the risk of pulmonary aspiration.

Activated charcoal is also not recommended, as the substance has a poor affinity for alcohol.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for glycol ether toxicity includes ingesting similar toxic alcohols such as methanol and isopropyl alcohol. Toxic ingestions of these compounds would produce a metabolic acidosis similar to glycol ether toxicity; however, the lethal dose and toxicokinetics may vary. In addition, drug overdoses may also present similarly (i.e., neurological and metabolic derangements).

# Toxicity and Adverse Effect Management

Studies on the toxic dose of diethylene glycol (DEG) in rodents have revealed that, despite their lower susceptibility to DEG poisoning compared to humans, their toxic dose is estimated to be around 10 grams per kilogram. Historical data from two incidents of mass poisoning, the 1995 Haitian mass poisoning and the 1930 United States elixir sulfonamide poisoning, reported a toxic dose of approximately 1.5 g/kg. However, data from the 2006 DEG mass poisoning incident indicated a lower toxic dose of 0.36 g/kg.

It is important to note that polyethylene glycol (PEG), used for gastrointestinal irrigation and bowel preparation for colonoscopies, contains small amounts of DEG, exposing patients to approximately 11 mg. Despite this exposure, patients do not exhibit symptoms of toxicity, suggesting that a dose of 22 mg in adults may be tolerated without severe adverse effects.

Managing glycol ether toxicity and associated side effects depend on factors such as the amount ingested, time since exposure, and any co-ingestions. Additionally, underlying comorbid conditions, such as chronic renal failure, should be considered when evaluating treatment options. Further information on treatment can be found in the relevant section.

# Prognosis

A favorable prognosis has been associated with early hospitalization. Additionally, respiratory compensation to offset metabolic acidosis has correlated with a better prognosis. Key findings correlating with a poor prognosis include severe neurological damage (coma), respiratory failure, profound metabolic arrangements requiring dialysis, acidosis with a pH of less than 7, and delayed hospital evaluation.

# Complications

Glycol ether (GE) toxicity complications primarily affect the neurologic and renal systems. Evidence of seizures, cranial palsies, and structural changes in the brain have been documented.

Clinical case reports and studies of epidemics, such as the Panama mass poisoning incident, indicate that patients may experience axonal sensorimotor neuropathy, peripheral neuropathy, cranial nerve neuropathies, and demyelination. Some complications may occur in the acute to subacute stages, while others may develop months after the initial presentation in patients who survive the acute poisoning. However, limited long-term longitudinal studies are available to follow up on these patients.

Electrolyte imbalances, pancreatitis, and acidemia are expected acute complications likely related to renal failure, encephalopathy, and peripheral neuropathies. In addition, a few isolated case reports suggest that significant acute GE ingestion can cause pulmonary edema.

In patients who survive GE toxicity, the long-term complications can vary widely. For example, mild kidney injury may resolve, but those who require hemodialysis generally remain dialysis-dependent.

Oxidative stress caused by GE metabolites can result in liver damage, although the long-term hepatic effects have not been studied. No evidence suggests that GE toxicity increases the risk of malignancy. A few studies on GE exposure and the risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia have not shown statistically significant results.

# Consultations

It is recommended to consult with the nearest poison control center and, if available, your institutional medical toxicologist. In addition, other specialists, such as nephrology, neurology, and intensive care, may be needed to manage complications such as renal failure, seizures, and respiratory failure.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

It is advised that household supplies such as cleaning, paint, and automotive liquids be kept safe and secure, especially from young children, as accidental pediatric ingestions have been reported.

The reduction of occupational exposure to glycol ethers requires the implementation of both respiratory and dermal protection strategies. Engineering controls, such as using exhaust ventilation in small closed spaces, are key examples. In addition, personal protective equipment, such as gloves, respiratory masks, facial shields, and protective clothing, may be necessary to prevent dermal exposure.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Upon exposure, glycol ethers are metabolized to their respective alkoxyacetic acids, which orchestrate systemic toxicity.

- Alcohol dehydrogenase is the primary means of metabolism, and excretion is primarily by the kidneys.

- Although the half-life is relatively short, evaluating for co-ingestions that can prolong clearance through competitive enzyme inhibition is paramount.

- Acute toxicity is generally mild to moderate and can result in skin irritation, metabolic derangements, central nervous system depression, hemolytic anemia, and spermatogenesis defects.

- Chronic toxicity can result in hematological side effects (anemia, bone marrow suppression), hepatic histologic changes in the liver, and reproductive and developmental damage.

- Managing glycol ether toxicity, like most toxic alcohol ingestions, begins with assessing the airway, breathing, and circulation, followed by supportive measures.

- The two primary avenues for treatment are fomepizole and hemodialysis for managing acute toxicity, which may provide the most benefit if given early.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Assessing and managing toxic ingestions require a multidisciplinary and interprofessional approach that includes clinicians, specialists, nursing staff, and pharmacists.

- It is recommended to consult an institutional medical toxicologist and a local poison control center if available.

- Recommendations by a medical toxicologist and nephrologist may be necessary for managing metabolic acidosis and renal failure through hemodialysis.

- Early diagnosis of GE ingestion to prevent further toxic metabolite production is critical.

- Treatment involves blockage of alcohol dehydrogenase with fomepizole and urgent enhanced extracorporeal elimination through hemodialysis.

- Severe cases requiring intubation, mechanical ventilation, and hemodynamic support may require consultation with an intensivist.

Human data regarding glycol ether toxicity and management is primarily based on retrospective observational and case studies. Management of acute glycol ether toxicity involves prompt assessment of ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation), followed by supportive care. Patients should promptly be treated with fomepizole and urgent enhanced extracorporeal elimination by hemodialysis to remove the parent toxic GE, preventing further production of toxic metabolites.

Interprofessional care coordination is necessary between clinicians and specialists, nursing staff, who will administer medication and monitor patient responses, and pharmacists (who can perform medication reconciliation, verify dosing, and perform patient drug therapy counseling.

Management of long-term side effects such as permanent disability or reproductive defects would require consultation with their respective specialists. The interprofessional care paradigm is crucial to optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]