**Opioid Calculation and Conversion Steps**

- Determine the total daily dose of the present opioid

- Calculate the 24-hour OME: Add all scheduled and breakthrough opioid doses over 24 hours. Using the equianalgesic dose chart, determine the morphine equivalents of the current opioid. This will be the 24-hour equivalent of morphine. (24-hour OME = 24-hour dose of current opioid X 30 /Number of equianalgesic units in current opioid

- Determine new opioid and route of administration: Using the equianalgesic dose chart, determine the 24-hour dosage of the new opioid. (24-hour dose of new opioid = Total OME X Equianalgesic units of new opioid / 30)

- Decrease dose of new opioid due to incomplete cross-tolerance: Decrease dose of the new opioid by 50% to reach the final amount of the drug to be given

- Develop a pain prescription

The following are some examples.

**Case Example 1: Changing Route, Same Opioid**

Ms. T is a patient with lung cancer and painful bony metastases who takes extended-release morphine 90 mg every twelve hours and has tolerated it well. She is admitted to the hospital for a planned stabilization procedure of lytic bony metastasis. She is likely to suffer from uncontrolled pain if she doesn’t take her scheduled Morphine doses.

- Determine the total daily dose of current opioid: morphine 90 mg every twelve hours 90 +90 = 180 mg

- Calculate the 24-hour OME: 180 mg OME per 24 hours

- Determine new opioid and route of administration: The patient is NPO for surgery, and her oral morphine requirement is replaceable by a continuous infusion of morphine (24-hour dose of the new opioid = 180 X 10 / 30 = 60 mg)

- Decrease dose of new opioid due to incomplete cross-tolerance: Since the new drug is unchanged, tolerance to the new formulation of the same drug will be the same. One does not need to decrease the dose.

- Develop pain prescription: A continuous infusion of morphine IV would be 60 / 24 = 2.5 mg per hour. In clinical practice, an IV infusion of an opioid frequently allows patients to deliver an additional dose during episodes of pain escalation. The prescription would more likely be for a continuous infusion of 2 mg per hour with a patient capability of 0.5 mg or 1 mg every few minutes (typically 10-15 minutes). This is called patient-controlled analgesia (PCA).

**Case Example 2: Rotating opioid, Keeping the Same Route**

During her hospital stay, Ms. T develops acute renal failure from IV contrast during a procedure. To avoid toxicity from morphine in the setting of renal failure, you decide to switch her to an opioid that can be administered safely in cases of renal insufficiency, such as fentanyl or hydromorphone. On bedside assessment, her pain is well controlled, and she is receiving morphine IV continuous infusion at 2.5 mg per hour.

- Determine total daily dose of current opioid: (2.5 mg IV morphine per hour = 60 mg per 24 hours)

- Calculate the 24-hour OME: 24-hour OME = 24-hour dose of current opioid X 30 /Number of equianalgesic units in current opioid. (24-hour OME for this patient is: 60 x 30 / 10 = 180 mg)

- Determine new opioid and route of administration: Unlike morphine, IV hydromorphone has a short half-life and lacks clinically relevant metabolites, and is considered safer for patients with renal insufficiency. Total OME X Equianalgesic units of the new opioid / 30 = 24-hour dose of new opioid. (180 X 1.5 / 30 = 9 mg per 24 hours or 0.375 mg per hour)

- Decrease dose of the new opioid due to incomplete cross-tolerance: While the patient is tolerant to morphine, her tolerance to hydromorphone is likely to be incomplete. Her hydromorphone dose will need to be decreased by 50%, which would be 0.1875 mg per hour.

- Develop pain prescription: A close approximation to a measurable dose of IV hydromorphone to the amount calculated above is 0.2 mg per hour. Similar to the solution above, the IV infusion of hydromorphone will allow an additional dose during episodes of pain escalation. The prescription would more likely be for a continuous infusion of 0.2 mg per hour with a patient capability of 0.2mg every 10 to 15 minutes.

**Case Example 3: Change Opioid and Route**

Towards the end of her hospital stay, Ms. T reports that her pain has been controlled with the IV hydromorphone; however, her renal function has not completely recovered, and she needs to be switched to oral opioids that are safe to use in renal dysfunction.

- Determine the total daily dose of current opioid: 0.2 mg IV hydromorphone per hour = 4.8 mg per 24 hours

- Calculate the 24-hour OME: 24-hour OME = 24-hour dose of current opioid X 30 /Number of equianalgesic units in current opioid (24-hour OME for this patient is: 4.8 x 30 / 1.5 = 96 mg)

- Determine new opioid and route of administration: Hydromorphone is available in a short-acting oral formulation, and a 24-hour dose of oral hydromorphone calculated from the previous steps could be dosed in equal divided doses 4 hours apart. Total OME X Equianalgesic units of the new opioid / 30 = 24-hour dose of the new opioid (96 X 7.5 / 30 = 24 mg).  However, there is a strong likelihood that multiple daily doses of the drug will decrease compliance and lead to poorly controlled pain. A different opioid that is long-acting and safely dosed in patients with renal insufficiency is fentanyl. Fentanyl is delivered transdermally as a patch in its long-acting formulation. A fentanyl patch takes 12 to 24 hours to achieve the full effect. Studies clarifying the equianalgesic dosing of fentanyl are lacking. To calculate a comparable dose of fentanyl, a conversion formula is used. While there are several conversion formulas available, we recommend the use of the following: **Fentanyl Transdermal Patch Dose calculation:**The 24-hour OME divided by 2 is equal to fentanyl dose in mcg per hour  (96 / 2= 48 mcg per hour)

- Decrease dose of the new opioid due to incomplete cross-tolerance: Decreasing the dose of fentanyl by 50% would yield a dose of 24 mcg per hour. The closest approximation of commercially available formulations of fentanyl patch to that calculation is 25 mcg per hour.

- Develop pain prescription: Fentanyl patch is placed on the skin for 72 hours, after which the old patch is removed and replaced with a new one. For patients who are prescribed a long-acting opioid, it is preferable to add a short-acting opioid. The short-acting opioid helps to address breakthrough pain, which is not addressed by the long-acting opioid alone. The dose of the short-acting opioid is determined as follows: Calculate 24-hour OME from the long-acting opioid dose. In the example above it is: (24-hour OME = fentanyl patch dose X 2 = 50 mg) Dose of short-acting opioid is 10% of OME: Morphine 5 mg PO. A short-acting medication is usually dosed every 3 to 4 hours, which the patient takes on an as-needed basis. Equivalent doses of different short-acting formulations of hydromorphone and oxycodone are calculated using the same principles of equianalgesia as outlined above.

Optimal patient analgesia is best accomplished through the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team that includes clinicians, specialists, nursing staff, and pharmacists. When these team members are involved with patients in scenarios such as the above cases, they must be well familiarized with opioid equivalency and monitoring patient pain control. This responsibility falls to the prescribing or ordering clinician, should be double-checked by the pharmacist. If a nurse is administering or counseling the patient on how to take the medication, they should also be trained on opioid equivalence and equianalgesia. This interprofessional approach will minimize opioid misuse and dependence, prevent adverse events, and provide the patient with the needed analgesia for their situation. [Level 5]