Normally there are 12 ribs bilaterally in the human body. Each rib corresponds with each of the 12 vertebrae of the thoracic spine. The head of each rib articulates posteriorly with the bodies of the vertebra at its own level and of the one above it, except for the first rib, which only attaches to the first thoracic vertebra.

Muscles that are associated with rib movement include the diaphragm, pectoralis major, pectoralis minor, external abdominal oblique, rectus abdominis, subclavius, serratus anterior, external intercostal, internal intercostal, innermost intercostal, quadratus lumborum, transversus thoracis, latissimus dorsi, anterior scalene, middle scalene, posterior scalene, serratus posterior superior, and serratus posterior inferior.

Normal respiration is required for optimal lymphatic drainage to occur. The thoracic duct drains lymph from the left head and neck, the left thorax, the left upper extremity, and the rest of the lower body into the venous system at the junction of the left internal jugular vein and left subclavian vein. The right lymphatic duct drains the right head and neck, right thorax, and right upper extremity into the venous system.

Osteopathic physicians describe ribs by their motion with respect to the thoracic spine. Ribs fall into three categories; pump handle motion (ribs 1 to 5), bucket handle motion (ribs 6 to 10), and caliper motion (ribs 11 and 12). The diaphragm connects to ribs 6-12 and is domed cephalad at rest.

The inferior scapular angle (ISA) can serve as a landmark for the spinous process of the T7 vertebra, but in a literature review of anatomical studies by Cooperstein et al., it was concluded that the ISA is not an acceptable landmark for identifying spinal levels.