**Clinical Consideration**

Daptomycin is contraindicated in patients with a known hypersensitivity reaction to the drug or any component within the formulation. Although daptomycin does not have other contraindications to its use, there are significant clinical considerations to keep in mind when caring for patients.

**Geriatric Patients**

Elderly patients are at an increased risk of daptomycin toxicity due to age-related changes in renal function or factors that may enhance the exposure to the medication. However, no dosage adjustments are recommended for patients with a creatinine clearance greater than 30 mL/min.

**Pregnancy**

Daptomycin is pregnancy category B; however, there is still limited information available on the use of daptomycin during pregnancy. Case reports describe the successful use of daptomycin during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy. Additionally, animal reproductive studies have not yet determined any evidence of fetal harm from maternal use of daptomycin. Nevertheless, a risk-benefit analysis should be conducted before initiating daptomycin in pregnant patients.

**Breastfeeding**

Low concentrations of daptomycin have been detected in breast milk (0.1% of the maternal dose). Currently, there is no information available on the effects of daptomycin on breastfed infants or milk production. Like other antibiotics, maternal use of daptomycin may cause a non-dose-related change in bowel flora. Therefore, breastfed infants should be monitored for gastrointestinal disturbances. Breastfeeding mothers receiving treatment with daptomycin should be advised to consult with their provider and conduct a risk-benefit analysis before breastfeeding.

**Renal Impairment**

Reduced renal function can lead to the accumulation of daptomycin, thereby increasing the risk of adverse effects. Dose adjustments are necessary for patients with a creatinine clearance of less than 30 mL/min, including patients receiving hemodialysis or continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD). It is recommended that renal function and creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) levels be monitored multiple times a week in patients with renal impairment.

**Bacterial Resistance**

Like other antibiotics, prolonged or inappropriate treatment with daptomycin can lead to bacterial resistance. Therefore, providers need to be aware of increased antibiotic resistance patterns and practice appropriate antimicrobial stewardship. In addition, patients should be counseled on the importance of medication adherence to prevent the development of multidrug-resistant infections.

**Drug Interactions**

Other medications taken along with daptomycin may increase the risk of adverse effects and drug toxicity. Therefore dosing adjustments, additional monitoring, and alternative treatment should be considered when combining daptomycin with certain medications. Caution is advised when administering daptomycin with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins), as this can potentially increase the risk of skeletal muscle toxicity. It is recommended that the administration of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors be temporarily discontinued while patients receive treatment with daptomycin. If the concomitant administration is unavoidable, close monitoring of creatinine phosphokinase should be instated at least once weekly.