The specimen for histopathological evaluation (HPE) can be obtained either by in toto excision (small lesions) or incisional biopsy (large infiltrative lesions). The papillomas on HPE show papillary fibrovascular fronds with acanthotic epithelium covering them. Pediatric papillomas are a mixture of goblet cells and neutrophils contained in the epithelium. Adult papillomas are characterized by epithelial dysplasia, nuclear enlargement, raised nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, and mitotic figures. The preinvasive OSSN is classified on HPE as mild, moderate, and severe based on the degree of dysplastic epithelium involvement.

- CIN grade I: Mild - dysplasia involving the lower one-third of the epithelium.

- CIN grade II:  Moderate - dysplasia involving the middle third.

- CIN grade III: Severe - full thickness dysplasia, also labeled as carcinoma-in-situ.

Invasive OSSN is characterized by islands of infiltrating cells that usually penetrate the epithelial basement membrane and invade into the conjunctival stroma. These cells can be well- differentiated well and are labeled as squamous or poorly differentiated, which are difficult to distinguish. In squamous cells, two types of cells are seen: mucoepidermoid cells and spindle cells.

**Electron Microscopy**

OSSN on detailed electron microscopy depicts numerous mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, tonofilaments, reduced number of desmosomes, altered basement membrane, and fibrillogranular material between the bowman and basement membrane.