- Supraspinatus’ nerve supply is from the suprascapular nerve (C5-C6), a branch of the superior trunk of the brachial plexus.

- Infraspinatus’ nerve supply is also from the suprascapular nerve (C5-C6), a branch of the superior trunk of the brachial plexus.

- Teres minor’s nerve supply is from the axillary nerve (C5-C6), which comes from the posterior cord of the brachial plexus.

- Subscapularis’ nerve supply is from the upper, middle, and lower subscapular nerves (C5-C7), which come from the posterior cord of the brachial plexus.

- Teres major’s nerve supply is from the thoracodorsal nerve and the lower subscapular nerve.

- Coracobrachialis’ nerve supply is from the musculocutaneous nerve (C5-C7).

- The deltoid’s nerve supply is from the axillary nerve (C5-C6), which comes from the posterior cord of the brachial plexus.

- The biceps brachialis muscle is innervated by the musculocutaneous nerve (C5-C7), which nerve forms from the terminal branch of the brachial plexus.

- The brachial triceps receives innervation from the radial nerve (C5-T1).

- The latissimus dorsi muscle receives innervation from the thoracodorsal nerve (C6-C8), resulting from the brachial plexus.

- The pectoralis major muscle receives innervation from the nerve of the pectoralis major muscle (C5-C7), which derives from the brachial plexus, from its ventral collateral branch.

- The trapezius muscle receives a double innervation: from peripheral branches, rear cervical branches C2-C4; from central pathways, cranial nerve XI.