# Definition/Introduction

Opioids are a class of analgesics commonly employed in the treatment of acute and chronic pain conditions.

The use of opioids in treating chronic non-cancer pain is a current area of controversy due to the potential risk of patients' physical dependence on opioid medications.

Several tools have undergone development for assessing the risk of developing opioid use disorder. The Opioid Risk Tool (ORT) is a validated screening instrument commonly used in practice to evaluate the risk of future aberrant opioid use among chronic nonmalignant pain patients who receive prescribed opioids for pain relief.

Webster et al. developed the ORT questionnaire., in 2005, as a self-performed screening tool designed for use by adult patients in primary care settings before beginning opioid treatment for pain management.

- Family history of substance abuse including alcohol (Female=1; Male=3), illegal drugs (2;3), and/or prescription drugs (4;4)

- Personal history of substance abuse including alcohol (Female=3; Male=3), illegal drugs (4;4), and/or prescription drugs (5;5)

- Whether the patient age range is between 16 to 45 years (1;1)

- A history of preadolescent sexual abuse (3;0)

- Psychological disease including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), bipolar disorder, schizophrenia (2;2); and/or depression (1;1)

Scores are summed, and a score of 3 or below suggests a low risk for future opioid abuse, while a score of 4 to 7 indicates moderate risk. A score of 8 or greater suggests a high risk of future abusive drug-related behavior. According to the ORT, there are several interactive versions of the ORT available online, which allow for quick calculation of a patient's risk.

Cheatle et al. have recently developed and validated a weighted ORT eliminating the gender-specific history of preadolescent sexual abuse. Of note, they found that this revised ORT was able to better predict the development of OUD in individuals with chronic nonmalignant pain on long-term opioid therapy.

Other opioid risk screening tools include the Screener and Opioid Assessment for Patients with Pain Revised (SOAPP-R), developed to predict aberrant drug-related behaviors before initiation of long-term opioid therapy;

# Issues of Concern

Over the past several decades, there has been a significant increase in opioid use, misuse, and abuse, although the phenomenon seems to be dramatic, especially in some geographical areas, while in others such as Europe, the consumption and misuse or abuse of opioids is less alarming. This upward trend in opioid use started in the 1990s, especially in the United States, which is the largest consumer of opioid drugs globally, accounting for close to 80% of the opioids produced worldwide. Prescription opioids are now the leading drug of abuse, and their use can produce both medical and psychological side effects. Opioid overdose, indeed, is the most common cause of accidental death among young adults. As of 2018, predictions suggest that there could be close to 500000 opioid-related deaths in the United States over the next decade. The effects of the misuse of opioids are manifold. In the surgical setting, for instance, opioid misuse is associated with an increased risk of postoperative complications, postoperative death, and falls and fractures in the elderly.

# Clinical Significance

Early identification of at-risk patients is an effective strategy in preventing aberrant opioid behavior. In the postsurgical setting, opioid abuse increases the risks of poor surgical outcomes, motor vehicle accidents, myocardial infarction, bone fractures, and death, among various other medical issues. Opioid-related adverse events have a direct positive correlation with the opioid dosages. Although the CDC has indicated there is insufficient evidence to determine the utility of opioid risk screening tools, some prescription guidelines suggest using these instruments. In this context, the ORT has been adopted in clinical practice to evaluate the risk of future aberrant opioid behavior.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

For patients with an established treatment plan involving opioid therapy, frequent follow-up is essential for all patients, no matter their risk stratification. Higher risk patients require more frequent monitoring than lower-risk patients. Follow-ups may include re-screening of risk, urine drug screening, and observation for other clues of drug abuse. These clues may consist of requests for dose escalation, doctor shopping, forging prescriptions, requesting early prescriptions, unscheduled clinic visits, or emergency room visits with complaints of pain. Urine drug screening may identify illicit substances or non-use of prescribed medication. It is strongly recommended to collect a baseline urine drug screen to identify pre-existent drug abuse when present. These recommendations should involve interdisciplinary cooperation of physicians, nurses, technicians to improve patient outcomes.