The 'pelvic plexus,' more specifically known as the inferior hypogastric plexus, consists of a complex fibro-nervous structural network of afferent and efferent fibers providing function for the pelvic and perineal organs. Knowing this important relationship is extremely important from a surgical point of view. Understanding this anatomy is crucial to preventing errors that can potentially be fatal to patients undergoing surgery or abdominopelvic procedures.

The bladder is innervated by the superior and inferior levels of the efferent fibers of the pelvic plexus. The superior level arose from the hypogastric nerves at the ureterovesical junction. The inferior level fibers arose from the anterior plexus edge of the bladder neck at 5 and 7 o'clock. Proximal seminal vesicle fibers follow the posterior (between the seminal vesicles and rectal fascia) and lateral (runs along the lateral wall of the seminal vesicles and the prostate) courses.

It is important to note that the posterior courses are intimately connected with the seminal vesicles and provide fibers to the vas deferens and ejaculatory canal, reaching the colliculus seminalis via the prostate gland.

**Efferent Fibers from the Pelvic Plexus**

The efferent fibers innervate the bladder and are situated superior and inferior. Fibers of the superior level arise from the hypogastric nerves at the ureterovesical junction, unlike the inferior level fibers that arise from the anterior plexus edge and approach the bladder neck at 5 and 7 o'clock positions.

Proximal seminal vesicle fibers follow two courses: lateral and posterior, the latter which lays between the rectal fascia and the seminal vesicles and connected intimately with the seminal vesicles. This intimate posterior fiber connection provides fibers to the vas deferens and ejaculatory canal, eventually reaching the colliculus seminalis via the prostate. The lateral fibers run along the lateral wall of the prostate and seminal vesicles, and some even penetrate the prostate from its lateral side, unlike others that run anterolateral, eventually reaching the prostatic apex and external urethral sphincter. The two different courses of fibers contain a cholinergic and adrenergic function. The fibers involved in innervating erectile bodies are postero-lateral to the prostate (distant from the prostatic capsule at the base level) and are mainly cholinergic with few adrenergic fibers.