While a neurologist most commonly prescribes selegiline, the patient is often followed by the primary care provider, which can be an MD, DO, NP, or PA. However, given the adverse event profile and interactions of this drug, therapy management, and monitoring are best accomplished with an interprofessional healthcare team that also includes nursing staff and pharmacists, as well as mental health professionals. This approach will maximize therapeutic efficacy and minimize potential adverse events. [Level 5]

Patients taking selegiline require education about the risks associated with medication usage and specific symptoms they can self-monitor. Blood pressure monitoring is necessary for patients taking selegiline to decrease falls related to orthostatic hypotension and prevent hypertensive crisis and long-term effects of elevated blood pressure. Patients require monitoring for symptoms of Parkinsonism and serotonin syndrome. Behavior, mood, and suicidality also require assessment in patients taking selegiline to prevent psychiatric disturbances and death. Periodic skin examinations are warranted, especially in patients using the transdermal form of selegiline—the importance of close monitoring increases when starting the medication or making dosage adjustments. Pharmacists should verify dosing, check for drug interactions, and provide patient counseling. Nursing will also reinforce these points and remind the patient about the need to avoid tyramine-containing foods. If the patient sees a mental health practitioner, they should be aware that the patient is taking selegiline and report back to the prescriber if they observe any signs of issues with therapy. These are but a few examples of how interprofessional teamwork optimizes patient outcomes.