The black widow spider species, also known by its biological nomenclature as the Latrodectus species is one of more than 40,000 different species of spiders. Clinically, it is one of most significant species of spiders worldwide. Within the United States, it is responsible for most of the clinically significant envenomation among all species of spiders. There are more than 30 different types of black widow spiders worldwide; however, not all species are as relevant due to their separation from human habitat.

The genus Latrodectus derives its ubiquitous nickname “black widow” from its physical characteristics. The Black Widow, or Latrodectus mactans, is easily identified by its characteristic shiny black body and strikingly red hourglass-shaped marking on the abdomen. Interestingly, this species is well known by the phenomenon of the female spider devouring the male spider after mating, thereby making her a widow. Black widow spiders range from 5 to 15 mm (0.25 to 0.50 inch) in length. They have fangs and venomous glands sufficient to cause harm to humans. The female gender of the species is the most dangerous, compared to their male counterparts.  Females have more prominent venomous glands, longer fangs and a body size that can reach up to 20-times larger than their male counterparts.

Symptoms of envenomation range from local irritation and pain to a more systemic syndrome termed “latrodectism.” Latrodectism is characterized by variations in presentations ranging from autonomic disturbances to widespread pain and rigidity. Treatment ranges from simple analgesia to the administration of antivenom.