Cholesterol is synthesized in the liver or absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Ezetimibe is a synthetic 2-azetidinone agent. Ezetimibe is different from other cholesterol-lowering agents because it does not increase bile acid excretion or inhibit cholesterol synthesis in the liver. Ezetimibe inhibits cholesterol absorption at the brush border of the small intestine mediated by the sterol transporter Niemann-Pick C1-Like-1 (NPC1L1).

The decrease in cholesterol absorption leads to a reduction in the delivery of cholesterol to the liver, an increase in cholesterol clearance from the blood, and a reduction in hepatic cholesterol stores. This consequent reduction n cholesterol absorption results in a decrease in total cholesterol, triglycerides, and LDL cholesterol and an increase in HDL cholesterol. Ezetimibe does not significantly affect fat-soluble vitamins, including vitamins A, D, and E.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**According to the manufacturer's labeling, after oral administration of ezetimibe, it is absorbed and conjugated to a pharmacologically active ezetimibe-glucuronide. Mean peak plasma concentrations are attained within 4 to 12 hours. However, ezetimibe-glucuronide peak plasma concentrations are achieved between 1 and 2 hours. Cmax of ezetimibe is increased by 38% with consumption of high-fat meals; however, administration of food with ezetimibe does not affect the extent of absorption. Consequently, ezetimibe Tablets can be administered without regard to food.

**Distribution:**Ezetimibe and ezetimibe-glucuronide complex are more than 90% protein bound.

**Metabolism:**In humans, ezetimibe is rapidly metabolized to ezetimibe-glucuronide. Ezetimibe(10 to 20%) and ezetimibe-glucuronide(80 to 90%) are detected in plasma. In addition, plasma concentration-time profiles exhibit multiple peaks, suggesting enterohepatic recycling. The CYP450 metabolizes ezetimibe, but it has a negligible effect on other drugs' pharmacokinetics because it is rapidly conjugated and excreted in the bile as a glucuronide.

**Excretion:**Both ezetimibe and ezetimibe-glucuronide are eliminated from plasma with a half-life of approximately 22 hours. Ezetimibe is primarily excreted in feces, while Ezetimibe-glucuronide is excreted in the urine.