The most commonly encountered side effects of amitriptyline include weight gain, gastrointestinal symptoms like constipation, xerostomia, dizziness, headache, and somnolence.

The following is a list of other adverse effects, including serious adverse drug reactions of amitriptyline:

- Amitriptyline, due to its alpha-adrenergic receptor blockade, can cause orthostatic hypotension, dizziness, and sedation. It can also cause heart rate variability, slow intracardiac conduction, induce various arrhythmias, and cause QTc (corrected QT) prolongation.

- Anticholinergic side effects include blurred vision, dry mouth, urinary retention, tachycardia, acute angle glaucoma, confusion, and delirium.

- Antihistamine side effects secondary to its histamine(H1) receptor binding property include sedation, increased appetite, weight gain, confusion, and delirium.

- Amitriptyline can decrease the seizure threshold in a dose-dependent manner; therefore, caution is required in patients with a seizure disorder. Seizure rate is 1 to 4% at 250 to 450 mg/day doses.

- Abnormalities in liver function tests. Usually, the effect on the liver is mild, asymptomatic, transient, and reverses with discontinuation. Liver function tests are usually under three times the upper limit of normal It rarely causes acute liver injury.

- It can increase the risk of bone fracture and (rare) bone marrow suppression.

- Amitriptyline gets metabolized through CYP3A4. Several drugs alter the activity of CYP3A4, and thus dose should be cautiously regulated, and the entire patient medication regimen should be checked for CYP3A4 inducers and inhibitors.

- Black box warning - The FDA has issued a black box warning regarding the use of amitriptyline in adolescents and young adults (ages less than 24 years). It can increase the risk of suicidal ideation and behavior.

- As an antidepressant, amitriptyline can rarely induce mania. Risk factors are a history of bipolar disorder, family history of mania, pharmacologically induced hypomania.