There are no set guidelines for the management of amniotic band syndrome when diagnosed prenatally. Regardless of the therapeutic approach chosen, all patients should receive counseling about fetal abnormalities detected and the possibility of other hidden abnormalities. Amniocentesis, for chromosomal microarray (CMA), is indicated if results will affect pregnancy decision making. Consulting with concerned subspecialists is ideally recommended. In cases of lethal anomalies, post-natal palliative care should also be a topic of discussion.

The in-utero intervention of amniotic band lysis can potentially slow down the progression of the effects of constriction and restore normal flow to the downstream structures. There is a hypothesis that fetal limb recovery is more likely after fetal intervention than postnatal recovery because of the plasticity tissue healing during fetal life. Although fetoscopic intervention may restore blood flow and save the limb, plastic surgery may still be necessary after birth. However, the efficacy of this intervention is unknown, as there are no set criteria for the selection of candidates and a lack of clinical studies.

There are no standard guidelines for the management of pregnancy complicated with fetal ABS. Follow-up, ultrasound, and intervention are individually tailored and depend on the severity of ABS complications.

Postnatal management includes a thorough physical exam, and if needed, imaging studies to clearly describe the extent of ABS. Relief of constriction rings postnatally may help salvage some limb function by relieving venous pressure. Vascular comprise diagnosed postnatally may require urgent surgical intervention.