Understanding the anatomy involved in hemicolectomy requires knowledge of structures, including the colon, arterial supply, venous drainage, lymphatic supply, peritoneal attachments. Anatomy will be discussed relevant to the right and left hemicolectomy.

**Anatomy of the Colon**

The colon is comprised of the cecum, appendix, ascending colon, hepatic flexure, transverse colon, splenic flexure, descending colon, and sigmoid colon. The ileocaecal valve lies between the ileum and cecum. The colon is derived embryologically from the midgut (cecum to two-thirds along the transverse colon) and the hindgut (remaining 1/3rd of the transverse colon to the sigmoid colon). The colon is composed of incomplete sacculations called haustra, and a longitudinal smooth muscle layer lying just below the serosa called the teniae coli. Fatty appendages, termed the appendices epiploicae, are located along the colon.

**Right Colon**

The right colon starts in a blind-ending pouch called the cecum, located in the right iliac fossa of the abdomen. The ascending colon is covered by a layer of peritoneum covering its anterior and lateral surfaces. The hepatic flexure lies intraperitoneal adjacent to the liver in the right hypochondrium. The paracolic gutter lies lateral to the ascending and descending colon and acts as a collecting point or conduit for free fluid in the peritoneal cavity.

The blood supply to the right colon is via the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) that branches off the abdominal aorta anteriorly at the lower pole of L1. The SMA gives off two main branches supplying the right colon that are the right colic and middle colic arteries. Another branch supplies the terminal ileum and caecum called the ileocolic artery. The marginal artery of Drummond is a branch of the middle colic that forms an anastomosis with a branch from the left colic artery. Venous drainage of the right colon is via the superior mesenteric vein and tributaries that drain into the hepatic portal vein. Lymphatic drainage of the colon is through lymph nodes that lie on the colon surface (epicolic), which drain into the paracolic nodes. Around the arterial branches from named vessels (e.g., branches of the right colic artery) are the intermediate nodes, and along the named vessels themselves are the mesocolic lymph nodes.

**Left Colon**

The transverse colon is intraperitoneal and is attached to the stomach via the gastrocolic ligament. It is also connected to the greater omentum. The transverse colon has its mesocolon and is relatively mobile within the abdominal cavity. The splenic flexure is a relatively fixed structure owing to the splenocolic ligament which is divided during left hemicolectomy with care to avoid splenic capsular tear.

The descending colon is covered by peritoneum on its anterior and lateral surfaces. Posterior and medial the descending colon is retroperitoneal. The sigmoid colon is surrounded by the peritoneum and attaches to the lateral abdominal wall via the "white line of Toldt." The ureters and kidneys can be identified and protected by beginning dissection at the intersigmoid fossa at the base of the mesosigmoid.

The inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) and its branches supply the distal transverse colon, descending colon (left colic artery), and sigmoid colon (sigmoid branches and superior rectal artery). The right branch of the left colic artery gives rise to the marginal artery of Drummond, which anastomoses with the left branch of the right colic artery and supplies the splenic flexure and distal transverse colon.

The inferior mesenteric vein drains the left colon and drains into the hepatic portal vein after anastomosis with the splenic vein and superior mesenteric vein.

The superior hypogastric plexus lies in close relation to the IMA pedicle at the bifurcation of the aorta and must be preserved during dissection.