There is no definitive treatment for Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease; it is mainly symptomatic and palliative. However, studies are taking place to investigate treatments that target the molecular mechanisms responsible for PMD.

Patients with connatal PMD have seizures that are usually responsive to antiepileptic medications (AED). Currently, there is no AED that is used specifically to treat seizures due to PMD. Spasticity is a major symptom in PMD, and centrally-acting skeletal muscle relaxants such as baclofen, tizanidine, or diazepam are effective in treating it. Due to pharyngeal weakness that some patients of PMD experience, a gastrostomy is done, and enteral feeding is initiated. A lot of PMD patients experience some degree of scoliosis, which necessitates physiotherapy and/or surgery.

Studies on some drugs yielded promising results in targeting the molecular cause of PMD. However, they have been mostly tested on genetically modified mice (mutated PLP1) and not in humans. Lonaprisan, a progesterone receptor antagonist, decreases PLP1 overexpression caused by the mutation; therefore, it increases myelination. According to Epplen et al., curcumin, an extract of turmeric, has been correlated with motor improvement and decreased oligodendrocyte loss in mice with PLP1 overexpression. It works by exerting an anti-oxidative effect promoting axonal survival and reducing the inflammatory process that occurs in PMD.

Dietary changes can also exert an effect on the pathophysiology of the disease. A diet rich in cholesterol can increase the life span of oligodendrocytes and the axonal caliber, according to a study conducted by Rudolphi et al.