Heyl, in 1880 described a case of lipemia retinalis (LR) in detail.**chylomicrons**, very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL), intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDL), low-density lipoproteins (LDL), and high-density lipoproteins (HDL) and their sizes are 100 to 1000 nm, 34 nm, 27 nm, 22 nm, and 5 to 12 nm respectively. Smaller lipoprotein molecules do not scatter light and are transparent. Chylomicrons are the largest lipoprotein macromolecules. Most of the dietary triglyceride is transported from intestine to the systemic circula­tion via chylomicrons. Chylomicrons are normally rapidly removed from the plasma. It is likely the high proportion of triglycerides in chylomicrons, which leads to the association of raised triglyceride levels and lipemia retinalis. If a sample of hyperlipidemic serum is allowed to stand, chylomicrons form a hazy surface layer. Circulating blood with a high level of chylomicrons gives the appearance of lipemia retinalis due to the light scattering effect of the chylomicrons in the retinal vessels.

Chylomicronemia has been noted to occur when the plasma triglyceride level is higher than 1000 mg/dl.

- Eruptive xanthoma

- Lipemia retinalis

- Abdominal pain and/or pancreatitis

However, some authors consider a triglyceride level of 2000 mg/dl as a lower cutoff while defining chylomicronemia and chylomicronemia syndrome.

- Lipemia retinalis in 23%

- Flushing with alcohol in 25%

- Documented pancreatitis in 28%

- Eruptive xanthoma in 40%

- Objective dyspnea in 46%

- Abdominal pain and/or pancreatitis in 63%

- Recent memory loss in 85% of patients

Elevation of plasma triglycerides is the main etiology of LR. HTG can be familial or secondary to other diseases.

Familial HTG occurs due to:

- The presence of endogenous circulating lipoprotein lipase ( LPL ) inhibitor

- Deficiency of LPL

- Deficiency of apoprotein of LPL i.e., APOC-II. LPL deficiency is an autosomal recessive transmission due to a number of LPL gene mutations like Asp9Asn, Gly188Glu, Pro207Leu, Asp250Asn, Asn291Ser, Ser447X, Pro214Ser, and others.

Secondary causes of HTG include

- Uncontrolled type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus

- Endocrine disorders (obesity, metabolic syndrome, hypothyroidism, hypercortisolism)

- Medications (corticosteroids, estrogen, antipsychotics (clozapine and olanzapine), antidepressants, rosiglitazone, thiazides, beta-blockers, bile acid sequestrants, sirolimus, antiretroviral therapy,13-cis-retinoic acid, tamoxifen)

- Pregnancy

- Renal disease (nephrotic syndrome, renal failure, renal dialysis)

- Liver disease (acute hepatitis)

- Dietary intake (high in saturated fats and carbohydrates, excessive alcohol intake)

- Systemic diseases (Human immunodeficiency virus infection, acute spinal cord injury, anorexia nervosa, organ transplant, sarcoidosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, myeloma)