# Continuing Education Activity

Malignant tumors of the palate incorporate a wide range of differing histologies with their own distinctive characteristics. The location is rich in minor salivary glands with close interaction between the mucosa and underlying periosteum, which creates a unique array of tumor histologies from their adjacent subsites. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of malignant tumors of the palate and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of malignant tumors of the palate 
- Summarize the physical evaluation of malignant tumors of the palate.
- Outline the management options available for malignant tumors of the palate.

# Introduction

Malignancies of the hard and soft palate have a wide variety of characteristics. The hard palate, a subsite of the oral cavity, comprises the palatine bone's horizontal plate and the palatine process of the maxillary bone. Its boundaries include the alveolar ridge anteriorly, the soft palate posteriorly, the nasal cavity superiorly, and the oral cavity inferiorly. The hard palate is rich in minor salivary glands with close interaction between its mucosa and the underlying periosteum. This unique composition creates a different array of malignancies compared with other oral subsites.

The soft palate, on the other hand, is a subsite of the oropharynx. It is bordered by the hard palate anteriorly, palatoglossal and palatopharyngeal muscles laterally, and the uvula posteriorly. The most common malignant tumor histologies of the hard and soft palate include squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC), adenoid cystic carcinoma (AdCC), polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma (PLGA), low-grade papillary adenocarcinoma (LGPA), acinic cell carcinoma (ACC), mucosal melanoma (MM), Kaposi sarcoma (KS), and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL).

# Etiology

Tobacco and alcohol are proven carcinogens and can be synergistic causes for the development of oral squamous cell carcinoma.

The etiology of minor salivary gland malignancies such as adenoid cystic carcinoma (AdCC), mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC), polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma (PLGA), low-grade papillary adenocarcinoma (LGPA), and acinic cell carcinoma (ACC) remains unknown but is theorized to be due to specific gene mutations with input from advancing age and hormonal influences.

Mucosal melanoma comprises a rare and aggressive form of palatal malignancies. It is thought to arise from melanocytes found in the basal layer of the oral mucosa.

Kaposi sarcoma (KS) is linked to the human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).

The risk factors for developing Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma (NHL) is multifactorial, including immunosuppression (HIV, congenital immunodeficiency, organ transplant, chemotherapy, and radiation), viral infections (EBV, HTLV-1, Herpes, Hepatitis C), bacterial infections (such as Helicobacter pylori gastritis and Lyme disease), tobacco, animal fat consumption, obesity, hair dyes, ultraviolet radiation, pesticides, occupational toxin exposure, and genetic predisposition for B-cell survival and growth.

# Epidemiology

Within the oral cavity, about 1 to 5% of oral cavity malignancies are located on the hard palate.

**Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)**is the most common malignancy in the oral cavity. Although the incidence of SCC of the palate is lower compared to other subsites, SCC remains the most common malignant lesion in the hard palate accounting for 2% of all head and neck SCC, with a predilection for male patients in their 6th decade.

**Minor salivary gland tumors (MSGT)**are the most common neoplasms found in the hard palate with malignancy rates ranging from 40 to 82%.

**Adenoid cystic carcinoma (AdCC)**is the most common salivary gland malignancy seen in the palate, accounting for 17.7% of all malignant salivary gland tumors.

**Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC)**is the most common salivary gland malignancy. The minor salivary glands of the hard palate are the 2nd most common location for MEC following the parotid gland.

**Polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma (PLGA)**accounts for 19% to 26% of minor salivary gland malignancies.

**Low-grade papillary adenocarcinoma (LGPA)**is a rare oral minor salivary gland tumor that has a predilection for the hard palate in patients in the 4th to 5th decade.

**Acinic cell carcinoma (ACC)**is a rare tumor found in 2.91% of minor salivary glands tumors in the palate.

**Mucosal melanomas (MM)**can present in the mucus membranes in the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary tract and comprises of only 0.8% to 3.7% of all melanoma cases.

**Kaposi sarcoma (KS)**most often involve cutaneous lesions and can involve the mucus membrane in the oral and gastrointestinal tract in up to 50% of all cases.

**Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)**is the 7th most common cancer in the USA and can present in extra-nodal tissue in 25% to 40% of cases.

# Pathophysiology

Palatal SCC pathogenesis is associated with an accumulation of genetic mutations and epigenetic anomalies in signaling pathways that promote uncontrolled cellular proliferation and cancer development. The genetic mutations associated with oral SCC are most often attributed to cigarette smoke, alcohol, and human papillomavirus.

The majority of AdCC tumors contain a recurrent t(6;9) translocation, which fuses the MYB Proto-Oncogene transcription factor (MYB) on chromosome 6q to the Nuclear Factor IB (NFIB) gene on chromosome 9p, resulting in an overexpression of MYB-NFIB fusion oncogene.

Approximately 50% to 70% of MEC have specific chromosomal translocation t(11;19)(q21:p13) leading to mucoepidermoid carcinoma translocated protein 1 (MECT1) and mastermind-like protein 2 (MAML2) gene fusion. Low or intermediate-grade MEC tumors are more likely to display this translocation compared with high-grade tumors.

Acinic cell carcinoma is theorized to evolve from either serous acinic cell differentiation or pluripotent intercalated duct cells.

Mucosal melanoma arises from precursor melanocytes which develop from the neural crest cells.GNAQ/11) mutations found in 9.5% of patients and overexpression of tyrosin-protein kinase Kit (c-KIT) in over 80% of cases.

Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8) is a transforming virus found in several malignancies that can alter the genes of its infected cells. It is theorized that HHV8 along with immunosuppressive cytokines induce the deterioration of the immune system and proliferation of Kaposi’s sarcoma.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) can develop from several de novo mutations and rearrangements of immunoglobulin chain genes such as B-Cell CLL/Lymphoma 2 (BLC2), B-Cell CLL/Lymphoma 6 (BLC6), tumor protein 53 (TP53), myc proto-oncogene protein (MYC), proto-oncogene C-Rel (REL), enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), Notch Receptor 2 (NOTCH2), and 9p21/Cyclin Dependent Kinase Inhibitor 2A (9p21/CDKN2A). Extranodal marginal zone lymphomas (EMZL) involving the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) can arise from somatic translocation mutations in the immunoglobulin genes due to chronic infection or autoimmune disease. The most common abnormalities include t(11;18)(q21;q21), t(14;18)(q32;q21), and t(1;14)(p22;q32) which upregulate the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kB) pathway, immunoglobulin heavy locus-forkhead box P1 (IGH-FOXP1) fusion, tumor necrosis factor, alpha-induced protein 3 (TNFAIp3) deletion, and myeloid differentiation primary response 88 (MYD88) mutation.

# Histopathology

**Palatal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)**arises from the stratified squamous epithelium of the oral mucosa. It often presents with bony erosion, perineural spread, invasion of the maxillary alveolus laterally or nasal cavity, and maxillary sinus superiorly.

**Adenoid cystic carcinoma (AdCC)**arises from the intercalated ducts of mucin-secreting glands and presents with three different histologic subtypes, including cribriform (most common), tubular, and solid (most aggressive).

**Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC)**contains varying amounts of mucin-producing cells, epidermoid (squamous) cells, and intermediate cells.

**Polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma (PLGA)**is a rare salivary gland tumor that is most commonly found in the palate.

**Low-grade papillary adenocarcinoma (LGPA)**was once considered to be under the spectrum of PLGA but has since been classified as a separate entity due to its more aggressive nature.

**Acinic cell carcinoma (ACC)**is encapsulated by a fibrous capsule and is divided into a mixture of nests containing solid, microcystic, papillary-cystic, and follicular components. Cells have a characteristic basophilic granular cytoplasm.

**Mucosal melanoma (MM)**consists of malignant melanocytes of varying phenotypes (epithelioid, spindle-cell, and plasmacytoid) arranged in a sheet-like, organoid, alveolar, solid, or desmoplastic architecture.

**Kaposi sarcoma (KS)**presents with a mixture of vascular slits, extravasated erythrocytes, and proliferating spindle cells.

**Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)**histopathology shows irregular lymphocytes mixed with plasma cells, histiocytes, and lymphoid follicles.

# History and Physical

Patients with a palatal mass may present with a history of foul oral odor or halitosis, oral bleeding, poor-fitting dentures, dysphagia, odynophagia, changes in oral speech, and loose teeth. A detailed history including pain symptoms, the time of onset of the palatal mass, growth rate, swallowing difficulties, bleeding episodes, and prior oral trauma should be taken. Past medical history, surgical history, family history of malignancies, and social risk factors such as smoking, alcohol, drug use, and occupational hazards should be elicited.

Physical examination consists of a comprehensive head and neck exam with a focus on the oral cavity and its structures. Palatal malignancies most commonly present as a palatal mass with or without oral bleeding, and pain.

**Adenoid cystic carcinoma (AdCC)**may present with pain prior to any visible lesion.

**Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC)**presents as a slow-growing, painless, and red-bluish mass.

**Polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma (PLGA)**presents as a painless, slow-growing mass with non-ulcerated mucosa and may resemble a benign tumor.

**Low-grade papillary adenocarcinoma (LGPA)**presents as a painless, lobulated, friable, yellow-tan, firm mass.

**Acinic cell carcinoma (ACC)**is an uncommon salivary gland malignancy that rarely appears in the hard palate. It presents as a painless, slow-growing mass.

**Mucosal melanomas (MM)**present as macular or nodular lesions with pigmented brown to black coloration. The majority of tumors within the oral cavity are between 2 to 6 cm in size.

**Kaposi sarcoma (KS)**presents with focal or widespread violaceous-brown patches, papules, plaques, or exophytic nodules. They can involve the mucosal membrane, skin, lymph nodes, and visceral organs.

**Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)**often presents as a painless, submucosal mass at the junction of the hard palate and soft palate without ulceration, and with cervical lymphadenopathy.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of palatal malignancies is obtained through history, physical exam, imaging, and biopsy.

- **Computerized tomography (CT):**Conventional CT has traditionally been used to evaluate tumor extent, bony erosion, and lymphadenopathy. However, it has lower soft-tissue resolution and precision compared with magnetic resonance imaging. It is also is limited by dental artifacts.

- **Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI):**MRI can show the extent of palatal tumors, signs of perineural spread, and cervical lymph node metastasis.

- **Panorex:**A panoramic X-ray of the maxilla and mandible is utilized to determine any bone or tooth involvement.

- **Positron emission tomography (PET):**Although PET has a poor anatomical resolution, it is superior in detecting lymph node metastasis, occult metastases, and post-treatment surveillance.

- **Biopsy:**Punch biopsy, incisional biopsy, or fine need aspiration (FNA) biopsy can be utilized to determine the specific histology of the palatal tumor to help dictate the treatment plan. The sensitivity and specificity of FNA biopsy may vary depending on the technique used and the pathologist's level of experience.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of palatal malignancies often requires multimodal therapy depending on the specific histology, stage and extent of disease, and patient tolerance of treatment. Wide local excision with negative margins is the treatment of choice for the majority of malignant palatal lesions.

Adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation therapy (RT) is often used after initial surgical resection for high-grade tumors, positive or close margins, cervical metastasis, perineural invasion, and recurrent disease.

Radiotherapy alone is ineffective for malignant salivary gland tumors due to its radio-resistance and frequent bony invasion.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Neurofibroma

- Neurilemmoma

- Schwannoma

- Lipoma

- Pyogenic granuloma

- Follicular lymphoid hyperplasia

- Necrotizing sialometaplasia

- Multiple myeloma

- Ewing sarcoma

- Langerhans cell histiocytosis

- Leukemia

- Osteosarcoma

- Osteomyelitis

- Abscess

- Tuberculosis

- Mucocele

- Leiomyoma

- Pleomorphic adenoma

- Other rare benign minor salivary gland tumors including basal cell adenoma, myoepithelioma, and cystadenoma

# Surgical Oncology

Surgical resection is the treatment of choice for non-lymphoma palatal tumors. A Transoral approach can be used for the majority of small, superficial palate malignancies. If the tumor involves the hard palate or alveolus bone, resection of the maxilla will be necessary for oncologic clearance. The extent of resection would depend on the tumor's extent, ranging from a central or partial palatectomy to some form of infrastructure maxillectomy. The resulting defect may be rehabilitated with a removable obturator or prosthesis to facilitate oncologic surveillance in the future, or it may be repaired with a local, regional, or free tissue transfer.

For more extensive tumors or those involving the infratemporal fossa, pterygopalatine fossa, parapharyngeal space, masticator space, or nasopharynx (areas where a transoral approach will not be sufficient), an external approach such as an Upper Cheek flap, Lateral rhinotomy, Weber-Ferguson approach (upper lip-split incision extending along the nasal base into the nasomaxillary groove) or paramedian mandibulectomy may be required for adequate access.

For extensive palatal tumors requiring palatectomy and/or maxillectomy, a defect between the nasal and oral cavities can lead to difficulties with talking, chewing, and swallowing. Reconstructive options for these defects include temporary prosthetic obturators, rotational flaps (such as buccal myomucosal flaps, temporoparietal fascia or temporalis muscle flap and facial artery myomucosal flaps) for smaller defects, and free-tissue transfer flaps (such as fibula, iliac crest, scapula, radial forearm, rectus abdominus, or anterolateral thigh free flaps) for larger defects.

Studies have shown that surgical intervention for palatal malignancies provides higher disease-free survival compared with non-surgical approaches.

Cervical metastasis of hard palate SCC was historically thought to be low, and many surgeons did not perform elective neck dissection for N0 disease. However, recent studies have shown that cervical metastasis rates range from 13.7% to 40%, with an occult nodal metastasis rate of 21.7% to 26%, both of which are comparable to other subsites of the oral cavity.

Wide local excision with negative margins is the treatment of choice for AdCC, MEC, PLGA, LGPA, acinic cell carcinoma, and mucosal melanoma.

Cryotherapy with curettage has been proposed in the literature as an adjuvant treatment for patients with extensive Kaposi’s sarcoma who do not have adequate cosmetic improvement with chemotherapy.

# Radiation Oncology

For high-grade SCC of the palate, adjuvant radiation is often used after surgical resection for positive or close margins, cervical metastasis, perineural invasion, and recurrent disease.

For AdCC, adjuvant chemoradiation is recommended after surgical resection for tumors with close proximity to the skull base, cervical metastasis, perineural invasion, solid-variant histology, and recurrent tumors.

Radiation therapy for MEC is recommended for patients with cervical lymph node metastasis, bony involvement, recurrent disease, positive margins on surgical resection, perineural invasion, lymphovascular invasion, and anaplasia.

Radiation therapy for PLGA has been suggested for cases of positive margins, perineural invasion, and lymph node metastasis.

Unresectable LGPA lesions are treated with radiation therapy with reports showing successful tumor shrinkage when doses of 4000 to 5000 rads are used.

Radiation has not been found to be effective for acinic cell carcinoma.

Radiation therapy has been utilized in mucosal melanoma with one report recommending 25 Gy over 25 fractions.

NHL is treated with a combination of radiation and chemotherapy. Radiation has been reported to be given at a range of 24-45 Gy over 16-25 fractions.

# Medical Oncology

For hard palate SCC with positive margins or extracapsular nodal extension, the addition of concurrent cisplatin-based chemotherapy to radiation therapy has been shown to improve locoregional control and overall survival versus adjuvant radiation alone.

Chemotherapy alone has been reserved as a palliative option for metastatic or recurrent salivary gland tumors that are not amenable to surgery or radiation therapy. No specific chemotherapy regimens have been proposed by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN), and few agents (such as cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil, and doxorubicin) are considered effective in improving overall or disease-free survival.

Systemic therapy for mucosal melanoma has included chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy. Chemotherapy regimens for mucosal melanoma have included 5-fluorouracil, cisplatin, dimethyl triazeno imidazole carboxamide (DTIC), interferon, dacarbazine, nimustine hydrochloride (ANCU), and vincristine.

Chemotherapy is indicated for Kaposi’s sarcoma when there is widespread skin involvement, extensive intraoral disease, symptomatic edema, or rapidly progressive disease. Patients with high-risk factors such as advanced age and poorly controlled AIDS should undergo a combination of HAART and chemotherapy. Chemotherapy regimens have included bleomycin, vinca alkaloids, and Adriamycin.

In addition to radiation therapy, NHL is most commonly treated with a standard chemotherapy regimen involving cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone (CHOP) for 8 cycles over a duration of 3 weeks.

# Staging

Tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging of oral cavity cancers based on American Joint Committee on Cancer 8 edition.

**T Category**

**Tumor Size and Characteristics**

Tx

Primary tumor cannot be assessed

Tis

Carcinoma in-situ

T0

No primary lesion identified

T1

Tumor <2 cm, Depth of Invasion (DOI) <5 mm

T2

Tumor <2 cm, DOI > 5 mm and <10 mm or

Tumor >2 cm but <4 cm and DOI <10 mm

T3

Tumor >4 cm or

Any tumor with DOI >10 mm but <20 mm

T4a

Tumor invades cortical bone of the mandible or maxilla, maxillary sinus, skin of the face, bilateral tongue, and/or DOI >20 mm

T4b

Tumor invades masticator space, pterygoid plates, skull base, and/or encases the internal carotid artery

**Node Category**

**Node Criteria**

cNx

Regional lymph node cannot be assessed

cN0

No regional lymph node metastasis

cN1

Single ipsilateral lymph node<3 cm and Extranodal Extension (ENE) negative

cN2a

Single ipsilateral metastatic node >3 cm but <6 cm, ENE negative

cN2b

Multiple ipsilateral nodes <6 cm, ENE negative

cN2c

Bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes <6 cm, ENE negative

cN3a

Metastatic in any lymph node >6 cm, ENE negative

cN3b

Metastasis in any lymph node, ENE positive

**Metastasis Category**

**Metastasis Criteria**

Mx

Metastasis cannot be assessed

M0

No distant metastasis

M1

Distant metastasis

TNM for mucosal melanoma based on American Joint Committee on Cancer.

**T Category**

**Tumor Size and Characteristics**

T3

Tumors limited to the mucosa and immediate underlying soft tissue

T4a

Tumor involves deep soft tissue, cartilage, bone, or overlying skin

T4b

Tumor involving the brain, dura, skull base, lower cranial nerves (IX, X, XI, XII), masticator space, carotid artery, prevertebral space, or mediastinal structures

**Node Category**

**Node Criteria**

Nx

Regional lymph node cannot be assessed

N0

No regional lymph node metastases

N1

Regional lymphadenopathy present

**Metastasis Category**

**Metastasis Criteria**

Mx

Metastasis cannot be assessed

M0

No distant metastasis

cM1

Distant metastasis

pM1

Distant metastasis, microscopically confirmed

Staging for NHL based on the Lugano classification.

**Stage**

**Nodal Involvement**

**Extra-nodal Involvement**

Stage 1

1 node or group of adjacent nodes

Single extra-nodal lesion without nodal involvement

Stage 2

2 or more nodal groups on the same side of the diaphragm

Stage 1 or 2 with limited contiguous extra-nodal spread

Stage 3

Nodes on both sides of the diaphragm, nodes above diaphragm with spleen involvement

N/A

Stage 4

Wide non-contiguous spread beyond lymph system to bone, liver, lung

N/A

# Prognosis

Malignant tumors of the palate have a wide range of overall prognosis depending on the specific histologies, tumor grade, margin status, cervical metastasis, and recurrence.

Prognosis of specific palatal histologies.

**Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC)**

Negative prognostic factors for SCC include high-grade tumors, advanced T stage, positive margins, cervical metastasis, and local recurrence.

**Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma (AdCC)**

The overall 5-year survival rate for AdCC ranges from 60% to 90% but decreases to 40-50% after 10 years.

**Mucoepidermoid Carcinoma (MEC):**

Low-grade MEC has a 5-year survival rate of over 90% whereas the high-grade variant has a tendency to metastasis and recur locoregionally.MECT1 and MAML2 gene fusion have a better prognosis.

**Polymorphous Low-grade Adenocarcinoma (PLGA):**

Local recurrence has been reported in 9-33% of cases with cervical lymph node metastasis present in 6-35% of cases. Distant metastasis is rare at about 1%.

**Low-grade Papillary Adenocarcinoma (LGPA)**

LGPA has a more aggressive course than PLGA and has an increased tendency for recurrence due to a discontinuous growth pattern.

**Acinic cell carcinoma (ACC)**

ACC has a 5-year overall survival rate of 88.6%. Poor prognostic factors included high tumor grade, advanced T stage, cervical lymph node metastasis, and advanced age.

Mucosal melanoma (MM): The prognosis for mucosa melanoma is poor with a 5-year survival rate of 15%-45%.

**Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS)**

KS has a median survival of 18 months if left untreated.

**Non-Hodgkins Lymphoma (NHL)**

Studies show the 5-year disease-free progression of 88% in NHL of the head and neck after radiation therapy.

# Complications

The most significant complication is a failure to cure the disease due to positive surgical margins, locoregional occurrence, distant metastasis, or development of a second primary cancer.

Acute radiation toxicity is common after a standard course of adjuvant radiation therapy and is non-life-threatening. The introduction of 3D conformal RT (3D-RT) and intensity-modulated RT (IMRT) have significantly reduced the damage to salivary glands and subsequent xerostomia.

Chemotherapy for oral malignancies has been linked to several complications such as mucositis, fungal and viral infections, xerostomia, dysgeusia, malnutrition, and pain.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Patients who undergo treatment for oral malignancies often display long-term impairments in swallow and speech due to resection of anatomic oral structures, soft tissue fibrosis from radiation, and mucositis from chemoradiation. Early consultation with speech and swallow professionals is vital for assisting the patient in regaining some pre-treatment function to prevent malnutrition, aspiration, long-term reliance on enteric feeding, and poor communication.

Recurrence can often occur many years after initial treatment, and continuous follow-up is needed.

# Consultations

Diagnosis and management of palatal malignancies would need to consist of an interprofessional team, including an otolaryngologist, plastic reconstructive surgeon, general surgeon, radiation oncologist, medical oncologist, speech-language pathologist, psychologist, and primary care physician.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education on palatal cancer can be challenging due to the heterogeneous array of pathologic histologies and the need for multidisciplinary and multimodal management. Patients and their families should be educated on the different treatment options and timelines, including surgical resection, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy as well as reconstructive surgery for large palatal defects.

Patients and parents (for minors) should be counseled on the possible risks and complications of all treatment modalities and their comorbidities fully assessed by their primary care physicians to determine if they will be candidates for surgical resection. Cessation counseling for social risk factors such as smoking and alcohol must be provided to reduce the risk of recurrent cancer and poor treatment outcomes. The importance of long-term follow up is crucial for oral malignancies given the high recurrence rates and indolent growth patterns of certain pathologies and must be emphasized to patients.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients with palatal malignancies should be managed by a multidisciplinary team of otolaryngologists, plastic surgeons, general surgeons, pathologists, radiation oncologists, medical oncologists, speech-language pathologists, psychologists, and primary care physicians. Oral palatal malignancies present with varying histologies and severities, often requiring multimodal therapy involving surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy.

Close communication and collaboration between the surgeons, radiation oncologists, and medical oncologists can provide a tailored approach for each patient. Difficulties in swallow and speech are common complaints before and after treatment for oral malignancies. Therefore, patients may need a consultation with general surgery for gastric tube placement to ensure optimal nutrition perioperatively. Early post-treatment intervention by a speech-language pathologist can help patients regain some pre-treatment function to prevent malnutrition, dependence on enteric feeding, and communication difficulties.

Recurrence of palatal malignancies can occur several years, even decades, after initial treatment. Thus, routine close follow-up by the otolaryngologist and primary care physician is advocated. Finally, patients may develop depression, social anxiety, and avoidance due to their cancer diagnosis, visible surgical scarring, and speech difficulties. Formal peer support groups and consultation with a psychologist can aid patients in addressing their concerns.