The liver has a dual blood supply. The portal vein, which is responsible for splenic and intestinal drainage, provides approximately 80% of the blood supply to the liver. The portal vein forms by the union of the splenic vein and the superior mesenteric vein. The inferior mesenteric vein drains into the splenic vein. The hepatic artery supplies the remaining 20%. In most people, the proper hepatic artery branches from the common hepatic artery, which originates at the celiac axis. The proper hepatic artery subdivides into the right and left hepatic arteries, which provide flow to the right and left hepatic lobes, respectively. However, multiple anatomic variations of the right and left hepatic arteries exist; these variants are known as "accessory" or "replaced" vessels. The right hepatic artery is considered accessory or replaced when it originates from the proximal aspect of the superior mesenteric artery, while the left gastric artery is often the origin of an accessory or replaced left hepatic artery.

Three hepatic veins allow for drainage of the liver. The liver is divided into anterior and posterior segments by the right hepatic vein. The left hepatic vein separates the liver into medial and lateral segments. The middle hepatic vein lies in the same plane as the inferior vena cava and the gallbladder fossa; it partitions the liver into the right and left lobes. The portal vein does not provide venous hepatic drainage, but it does divide the organ into the upper and lower hepatic segments.

There are multiple classification schemes for describing the various portions of the liver; the Couinaud system is the most widely used. According to Couinaud, the liver is divided into eight independent functional sections. Each section has its own portal pedicle comprised of a branch of the right or left hepatic artery, a branch of the portal vein, a hepatic venous branch, and a bile duct. The sections are numbered in a clockwise manner. The caudate lobe is segment I. Segment II is the anterior segment of the left lobe, and segment III is the posterior segment of the left lobe. The medial segment of the left lobe is segment IV. Together, segments II, III, and IV represent the left lobe of the liver. Conversely, the right lobe is comprised of segments V and VIII anteriorly and segments VI and VII posteriorly. Classification of these various segments of liver anatomy is important to both radiologists and surgeons alike, especially for preprocedural localization of focal hepatic lesions.