Optimal care for patients with osteopetrosis is best delivered by an interprofessional team consisting of nurses, pharmacists, physical therapists, and physicians of a variety of specialties. This interprofessional team design allows for these sometimes complex patients to have patient-centered care that hopefully leads to improved outcomes.

Diagnosis is often made by clinical and radiographic assessment by a primary care physician, pediatrician, emergency medicine physician, or orthopedic surgeon, depending on age and symptoms at initial presentation. These patients will almost all require hospitalization at some point in their life secondary, either medical or orthopedic complications. The nursing staff must have an understanding of these patients and the physiologic mechanism that makes them prone to fracture to provide optimal care. The same applies to physical therapists when performing physical activity with these patients during rehab. Pharmacists guide complex medical treatment in patients with the malignant, autosomal recessive form of the disease.

Regardless of the specialty of the provider that initially discovers this condition, they must communicate with the other specialties needed to provide optimal care for these patients. These patients will almost all require orthopedic care. In addition, neurosurgeons may be required for worsening cranial compression neuropathies, and ophthalmologists and dentists are needed to provide maintenance and surveillance care for these at-risk patients. Care for these patients with osteopetrosis is truly a team effort, and interprofessional communication is a must.