The diagnosis of T1DM is usually through a characteristic history supported by elevated serum glucose levels (fasting glucose greater than 126 mg/dL, random glucose over 200 mg/dL, or hemoglobin A1C (HbA1c exceeding 6.5%) with or without antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) and insulin.

Fasting glucose levels and HbA1c testing are useful for the early identification of T2DM. If borderline, a glucose tolerance test is an option to evaluate both fasting glucose levels and serum response to an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). Prediabetes, which often precedes T2DM, presents with a fasting blood glucose level of 100 to 125 mg/dL or a 2-hour post-oral glucose tolerance test (post-OGTT) glucose level of 140 to 200 mg/dL.

According to the American Diabetes Association (ADA), a diagnosis of diabetes is through any of the following: An HbA1c level of 6.5% or higher; A fasting plasma glucose level of 126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L) or higher (no caloric intake for at least 8 hours); A two-hour plasma glucose level of 11.1 mmol/L or 200 mg/dL or higher during a 75-g OGTT; A random plasma glucose of 11.1 mmol/L or 200 mg/dL or higher in a patient with symptoms of hyperglycemia (polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, weight loss) or hyperglycemic crisis.

To test for gestational diabetes, all pregnant patients have screening between 24 to 28 weeks of gestation with a 1-hour fasting glucose challenge test. If blood glucose levels are over 140mg/dL, patients have a 3-hour fasting glucose challenge test to confirm a diagnosis. A positive 3-hours OGTT test is when there is at least one abnormal value (greater than or equal to 180, 155, and 140 mg/dL for fasting one-hour, two-hour, and 3-hour plasma glucose concentration, respectively).

Several lab tests are useful in the management of chronic DM. Home glucose testing can show trends of hyper- and hypoglycemia. The HbA1c test indicates the extent of glycation due to hyperglycemia over three months (the life of the red blood cell). Urine albumin testing can identify the early stages of diabetic nephropathy. Since patients with diabetes are also prone to cardiovascular disease, serum lipid monitoring is advisable at the time of diagnosis. Similarly, some recommend monitoring thyroid status by obtaining a blood level of thyroid-stimulating hormone annually due to a higher incidence of hypothyroidism.