Managing malignant pleural effusion requires a multidisciplinary approach with coordinated care between a pediatric hematologist-oncologist, a pediatric surgeon, and an interventional radiologist. The most common cause of MPE in a pediatric population is non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The initial chemotherapy treatment should be directed towards the primary cause of the effusion.

Thoracocentesis

The main goals of thoracentesis are:

- Removal of the pleural effusion

- Clinical improvement in symptoms

- The prevention of  fluid re-accumulation

Thoracentesis for MPE is for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Most patients with MFE will have a mass in the thoracic cavity causing respiratory compromise and difficulty breathing. Mild effusion can be monitored with serial x-ray and chest ultrasound while the patient is undergoing chemotherapy. For moderate to large effusion, thoracentesis using the Seldinger technique can be utilized. For patients with large pleural effusion, it is better to remove the fluid slowly, as aggressive removal of pleural fluid might lead to re-expansion of pulmonary edema, which can also compromise the respiratory status of the patient.

In the absence of immediate improvement following the thoracentesis, alternative causes of symptoms, including non-expandable lungs, severe cardiopulmonary failure, and lymphangitic cancer, should be considered. However, in terms of immediate symptoms improvement, patients should still be monitored for the clinical recurrence of dyspnea and chest pain. The presence of any evidence of sign and or symptom recurrence dictates the follow-up with chest x-ray, chest CT or chest ultrasound. The recurrence of pleural effusion should be differentiated from the alternative causalities, including but not limited to the non-expandable lungs and severe cardiopulmonary failure.

If the recurrence is acute within the first month following the thoracentesis, the patient should be evaluated for intra-pleural catheter placement and drainage. Intrapleural catheter placement is generally recommended in these circumstances and has several advantages, including;1. a minimally invasive procedure, 2. it offers spontaneous pleurodesis, and 3. IPC can be performed in an outpatient setting along with pleurodesis.

**Tube Thoracostomy******

For patients with a short life expectancy and recurrent MFE or very young patients under moderate anesthesia, a tube thoracostomy can be performed under local anesthesia. A 7 to 16 Fr chest tube can be utilized for drainage. The tube is usually inserted in the fourth or fifth intercostal space along the anterior or middle auxiliary line. The tube should not be in place for too long because of the risk of infection, bleeding, or pneumothorax.

Chest tube or small-bore catheter drainage is considered an alternative to large volume thoracentesis. Chest tube drainage might be specifically performed in patients with large fluid volumes. A consistent and slow rate of pleural fluid removal might be planned for this group of patients.

**Pleurodesis**

After the evacuation of MFE, the next step, depending on the life expectancy of the patient, is pleurodesis. Pleurodesis is the obliteration of the pleural space with the sole purpose of preventing reaccumulation of pleural fluid. This is for patients who are expected to survive for more than 3 months.

Several agents can be used for pleurodesis.

**Chemical Pleurodesis
**

Agents for chemical pleurodesis include:

- Bleomycin

- Tetracycline/doxycycline

- Corynebacterium parvum extract

- Silver nitrate

- Iodopovidone, quinacrine

- Interferons

- Interleukin-2

Bleomycin as an agent for pleurodesis has a relatively high success rate in adults, close to 60% to 80%.

**Talc
**

Talc is also another effective substance that is widely used for pleurodesis. It can be applied as a powder or slurry. As a powder, talc is introduced into the pleural cavity in the form of powder to irritate to opposing surface and seal the pleural cavity. A slurry combines talc in 5% dextrose and a local anesthetic agent that can be instilled into the pleural cavity as a sealant.

The procedure can be done conventionally or with video-assisted thoracoscopy (VAT).

**Tunneled Indwelling Pleural Catheter**

For a palliative purpose, patients with recurrent MFE can have a tunneled indwelling pleural catheter inserted under local anesthesia or moderate sedation. Intermittent catheter drainage can be done by a family member or qualified healthcare professional.

**Complications**

- Pneumothorax

- Hemothorax

- Empyema

- Obstruction with the development of tension pleural effusion

This palliative treatment method has become popular as patients can be managed in an outpatient setting. Consequently, costs are less due to shorter hospitalization and reduced recovery time.

**Pleuroperitoneal Shunt**

This is a palliative measure that can be used for patients who are not candidates for pleurodesis. The procedure creates a chronic drainage system that connects the pleural and peritoneal cavity. It is rarely used in the pediatric population and only as a palliative measure in adults.

In summary:

- Thoracentesis: Repeated aspiration of MPE is indicated for patients with a limited lifespan and is justified to provide symptomatic relief

- Thoracostomy:  Indicated if survival is about a month or more to justify the risk and or benefit of thoracostomy

- Pleurodesis: Indicated if survival is more tthan2 to 3 months.