Debriefing can be used to understand how learners make medical decisions by evaluating the medical knowledge, interpersonal, and communication skills that comprise them. Instructors should ask learners open-ended questions that help them self-reflect about their performance. A method of debriefing termed “debriefing with good judgment” is best suited for this, being direct but non-confrontational. In this model, the instructor determines the mental model, or frame, of the learner; this allows the instructor to understand why the learner took specific actions during the scenario. While still valuing the frame of the learner, even if it was misguided, the instructor reconciles it with their own frame for the scenario and makes a clear teaching point.et al. (2014) found that surveyed first-year residents rated debriefing as a program highlight of their pilot simulation program.

Simulation can be useful for leadership training. There are many situations in medicine that require leadership, particularly medical emergencies such as cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Third-year internal medicine residents were divided into simulation and lecture groups to study the effect of simulation on leadership performance during several scenarios of cardiopulmonary arrest. The simulation group attended two two-hour simulation sessions, while the lecture-based group attended two two-hour lectures. Crisis resource management (CRM) skills such as calling for help, assigning tasks, and asking for input from the group were assessed six months after the intervention and again one month before the residents graduated. The group that underwent simulation training demonstrated significantly better performance in several areas of CRM, including requesting the roles of the arriving code team personnel, assigning patient care tasks, and asking the team for suggestions. Furthermore, these same residents who had participated in simulation showed better communication skills such as requesting and receiving information from the team.

Interpersonal and communication skills are required to become board certified in any specialty though internists certainly need strong skills to interact well with clinical staff and patients. Simulation can be used to improve communication. For example, otolaryngology residents improved their communication skills in just three half-days of simulated sessions over the span of three years. In this study, the residents participated in simulations with standardized patients. The cases featured difficult ethical situations that the residents had to navigate and demonstrate their communication skills. A debriefing followed the scenarios with a faculty member on how to improve communication. The overall rating of communication by medical observers significantly improved each year of the study. Even residents who obtained low scores in their first year were able to achieve the average level of performance of their colleagues in subsequent years.