A typical patient with Wallenberg syndrome is an elderly patient with vascular risk factors. Like any stroke syndrome, the onset is acute. The most common symptoms of onset are dizziness with vertigo, loss of balance with gait instability, hoarseness of voice, and difficulty swallowing. The symptoms often progress over several hours to sometimes a couple of days.

Usually, no weakness is associated with this syndrome, so this condition is often misdiagnosed or missed. A careful neurological examination is a key to the diagnosis. Complete Wallenberg syndrome is not common, yet partial syndromes are satisfactory for the diagnosis most of the time. The critical points in clinical diagnosis are a combination of crossed hemiparesis or hemianesthesia to indicate a brainstem lesion and the involvement of structures in the posterolateral medulla to localize, wherein the brainstem.

Different combinations of the following deficits may be elicited in Wallenberg syndrome:

On the side of the lesion:

- Vertigo with nystagmus (inferior vestibular nucleus and pathways): nystagmus is typically central, beating to the direction of gaze. Nausea and vomiting, and sometimes hiccups, are associated with vertigo. Hiccups can often be intractable.

- Dysphonia, dysarthria, and dysphagia (different nuclei and fibers of the IX and X nerves), often present with ipsilateral loss of the gag reflex

- Horner syndrome; miosis, ptosis, and anhydrosis (sympathetic fibers)

- Ipsilateral ataxia with a tendency to fall to the ipsilateral side (inferior cerebellar hemisphere, spinocerebellar fibers, and inferior cerebellar peduncle)

- Pain and numbness with impaired facial sensation on the face (descending trigeminal tract)

- Impaired taste sensation (involvement of nucleus tractus solitarius)

On the contralateral side:

- Impaired pain and temperature sensation in the arms and legs (spinothalamic tract)

- It is important to note that there is no or only minimal weakness of the contralateral side (corticospinal fibers are ventral in location)

It is clinically interesting to note that more rostral lesions tend to be more ventrally located. These patients present with significant dysphagia and dysphonia due to the involvement of the nucleus ambiguus. More caudal lesions involve more dorsolateral structures. These patients present with vertigo, ataxia, nausea/vomiting, and Horner syndrome.