Distinguishing difficult intubation from difficult ventilation is important. If the patient is difficult to intubate, adequacy of bag-mask ventilation becomes paramount especially if the patient is already paralyzed or not breathing on their own. This technique requires a mask attached to a self-inflating bag with an oxygen source. The bag is placed over the nose and mouth, and the non-dominant hand is used to create a seal with the face and provide chin lift. The thumb and forefinger are used to seal the mask to the face. The other three fingers should be positioned on the bone, with the fifth finger under the angle of the mandible providing lift. It is vital that the pressure is applied to the mandibular bone as soft tissue manipulation can easily occlude the airway. The right hand is used to squeeze the bag and provide positive pressure ventilation. In some cases two person ventilation may be required which require one person to use both hands must be used to provide an adequate seal on the mask and to provide enough chin lift while another person provides tidal breaths. Two-person ventilation is required more often in patients who are obese and in those whom it is difficult to provide optimal seal. It is vital that a call for help should be made immediately if a difficult airway is identified. A skilled practitioner can support a patient for prolonged periods of time with bag-mask ventilation alone. If the unanticipated difficult airway arises, bag-mask ventilation can provide adequate oxygenation while equipment is retrieved or more skilled providers arrive for intubation

Practitioners who are not regularly performing intubations should not attempt a difficult airway unless it is an emergency. Failed intubation attempts lead to increased gastric insufflation, trauma to the posterior pharynx, increased blood and secretions in the airway, and edema to the subglottic structures which can make subsequent intubation more difficult or complete airway obstruction. In this instance, a surgical airway may be obtained immediately.

After a difficult airway is identified, one needs to determine what equipment is available to make informed decisions about how to proceed. Preferably, this is done before there is an immediate threat of desaturation. For each practitioner, the difficult airway tools used will be those which they are most familiar with and have achieved the best results with anecdotally. The options include the intubating laryngeal mask airway, fiberoptic bronchoscope, intubating stylet, articulating laryngoscope, video laryngoscope, and cricothyroidotomy.

If the patient is breathing spontaneously, consideration should be made to postpone the administration of neuromuscular blocking drugs. Often, in traumatic airways, the only way to identify the tracheal opening is to watch the subglottic area for spontaneous respiration. In elective intubations, the patient with a history of difficult intubation can be intubated while awake. The airway is prepped with nebulized viscous lidocaine 10-15 mL for 15 minutes to achieve proper anesthetic of the buccal, subglottic, and tracheal anatomy. A fiber-optic bronchoscope with a preloaded endotracheal tube is introduced through the oropharynx. The vocal cords are identified, and the scope is passed through the vocal cords. After visualization of the tracheal rings, an endotracheal tube is passed over the bronchoscope, and position is confirmed through direct visualization. The bronchoscope is removed, and the patient is sedated immediately and supplemental ventilation is provided. Fiber-optic bronchoscopy is disadvantageous as it requires considerable experience to be performed successfully.  It can also be difficult to visualize laryngeal structures when the airway is bloody or full of secretions since the aspiration port on the scope is small, and it can be difficult to suction large volumes or thick mucus.

In an emergency situation, the patient should have the buccal cavity suctioned completely, and bag-mask ventilation should be attempted. If bag-mask ventilation is successful, direct laryngoscopy can be performed. If direct laryngoscopy fails because the vocal cords cannot be visualized due to an anterior larynx, an articulating laryngoscope blade may provide a better view. This blade has a lever attached to the tip which allows the tip a greater range of anterior motion thus elevating the epiglottis and allowing visualization of the vocal cords. If direct laryngoscopy fails, a lighted scope may make the visualization of the cords easier. The endotracheal tube can then be placed under direct video guidance using the specialized, rigid stylet that is placed inside the endotracheal tube. If a lighted scope is not available, placement of an intubating LMA may be done. This device is placed in the posterior pharynx, and the patient can be ventilated through the device. It should be noted that LMAs do not provide a protected airway, and the patient is at risk of aspiration. The iLMA is designed to accept a specific endotracheal tube that should be kept in the same package which passes through the LMA and may blindly enter the trachea based on the appropriate positioning of the tip of the device in the esophagus. The Combitube functions similarly to this in that it is placed blindly. The tip is placed into the esophagus, and the distal balloon inflated, sealing the esophagus. A proximal balloon is then inflated, and the result is the lumen of the ventilatory circuit isolated around the larynx. Positive pressure can then be applied to ventilate the patient. This device also is easily displaced, and other difficulties with cuff pressures can disrupt the mucosal membranes in which they come into contact. A Combitube should not be considered a long-term solution; it does not protect from aspiration.

Another option is the intubating stylet. This small-diameter plastic tube is hollow and has an adapter that allows ventilation. The benefit to this device is that it is more flexible than an ETT and can be passed through small openings when tracheal intubation is impossible with a regular ETT. It can also accept a pre-applied curvature to allow access to an anterior vocal cord position. A standard ETT can be passed over the intubating stylet if long-term ventilation is necessary.

If all else fails, and the patient cannot be ventilated or intubated, a surgical airway is necessary. If a potentially difficult airway is identified, a surgeon should be made aware early. There are also kits available using a Seldinger technique, with a needle inserted through the cricothyroid membrane. On successful aspiration of air, a wire is passed into the trachea, and the needle removed. A small incision is made in the skin, and a dilator is passed over the wire. This should produce a large air leak on positive ventilation, confirming the placement. Then a cricothyrotomy tube is passed through the opening and the patient ventilated. Proper placement of an airway device should always be confirmed with an end-tidal carbon dioxide (CO2) device immediately.