When working up the differential diagnosis for FUO, it is important to remember that the cause is more likely a subtle or atypical manifestation of a common disease rather than a rare disease. Diagnosing a cause of FUO can be a cumbersome task and requires repeated diligent and thorough history taking along with a complete physical examination.

**Non-invasive Tests**

Initial diagnostic testing should include:

- Complete blood count with differential

- Complete metabolic panel

- Urine analysis with microscopy and urine culture

- Three sets of blood cultures (from different sites, several hours apart, and prior to initiation of antibiotic therapy)

- Chest radiograph

- Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)

- C-reactive protein (CRP)

- Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)

- Creatinine phosphokinase

- ANA

- Rheumatoid factor

- Cytomegalovirus IgM/PCR

- Heterophile antibody test

- Tuberculin skin test or interferon-gamma release assay

- HIV immunoassay

- CT scan of the abdomen

- CT scan of the chest

- Cardiac echocardiography can be helpful if culture-negative endocarditis or atrial myxoma is suspected.

To diagnose FUO, the non-invasive testing outlined above should have been inconclusive. At this point, a clinician should exclude surreptitious manipulation of the thermometer and analyze patients' medication lists to evaluate for drug-induced fevers.

**Nuclear Medicine Tests**

In the past, nuclear medicine testing was generally reserved for cases that remain undiagnosed after thorough initial evaluation. Recent European studies suggest utilizing fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET)/CT scan earlier in FUO workup, if available.

If FDG-PET is not available, labeled leukocyte studies could be used as an alternative; however, they might have a lower diagnostic yield. Gallium- and indium-labeled leukocyte studies are highly sensitive but not specific enough for establishing a diagnosis. However, these tests are helpful to localize the involved site for a targeted evaluation with a CT scan. Note that indium scans have a high rate of false negatives with bone infections. Positron emission tomography can aid in detecting obscure infections or malignancies.

**Invasive Tests**

The most common invasive tests associated with FUO are biopsies of lymph nodes, liver,  bone marrow, epididymal nodule, and temporal artery. These tests are performed only if the clinical picture or initial tests reveal findings that require histopathological evaluation. Biopsies are most commonly used to diagnose malignancy, certain infections, myeloproliferative disorders, and inflammatory conditions causing FUO. For example, temporal artery biopsy should be considered in a patient older than 60 years old and with significantly elevated ESR, particularly, if there are other symptoms suggestive of giant cell arteritis. Additionally, if the physical examination reveals lymphadenopathy in a patient with FUO, lymph node biopsy is recommended and may reveal definitive etiology of fever.

Endoscopic examination of the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract should be done, including retrograde cholangiography when indicated as for Crohn disease, biliary tract disease, and gastrointestinal tumors. Crohn disease is the most common gastrointestinal cause of FUO. Diarrhea and other abdominal symptoms are sometimes absent in young adults.