The mechanism of pulsus bisferiens is not entirely understood. A normal central pulse has two waves; a percussion wave (larger) and a tidal wave (smaller). It is not easy to distinguish them clinically, as it happens in quick succession. But in some pathological conditions, these are exaggerated by a wider mid-systolic gap leading to two distinct waves.

It is postulated that a large, rapidly ejected left ventricular stroke volume is associated with left ventricular changes in pressure over time, resulting in percussion waves. The second wave (tidal wave) is caused by the backpressure exerted by the recoil of arterial musculature. Katz et al. (1927) also described the theory of a venturi effect caused by the high flow of blood in the ascending aorta. This theory has not received much attention from researchers.

- **Mixed Aortic Valve Disease:**In patients with aortic regurgitation with aortic stenosis, a regurgitant stroke volume results in smaller peak waves (percussion wave), and aortic stenosis results in mid-systolic dip followed by a taller second wave (tidal wave) in systole.

- **Hypertrophic Obstructive Cardiomyopathy (HOCM):**Rapid ventricular ejection results in a larger percussion wave, whereas outflow obstruction leads to a mid-systolic gap followed by a second smaller tidal wave.

- **Patent Ductus Arteriosus (PDA):**Newborns presenting with severe PDA (large left-to-right shunt), a large stroke volume results in a taller first wave (percussion wave), and large runoff resulting in a second smaller wave (tidal wave).