Arsenic is a naturally occurring metalloid element that comes in three major forms: inorganic, organic and arsine gas (-3 oxidative state), as well as three major valence states arsenic element (0), arsenite (trivalent +3) and arsenate (pentavalent +5). In general trivalent arsenic compounds; inorganic (arsenite) and organic (monomethyl arsenic) are considered more toxic than pentavalent compounds. Inorganic arsenic is generally considered to be more toxic than organic form.

Crustaceans and other fish are a known source of organic arsenic exposure; however, in this form, the toxicity is considered to be negligible.

Estimates are that sixty to ninety percent of inorganic arsenic gets absorbed through the GI tract, with initial distribution predominantly going to the liver, kidney, muscle, and skin. Respiratory and parenteral routes may also absorb arsenic.

Dermal penetration of intact skin has not been shown to pose a risk for acute toxicity secondary to poor absorption by the integumentary system. Still, caution is necessary when handling known arsenic contaminates. Hand washing with soap and water is adequate for removal of dermal exposure.

Excretion of arsenic is dependant on valence state and form. Arsenite the (trivalent form) has a slower excretion rate compared to arsenate the (pentavalent form) and organic arsenic, which may contribute to arsenite's increased toxicity compared to arsenate and organic arsenic.

Excretion primarily occurs in the renal system. Inorganic arsenic is eliminated slowly from the renal system with only an estimated 30% eliminated within the first week.