Viral encephalitis is a serious disorder, and the morbidity and mortality depend on the type of virus and the severity of the infection. Viral encephalitis may primarily involve the brain but has repercussions in many other organs; hence an interprofessional approach in management is key. It has been estimated that a single bout of viral encephalitis can cost upwards of $2 million to the healthcare system. For patients who are untreated, mortality rates can be high. Mortality after herpes encephalitis can range more than 50%, and after western equine encephalitis, children may develop marked behavior changes and seizures. The eastern equine encephalitis can also have crippling effects on children including paralysis, seizures and mental retardation. The recent Zika virus epidemic has resulted in microcephaly in newborn infants. However, mortality is low with the La Crosse and the Venezuelan equine virus. Recent data reveal that the tick-borne encephalitis from the Orient is far more dangerous than the central European tick-borne encephalitis. Patients who acquire the Asian tick-borne encephalitis often have residual seizures for a long time.

The key to viral encephalitis is prevention. Surveillance of mosquitoes must be done to assess the risk of infectivity. The primary care provider, infectious disease nurse, and pharmacist should educate travelers on how to prevent mosquito bites.

Travelers should wear protective garments to prevent mosquito bite and sleep under a mosquito net. One should also avoid outdoor activities where the risk of tick-borne infections is high. The public has to remove containers of stagnant water from the home surroundings, and insecticide spraying may help. Vaccines are available against the EEE, WEE and VEE. However, their effectiveness is not 100%.

Given the fact that complications may arise following encephalitis, establishing an interprofessional team to monitor and treat the patient is necessary. In addition to the clinical team, the other members should be therapists, rehab specialists and speech therapists