The timing of reconstructive surgical intervention is controversial. Proponents of early intervention hypothesize that mandibular asymmetry worsens over time as the affected side undergoes minimal growth, resulting in secondary deformities. They propose that early intervention can improve growth potential, masticatory function, dental development, and patient self-confidence.

Supporters of delayed surgical intervention recommend correction upon skeletal and dental maturity (age 15 in boys and 13 to 15 in girls) to avoid relapse of asymmetry and need for additional surgery as well as decreased blood loss and improved patient compliance. Large systematic reviews have concluded no evidence in supporting early surgical reconstruction and recommend postponing surgery until completion of dental and bony growth.

The timeline for treatment depends on the patient's age and severity of malformations. During infancy, indicated interventions include correction of cleft lip and palate, hearing aids for hearing loss, osteotomies for significant orbital dystopia and plagiocephaly, and mandible distraction for patients with severe retrognathia resulting in respiratory or feeding difficulties. During the skeletal growth phase from ages 6 to 12, reconstruction of the malformed auricle or placement of a prosthesis is recommended.

Maxilla and mandible defects can be addressed with orthodontic devices. Costochondral grafts or mandibular distraction can also be considered. In adolescence and adulthood, definitive reconstruction surgery of the facial skeleton to improve facial asymmetry and occlusion is recommended along with soft tissue augmentation using free tissue transfer or fat grafting. Any revision surgeries can also be done at this time.