Mutations of the LAMA2 gene account for the etiology of merosin-deficient congenital muscular dystrophy (MDC1A) or LAMA2-related muscular dystrophy (LAMA2 MD). Identification of these mutations has been revealed through numerous molecular diagnostic techniques, including array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) and next-generation sequencing (NGS), to improve clinical management and guide genetic counseling.

CGH was developed to identify copy-number variations (CNV) within a genome. This technique hybridizes differentially labeled genomic DNA from a test and reference source to arrays of genomic clones or metaphase chromosomes. The labeled DNA binds to its respective locus of origin, and the resulting fluorescent intensity is directly proportional to the ratio of CNV relative to the corresponding DNA of the two sources. CGH aims to compare two genomic DNA samples from two different but often related sources and identify differences within whole or subchromosomal regions. CGH provides a measure of detecting chromosomal differences between two sources as well as an approach to associating disease phenotypes to the localization of specific genes. CGH is, however, limited as it can only detect unbalanced chromosomal aberrations as reciprocal translocations, inversions, or ring chromosomes do not affect changing CNV.

Next-generation sequencing allows for high-throughput data collection and analysis of mutations by detecting nucleotide substitutions and small insertions/deletions (indels). NGS sequences millions of DNA fragments in parallel and utilizes bioinformatic analytical programs to piece the numerous fragments relative to the known human genome. These fragments are often sequenced multiple times to ensure high fidelity accuracy.

In the clinical setting, MDC1A patients will have elevated serum levels of creatine kinase (CK). Diagnostic imaging such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with diffusion-weighted imaging may also reveal abnormal intensities in white matter. The clinical diagnosis may warrant direct genetic testing rather than an invasive muscle biopsy.