Bradykinin plays a prominent role in the pathophysiology of C1 esterase inhibitor deficiency; this is an autosomal dominant hereditary disease that presents with recurrent episodes of angioedema without urticaria of the face, extremities, oropharynx, and abdomen. It can also cause angioedema of the gastrointestinal tract, which manifests with severe abdominal pain as well as gastrointestinal upset. These episodes of angioedema are often preceded by a period of fatigue and flu-like symptoms. When assessing a patient with angioedema, the airway requires examination, and patient intubation may be necessary.

C1 esterase deficiency is a complement regulatory protein deficiency that causes hereditary angioedema. C1 esterase is a protein inhibitor; it inhibits the complement system to prevent spontaneous activation of the complement system. Without the C1 esterase inhibitor, there is unchecked activation of C1, C2, and C4 complement proteins before other inhibitors can stop the cascade.

Angioedema is due to the unregulated activation of kallikrein. This activation of kallikrein increases levels of bradykinin because kallikrein activates bradykinin. This excessive bradykinin induces increases permeability, increased vasodilation, and increased pain.

Decreased levels of C4 complement characterize this disease, because without the C1 esterase inhibitor to inhibit spontaneous activation of the complement system such that there is unchecked activation of C1, C2, and C4, and these complement proteins get consumed as they are activated, decreasing their levels. Thus, decreased C4 and C2 protein levels are the best initial tests. However, C1 inhibitor deficiency would be unlikely if C4 levels were detected to be at normal levels. If the initial test indicates decreased levels of C4 complement protein, a confirmatory diagnostic test should follow, and confirmation of C1 esterase deficiency would show by decreased C1 inhibitor antigenic levels and decreased C1 inhibitor functional levels.

In C1 esterase deficiency, there is an excessive buildup of bradykinin. Therefore, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are contraindicated for patients with this disease, as ACE inhibitors also have the risk of increasing bradykinin further, which would then exacerbate the manifestations of the patient’s C1 esterase deficiency due to excessive inflammation. This exacerbation is because ACE inactivates bradykinin, thus, inhibiting the ACE enzyme inhibits this inactivation, which would allow for the continuation of bradykinin, leading to angioedema.