CRPS occurs as a result of varying degrees or types of tissue trauma but has even been documented in the absence of injury or due to periods of prolonged immobilization. The most common injury associated with developing CRPS is a fracture. Surgery is another common etiology. Other common inciting injuries or insults include sprains, contusions, crush injuries, and surgery. CPRS even has been reported to arise after seemingly innocuous interventions such as intravenous line placement. Increased psychological distress experienced during the physical injury associated with the onset of CRPS may affect its severity and prognosis.

**Fracture**

CRPS has been noted to be commonly associated with extremity fractures. A large multicenter prospective study found that 48.5% of patients developed CRPS (IASP criteria) after suffering a single fracture of the ankle, wrist, scaphoid, or the fifth metatarsal. All patients remained symptomatic at 1-year follow-up. Rheumatoid arthritis and intraarticular ankle fractures and dislocations were identified as risk factors for CRPS. However, no significant difference for disease onset was noted between fractures of arms or legs.

Some studies in patients who developed CRPS after fracture of the distal radius identified higher age, social or psychological factors, and psychiatric comorbidities as risk factors.

**Surgery**

Like fractures, extremity surgeries also seem to be more commonly associated with the development of CRPS. In a retrospective study of 390 patients who underwent foot and/or ankle surgeries, 4.36% developed CRPS.

**Genetics**

The impact of genetic factors in the development of CRPS is yet unclear. Human leukocyte antigen and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) polymorphism have been found to play a role in CRPS. These factors can lead to an earlier age of onset and more severe symptoms. Familial inheritance has been suggested by a few retrospective reports.