While there is a significant overlap, most inflammatory arthropathies can be classified based on history and physical examination. The onset of symptoms is usually acute in infectious and crystalline arthropathies while subacute or insidious in most autoimmune inflammatory arthropathies. Infectious arthritis is usually monoarticular. Crystalline arthropathies can be monoarticular, oligoarticular, or polyarticular.  While most autoimmune inflammatory arthropathies are polyarticular, they may initially have an oligoarticular or a monoarticular presentation gradually evolving into a polyarticular pattern. Bacterial infectious arthritis is more common in previously damaged joints and lower extremities such as knees. Inflammatory arthritis in Lyme disease usually presents as acute onset monoarticular inflammation of the knee.

Inflammatory arthritis secondary to viruses such as hepatitis B, hepatitis C, parvovirus B19 is usually polyarticular and may mimic rheumatoid arthritis. 50% of gout patients present with podagra, which is acute onset inflammatory arthritis of the 1st metatarsophalangeal joint in the foot. The 1st metatarsophalangeal joint is eventually involved in 90% of the patients with gout. Pseudogout is more common in the knees, wrists, and 2nd and 3rd metacarpophalangeal joints of the hands. Basic calcium phosphate disease more commonly involves the shoulders. Rheumatoid arthritis typically involves small joints of the upper and lower extremities but spares the spine (except C1-C2) and distal interphalangeal joints in the hands.  Patients with seronegative spondyloarthropathies may have axial involvement and peripheral inflammatory arthritis, these patients as a predilection for lower extremity joints. Enthesitis and dactylitis may be seen frequently in seronegative spondyloarthropathies.  Patients with inflammatory arthritis associated with other connective tissue diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus usually have other systemic clinical features such as skin rashes in systemic lupus erythematosus, sclerodactyly in systemic sclerosis, keratoconjunctivitis sicca in Sjogren syndrome, etc.

Thus, knowledge about the onset of arthritis, number of joints involved, symmetry of involvement, distribution of involvement, and pattern of involvement can give clues about the potential underlying etiology of inflammatory arthritis in a patient.