Sex cord-stromal tumors have their origin in the supporting tissue of testicles, including Leydig-Seroli and granulosa-cell tumors. Other tumors include tunica vaginalis malignant mesothelioma, adenocarcinoma rete testes, and para-testicular rhabdomyosarcoma.

**A) Leydig cell tumor:**(LCT) Leydig cells produce testosterone. Their location is the testicular interstitium.

**Gross**

- 3 to 5 cm, circumscribed, solid, yellow-tan

- 3% bilateral

- 10% malignant (adults mostly)

**Histology**

- Diffuse/nodular

- In the nodular pattern, stroma may be showing extensive hyalinization & forming wide bands.

- Gross: lobulations, hemorrhage/necrosis (about 30%)

- Cells: large, polygonal, abundant mildly granular and eosinophilic cytoplasm, which sometimes is clear with an abundance of lipids

- Nucleus: round with one prominent nucleolus

**Reinke crystals**(eosinophilic) present in about 33% of cases. Highly characteristic of Leydig cells but are not diagnostic of malignancy.

- Lipochrome(pigment) may be present (10% to 15% cases)

**Cytogenetics**

- Commonest: gain of chromosome X, 19, and 19p and loss of chromosome 8 and 16

- A few cases of childhood tumors: acquired missense mutations in codon 578 of the gene for luteinizing hormone/choriogonadotropin receptor (LHCGR)

- Rare: FH-gene mutation, which can be sporadic or spectrum of hereditary leiomyomatosis and RCC (renal cell carcinoma) syndrome

**B)****Sertoli cell tumor**: It is derived from Sertoli cells. Their location is in seminiferous tubules, and they support spermatogenesis. Classification can be into large-cell calcifying or sclerosing type. But, maximum SCTs do not accommodate either of these categories. Hence, they are called NOS (not otherwise specified). Sclerosing variants is the least common.

**Gross Characteristics**

- Typically unilateral, except the tumors in association with Peutz-Jegher syndrome or large calcifying

- Mean diameter- 3.5 cm (smaller in Peutz-Jeghers)

- Well circumscribed, lobulated, yellow, tan or white surface cross-section

**Histology**

- Nodulated/diffuse with round/elongated hollow, solid (size/shape may be irregular) or retiform tubules

- Predominantly cordlike/solid

- Single line cuboid/columnar cells line tubules

- The cytoplasm has moderate/abundant eosinophilia/ paleness (lipid accumulation which may form large vacuoles)

- Stroma: edema/hyalinization/sclerosis maybe there

**Cytogenetics**

- Commonest: gain of chromosome X, loss of portion/entire chromosome 2 and 19

- NOS & sclerosing subtype show CTNNB1 mutation

**C) Granulosa cell tumors**: Granulosa cells are not native to testes. Quite rare compared to the female variant. The juvenile type occurs in males in the early months of life

**1)****Adult GCT**

**Gross characters**

- Large (10 to 14 cm)

- Homogeneous, yellow-gray/white, firm & lobulated

- Cysts may be present

**Histology**

- Similar to ovarian adult GCTs

- Diffuse/microfollicular with Call-Exner bodies

- Cells: scant cytoplasm with elongated nuclei & multiple grooves

- Low rate of mitosis

- Sometimes show prominent fibro-thecomatous background like in ovary

**Cytogenetics**

- Acquired FOXL2mutations (less than ovarian tumors)

**2)****Juvenile GCT:**

**Gross**

- Up to 6.5 cm

- Solid, cystic or both

**Histology**

- Solid, nodular or follicular

- Follicles: contain basophilic/eosinophilic secretions (mucicarmine positive)

- Mitoses are commonly seen in contrast with adult-type

- Extensive hyalinization and myxoid background can be there

**D) Mixed and Unclassified**

Contain multiple components having individual characteristics of the tumors. Tumors with components of multiple types of sex cord-stromal tumors without adequate characters to be classified as an individual entity are termed unclassified type. They may be malignant, especially in adults.

Sertoli Leydig cell tumor has a cellular, neoplastic stroma with intermediate Leydig cell components.

- **Gonadoblastoma**consists of seminoma-like cells scattered amongst cells that resemble immature Sertoli cells arranged in a palisading pattern. Focal calcification is characteristic. Gonadoblastoma maybe considered the premalignant having the capability to develop GCTs (characteristically seminoma). They generally develop in dysgenetic gonads. Undescended testes, ambiguous genitalia or hypospadias, may be commonly seen. 80% seen in phenotypic females having 46 XY karyotype.

- **Fibroma-thecoma**is exceptionally rare, microscopy showing spindle-shaped fibroblasts in a storiform pattern.

Epithelium, mesothelium & soft tissue tumors may be seen in rete testis & para-testicular tissues. Mesothelial lesions include cysts, reactive hyperplasia, adenomatoid tumors, benign cystic mesothelioma, papillary mesothelioma, and malignant mesothelioma, commonest being adenomatoid tumor. It shows infiltration, hence sometimes it is mistaken as being malignant.

- **Testicular lymphoma**is an aggressive extranodal non-Hodgkin lymphoma. It presents bilaterally and spreads outside nodes. It is the commonest reason for mass in the testis in age more than 60 years. Most commonly, it is of large cell diffuse B-cell type.