The diaphragm separates the thoracic cavity from the abdominal cavity. It is a double-domed, musculotendinous partition that consists of a continuous sheet of muscle surrounding a central tendon. The peripheral muscle is named according to its peripheral points of attachment. The sternal part attaches to the posterior aspect of the xiphoid process. The coastal part attaches to the internal surfaces of the inferior six costal cartilages. Finally, the lumbar part attaches to the medial and lateral arcuate ligaments, as well as, the three most superior lumbar vertebrae.

The diaphragm is centrally and peripherally attached. The three peripheral attachments include:

- Xiphoid process of the sternum

- Lumbar vertebrae and arcuate ligament

- Coastal cartilages of ribs 7 to 10 and direct attachment to ribs 11 to 12.

The segments of the diaphragm that evolve from the vertebrae are known as the left and right crura.

The diaphragm separates the abdominal and thoracic cavities but does allow certain structures to pass through via its three openings:

The inferior vena cava passes through the diaphragm at the vena caval foramen. This aperture is located in the central tendon at the level of T8. Sometimes the phrenic nerve may also be found passing through this aperture. The esophageal hiatus is located in the muscular aspect of the diaphragm near the right crus. It is located at the level of T10. The posterior and anterior vagal nerves are also found passing through this hiatus. Finally, the aortic hiatus is located between the two crura at the level of T12. The thoracic duct and azygos vein pass through the aortic hiatus.