Drug Utilization Review (DUR) is an ongoing, systematic quality-improvement activity constructed to ensure the effective and appropriate use of medicines. It can also be considered a formulary system management technique. It comprises a comprehensive review of a patient's health and medication history before, during, and after dispensing medicines to optimize patient outcomes. As a result, it provides quality assurance, prescriber feedback, corrective action, and additional evaluations. Hence, DURs performed by pharmacists improve the quality of patient care, enhance therapeutic outcomes, prevent adverse drug reactions, and reduce inappropriate pharmaceutical expenditures, reducing overall healthcare costs.

Although distinctions have been made among the terms drug-use evaluation, drug-use review (DUR), and medication use evaluation (MUE), they all refer to the systematic evaluation of medication use employing standard, observational quality-improvement methods. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) promotes the term DUR for the Medicare Part D prescription drug benefits.

MUE encompasses the goals and objectives of drug use evaluation (DUE) in its broadest application, emphasizing improving patient outcomes. MUE, rather than DUE, emphasizes the need for a more multifaceted approach to improving medication use. However, MUE has a common goal with the pharmaceutical care it supports: to improve the quality of life of an individual patient by achieving predefined, medication-related therapeutic outcomes. Through its focus on the medication use system, the MUE process helps to identify actual and potential medication-related problems, resolve actual medication-related problems, and prevent potential medication-related problems that could interfere with achieving optimum outcomes from medication therapy.

MUEs and DURs fall into three categories: prospective, concurrent, and retrospective**.**In a prospective review, evaluating a therapeutic intervention is planned and takes place before the medication is dispensed.

DUR is a performance improvement method that evaluates and improves medication-use processes to optimize patient outcomes. Specific elements addressed in each medication use evaluation are:

- Define the purpose, focus, and priorities

- Develop the usage criteria to be evaluated

- Collect the usage data; review and evaluate the data collected

- Develop and implement actions to improve medication usage

- Assess the actions that were implemented

- Document the results

- Report the results to other healthcare professionals.

The success of each medication usage evaluation should be reviewed within a specific timeframe, whether it be three months, six months, or a year.

Drug dose adjustments, inappropriate duration of drug treatment, therapeutic interchange, or generic substitution are often addressed during prospective DURs. Other important issues addressed include identifying misuse, abuse, drug-drug interactions, drug-disease contraindications, and drug-patient precautions (specific patient population of age, allergies, pregnancy status, etc.)

Issues commonly addressed by retrospective DUR include appropriate generic medicine use, use of formulary medications whenever appropriate, inappropriate duration of treatment, incorrect drug dosage, clinical misuse or abuse, drug-disease contraindications, drug-drug interactions, over and underutilization, therapeutic appropriateness, and duplication.

**Steps in the DUR Process**

- Identification of Optimal Use: The established criteria define the optimal use of drugs, which focus on relevant patient health outcomes and are in scope for DUR. Medicine use is monitored for optimal use in advance.

- Measurement of Actual Use: The precise use of medications can be acquired from medical, prescription, or electronic health records.

- Assessment: This step involves using a computerized algorithm, identifying members who meet the DUR criteria, and comparing optimal and actual use. It helps identify and evaluate discrepancies and, if appropriate, intervene.

- Intervention: This corrective action is implemented if any targeted areas of concern are identified in the previous steps, i.e., economic considerations, prescribing patterns, and adverse drug reactions.

- Evaluate the DUR Program:****Evaluation of the effectiveness of the DUR program is performed to evaluate the outcomes and document reasons. Appropriate alteration to the DUR program and persistent surveillance should be conducted.

- Report the DUR Findings: This is the final step; reporting the results to the pharmacy and therapeutics committee and clinician when appropriate.