Patients with Ehrlichia infections, regardless of organism, typically present with fever, malaise, headache, body aches, and chills. Symptoms typically begin one to two weeks after a tick bite, at a median of nine days. It is important to collect history regarding travel to endemic areas and outdoor activities of patients with these non-specific flu-like symptoms during the summer months. Prompt recognition and treatment of ehrlichiosis and other tick-borne illnesses may improve outcomes. Other findings may include gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting and diarrhea, and rash. The rash is more common in children and typically presents five days into illness as a maculopapular rash, petechiae, or diffuse erythema. Cough and respiratory symptoms are more common in adults than in children. Similar to rickettsial infections, central nervous system involvement can also occur in up to 20% of patients, including meningitis and meningoencephalitis.

In some patients, symptoms may progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) or a sepsis-like or shock-like presentation with cardiovascular instability and coagulopathy. However, overall mortality is much lower in ehrlichiosis than in rickettsial disease. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports mortality rates of 1% to 3%, since 2000, in patients who present for medical care of ehrlichiosis. Importantly, many patients may be infected with ehrlichiosis but not present for medical evaluation, and thus this may be an overestimate of mortality. Patients who are immunocompromised, elderly, or have received pretreatment with sulfonamide antibiotics are predisposed to more severe illness.