Glucose is an aldose-monosaccharide having the chemical formula of CHO. Humans derive glucose by consuming food of plant or animal origin. Complex carbohydrates present in these foods are digested in the gastrointestinal tract, converted to simple monosaccharides, and absorbed.

Digestion of disaccharides of milk (lactose) and table sugar (sucrose) gives galactose and fructose, respectively. These monosaccharides can also be converted to glucose during body metabolism. Apart from diet, glucose can be generated from breaking down liver glycogen (glycogenolysis) and non-carbohydrate sources via gluconeogenesis.

Plasma glucose level is very meticulously regulated within a defined range. This is done with the help of highly regulated control exerted by insulin and glucagon hormones. Insulin hormone is secreted in response to high plasma glucose levels, which are encountered after a meal. Insulin increases glycolysis, glycogenesis, lipogenesis, and protein anabolism, while it decreases glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, lipolysis, and protein catabolism.

On the other hand, glucagon is secreted in response to low plasma glucose levels, which are generally encountered during fasting. It increases plasma glucose levels by increasing glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. It decreases glycogenesis and glycolysis. Catecholamines, glucocorticoids, thyroid hormones, etc., also increase plasma glucose levels.

Any pathology that disturbs the balance of these regulatory mechanisms can alter the plasma glucose level. Plasma glucose is the commonly ordered investigation to evaluate the fluctuation in these mechanisms.

Many point-of-care testing devices are utilized in emergency and home care settings which use capillary blood to estimate the plasma glucose via a biosensor-based chip. The major drawbacks of such devices are imperfection in dispensing the blood sample to the biosensor chip, interference by tissue interstitial fluid, lack of timely calibration and quality control, etc.

Various chemical and enzymatic methods are available for plasma glucose estimation. Due to higher time requirements and relatively less accuracy and precision than the enzymatic methods, chemical methods such as Folin Wu and O-Toluidine methods are less utilized in clinical laboratory setups. In the hospital’s clinical laboratory, enzymatic methods based on Glucose Oxidase-Peroxidase (GOD-POD) method, glucose dehydrogenase (GDH) method, hexokinase (HK) method, etc., are utilized commonly.

In the GOD-POD method, beta-D-glucose is first oxidized by the GOD enzyme, leading to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) formation. This H2O2 reacts with a colorless chromogen substrate in the presence of peroxidase (POD) to produce a colored product. The intensity of color produced is proportional to the glucose concentration in the sample. The GOD enzyme can act on beta-D-glucose only. At equilibrium, alpha and beta isomers of D-glucose are at 36% and 64%, respectively. To optimize the results, a mutarotase enzyme should be added, or an extended incubation time is needed to complete the reaction.

In the GDH method, the GDH enzyme acts on beta-D-glucose and NAD+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) to form gluconolactone and NADH (Dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide). The amount of NADH generated is proportional to the glucose concentration in the sample. This method also requires mutarotase or extended incubation time to complete the reaction.

Hexokinase (HK) method is an exact and accurate method for plasma glucose estimation. Serum or plasma is first deproteinized by barium hydroxide, and zinc sulfate and clear supernatant are used for the reaction.

The cofactor utilized in the G6PD reaction depends upon the origin of the enzyme used in the reaction. If G6PD of leuconostoc mesenteroides bacteria is used, NAD+ is used as a cofactor. While G6PD from yeast or higher plant requires NADP+ as a cofactor.

Due to its high accuracy and precision, this method is the reference method for plasma glucose estimation. The need for deproteinization increases the turnaround time for glucose estimation. To minimize the turnaround time in the hospital clinical laboratory, the deproteinization step is not performed, and plasma or serum is directly added to the reagents as per assay protocol. The effect of interfering substances in plasma or serum can be nullified by sample blanking. It will eliminate the error occurring due to the presence of any interfering substance in plasma or serum, which can absorb 340 nm radiation and affect the final result.