**Route of Transmission**

The path of transmission of shigellosis is mostly via the fecal-oral route in developed countries and fecal-oral route, water-borne or food-borne in developing countries.

**Size of Inoculum**

The number of organisms required to cause the disease is usually 10 to 200 due to the low sensitivity to stomach acid and downregulation of antibacterial proteins of the host by the organism.

**Pathogenesis**

Once ingested, Shigella enters the small intestine and multiplies then enters the large intestine. Shigella causes cell injury and resulting complications by direct invasion of colonic mucosa and production of enterotoxins.

**Direct Invasion of Epithelial Cells**

In the large intestine, it invades using transcytosis and transports through basolateral epithelium using M cells which are mainly responsible for immune activation of intestinal lymphoid tissue by antigen recognition.Shigella is released from the macrophages after following apoptosis and inflammation. It continues to invade the adjacent epithelium and the immune system by using the intercellular actin polymerization process. As Shigella invades the epithelial cells, it activates nuclear factor (kappa B) in the cells causing the production of IL-8 which stimulates recruitment of neutrophils at the site causing more inflammation and epithelial damage. It causes impaired absorption of nutrients causing diarrhea.

**Toxin production**

Another mechanism for cell injury by Shigella is through the production of enterotoxin 1 and 2 which plays a part in impaired fluid and nutrient absorption causing Shigella-associated diarrhea. Cytotoxin Shigella dysenteriae serotype 1 is responsible for cytotoxicity and vascular lesions in the colon and other organs such as kidneys causing bloody diarrhea and complications such as hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS).