Cancers in the mediastinum have a wide diversity of presentations.

**Chest X-ray**

Chest radiographs (posteroanterior and lateral) are usually the first step in discovering a mediastinal mass and can help localize the mass is in the anterior, posterior, or medial mediastinum to help with the differentials. The mass could be an incidental finding on an asymptomatic patient who has had a chest X-ray before elective surgery or an evaluation of an unrelated condition. It can also be done as an evaluation in patients who present with symptoms due to the mediastinal mass or paraneoplastic syndromes. In general, malignant lesions tend to be symptomatic. When a mass protrudes into the mediastinum, the normal structures (e.g., aorta) lose their roentgenographic signatures, their "silhouette sign."

**CT Scan of the Chest**

To evaluate masses seen on chest X-rays, a CT scan of the chest is usually performed with intravenous (IV) contrast, which can often show its exact location, whether the mass is well-circumscribed, or if it infiltrates the surrounding structures. In many cases, no further workup is necessary for diagnosis. Characterization of the mass on the CT scan is based on specific attenuation of water, air, fat, calcium, soft tissue, and vascular structures. High-resolution multiplanar reformation images demonstrate the detailed anatomical relationship of cancer's precise location, morphology, and relationship to the adjacent structures.

**MRI of the Chest**

MRI is indicated when CT finding is equivocal. Recently, special applications of MRI have been developed to identify precisely the tissular components of mediastinal masses. Excellent soft-tissue contrast makes MRI an ideal tool to evaluate cancers of the mediastinum. Chemical-shift MRI has helped differentiate normal thymus and thymic hyperplasia from thymic cancers and lymphoma. Diffusion-weighted MRI (DWI) is another special application that unveils minute biophysical and metabolic differences between tissues and structures. The mean apparent diffusion coefficient for malignant mediastinal entities could be substantially lower than for benign diseases.

**Mediastinoscopy with Biopsy**

This test collects cells from the mediastinum to determine the type of mass present for a definitive diagnosis. It is done under general anesthesia. A small incision is made under the sternum, and a small tissue sample is removed to analyze if cancer is present. This test will help the physician determine the type of cancer present with very high sensitivity and specificity. Establishing the diagnosis of lymphoma generally requires a core biopsy for flow cytometry.

**Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) and Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)**

Endobronchial ultrasound has become the diagnostic procedure of choice for most mediastinal pathologies. Most of the mediastinal lymph node stations, including stations 2, 4, 7, 10, and 11, can be accessed with the help of an EBUS and combined with EUS, even other stations like 7, 8, and 9 can be accessed. EBUS can be done under conscious sedation or general anesthesia. It is usually a single-day, outpatient procedure with minimal complications. It is safer than mediastinoscopy, with almost similar diagnostic efficacy.

**Laboratory Studies**

Basic Laboratory tests such as complete blood count (CBC) and basic metabolic panel (BMP) can help in the differential diagnosis of lymphomas. In the instances of mediastinal masses, tumor markers can help support a presumptive diagnosis. These include:

- Beta-hCG (associated with germ cell tumors and seminoma)

- LDH (may be elevated in patients with lymphoma)

- AFP (associated with malignant germ cell tumors): Mediastinal non-seminomatous germ cell tumors are more likely to result in distinct elevations of serum AFP and less likely in elevations of beta-hCG compared to gonadal or retroperitoneal non-seminomatous germ cell tumors. Malignant germ cell tumors are closely related to serum tumor markers, especially AFP and beta-hCG. The measurement of these serum tumor markers is important in the diagnosis, management, and follow-up of these patients.

**Testicular Ultrasound**

In suspected cases of metastasis to the mediastinum from primary testicular germ cell tumors, palpation of the testicles is insufficient, and ultrasonography of the testicles should be performed in all patients.