**Donation after Brain Death (DBD)**

The definition of brain death is the irreversible loss of consciousness, absence of brainstem reflexes, and persistent apnea. It is a clinical diagnosis made by two independent physicians. The most common causes are cerebrovascular accidents and traumatic brain injuries, but can also occur secondary to anoxia or brain tumors. To make a diagnosis of brain death, the patient must be in an irreversible coma with a known cause and completely unresponsive to mechanical stimuli. All reversible causes of coma must be excluded. The patient must be weaned off CNS depressant medications (alcohol, opioids, anesthetics) and neuromuscular-blocking agents. The patient cannot be hypothermic (core body temperature <35 degree Celsius) or hypotensive (mean arterial pressure [MAP] <60 mmHg). Severe acid-base and electrolyte abnormalities must be ruled out as well. All brainstem reflexes should be assessed, including the pupillary, corneal, oculocephalic, vestibular, and cough/gag reflexes. Spinal reflexes remain in up to 75% of patients, and their presence does not preclude a diagnosis of brain death. The apnea test can assess ventilatory drive. The patient is disconnected from the ventilator for 10 minutes, and a positive test occurs with absent respiratory effort and increasing PaCO2. The apnea test should stop, and the patient reconnected to the ventilator if the patient experiences hypotension, hypoxemia, or cardiac arrhythmia. A false-positive apnea test can occur when the patient is sedated or with a high cervical injury impairing diaphragmatic function. While brain death is a clinical diagnosis, additional testing can support the diagnosis, particularly when confounding factors are present. Electroencephalography (EEG) is a common method to assess for brain electrical activity, as it is non-invasive and is performable at the bedside. However, it can be heavily influenced by sedation, hypothermia, and metabolic derangements, limiting its usefulness. Cerebral angiography, transcranial doppler ultrasound, and cerebral scintigraphy - all assessments of cerebral blood flow - are not influenced by CNS depression, hypothermia, and metabolic disorders, making them very useful as confirmatory tests for brain death.

**Donation after Circulatory Death (DCD)**

Circulatory death, defined as the permanent absence of respiration and circulation, is becoming increasingly prevalent in attempts to expand the number of potential organ donors. The typical DCD patient is one who has suffered a neurologic injury but does not fit the criteria for brain death; less common are patients with respiratory or neurodegenerative disease who are planning to withdraw treatment electively. Initially, only kidneys were transplanted, but the practice has expanded to include liver, lung, and pancreatic transplants. One of the primary challenges of DCD is the balance of ensuring donor death, while also limiting ischemia to the desired organs.  The Maastricht classification system is used to classify these patients into five categories based on the type of circulatory death, location, and other factors. There are two defined forms of DCD - controlled circulatory death, and uncontrolled circulatory death.

**Organ Procurement**

Following the death declaration and appropriate preparation, the process of organ retrieval may then commence in the operating room. The patient is prepped and draped in a sterile fashion, and the intended organs mobilized. The donor is then exsanguinated, and blood rapidly replaced with a preservation solution. These solutions are hypothermic (often 5 to 10 degrees Celsius) and function to rapidly lower the temperature of the intended organs - decreasing metabolism and facilitating preservation. Rapid cooling can be enhanced with topical ice. Following cooling, the intended organs are removed, placed in sterile containers on ice, and then transported to another location for implantation. In general, the heart/lungs are removed first, followed by the liver then the kidneys. During organ removal, vascular conduits are an option to assist with vascular reconstruction during implantation. After solid organ removal, other tissues (bones, corneas, tendons, etc.) may be removed.