The IV line itself is a hollow, plastic, tube-shaped catheter that is attached to a larger hub which remains above the skin. Most modern lines are made of polyurethane, as this is thought to be less thrombogenic than older polyvinylchloride versions. The line is supplied pre-loaded over a hollow, laser-sharpened, beveled needle with a transparent "flashback" chamber at its opposite end. This allows the operator to identify when blood from the target vein starts to flow into the needle tip during insertion. The hub is color-coded according to the gauge of the needle, which reflects the internal diameter of the catheter and ranging in size from 14G to 24G depending on patient age and characteristics; the higher the gauge number, the narrower the catheter. The length of the catheter can vary between different manufacturers. Removing the needle from the external hub of the line reveals a standard Luer-taper connector to which a phlebotomy adapter, a needle-free injection bung, or an IV fluid administration set can be attached. The hub may also have a side port with a removable cap, allowing drug administration without disconnecting other ongoing IV fluids or medications.

So-called "safety lines" are a newer type of IV line with modifications intent on reducing accidental needlestick injury during line placement and have become more prevalent over the past decade.

Aside from the cannula itself, other equipment required for peripheral vascular access includes antiseptic swabs or sponges, gauze, a needle-free bung, a prepared flush of sterile normal saline, and a sterile transparent moisture-permeable dressing. Local anesthetic agents may be of use with larger cannulas, or to minimize distress in selected patient cohorts such as young children. They can be infiltrated subcutaneously using a narrow-gauge needle shortly before the procedure (for example, 0.1 mL of 1% lidocaine). Alternatively, a bolus of topical ointment containing local anesthetic may be applied to the skin ahead of time and left in contact under a dressing.