**Patient Positioning**

Supine, semi-sitting (with head turned to the contralateral side), or lateral decubitus. Lateral decubitus position allows the ultrasound to be placed across from the patient for optimal ergonomics and viewing of the display screen. The patient's comfort and limitations must be taken into consideration during positioning. In obese patients, the posterior border of the SCM can be difficult to identify. Ask the patient to lift his/her head off the bed to facilitate palpation of the posterior border of the SCM.

**Landmark-based Technique**

A line extending from C6 to the mastoid process is drawn (along the posterior border of the SCM). The needle insertion is at the midpoint of this line. The branches of the superficial cervical plexus emerge behind the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle at this point. Skin is prepped and draped in the usual fashion. Using a "needle fanning" technique with repeated needle redirections, the local anesthetic is injected alongside the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle 2 cm to 3 cm below and above the needle insertion site. Avoid deep needle insertion (greater than 1 cm to 2 cm).

**Ultrasound-based Technique**

Place the high-frequency linear probe in a transverse orientation for an in-plane approach (parallel to the probe axis). This should be done at a location over the midpoint of the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. This also approximates the level of C4 and the notch of the thyroid process. The probe marker should be pointed medially towards the thyroid cartilage. Skin is prepped and draped in the usual fashion. Insert the needle in lateral to medial direction 1 cm to 2 cm directly under the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The needle should enter at the level of the thyroid cartilage (located halfway between the clavicle and mastoid bone). Place the needle tip in a position to inject the local anesthetic just deep to the posterolateral tapering sternocleidomastoid muscle and superior to the levator scapula as this thick fascial layer is the location of the cervical plexus. The needle tip should not be further than 2 cm deep to prevent inadvertent injection into underlying structures. While directly visualizing the needle tip to prevent inadvertent intravascular injection, inject approximately 5 mL to 10 mL of local anesthetic.

Of note, experienced operators have been found to have a similar success rate when using the landmark-based technique only vs. an ultrasound-guided technique.