Bacopa monnieri is a medicinal creeping perennial in the Scrophulariaceae family with small oblong leaves and white to purple flowers frequently used in ayurvedic medicine. Other names for this herb include brahmi, water hyssop, thyme-leaved gratiola, and the herb of grace.Bacopa monnieri,
Centella asiatica (Gotu kola), or a combination of the two botanicals.

Bacopa is native to India, Indochina, Australia, and Sri Lanka. The leaves are used medicinally and contain triterpenoid saponins (Bacoside A, bacoside B, bacopasaponins, D-mannitol, acid A, monnierin), alkaloids (brahmine, nicotine, herpestine, hydrocotyline), flavonoids (luteolin, apigenin), glycosides (asiaticoside, thanakunicide), Phytochemicals (betulinic acid, betulic acid, wogonin, oroxindin, stigmasterol, beta-sitosterol), sapogenin (jujubacogenin, pseudojujubacogenin) and other compounds (Brahmic acid, brahamoside, brahminoside, isobrahmic acid.)

Its use has been documented in the Ayurvedic text "Caraka Samhita" as a treatment for various mental conditions.Bacopa as a "medhya rasayana," meaning a class of herbs believed to improve mental health, memory, and intellect and promote rejuvenation and longevity.Bacopa. It has been described as a calming cognitive enhancer.

Bacopa can be used on its own or in combination with other nootropic herbs such as Gotu Kola (Centella asiatica). Bacopa monnieri and Centella asiatica both possess neuroprotective properties and have nootropic activity with therapeutic uses for patients experiencing memory loss.Bacopa has demonstrated beneficial effects on cognitive performance, verbal learning, delayed word recall, memory acquisition, and decreasing anxiety. The FDA's position is that Bacopa monnieri products are not approved for any medical purposes, and in 2019 issued a warning to dietary supplement manufacturers who produce products containing Bacopa monnieri regarding making any therapeutic claims about the herb.

**Human Studies**

Bacopa monnieri functioning as a cognitive performance enhancer was demonstrated in a small (17 patient) randomized control trial published in 2014. They noted statistically significant improvement in cognitive performance (mental arithmetic, Stroop, letter search, visual tracking), improved mood, and a decreased cortisol response from stress after one dose of Bacopa (320 mg and 640 mg). A stronger effect was observed with the 640 mg dose.Bacopa group.

A meta-analysis incorporating nine randomized controlled trials (437 subjects) demonstrated an improved speed of attention and cognition and decreased reaction time.

In a study of memory acquisition, there was a randomized, double-blinded study (81 adults 55 years and older) that reported a 12-week cycle of Bacopa significantly improved memory acquisition and retention in healthy older Australians.Bacopa improved memory-free recall but did not improve other aspects of cognition. These studies used a 300 to 450 mg dose of Bacopa extract standardized to 10 to 20% bacopa glycosides

Bacopa has shown anxiolytic effects in people with cognitive decline. Bacopa, in combination with Gotu kola (Centella asiatica), has been shown in double-blind, randomized clinical trials to effectively reduce general anxiety symptoms.

**Animal Studies**

In a study on male albino mice, Bacopa monniera extract was administered along with phenytoin in the second week of a two-week trial. There was a significant reversal of phenytoin-induced cognitive impairment with improved acquisition and retention of memory and no effect on the anticonvulsant activity.Bacopa monnieri for Alzheimer disease,Helicobacter pylori activity in human colonic tissue.