Different approaches involve static versus real-time and longitudinal versus transverse.

In the static approach, the vessel is identified and a skin marking is made at the sight of proper needle entry point. The course of the vein and anticipated point of vessel contact also may be marked. The probe is then put down, the site is sterilized, and IV access is attempted. This approach alleviates the need for a sterile probe covering and the need to maintain the ultrasound probe on the patient during the procedure. The success rate is much lower for this method when compared to the real-time method.

In the real-time approach, a sterile probe cover is placed on the US probe, and the US is used to visually guide the needle dynamically during the procedure. The success rate for this method is higher, allowing for a fewer number of attempts and higher patient satisfaction.

With the longitudinal approach,  the vessel appears as a long cylindrical structure. This provides the advantage of visualizing the entire needle while attempting to cannulate the vessel. The ultrasound probe, for the most part, remains still while the needle is guided into place. The beam of the ultrasound, the needle, and the vessel must all remain in the same plane during this view which makes lateral movements of the needle difficult and the lateral position of the needle relative to the vessel hard to identify. This approach is more difficult on curving or tortuous vessels.

With the transverse or short axis approach, the vessel appears as a circular structure. Needle identification is done by visualizing the hyperechoic needle tip. This is best done by maintaining the bevel of the needle facing the ultrasound probe. In this approach, the US probe must be moved along with the needle to track the tip as you attempt to reach the vessel, and it is important to maintain visualization of the needle tip at all times since visualization of the entire needle is not possible as in the longitudinal approach. Losing sight of the needle tip can lead to puncturing adjacent structures or puncturing through the back wall of your intended vessel. This can be done with a combination of slight movements of the needle back and forth while observing the surrounding tissue for movement, and fanning the probe back and forth until the needle tip is found. Once the needle enters the vessel with either approach, the needle should be advanced while remaining in the vessel until the angiocatheter can be advanced into the vessel. With the longitudinal approach, it is usually easier to visualize entry into the vessel, since the entire needle and length of the vessel is visible on the screen. In the transverse approach, the needle can be “walked” in by slight advancements of the needle followed by a slight fanning of the probe, paying careful attention to maintain the needle tip in the center of the vessel at all times. These two approaches may be used independently or together, depending on the operator's comfort level and needs during the procedure.

**Procedure**

1. Explain and discuss the procedure (including what to expect, risks, benefits, and alternatives) and consent the patient (if required).

2.  Collect equipment (see preparation section).

3.  Identify a site. Use the high-frequency probe and scan at desired locations to identify the best access site. Consider relative contraindications, depth of vessel, size and shape/path of the vessel, overlying structures such as nerves or other vessels that may be in your anticipated path, and impact the site will have on the patient’s comfort and range of movement. Optimal needle entry point may be marked at this time if desired.

4.  Prepare the site as follows:

- Topical Anesthetic: Depending on the individual and situation, consider using a local anesthetic such as a topical eutectic mixture of lidocaine and prilocaine or a vapocoolant spray.

- Warming: Consider local warming of the site. While it is used in cases when the vessel is small or there is a reason for vasoconstriction, it has been shown to improve first stick success and to decrease time to access. Two minutes of heat was shown to counteract vasoconstriction noted after use of a eutectic mixture of lidocaine and prilocaine.

- Tourniquet: When used, a tourniquet should be placed three to four centimeters (cm) proximal to the insertion site. This may be adjusted depending on the length of the needle used.

- Clean the site: Clean the site with an alcohol prep pad or other antiseptic pad/solution provided in IV starter kit/central line kit.

- Unlock the needle cap:  Most needles have a cap that may be hard to remove one-handed, so it is beneficial to have the needle set up and ready.

- Ensure saline lock and cap are attached, pre-flushed, and that they are easily reached along with the transparent patch to and any other securing dressing to be used.

5. Apply Tegaderm cover or sterile probe cover, depending on the procedure.

6.  Identify the location and vessels with the ultrasound, making sure to verify vein and/or artery.  Align the targeted vessel with the middle of the probe and screen in short or long axis (user preference).

7.  Advance the needle using the guidance of the US in real time and visualize the insertion of the needle into the vessel.  Maintain vision on the screen during the procedure to prevent loss of sight of the needle and vessel position. Look for blood return ("flash") in the hub. Some individuals find it beneficial to visualize further advancement within the vessel to ensure that when the catheter is advanced off the needle, it is well within the vessel.

8.  Advance the catheter from the needle into the vessel. Withdraw the needle manually or with the needle’s adjunct, as some needles may come with a button for a spring-loaded withdrawal of the needle.

9.  Draw any blood required for diagnostic purposes.

10.  Attach the pre-flushed syringe to the catheter and secure the site with the dressing(s) chosen. Any remaining gel should be cleaned from the site before dressing. Otherwise, adhesive dressings are likely to fail.

11.  Remove the tourniquet and flush the tubing to ensure easy flushing and that the catheter/fluid did not infiltrate. While flushing, it may be helpful to place the probe back on the patient to observe the target vessel. There often will be a slight dilation of the vessel during the flush which can help confirm proper placement.