**Examples of Society Recommendations**

**Expert Witness Recommendations from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)**

**Advocacy and Education**

The AAP believes that the establishment of certain minimal qualifications for physicians serving as expert witnesses will improve the quality of testimony and promote just and equitable verdicts. Therefore, the AAP supports efforts to:

- Implement the recommendations of this statement through legislative or regulatory reform of expert witness testimony (e.g., establish minimal qualifications for expert witnesses in medical negligence); and

- Educate pediatricians (during residency training and through continuing medical education) to provide them with the skills and knowledge base needed to provide objective, scientific, and ethical expert witness testimony in legal proceedings involving alleged medical negligence.

**Relevant Qualifications**

Physicians should limit their participation as medical experts to cases in which they have genuine expertise. The following qualifications must be met (and verified) to demonstrate relevant education, certification, and experience.

- Physician expert witnesses must hold a current, valid, and unrestricted medical license in the state in which they practice medicine.

- Physician expert witnesses must be certified by the relevant board recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or a board recognized by the American Osteopathic Association.

- Physician expert witnesses must be actively engaged in clinical practice in the medical specialty or area of medicine about which they testify including knowledge of or experience in performing the skills and practices at issue to the lawsuit.

- It may be appropriate for an expert in the area of research that is complicated to be asked to explain the nature of the research to the jury (for example, development of vaccines, cloning, DNA testing) that may be purely educational and not relate to the clinical care provided by the defendant.

**Unbiased and Complete Testimony**

Physicians serving as experts in medical negligence actions should take all necessary steps to provide a thorough, fair, objective, and impartial review of medical facts. To meet that obligation, physicians agreeing to testify as experts in medical negligence cases should conduct themselves as follows:

- Regardless of the source of the request for testimony (plaintiff or defendant physician), expert witnesses should lend their knowledge, experience, and best judgment to all relevant facts of the case.

- Expert witnesses should take necessary steps to ensure that they have access to all documents used to establish the facts of the case and the circumstances surrounding the occurrence.

- Relevant information should not be excluded for any reason and certainly not to create a perspective favoring the plaintiff or the defendant.

- The expert witness’s opinion should be fair and objective. The expert witness should be comfortable with his or her testimony regardless of whether it is to be used by the plaintiff or defendant.

**Standards of Care**

The physician expert witness should be familiar with the medical standards at issue before accepting a case. Becoming schooled on a medical standard after accepting a case may lead to a biased understanding of the issue. A physician unfamiliar with the medical standards would not meet the recommended qualifications of an expert.

- Before testifying, the physician expert witness should review and understand the current concepts and practices related to that standard as well as the concepts and practices related to that standard at the time of the occurrence that led to the lawsuit.

- The testimony presented should reflect accepted standards within the specialty or area of practice about which the expert witness is testifying, including those held by a significant minority.

- When a variety of acceptable treatment modalities exist, this should be stated candidly and clearly.

- Expert witness testimony should not condemn performance that falls within generally accepted practice standards or condones performance that falls outside accepted practice standards.

**Assessing Breach of Care and Proximate Cause**

Physician expert witnesses must exercise care in assessing the relationship between the breach in the standard of care and the patient’s condition, because deviation from a practice standard may not cause the patient outcome at issue. Thus, medical expert witnesses should:

- Base distinctions made between medical malpractice and medical maloccurrence on science, not on unique theories of causation;

- know that transcripts of depositions and courtroom testimony are public records and may be reviewed by audiences outside of the courtroom; and

- be willing to submit transcripts of depositions and courtroom testimony for peer review.

**Ethical Business Practices**

The business practices (e.g., marketing, contractual agreements, and payment for services) associated with the provision of expert witness testimony must be conducive to remaining nonpartisan and objective throughout the legal proceedings.

- Contractual agreements between physician expert witnesses and attorneys should be structured in a way that promotes fairness, accuracy, completeness, and objectivity.

- Compensation for expert witness testimony should be reasonable and commensurate with the time and effort involved.

- Physicians should not enter into contracts in which the fees for expert witness testimony are disproportionately high relative to the time and effort involved.

- Physicians should not enter into contracts in which the compensation for expert witness testimony is contingent on the outcome of the case.

**Expert Witness Guidelines for the Specialty of Emergency Medicine from the American College of Emergency Medicine**

To qualify as an expert witness in the specialty of emergency medicine, a physician shall:

- Be currently licensed in a state, territory, or area constituting legal jurisdiction of the United States as a doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine;

- be certified by a recognized certifying body in emergency medicine;

- have been in the active clinical practice of emergency medicine for at least three years (exclusive of training) immediately preceding the date of the occurrence giving rise to the case. A physician serving as an expert witness who is not currently engaged in the clinical practice of emergency medicine shall be considered to have met this requirement if he or she was so engaged during the three years immediately preceding the date of the occurrence giving rise to the case.

**Abide by the Following Guidelines**

- The expert witness should possess current experience and ongoing knowledge in the area in which he or she is asked to testify.

- The expert witness should not provide expert medical testimony that is false, misleading, or without medical foundation.2 The key to this process is a thorough review of available and appropriate medical records and contemporaneous literature concerning the case being examined.

- A medical expert’s opinion should reflect the state of medical knowledge at the time of the event giving rise to the case.

- The expert witness should review the medical facts in a thorough, fair, and objective manner and should not exclude any relevant information to create a view favoring either the plaintiff or the defendant.

- Expert witnesses should be chosen on the basis of their experience in the area in which they are providing testimony, and not on the basis of offices or positions held in medical specialty societies unless such positions are material to the expertise of the witness.

- An emergency physician should not engage in advertising or solicit employment as an expert witness where such advertising or solicitation contains false or deceptive representations about the physician’s qualifications, experience, titles, or background.

- The expert witness should be willing to submit the transcripts of depositions and testimony to peer review.

- An expert witness should never accept any compensation arrangement that is contingent on the outcome of litigation.

- Misconduct as an expert, including the provision of false, fraudulent, or misleading testimony, may expose the physician to disciplinary action.

- Be not only familiar with the local state law, regulations, and practice of emergency medicine but also strictly adhere to the state-specific definitions of negligence.