In acute facial burns, particularly those that are associated with major burn injury, the principles of general trauma and burn care apply. Management will follow advanced trauma life support (ATLS) guidelines and focus on a primary survey combined with treatment of life-threatening complications as they are discovered, followed by exposure and treatment of specific injuries. In the prehospital setting, initial management consists of first establishing scene safety, preventing further harm to the victim or provider. Initial management consists of stopping the burning process, adequate exposure, and immediate transport to the nearest appropriate facility.

In the emergency department (ED), the care of the patient will continue to follow ATLS principles. At major centers with numerous team members, multiple steps can be conducted simultaneously, expediting care. It is important to decontaminate and expose the patient. Solid chemicals should be brushed off. Neutralizing agents should be avoided as they often cause further thermal injuries from acid-base reactions. Ocular exposure to chemicals should be irrigated for at least 15 minutes with at least 1,000 mL saline solution.

Airway compromise and inhalation injury are common with severely burned patients or patients with significant facial burns. Supplemental oxygen should be given to any patient sustaining facial burns to treat any concomitant carbon monoxide or cyanide poisoning.

Rapid sequence intubation can be performed in the standard fashion in acute burn injury, but in burn victims 48 hours out from the event, depolarizing paralytics such as succinylcholine should be avoided. Intubating, the patient does also allow one to provide aggressive sedation and analgesia. Ketamine is a good choice for an induction agent as it is typically less associated with hemodynamic instability. However, in patients with catecholamine deficiency, such as patients with large burn injuries, ketamine has the potential to cause hypotension.

Even if the patient sustains inhalation injuries, direct thermal injury below the larynx is less common as heat is poorly transmitted via humid air. Is important to be cognizant of the fact that chemical agents can cause parenchymal injuries to the lung. Additionally, damage to the epithelial cells impairs mucociliary transport, increasing inflammatory changes and edema, causing airway obstruction. Inhalation injury also leads to loss of surfactant, leading to atelectasis. The resultant airway compromise consists of airway obstruction, bronchospasm, shunting, and increased risk of infection. Wheezing and respiratory distress may be present on examination due to the obstructed airflow. Aggressive treatment with aerosolized bronchodilators decreases airway resistance and improves aeration. Nitric oxide has been proposed as another adjunct therapy. While early studies demonstrated some benefits, a meta-analysis argues against it.

Combustion consumes oxygen and produces an atmosphere rich in carbon monoxide and cyanide. Carbon monoxide binds to hemoglobin with a 200 times higher affinity than oxygen. This prevents aerobic ATP production, significantly harming skeletal and cardiac muscle and potentially causing CNS demyelination. Patients have a variable presentation and do not always demonstrate signs of inhalation injury. Presumptive administration of 100% oxygen competitively binds to hemoglobin and decreases carbon monoxide toxicity. Overall, 100% oxygen decreases carboxyhemoglobin levels by about 50% every 20 minutes. Hyperbaric chambers have been shown to improve outcomes for patients with carbon monoxide poisoning, but usefulness is impaired by the availability and potential instability of the patient.

Cyanide is also a product of combustion and readily absorbed by the lungs. Cyanide binds to cytochrome C oxidase of the electron transport chain, inhibiting aerobic ATP production, also significantly harming skeletal and cardiac muscle and potentially causing CNS demyelination. Persistent lactic acidosis despite adequate fluid resuscitation and normal or slightly elevated carboxyhemoglobin level indicates cyanide poisoning. If the patient has evidence of thermal inhalation of combustible materials, neurologic deficits, and the above laboratory derangements, it is recommended to consider treatment with hydroxocobalamin.

Burns involving 15 to 20% TBSA will likely develop hypovolemic shock, and aggressive early fluid resuscitation is indicated. Vascular access can be gained through burn tissue if needed, but avoiding burn tissue is preferred. Intraosseous access and central lines are acceptable alternatives. Burns with less than 10% TBSA rarely cause hemodynamic changes, and aggressive fluid rehydration is not indicated. It is recommended to start fluids initially during the primary phase and calculate the Parkland formula during the secondary survey. Ongoing resuscitation is titrated to physiologic response for long-term management. The goal is 0.5 mL/kg/h urinary output in the adult or 1 mL/kg/h in children (less than 14 years old or less than 25 kg). Urinary output exceeding these numbers increases the risk of worsening edema, causing worse clinical outcomes. Consider inserting a Foley catheter for further titration of fluids in regards to urinary output.

Burn pain is very difficult to manage. Aside from the initial insult, the therapies used to manage the burn tissue such as dressing changes, debridement and grafting can also cause significant discomfort. Attention to pain control is critical as it has been shown that better control in the acute phase results in better long-term clinical outcomes and improved quality of life. Increased pain perception increases the inflammatory response, negatively impacting the long-term healing process.

Individuals experience very different levels of pain, and it is not possible to determine optimal pain management by assessing TBSA or depth of the burn. The initial pain is nociceptive, followed by neuropathic as the burns start healing. Various methods of quantifying pain include numerical or expressional pain scales, vital signs, and clinical appearance. Initial post-burn physiologic changes include decreased cardiac output, increased systemic edema, and decreased albumin concentrations, all of which alter the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of pain medications. In addition, there is an increased volume of distribution for all pain meds. Initially, there is decreased filtering from the liver and kidney, increasing the effect of the pain medications, but eventually, the hypermetabolic phase begins, and drugs are processed at a much faster rate, so increased dosage requirements can occur.

Pain management is best treated using the multimodal approach, using multiple agents for pain control simultaneously. Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) has been shown to effectively manage pain in hospitalized burn patients and should be used in conjunction with oral agents such as Acetaminophen, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications, Gabapentin, muscle relaxers, anxiolytics, and regional blocks. Ketamine is good for induction, but also before painful procedures such as dressing changes or grafts. Regional blocks could also be instituted before a painful procedure to optimize pain control during and immediately after the procedure. Anxiety is a common manifestation after burn injury, so anxiolytics should be an important component to pain management.

The initial care of facial burns includes cleansing and decontamination of the wound while avoiding further tissue damage. Initial burn management will consist of removing debris and cleaning the burn-injured area. For facial burns, chlorhexidine should be avoided as it is toxic to the cornea, and any contact with the eye could cause further injury.

The main goals for the application of antibiotic ointments and dressings for burns to the face are to prevent complications, limit damage, and provide protection and comfort for the patient. Patients with significant injuries often need surgical intervention due to the cosmetic importance and special functions of facial structures. This requires persevering as much tissue as possible during the initial phase of treatment. Providing appropriate dressings will give the surgeon the most tissue to work with and the patient the best chance for a good outcome.

Dressings for coverage of burns can be divided into categories of passive, interactive, and biologic. Passive wound dressings, such as traditional gauze pads, provide coverage for the wound and can be used in conjunction with topical agents to prevent adherence to healing tissue. Dry gauze should not be used as this will slough off any re-epithelialized tissue during dressing changes. Interactive products protect the wound while maintaining a clean moist environment for healing. Examples include semipermeable foam dressings, hydrogel, hydrocolloids, and alginates. Biologic dressings may be considered in clean, non-infected wounds and include bio-membranes and scaffolds to facilitate epithelial growth.

Semipermeable film dressings allow gas exchange but protect the wound from contamination with bacteria. They are ideal for minor abrasions and burns. They are impermeable to liquid, so they should not be used on wounds with high levels of exudate. Alginates, foam, and hydro-active dressings absorb fluids and would be considered for highly exudative wounds. They would be relatively contraindicated with fresh burn wounds in that they could dry out the tissue and extend the depth of injury. They could be considered for donor sites or older wounds that are highly exudative. Hydrogel dressings have high water content. They are good for dry or minimally exudative wounds and provide cooling and protection for burns. They are not a very effective barrier to bacteria. There is evidence that they do outperform traditional dressings in terms of wound healing.

Biosynthetic dressings are available commercially and appropriate for use in uninfected, clean, acute burns. Sheets can be used that will conform to the surface of the burn, making it an ideal alternative for the treatment of the face. These dressings do not have any inherent antimicrobial activity but can be used in conjunction with topical antibiotics. They are expensive, but there is evidence that there is an improvement in time to healing compared to more traditional methods.

Topical agents are also important in maintaining a healing environment while preventing wound infections. Topical agents have the advantage of preventing wound adherence to the dressings, decreasing wound infections, and enhancing wound healing. The choice of a topical agent is not entirely clear with data on the efficacy that is somewhat mixed.

Perhaps one of the most ubiquitously used is silver sulfadiazine. While it is easy to apply and readily available, it should be used with caution on the face as it should not be used on burns near the eyes. It is associated with skin hypersensitivity, neutropenia, leukopenia, and should not be used in pregnant or breastfeeding women. Furthermore, in a systematic review of antibiotic therapy to prevent wound infection rate in burned patients, pooled results showed that silver sulfadiazine was associated with a higher risk of burn infection than many other options and is also associated with longer hospital stays and time to healing compared to skin substitutes. However, the quality of evidence was limited by small sample sizes and a significant risk of biases.

Antibiotic ointments and combination ointments such as bacitracin, neomycin, and polymyxin B are easy to apply, are useful on the face, and can be used with frequent dressing changes.  They should be discontinued when signs of reepithelialization appear and have the potential for hypersensitivity and yeast colonization.  Mupirocin ointment is also an excellent option for the face.  It gives good staph aureus coverage and can be used with frequent dressing changes. Mafenide cream or solution is indicated for burns to the ears and nose as it penetrates cartilage and provides excellent eschar penetration. It has gram-negative coverage, including Pseudomonas. It has the potential to cause enough pain in a very small number of patients to require an alternative. Additionally, Mafenide is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor and, if used in large quantities, can cause or significantly worsen existing metabolic acidosis.

Other antiseptic agents such as aloe vera and honey have been suggested. Aloe vera is inexpensive, soothing, and easy to apply. It has been compared against silver creams with at least equal results.

In general, systemic antibiotic prophylaxis should not be used in burn patients.

Ocular burns can be devastating, resulting in disfigurement, vision loss, and corneal complications. Initial management should include copious irrigation with normal saline or lactated Ringer, as previously discussed, to stop the burning process.

Eyebrow and eyelash hair also have an aesthetic component and play a role in reconstruction. Initial management should include shaving off any singed or injured eyelashes as this has been shown to decrease cornea discomfort and decrease conjunctival injection.

Burns to the lip pose a significant risk to function, yet still have an aesthetic component. Early reconstruction is recommended in commissural burns to improve functionality. Even with significant physical therapy for months to years, patients with facial burns develop significantly reduced vertical and horizontal oral openings, limiting their functionality.

Like the nose, the ears are a cartilaginous structure that has the combined roles of aesthetics and functionality. Ears are affected in 30% of all facial burns. Ears are easily injured, as they have thin skin that covers a cartilaginous framework. The blood supply is tenuous and is easily compromised after a burn injury. It is important to take into consideration some basic tenants of ear care after a burn injury. This includes avoiding compression or tight dressings to the burned ears, initial debridement should be minimal, and shaving the hair around the ear can decrease the risk of infection. The burn should be cleansed with soap and water, and an antimicrobial ointment applied.

The unique shape of the ear makes reconstruction difficult. For minor damage, local flaps are typically used, but free flaps can be used if limited sites are available for grafting or for more extensive burns. Autologous costal cartilage is the preferred cartilage for grafting, but synthetic agents such as porous polyethylene are also potential options for re-creating the distinct appearance of the ear. Novel processes are becoming more available for reconstruction with expanding technology. For example, skin and cartilage engineering is closer to becoming a reality. Three-dimensional bioprinting of cartilage could potentially play a part in complex ear reconstruction.

The nose is located in the central part of the face, with important social and emotional implications. Beyond the functional aspect of the nares, the nose is crucial to aesthetics and integral and how people interact with each other. Gross disfigurement can cause social and psychological distress. Surgical repair of the nose can take many procedures and last months to years, but it is important to get as good as a functional and aesthetic outcome as possible.

The nose is a complex structure consisting of mucosa, cartilage, and skin. Superficial skin damage only requires skin grafting for definitive repair. With any type of cartilaginous compromise, autologous grafts from septal, conchal, auricular, and costal donor sites are common. If there are more severe deformities, local grafts from the forehead are the most common flaps, as they are the most similar in appearance and easily accessible. If the forehead is unavailable, superficial temporal artery based flaps or other autologous flaps can be used for grafting.

In addition to the aesthetic aspect of the nose, functionality has to be taken into consideration. One noted complication of a burn affecting the nose is stenotic nares. This can be improved by reconstruction of the alae with cartilage and stenting the opening for days to weeks after the surgery.

Hydrofluoric acid is a special chemical agent requiring specific management. It causes systemic toxicity via tissue destruction by the corrosive hydrogen that enters circulation. The fluoride anion chelates with calcium and magnesium, creating local calcium depletion and resultant hyperkalemia through cellular death. Although it is always recommended to decontaminate chemical burns with copious irrigation and generally recommended not to apply any neutralizing agent, applying calcium gluconate to hydrofluoric acid burns can decrease pain and minimize systemic damage caused by the acid. If the patient was exposed to a large amount of hydrofluoric acid, systemic hypocalcemia could occur. Since fluoride is cleared renally, if there is a concern for systemic toxicity, diuretics and sodium bicarbonate, hemodialysis, and IV calcium gluconate and magnesium sulfate could be used for mitigating adverse effects. Hydrofluoric acid is common in glass manufacturing and as industrial and domestic cleaning agents. Cardiac dysrhythmias are a leading cause of death from hydrofluoric acid burns. Therefore it is recommended to administer IV calcium gluconate if there is a concern for a hydrofluoric acid burn.

The electrical injury also deserves special mention. Duration of exposure, voltage, and path through the body influence the extent of the injury. Electricity to the heart can cause cardiac necrosis and conduction abnormalities. The most frequent dysrhythmia is atrial fibrillation, and ventricular fibrillation is the most serious dysrhythmia. Electricity to the brain can result in respiratory arrest, cranial nerve deficits, seizures, or various other abnormalities. With any resultant cardiac dysrhythmia from electricity, it is important to follow ACLS guidelines for resuscitation.