A major issue of concern is half-life. To predict its changes, indeed, it is necessary to know the status of both the main variables that determine it, including Vd and CL. In general, diseases, age, and other variables may alter the CL of a drug much more than it affects its Vd. On the contrary, in some circumstances, such as in elderly individuals, there is a body fat increase (up to 36% in men and 45% in women) that induces increased  t1/2 of lipophilic drugs. Furthermore, in this setting of reduced lean body mass, a reduction of total body water with an increase in plasma concentration of hydrophilic drugs, a decrease of serum albumin with an increased free fraction of highly protein-bound acid drugs, and an increase in acid a1-glycoprotein with a decrease of the free fraction in the plasma of basic drugs (e.g., tricyclic antidepressants, antipsychotics, beta-blockers), there are PK changes to consider during drug therapy. These variations usually have little clinical relevance, except for drugs with high binding to plasma proteins, low Vd, and restricted therapeutic index.

Another important factor to be considered is the mechanism for achieving steady-state and the factors that can modify it. An appropriate loading dose is necessary to reach therapeutic concentrations more quickly, similar to those obtainable in the steady-state. The steady-state concentration is also achievable with a series of close-up administrations to achieve the plasma concentration useful for the therapeutic effect in a very short time. Then it is possible to continue with maintenance doses. Although a pharmacological rule of thumb states that steady-state concentration is reached in approximately five half-lives, there are notable exceptions. Some drugs do not follow the conventional one- or two-compartment models or have non-exponential forms of decay (e.g., ethanol has zero-order elimination); as such, this rule of thumb may not apply to them.