Chloroquine remains the mainstay of treatment for uncomplicated vivax malaria. Exceptions to this include infection acquired in areas of chloroquine resistance, primarily Papua New Guinea and Indonesia

- Chloroquine phosphate: 600 mg base (=1,000 mg salt) orally immediately, followed by 300 mg base (=500 mg salt) orally at 6, 24, and 48 hours Total dose: 1,500 mg base (=2,500 mg salt) OR Hydroxychloroquine: 620 mg base (=800 mg salt) orally immediately, followed by 310 mg base (=400 mg salt) orally at 6, 24, and 48 hours

- Primaquine phosphate: 30 mg base orally once daily for 14 days

In regions where P. vivax is chloroquine resistant the CDC offers three possible treatment options: atovaquone-proguanil, quinine plus either tetracycline or doxycycline or mefloquine. Providers should select one of these three options to combine with primaquine.

Because of the dormant liver phase of P. vivax, primaquine must also be added to treatment regimens to treat the hypnozoite phase. Two scenarios in which primaquine is contraindicated include patient with G6PD deficiency and pregnant women. In patients with G6PD deficiency, primaquine may cause severe hemolytic anemia. Decisions for its use in this patient population must occur on a case-by-case basis.

For the treatment of severe malaria worldwide, the WHO recommends the use of intravenous artesunate (2.4mg/kg IV or IM at 0, 12, and 24h then daily). Multiple studies have shown improved efficacy and safety of artesunate in the treatment of severe malaria as compared to previously used intravenous quinidine.