A basic comprehension of respiration at the cellular level is important in understanding acid-base equilibrium in the human body. Aerobic cellular respiration is necessary for human life; humans are obligate aerobes. While individual cells can perform anaerobic respiration, in order to sustain life, oxygen must be present. One of the byproducts of aerobic cellular respiration is carbon dioxide. The simplified chemical equation denoting aerobic cellular respiration is:

- C6H12O6 (glucose) + 6O2 --> 6CO2 + 6H20 + energy (38 ATP molecules and heat)

The first stage of cellular respiration is glycolysis, which takes a six-carbon glucose and breaks it down into two pyruvate molecules which contain three carbons each. Glycolysis uses two ATP and creates four ATP, meaning it generates two net ATP. This process does not need oxygen to occur. Since patients are often deficient, it is worth noting that magnesium is a cofactor for two reactions in glycolysis.

Eventually, the pyruvate molecules are oxidized and enter into the TCA Cycle. The TCA cycle generates NADH from NAD+, FADH2 from FAD, and two ATP molecules. It is an aerobic process and does demand oxygen. Pyruvate is brought into the mitochondria and forms acetyl-CoA with the loss of carbon dioxide. This excess carbon dioxide is then exhaled during the process of expiration.

The last step in aerobic cellular respiration is the electron transport chain (ETC). The ETC produces the majority of the ATP created in cellular respiration with 34 ATP molecules being created. For the ETC reaction to occur, oxygen is needed. If there is not enough oxygen present, the products of glycolysis proceed to a reaction called fermentation to produce ATP. The byproduct of fermentation is lactic acid. During glycolysis and the TCA cycle, NAD+ is reduced to NADH and FAD is reduced to FADH2. Reduction is characterized by a gain of electrons. This is what drives the ETC. For every single molecule of glucose, ten NAD+ molecules are converted to NADH molecules, which produce three ATP molecules a piece in the ETC.

This process of aerobic cellular respiration characterizes why humans need oxygen. Anaerobic respiration allows the body to produce some ATP when there is not enough oxygen present; however, the process only generates two ATP as opposed to the 38 ATP produced with aerobic respiration. The two ATP molecules per reaction are not enough to sustain life.

As noted above, carbon dioxide is produced as a byproduct of the TCA cycle. This carbon dioxide is instrumental to acid-base balance in the body which is demonstrated with the following reaction:

- CO2 + H20 <-> H2C03 <-> HCO3- + H+

The carbon dioxide formed during cellular respiration combines with water to create carbonic acid. Carbonic acid then dissociates into bicarbonate and a hydrogen ion. This reaction is one of the many buffer systems in the human body; it resists dramatic changes in pH to allow a person to remain within the narrow physiological pH range. This buffer system is in equilibrium, that is, all components of the reaction exist throughout the body and are shifted to the side of the equation appropriate for the environment. This reaction can and does occur without an enzyme; however, carbonic anhydrase is an enzyme that assists with this process. It catalyzes the first reaction above to form carbonic acid which can then freely dissociate into bicarbonate and a hydrogen ion. Carbonic anhydrase is located in red blood cells, renal tubules, gastric mucosa, and pancreatic cells.

Other buffer systems in the human body include the phosphate buffer system, proteins, and hemoglobin. All of these contain bases which accept hydrogen ions which keep the pH from plummeting. The phosphate buffer system, while present globally, is important for the regulation of urine pH. Proteins assist with intracellular pH regulation. Red blood cells use the reaction above to help hemoglobin buffer; carbon dioxide can diffuse across red blood cells and combine with water. This alone would cause an increase in hydrogen ions; however, hemoglobin can bind hydrogen ions. Hemoglobin also can bind carbon dioxide without this reaction. This depends on the amount of oxygen that is bound to hemoglobin. This is called the Haldane effect and the Bohr effect. When hemoglobin is saturated with oxygen, it has a lower affinity for CO2 and hydrogen ions and is able to release it.