According to the United States Preventative Services Task Force (USPTF), Pap screening is recommended beginning at age 21 years of age. HPV testing begins at age 30 in conjunction with Pap smear cytology. Screening is recommended every three years for women with continued normal screening and those low risk for cervical cancer. For women over 30 years of age, cytology can be every five years with HPV testing. Level A recommendation for women with low-risk status and consistent normal screenings can discontinue cervical cancer cytology and HPV testing at age 65. Women who have had a total abdominal hysterectomy including removal of the cervix for benign disease do not require further screening.

Patients that have been diagnosed with invasive disease require a comprehensive staging workup. The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) staging system allows for several methods to stage a patient. Classically, this was based on the local extent of the tumor which could be determined with a combination of pelvic examination, cystoscopy, proctoscopy, chest x-ray, and/or intravenous urography in addition to basic labs (CBC, CMP, etc). More recently, advanced imaging modalities were allowed for staging such as MRI and PET scans. A pelvic MRI is excellent for detecting local tumor extension. It can also be used for gauging tumor response. PET scans are more sensitive than CT for the detection of nodal and visceral metastasis. This is critical as the presence of nodal disease can greatly influence the prognosis.