Page and Shroeder first described the histopathology of periodontal diseases. There are four distinct stages of disease progression, and each stage takes into consideration both clinical and histopathological appearances of tissues.

The initial lesion is marked by a plaque that results in vascular changes and intercellular gap formation that leads to increased amounts of gingival crevicular fluids (GCF). Adhesion molecules attract polymorphonuclear neutrophils to the site of the lesion. T lymphocytes specifically alter the fibroblasts of the affected area. Clinically, this stage of the lesion is benign.

As redness at the site develops, it is known as the early lesion. Polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN) infiltrate the area and clear the fibroblasts that are undergoing apoptosis. The infiltration also causes collagen fiber breakdown leading to an increased amount of space for infiltrates. There is a degradation of the marginal connective tissue matrix.

The established lesion is predominantly dominated by leukocyte aggregation and B cells, either plasma cells or lymphocytes, that initiate the transformation of the site by changing both the junctional epithelium and sulcular epithelium into the pocket epithelium. The pocket epithelium is extremely permeable and vulnerable. Clinically, this manifests as bleeding upon gentle probing of the gingival tissues.

The final stage, known as advanced lesion, is a transition to periodontitis. The advanced lesion is created by the migration of biofilm to the pocket, which gives an ideal niche for anaerobic bacteria to proliferate. There is an irreversible loss of attachment and bone loss that can be seen histologically and clinically. Loss of gingival fibers and loss of the alveolar bone are the hallmarks of this stage. This lesion is highly influenced by the microbial factors themselves and can cause several changes depending on the host and organism