Cyclic adenosine monophosphate(cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) are intracellular second messenger molecules degraded and inactivated by the enzyme phosphodiesterases(PDE).

PDE-4 is an enzyme found in cells of the lungs, and PDE-4 inhibitors inhibit the degradation of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate(cAMP) and increase cAMP levels in target cells, further causing bronchial muscle relaxation. Along with its effects on the lungs, it also decreases pro-inflammatory mediators.

PDE-5 inhibitors carry out their action by preventing the breakdown of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), further increasing cGMP levels in target cells. The endothelial cells of the penile smooth muscle corpus cavernosum release nitric oxide(NO), which initiates the enzyme guanylate cyclase, further enhancing the synthesis of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). The prevention of cGMP breakdown further prolongs an erection and is used therapeutically to treat erectile dysfunction(ED).

Theophylline is a nonspecific phosphodiesterase inhibitor used to treat COPD, and the mechanism of action is not entirely understood.

Anagrelide exerts its effects by inhibiting PDE-3, decreasing the platelet count and platelet aggregation. The full agent's action is still being studied and is said to interrupt the cell cycle post miosis of megakaryocyte development, decreasing megakaryocyte's size and ploidy. This drug helps decrease platelet count, further preventing thrombotic complications in myeloproliferative disorders such as essential thrombocytopenia, polycythemia vera, and chronic myeloid leukemia.

Ibudilast's bronchodilator and anti-inflammatory effects have been used therapeutically in Japan to treat bronchial asthma and post-stroke complications. Caffeine exerts its effects on phosphodiesterase enzymes by nonselective inhibition of PDE1, PDE4, and PDE5, promoting cAMP accumulation. Caffeine also inhibits adenosine and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors and enhances intracellular calcium release, improving and enhancing cognition, memory, energy, sleep, fatigue, and drowsiness.