**Nerve Conduction Studies**

- Sensory: Sensory nerve action potentials (SNAP) are typically normal in radiculopathy because the lesion is proximal to the corresponding dorsal root ganglion, and because if this, the axon and its cell body remain intact. If the SNAP is abnormal, other lesions must be a consideration.

- Motor: The majority of muscles in the extremities receive innervation from more than one nerve roots, and typically there is overlap with the root levels above or below. Therefore it is unlikely that the amplitude of a compound muscle action potential (CMAP) will be abnormal on motor nerve conductions studies in isolated radiculopathy.

The above indicates that the nerve conduction study is primarily useful to rule out other causes of similarly presenting conditions to lumbosacral radiculopathy. The diagnostic findings are mostly through the needle electromyography portion of the exam.

**Needle Electromyography**

In diagnosing lumbosacral radiculopathy, needle electromyography is the most useful diagnostic study. Findings of positive sharp waves and or fibrillations illustrate spontaneous activity. The examiner should perform the needle electromyography on at least three muscles, specifically one paraspinal muscle and two limb muscles supplied by the same nerve root but innervated by different peripheral nerves. Spontaneous activity found in all muscles sampled following the above protocol (along with normal SNAP and CMAP findings) supports a diagnosis of lumbosacral radiculopathy. The utility of testing the paraspinal muscles in the work-up of lumbosacral radiculopathy is its use in deciphering between radiculopathy from a plexopathy, as needle electromyography of the paraspinal muscles is typically normal in a pure lumbar plexopathy.