Cholesterol and TG are the two most relevant plasma lipids. Because lipids are insoluble in water, they are transported in the blood with the help of lipoproteins. They constitute the hydrophobic core of lipoproteins separated from plasma by phospholipoproteins and apolipoproteins. Lipoproteins are classified into chylomicrons (CM), very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL), intermediate density lipoproteins (IDL), low-density lipoproteins (LDL), and high-density lipoprotein (HDL). Plasma lipoproteins are subclassified based on their size, density, and composition, as listed in the table.

Plasma cholesterol is primarily derived from the liver, with only 15 to 20% from dietary sources. In the liver, cholesterol is either synthesized de novo with 3-hydroxy-3-methyglutaryl CoA reductase (HMGCR), the rate-limiting enzyme or absorbed from the plasma by lipoprotein uptake.

Plasma triglycerides are derived from both diet and hepatic biosynthesis.

CMs are TG-rich particles that contain up to 90% TG content, with the rest containing free cholesterol. They transport TG from the intestine to the liver and periphery. The size of the chylomicron depends on the amount of fat ingested. Apo B 48 is a core protein in CM. CMs are carried by the lymphatic system into the thoracic duct and are cleared from the circulation using lipoprotein lipase.

VLDL is the principal lipoprotein synthesized by the liver and TG-rich. Apo B 100 is a core structure protein. TG within VLDL is hydrolyzed by lipoprotein lipase. The size of VLDL particles can vary depending on the TG level.

LDL carries the majority of cholesterol that is present in the circulation. It is derived from VLDL and IDL particles. LDL particles can vary in size and density. Small LDL particles are more atherogenic than large LDL particles. Small LDL particles are increased in obesity, metabolic syndrome type 2 diabetes, and inflammatory states. Small LDL particles have a lower affinity to the LDL receptor, which prolongs their retention in the circulation; they are more prone to oxidation and bind more avidly to the arterial walls.

HDL is an anti-atherogenic particle that helps in the reverse transport of cholesterol from peripheral tissues to the liver. In addition, to reverse transport, it also has anti-oxidant and anti-thrombotic activity, which may contribute to inhibiting atherosclerosis.  Apo A-I is a core structural protein for HDL. HDL particles are heterogeneous and rich in cholesterol and phospholipids.