The pathogenesis of multifocal atrial tachycardia is not well understood. The multiple discrete p wave morphologies with variable PR intervals suggest atrial pacemaker activity originating from multiple ectopic foci within the atria. Thus, each unique P wave corresponds to a different site of atrial origin. Several theories have been proposed, including re-entry, abnormal automaticity, and triggered activity, but no theory has yet been demonstrated conclusively.

The theory of re-entry centers upon the idea that automaticity foci with different exit pathways or electrical circuits with abnormal intra-atrial conduction could produce tachycardia with several discrete P wave morphologies. However, the role of reentrant pathways has yet to be elucidated. Studies with programmed electrical stimulation, which can both trigger and terminate reentrant rhythms, have not been found to affect or reproduce multifocal atrial tachycardia. However, one electrophysiological study of patients with multifocal atrial tachycardia did find abnormal intra-atrial, atrionodal, and atrioventricular nodal conduction pathways.

The theory of abnormal automaticity focuses on an increase in the ability of atrial myocytes to spontaneously depolarize and trigger an action potential. This theory is supported by many of the underlying conditions associated with this arrhythmia. Pulmonary diseases, like COPD, can result in hypoxia, hypercapnia, acidosis, and increased adrenergic stimulation, all of which are known to increase automaticity. Furthermore, pulmonary hypertension associated with pulmonary diseases can result in right atrial enlargement and right atrial hypertension, which can also increase automaticity. Similarly, the ventricular dysfunction seen in coronary artery disease and congestive heart failure can result in atrial enlargement and atrial hypertension that can also increase automaticity. The electrolyte abnormalities and medications associated with this arrhythmia, are also known to increase automaticity. However, given all the above information the role of abnormal automaticity in multifocal atrial tachycardia has not yet been fully understood.

The theory of triggered activity involves spontaneous action potentials generated from afterdepolarizations due to myocardial cell membrane instability. According to this theory, a normal stimulus, such as an action potential generated by the sinoatrial node, gives rise to afterdepolarizations due to changes in membrane potential that can achieve threshold and “trigger” spontaneous action potentials. It is proposed that intracellular calcium overload may lead to afterdepolarization which can result in a triggered activity. This theory also has yet to be elucidated, however, the effectiveness of calcium channel blockers, such as verapamil, which may act to reduce the intracellular calcium overload, supports this theory.