The blood vessel is susceptible to numerous pathologies, including atherosclerosis, aneurysms, and pulmonary hypertension.

The formation of atheromas is a key feature of atherosclerosis. Atheroma formation involves the deposition of lipids in the subendothelial space of arteries. These lipids are then phagocytosed by circulating macrophages, forming "foam cells." Foam cells then result in plaque formation. Smooth muscle cells also participate in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis by synthesizing extracellular matrix proteins that form the cap of the plaque. The rupture of this coverage promotes thrombosis and may cause cardiovascular events, including myocardial infarctions and strokes.

Aneurysms are focal dilatations of vessels secondary to medial thinning of arterial walls. Aneurysms occur because of a failure of structural proteins such as collagen and elastin in the media, resulting in focal regions of dilation. These areas are not structurally supported and can be clinically significant if they rupture. Abdominal aortic aneurysm rupture is associated with nearly a 90% mortality rate. The tunica media of the infrarenal aorta contains less collagen than that of the thoracic aorta, resulting in more infrarenal aortic aneurysms than thoracic aneurysms. The exact etiology of aneurysm formation is unclear.

Pulmonary hypertension occurs when the mean pulmonary artery pressure reaches over 25 mmHg. Histologically, this is characterized by increased smooth muscle cells, which likely derive from other cell types such as endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and mesenchymal progenitor cells. There is also evidence of reduced arterial compliance of the arteries due to the increase of endothelial cells and extracellular matrix.