First and foremost, remove the patient from the source of exposure and administer oxygen, preferably 100% oxygen, by a non-rebreather mask. Intubation may be required in those with severely depressed consciousness. Oxygen shortens the half-life of carboxyhemoglobin by competing at the binding site and should be administered for at least 6 hours or until levels normalize. The half-life of CO in room air is 4 or more hours but is decreased to 40 to 80 minutes, with 100% oxygen and just 23 minutes with hyperbaric oxygen (HBO). Despite hastening carboxyhemoglobin elimination, HBO therapy has not been shown to decrease the devastating long-term neuropsychiatric sequelae, and studies thus far have not demonstrated improved outcomes or reduced mortality. Hence, the role of HBO remains controversial. Some propose that HBO can actually increase oxidative stress, free radical production, and apoptosis seen with a re-oxygenation injury. Additionally, treatment with HBO is not inherently benign and may cause barotrauma, pulmonary edema, and seizures. It is unclear whether hyperbaric treatment is beneficial in the setting of severe CO poisoning (coma, seizures, cardiac ischemia) as trials have generally excluded such patients. Clinical guidelines for the use of HBO vary among professional groups; however, the consensus is that it should be considered in consultation with poison control, a toxicologist, or a hyperbaric medicine center in cases of serious CO poisoning manifested by abnormal neurologic signs, cardiovascular dysfunction, severe acidosis, transient or prolonged loss of consciousness, in pregnancy, and those with carboxyhemoglobin levels greater than 25%.

Erythropoietin (EPO) is an emerging novel therapy for the treatment of carbon monoxide toxicity. Erythropoietin is of interest since it has been shown in animal models to have neuronal protective effects in global and local ischemia. One study on CO toxicity showed decreased delayed neurologic sequelae versus placebo; however, studies regarding EPO use in ischemic strokes have shown higher death rates, and additional research is necessary before this can be considered.