There are multiple causes for rhabdomyolysis, but the final common pathway resulting in muscle injury and necrosis is direct myocyte injury or energy supply failure in the muscle cell.

The muscle injury (trauma, exercise, thermal dependent syndromes) or lack of ATP (Medicines, electrolyte, hereditary and metabolic disorders, intense exercise, ischemia) in a muscle cell results in intracellular sodium and calcium influx. Water is drawn into the cell along with sodium, causing cell swelling and disruption of intracellular and membraneous structures. The presence of excessive intracellular calcium leads to activation of actin-myosin cross-linkage, myofibrillar contraction, and depletion of ATP. Excessive intracellular calcium also activates calcium-dependent phospholipases and proteases, promoting cell membrane dissolution and disruption of ion channels (Na+K+ pump and Na+Ca2+ exchangers). With reperfusion, leukocytes migrate into the damaged muscle and cause an increased number of cytokines, prostaglandins, and free radicals, causing further myolysis, necrosis of muscle fibers, and release muscle breakdown products like potassium and myoglobin, creatine kinase, phosphate, uric acid, and various organic acids into the bloodstream.

Myoglobinuria is only seen in rhabdomyolysis. Myoglobin is freely filtered through the glomerulus and reabsorbed in the renal tubule by endocytosis in a normal healthy state. Myoglobin has no nephrotoxic effect in the tubules in alkaline urine. The proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) of the kidney has limited ability to convert iron to ferritin. Urine acidification in rhabdomyolysis and excess myoglobin delivery to PCT causes ferrihemate accumulation. The globin chain readily dissociates from the iron-containing ferrihemate portion of myoglobin and is rapidly converted to ferritin. Ferritin generates oxygen-free radicals leading to excess oxidative stress and Proximal convoluted tubular cell injury.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) from rhabdomyolysis is multifactorial. Muscle breakdown and water sequestration within the muscle cause volume depletion and activation of the Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone and antidiuretic hormone secretion. Myoglobin, a heme protein with ferrous oxide (Fe2+) in circulation, oxidizes to ferric oxide (Fe3+) and generates hydroxyl free radicals, which are counteracted by effective intracellular antioxidants in a normal healthy state. Excess myoglobin released from rhabdomyolysis causes oxidative injury to lipids and allows the excess release of endothelin, thromboxane A2, necrotic tumor factor-alpha, isoprostanes (vasoconstrictors), and decreased nitric oxide (vasodilators), resulting in direct renal vasoconstriction. Excess myoglobinuria during rhabdomyolysis exceeds the renal metabolic threshold and manifests as brown-reddish tea-colored urine called myoglobinuria. Presence of volume depletion, intrarenal vasoconstriction, ischemia and direct cellular injury in PCT, precipitation of the Tamm–Horsfall protein–myoglobin complex obstructing DCT all play a role in developing the AKI.

Trauma involving muscle groups located in specific compartments is at high risk for the development of compartment syndrome because of muscle swelling, which further causes additional pressure-related damage like arterial occlusion and muscle necrosis. Persistently raised compartment pressure may lead to irreversible peripheral nerve palsy. Compartment pressure of more than 30 mmHg produces significant muscle ischemia, and measurement of compartmental pressure is helpful in decision-making for fasciotomy. Rhabdomyolysis victims with severe blood loss and hypotension are at increased risk for muscle ischemia even with lesser compartment pressures.