Netarsudil is a unique drug in that it increases aqueous outflow via the trabecular meshwork, decreases episcleral venous pressure, and reduces aqueous humor production. Netarsudil is the rho kinase inhibitor used for patients with primary open-angle glaucoma and ocular hypertension. Although netarsudil is not the first-line therapy for primary open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension, it is a novel drug indicated for IOP control without significant toxicity concerns. Netarsudil may be particularly indicated for patients with normotensive or steroid-induced glaucoma. In two large, randomized, double-masked trials, researchers found once-daily dosing of netarsudil 0.02% effective and well-tolerated for treating patients with ocular hypertension and open-angle glaucoma.

Patient compliance is also better with once-daily dosing of netarsudil; thus, it would benefit all interprofessional healthcare team members to understand the mechanism of action, indication, and adverse drug reactions and their management thoroughly. An interprofessional team approach is necessary to impart comprehensive and patient-centered care. There needs to be excellent communication between ophthalmologists, primary care physicians, mid-level practitioners (PAs and NPs), pharmacists, residents, medical students, and nurses.

For patients receiving netarsudil therapy, intraocular pressure should be checked by an ophthalmic specialist. Common adverse drug reactions need to be assessed. The ophthalmologists play a pivotal role in managing the patients on netarsudil therapy.

Trained ophthalmic nurses can perform initial screening, monitor disease progression, and assist with early treatment of glaucoma with netarsudil therapy.

Collaboration and communication across these various disciplines in a healthcare team can achieve the best patient outcomes. In summary, the interprofessional team approach using evidence-based medicine and patient-centered care correlates with reduced healthcare service utilization and helps achieve better clinical outcomes.