Olanzapine has a low potential for toxicity when prescribed alone. However, there are case reports which found olanzapine toxicity caused by high doses of the medication when taken in conjunction with other medicines. For example, a case report of a patient who overdosed by taking 560 milligrams of olanzapine in addition to 6.4 grams of propranolol and 280 milligrams of amlodipine had extreme hypotension, circulatory collapse, respiratory depression, and coma.

According to the product labeling and postmarketing reports, the following are the features of olanzapine toxicity.

Serum concentration of olanzapine >0.1 mg/L is toxic and serum concentration>1 mg/L can be fatal.

**Clinical Features**

- Agitation

- Dysarthria

- Tachycardia and hypotension

- Extrapyramidal symptoms

- Sedation

- Miosis

- Aspiration

- Delirium

- Respiratory depression

- Coma

- Convulsions

- Ventricular dysrhythmia

**Management**

- There is no specific antidote to olanzapine. In acute overdosage, establish and maintain an airway and ensure adequate oxygenation and ventilation, including intubation. In addition, clinicians should consider the possibility of multiple drug involvement.

- In addition, gastric lavage (after intubation, if the patient is unconscious) and administration of activated charcoal with a laxative should be considered. The administration of activated charcoal (1 g) reduced the Cmax and AUC of oral olanzapine by about 60%. As peak olanzapine levels are not typically obtained until about 6 hours after dosing, charcoal may be a valuable treatment for olanzapine overdose.

- The possibility of obtundation, seizures, or dystonic reaction of the head and neck following overdose may create a risk of aspiration with induced emesis. Therefore, cardiovascular monitoring should commence immediately and include continuous electrocardiographic monitoring to detect possible arrhythmias.

- Hypotension and circulatory collapse should be treated with appropriate measures; intravenous fluids and sympathomimetic agents. Do not use epinephrine, dopamine, or other sympathomimetics with beta-agonist activity, since beta stimulation may worsen hypotension in the setting of the olanzapine-induced alpha blockade.

- Close medical supervision and monitoring should continue until the patient recovers.