Bethanechol is a direct-acting parasympathomimetic agent that is FDA approved for the treatment of postoperative urinary retention, postpartum urinary retention, and overflow incontinence caused by neurogenic atony of the bladder. The care for patients suffering from urologic conditions requires critical care from an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals. Pharmacologic management can lead to a better quality of life for patients. These healthcare professionals include family or primary care clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), urologists, gynecologists, nurses, and pharmacists.

The primary care clinicians and specialists should be up to date with the latest guidelines on dosage and indications using bethanechol. Prescribing clinicians should determine the minimum effective dosage via 5 to 10 mg repeated in hourly intervals until the desired therapeutic result. The primary care physician should routinely monitor patients taking this medication for therapeutic efficacy, as dosing modifications may be necessary. The prescriber should also be aware of any underlying contraindications such as epilepsy, glaucoma, and COPD before administration, as these conditions can occur upon using the parasympathomimetic agent.

Patients should fully understand the multisystemic adverse events that may occur with bethanechol use. In the event of toxicity and overdose causing systemic effects, atropine should be administered at a dose of 0.6 mg and repeated every two hours as needed until the effects subside. Counseling and careful monitoring are necessary during pregnancy, as clinical studies during its use in pregnancy are limited, and bethanechol is FDA pregnancy category C. This is where the nursing staff and pharmacists can contribute to therapy, with patient counseling on dosing and possible adverse events and helping to monitor therapeutic progress.

Interprofessional teamwork and communication are key to building patient rapport and developing a therapeutic alliance, so the patients comply with therapy competently. Continued teamwork between healthcare professionals will improve patient outcomes and quality of life while mitigating potential adverse events. [Level 5]