**FDA approved Indications**

- Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia

- Doxazosin is an alpha1 antagonist that is FDA approved to treat the signs and symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) or lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). In the USA, alpha1 antagonists are the most commonly used treatment for the signs and symptoms of BPH.
- There is also an extended-release formulation of doxazosin. It utilizes the gastrointestinal therapeutic system (GITS). It is FDA-approved for the treatment of BPH and LUTS but does not have approval for the treatment of hypertension. One benefit of the extended-release formulation is stable drug concentrations throughout the day and decreased incidence of orthostatic hypotension/syncope.

- Hypertension (immediate release only)

- The immediate-release formulation can a second-line agent for the management of hypertension in patients with concomitant BPH.

**Non-FDA Approved Indications**

- Ureteral Stones

- The use of alpha1-antagonists, including doxazosin, for the treatment of ureteral calculi is recommended by US and European guidelines. Tamsulosin has the most evidence, but doxazosin has demonstrated efficacy in the expulsion of ureteral calculi less than 10 mm as medical therapy alone or in combination with shockwave lithotripsy.

- PTSD Associated Nightmares

- Like prazosin, doxazosin has an off-label use for the treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares. There have been numerous small studies and case reports that have shown that doxazosin is effective in treating PTSD-related nightmares.
- The benefits of doxazosin over prazosin are a longer half-life and a gastrointestinal therapeutic availability system (in the extended-release form), allowing for a more gradual absorption of the drug, thereby reducing the peak to trough concentration ratio. This characteristic permits higher initial doses without the risk of hypotension. Extended-release doxazosin dosing initially starts at 4 mg daily.