Like all malignancies, the management of acute leukemia is with an interprofessional team dedicated to the management of cancer patients; the an interprofessional team includes an oncologist, internist, infectious disease expert, and a hematologist. The primary care provider and nurse practitioner may be responsible for follow up after treatment and report back to the interprofessional team. These patients need close monitoring as they are prone to infections, coagulation dyscrasias, and relapse. Team conference should be held while the patient is being treated and any problems should be conveyed to the team.

The pharmacist should educate the patient on chemotherapy medications, their adverse effects, and benefits. The dietitian should encourage a healthy diet. To prevent infections, the nurse practitioner should encourage hand washing, washing of fruits and vegetables and maintaining good personal hygiene.

The oncology nurses should monitor the patient for adverse effects of the drug including tumor lysis syndrome. Patients should be given consistent messages and one should avoid offering unrealistic expectations. To improve outcomes, the team should keep updated on the latest clinical trials.

Outcomes

Despite improvements in supportive care, death resulting from treatment toxicity remains a challenge. It is important to watch out for Tumor Lysis Syndrome which occurs when chemotherapy causes cancer cells to lyse releasing certain intracellular elements such as potassium, calcium, uric acid, and phosphorus. These elements, in large numbers, resulting in toxicity that can often lead to renal failure. Pretreatment with fluids and steroids typically prevents Tumor Lysis Syndrome. However, if it occurs, aggressive fluid therapy is the treatment.

Even after treatment, Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia can come back (relapse). Relapses can occur as far back as 21 years. It is important to address other issues associated with cancer treatment in a young child including providing psychological support to child, parents, and family.