NIPPV is administered most commonly by a CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure) or BiPAP (bilevel positive airway pressure) machine. There are other less conventional modes for NIPPV, especially in pediatrics, but this is out of the scope of this article. A CPAP machine usually consists of a pump with a tube that is attached to a mask that goes over the patient’s face. A CPAP machine essentially delivers constant PEEP (normally adjusted between 5-12 cm H2O during sleep and is useful for at-home treatment of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). By providing constant positive pressure to the airway, it splints open its upper and lower portions, preventing the collapse of tissues that may occur at or after exhalation.

A BiPAP machine is the most commonly used noninvasive form of NIPPV. The machine works similarly to a CPAP machine in that it delivers a constant level of PEEP (usually 3 to 12 mm Hg), but it also provides positive inspiratory pressure (usually 5 to 25 mm Hg) when the patient initiates a breath. A mask that goes over the patient’s face is also required, and a tight seal must be formed. Otherwise, the positive pressure being delivered can escape from around the mask, thereby lowering the inspiratory pressure and the effectiveness of the therapy. BiPAP provides additional inspiratory support, helping the patient to actively inhale. It is often used to treat sleep apnea, asthma exacerbations, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

In order to initiate invasive positive pressure ventilation, a patient must either be intubated with an endotracheal tube or ventilated through a tracheostomy tube. Once an artificial airway is acquired, a circuit is connected to a ventilator machine, and the patient’s work of breathing is either supported (by a mode of ventilation called pressure support ventilation) or completely taken over. There are about 47 different mode names and multiple ventilator models that are discussed in separate articles. However, all of these ventilators work on the same principles in that they provide oxygenation and ventilation to a patient by insufflating air or other gas mixture into the lungs.