The foot nerves originate from the sciatic nerve, made up of the L4 to S3 nerve roots. The sciatic nerve, which provides motor innervation to the muscles of the posterior thigh and sensory innervation to the lateral side of the lower leg and lateral side and sole of the foot, ends just above the posterior knee in the popliteal fossa and bifurcates into the common fibular and tibial nerves. The common fibular nerve continues distally into the anterior and lateral compartments of the leg and foot whereas the tibial nerve descends towards the posterior compartment.

The common fibular nerve bifurcates into the superficial and deep fibular nerves. The superficial fibular nerve supplies the motor innervation to the lateral compartment of the leg, which is responsible for foot eversion, while the deep fibular nerve supplies the motor innervation to the anterior compartment, responsible for ankle dorsiflexion, toe extension, and foot inversion.

The deep fibular nerve descends lateral to the anterior tibial artery and is located just anterior to the interosseous membrane within the anterior compartment of the leg. At approximately 1.3 cm above the ankle joint, the nerve divides into a lateral branch and a medial branch. The lateral branch courses deep to the extensor digitorum brevis and extensor digitorum hallucis muscles and provides their motor innervations and some sensory innervation to the ankle. The medial branch courses medially on the dorsum of the foot, laterally to the dorsalis pedis artery, and inferiorly to the extensor hallucis brevis tendon as it moves towards the first dorsal web space to supply its sensory innervation. It is important to note that although the deep fibular nerve usually courses laterally to the anterior tibial artery, some anatomical variations exist. Regardless of variation, the anterior tibial artery makes an excellent landmark for identifying the deep fibular nerve in the leg on MR imaging. The region where the extensor hallucis brevis tendon crosses over the medial branch also serves as an excellent landmark for identification of the deep fibular nerve in the foot.

The tibial nerve arises in the popliteal fossa as the other branch of the sciatic nerve and supplies the motor innervation to the posterior deep flexor compartment of the lower leg. Proximal to the tip of the medial malleolus, the tibial nerve bifurcates into the medial and lateral plantar nerves at the level of the tarsal tunnel with some variation. This anatomy makes the posterior aspect of the medial malleolus an excellent landmark for visualizing the tibial nerve on MR imaging where it is visible between the flexor digitorum longus and flexor hallucis longus muscle tendons. The medial plantar nerve travels a course lateral to the posterior tibial artery and anterior to the medial plantar artery. Proximally, it travels between the quadratus plantae and abductor hallucis muscles. Distally, it lies close to the master knot of Henry (the crossover point of the flexor digitorum longus and flexor hallucis longus tendons), an excellent anatomical landmark for visualization on MR imaging, and continues its course medial to the flexor digitorum brevis muscle. From there, the medial plantar nerve continues to divide into muscular and cutaneous branches, ultimately contributing to the motor innervation to the abductor hallucis, flexor digitorum brevis, flexor hallucis brevis, and first lumbrical muscles and the sensory innervation to the medial side of the sole (i.e. first three digits and the medial half of the fourth digit). The lateral plantar nerve courses posterior to the posterior tibial artery and in between the lateral and medial plantar arteries. Proximally, it travels between the quadratus plantae and flexor digitorum brevis muscles in the middle plantar space and continues laterally to the flexor digitorum brevis muscle distally. From there, it divides into superficial and deep branches that provide motor innervation to all the intrinsic muscles of the foot and the sensory innervation to the lateral side of the sole (i.e., lateral half of the fourth digit and fifth digit).

Other direct and indirect branches of the tibial nerve in the foot include the medial calcaneal, inferior calcaneal, and digital nerves. The medial calcaneal nerve is a sensory nerve that typically arises from the tibial nerve, although variations exist, proximal to the tarsal tunnel, 4 to 10 cm above the ankle joint, and courses medially towards the medial heel and calcaneus. Visualization on MR imaging is difficult because of the many variations in its origin and course. The inferior calcaneal nerve, also known as the nerve to the abductor digiti minimi or Baxter’s nerve, typically arises as the first branch of the lateral plantar nerve and courses approximately 5 mm anterior to the anterior tubercle of the calcaneus, which may serve as an anatomical landmark on MR imaging. This nerve provides both motor innervation to the abductor digiti minimi muscle and sensory innervation to the anterior aspect of the calcaneus. The digital nerves originate from both the medial and lateral plantar nerves and provide innervation to the plantar web spaces. The digital nerves that come from the medial plantar nerve contribute to the innervation of the first three web spaces whereas the digital nerves that stem from the lateral plantar nerve innervate the fourth web space. The third web space typically receives communicating branches from both the medial and lateral plantar nerves and is subsequently most commonly involved in Morton neuromas.

The sural nerve arises from the branches of both the common fibular nerve (lateral sural nerve) and tibial nerves (medial sural nerve). In its descent towards the distal foot, the sural nerve travels between the two heads of the gastrocnemius muscle proximally and courses subcutaneously along the posterolateral aspect of the lower leg. It lies close to the lesser saphenous vein, which may serve as an anatomical landmark on MR imaging, and is lateral to the Achilles tendon. At the level of the ankle, it further branches out and provides sensory innervation to the lateral aspect of the foot and the fifth toe.

Last, the saphenous nerve arises from the femoral nerve. Proximally, it travels medially within the adductor canal and exits distally between the sartorius and the gracilis muscles. It continues its descent within the subcutaneous fat along the medial aspect of the lower leg where it courses next to the great saphenous vein, which can function as an anatomical landmark. Distally, the nerve crosses the medial malleolus towards the medial aspect of the dorsum of the foot where it provides sensory innervation to the medial foot up to the first metatarsophalangeal joint.