An interprofessional approach to patient care can act to prevent the development of fascial dehiscence and to enhance the recovery if it occurs via early recognition and intervention. Wound-care specialized nursing and other wound care clinicians provide a first-line opportunity to minimize risk via detection of increasing abdominal distention (i.e., ileus, obstruction) in need of decompression, urinary retention requiring catheterization, respiratory complications necessitating treatment, or wound drainage (either new-onset or with a change in character). Pharmacy involvement will come in the form of antimicrobial interventions if necessary; the pharmacist can verify dosing, perform medication reconciliation, and report any concerns to the medical team. Additionally, bedside wound care presents an opportunity for evaluation of wound healing and notice of developing issues. Respiratory care can provide benefit with pulmonary hygiene treatments to minimize atelectasis and promote oxygenation.

Also, the outpatient or emergency department providers may encounter with a patient experiencing fascial dehiscence as patients often seek initial care at their primary care office or in the emergency room. A high index of suspicion and early referral or consultation of a surgical provider offers an opportunity for optimum patient care.

Interprofessional collaboration and communication are essential team elements in the care and management of fascial dehiscence patients, leading to improved outcomes. [Level 5]