Vascular color flow imaging is heavily utilized in cardiovascular assessments such as echocardiography. By way of color flow imaging, a clinician can evaluate the patient for valvular dysfunction, including stenosis and regurgitation. Aortic stenosis is a condition that relies heavily on ultrasonographic findings and color flow imaging for diagnosis and staging.

The determination of these factors relies on ultrasound visualization of the valve and Doppler-guided assessment of valvular jet velocity. Vascular color flow imaging can also be utilized in acute aortic syndromes such as Stanford Type A aortic dissections. These syndromes can often present with severe aortic insufficiency and significantly turbulent flow across intimal flaps and valves; this can be visualized by changing color patterns on Doppler imaging during echocardiography.

Vascular color flow imaging can also provide diagnostic benefit in several noncardiac syndromes. These include reduction of flow in renal arteries seen in renal artery stenosis and backflow of venous blood in the deep veins of the lower extremities due to deep vein thromboses. The advancement of ultrasound technologies has allowed for even better tissue attenuation of neurological tissue. Transcranial Doppler ultrasound flow imaging is now being utilized in neuro-critical care settings to visualize brain flow abnormalities and hematomas.

The colors become apparent on Doppler imaging when the soundwaves are reflected off passing red blood cells, which are subsequently accepted by the ultrasound probe. The color can appear in varying shades, which reflects the frequency of the soundwaves reflected. In general, a lighter shade signifies a higher frequency.

Flow acquisition in Doppler imaging relies on a shift in wavelength of sound produced by particles in motion. The particles that reflect these sound waves are the erythrocytes. The probe emits a sound wave at a frequency designated as the transmitted frequency, and the probe also accepts sound waves reflected by erythrocytes, designated as the received frequency. These two factors are factored into the Doppler frequency shift, the formula which is F = 2fvcos(a)/c, where F is the Doppler frequency shift, f is the transmitted frequency, v is the flow velocity of blood, a is the insonation angle between the ultrasound beam and the direction of blood flow, and c is the speed of sound. It can be inferred from the equation that the Doppler frequency shift is proportional to the blood's flow velocity. This supports the finding that higher frequencies, evidenced by lighter hues, are indicative of faster flow.

Doppler color flow imaging relies on the acquisition of a good signal via the probe. There are two components of the Doppler signal; the amplitude and phase. An increased amplitude is seen with stronger ultrasonic waves and increased reflectivity of red blood cells, as more sound waves are delivered and received by the probe.

Selecting an appropriate probe for visualizing vascular structures and flow is also crucial to obtaining an ideal image. Typical probes used to perform Doppler color flow vary from 5.0 to 7.5 MHz, with higher frequency probes providing greater attenuation of the signal and a sharper image.