Currently, the pathophysiology of the disease is not yet clear; researchers link the condition to available neurotransmitters. Effect on neurotransmitter availability, sensitivity, and regulation directly affect the circadian rhythms, affecting mood and leading to depression. Several neurotransmitters related to SAD include glutamate, dopamine, and norepinephrine, with others having similar effects but not to the same magnitude as this trio.

Theories describing the pathophysiology of SAD are mainly concerned with circadian rhythm dysregulation, neurotransmitters, genetic polymorphisms, hormones, and other physiological factors. However, the serotonin hormone has the greatest effect due to its association with circadian rhythms, fatigue, and sleep induction. Serotonin is lowest in the human brain during the winter season, although it surges with increased light exposure.

The "phase-shift" hypothesis proposes a direct connection between the circadian rhythm and sleep-wake cycles. The current hypotheses are used in diagnosis and clinical prognosis to detect and treat SAD conditions. The endogenous circadian rhythm is known to shift during winter when day-lengths decrease and the duration of exposure and amount of light is low affecting sleep wave cycles.

Another hypothesis entails the use of bright light to limit the body's production of melatonin. Subjects used for this experiment were winter depressives and blind individuals. They were given small doses of melatonin administered in the afternoon or evenings to initiate phase advances, while in the morning, it would induce phase delays. Both groups of individuals responded optimally to the doses given at the correct time and had their health status improve dramatically.

Furthermore, the serotonin hypothesis points out that there is an association between SAD and presynaptic serotonin transporters. It mainly occurs during fall and winter, with a few outliers extending into the summer months. The monoamine hypothesis of depression points out that increased uptake of serotonin by the presynaptic neuron is dependent on the binding at the transporter—the surge results in an elevation of depressive symptoms.

Research has also linked SAD to genetic inheritance. The serotonin 2A receptor gene is closely linked to gene variation seasonality depending on the seasons; the receptor gene is highly sensitive and reactive to fluctuations in season and directly affects normal individual physiology.