Gait and rotational profile analysis are important aspects in the workup of angular deformities and help providers to identify the etiology of angular deformities, especially in the pediatric population. Primary or true valgus deviations about the knee can present as a stance-phase valgus thrust as seen in metabolic bone disease like renal osteodystrophy and longitudinal deficiency of the fibula that is associated with lateral femoral condyle hypoplasia. Secondary or apparent valgus gait deviations are associated with both axial and sagittal plane deviations. For example, increased femoral anteversion has an apparent valgus angulation attributed to internal rotation of the distal femur.

Radiographs are not indicated in children in the physiologic valgus phase. However, they are indicated in the setting of asymmetrical findings, excessive genu valgum clinically, age group beyond which is expected of physiologic changes, patients whose height falls below the tenth percentile for their age, and a history of trauma or infection. Radiographic assessment begins with obtaining weight-bearing long leg alignment images in which both patellae are facing forward. Coronal plane angulation of the lower extremities can be analyzed based on the deviation of the center of the knee from the mechanical axis and the tibiofemoral angle. The mechanical axis is a line connecting the center of the femoral head to the center of the ankle. In normal coronal alignment, the mechanical axis passes through the center of the knee. There is lateral and medial deviation of the center of the knee with respect to the mechanical axis of the lower extremity in genu varus (bowed legs) and genu valgum (knocked knee), respectively.

The tibiofemoral angle is the acute angle formed between the longitudinal axes of the tibial and femoral shafts. At birth, there is between 15 to 20 degrees of varus tibiofemoral angulation. As the child grows, this corrects to neutral by about age 2 and between 10 to 15 degrees of valgus tibiofemoral angulation between ages 3 and 4. At this point, the limb’s valgus angulation then starts to gradually decrease to approximately 3-5 degrees of valgus by age 7. This is the residual normal coronal plane angulation of the lower extremity that will be carried to adulthood and should not increase.

It is important to determine whether the deformity is primarily originating from the femur or tibia. This is done by measuring the mechanical lateral distal femoral angle (angle between the femoral shaft and the mechanical axis of the femur) and medial proximal tibial angle (angle between the tibial plateau and mechanical axis of the tibia). The normal range of these angles is between 85 and 90 degrees.