Those suffering from accidental hypothermia will normally have a history of cold exposure.  Obtaining a temperature is important to effectively diagnosis and manage hypothermia.  Oral temperature is only useful to rule out hypothermia as most commercially available thermometers cannot read under 35C.  Tympanic thermometers are also unreliable and not recommended.  Epitympanic thermometers when used properly reflect the carotid artery temperature and when done properly with the soft probe near tympanic membrane and ear canal insulated from environment can be fairly reliable.  Both rectal and bladder temperature measurement are reasonable in conscious individuals with mild to moderate hypothermia but should not be used in critical patients during rewarming as they lag behind true core temperature.  Neither should be performed in the pre-hospital setting as doing so may further expose the patient and cause further drops in temperature. Esophageal temperature measurement is the most accurate when done properly with the probe in the lower 1/3 of the esophagus, but should only be performed in patients with an advanced airway in place.    Given the difficulty to get an immediate reliable temperature in a pre-hospital setting, it is important to know the clinical findings associated with the stages of hypothermia so that appropriate treatment can be started immediately.

Mild Hypothermia 32-35C:  Presentation can often be subtle with vague symptoms such as hunger, nausea, fatigue, shivering, and pale/cold/dry skin.  Often will have increased muscle tone, increased blood pressure, tachycardia, and tachypnea from body’s attempts to promote thermogenesis.  Patients are often shivering, but if energy stores have been depleted they may not be shivering meaning you cannot rely on this finding.  Will often have decline in cognitive abilities, memory, and judgment with some experiencing ataxia and dysarthria.  May experience “cold diuresis” due to peripheral vasoconstriction leading to increased central fluid volume resulting in increased diuresis despite that they may be volume depleted.

Moderate Hypothermia 28-32C:  Patient will continue to have a cognitive decline and may be stuporous.  Increased CNS depression may lead to hypo-reflexia with pupils less responsive and dilated.  Will have a reduction in heart rate and respiratory rate with possible bradycardia and bradypnea.  May be hypotensive.  Shivering typically ceases between 30-32C and paradoxical undressing may be observed.  Susceptibility to dysrhythmias increases with atrial fibrillation being the most common.

Severe Hypothermia <28C:  Cognition continues to decline, usually unconscious and may have areflexia.  Increasing hypotension and bradypnea. Usually bradycardic but have an increased risk for ventricular arrhythmias and asystole. Due to the difficulty a provider may have palpating a pulse due to decreaed tactile sensation from ambient cold temperature and due to bradycardia and vasocontriction of a hypohermic individual it is reccomended to check for a pulse for a full minute, and preferably a central pulse using continuous wave Doppler, prior to declaring the patient pulseless and initating CPR.

All patients with suspected hypothermia should have a complete physical exam to exclude local cold-induced injuries and to assess for signs of trauma or other illness that may have caused their exposure to the cold.  Also be aware of vital signs inconsistent with the degree of hypothermia as this may be the only clue to an alternate diagnosis such as hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency, sepsis, hypoglycemia, carbon monoxide poisoning, alcohol abuse, malnutrition, overdose.