There are several developed theories about the etiology of endometriosis based on the logical sequel relating the severity of symptoms with the stage of the disease, although none of these proposed models can fully explain the range of clinical manifestations of the disease.

To explain the occurrence of endometriosis in the cul-de-sac and uterosacral ligaments, the mainly used theory is the Müllerian remnant theory, suggesting that atypical migration or differentiation of these remnants could imitate endometriotic tissue in the poster pelvic floor.

Moreover, the ambiguous pathogenesis of endometriosis led the investigators to research more about the role of oxidative stress, inflammatory elements, reactive oxygen species (ROS) as long as genetic and epigenetic factors. Oxidative stress is caused by the imbalance between the reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the antioxidant ability of the body. ROS have the potential to damage several components of the cell-like nucleic acids and proteins. If the enzymatic and non-enzymatic cellular antioxidant capacity is decreased, ROS do not get eliminated from the cells and can be the leading cause of endometriosis.

Endometriotic lesions present as a chronic local inflammatory disease and involve alterations in cellular immunity and the expression of inflammatory cytokines. According to previous research, patients with endometriosis have elevated serum levels of a wide number of pro-inflammatory cytokines like IL-1, IL-6, and IL-8, resulting in chemotaxis, recruitment, and activation of peritoneal macrophages and proliferation of monocytes. The surgical excision of the endometriotic lesions leads to a decrease in the serum levels of the interleukins, providing evidence that their local production is the reason for the systematic inflammatory reaction. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) in the peritoneal fluid, produced by the peritoneal macrophages, amplifies the inflammatory response.

The role of steroid hormones in the pathogenesis of endometriosis is also indisputable. Estrogen is the main hormone responsible for the propagation and expansion of the endometrium. The increased action of aromatase, mainly in the deep infiltrating endometriosis, leads to the locally increased activity of estrogen.