As mentioned above, shoulder pain is often multifactorial in etiology. Often the radiologist and orthopedist work together to determine the underlying cause(s) of a patient’s pain. A patient will typically present initially to their primary care provider, and if clinically indicated, they may be referred to an orthopedic specialist for further evaluation. Considering the patient’s history and physical exam findings, further evaluation with diagnostic imaging is sometimes indicated to evaluate for underlying pathology. It is not uncommon for imaging evaluation, such as MRI, to demonstrate multiple abnormalities, any of which could be causing the patient’s pain. In these cases, it can help perform a diagnostic and sometimes therapeutic injection to help clarify the clinical significance of the imaging findings. If a patient has pain relief from a targeted injection, it can be inferred that the area treated was a pain generator. Alternatively, if the patient does not have pain relief, one can infer that this area was not a pain generator. The patient’s response is clinically important as it can guide what surgical procedures, if any, may be offered for symptomatic relief. It can also help a patient avoid unnecessary surgical procedures. Orthopedic nurses set up and assist during the procedure, provide patient instruction. Physical therapy may need to assist with post-procedure recovery exercises and strengthening the muscles around the shoulder joint. These various disciplines need to function as an interprofessional team to bring about optimal patient results from this procedure. [Level 5]