M. avium complex is a nonmotile, non-spore-forming, gram-positive acid-fast bacillus. M. avium complex is a nonchromogen and slow-growing and takes about 10 to 20 days to develop mature colonies. M. avium complex belongs to class III of the Runyon classification. M. avium grows best at 34.5 C, and Mycobacterium intracellulare grows best at 31.5  C. However, M. avium complex components can grow between 28 C to 38.5 C. Most M. avium can survive 49 C. Whereas, only 10% of M. intracellulare survive a temperature of 49 C. Mycobacterium scrofulaceum is similar to Mycobacterium avium complex in the biochemical properties and the same group. M. avium is composed of four named subspecies; these are, M. avium subspecies Avium (two strains), M. avium subspecies silvaticum, M. avium subspecies paratuberculosis, and M. avium subspecies hominissuis. It appears that the M. avium subspecies avium are responsible for pulmonary infections and the M. avium subtype hominissuis appears to be gastrointestinal in origin (6). M. avium subspecies paratuberculosis was identified in ruminants as a causative agent for Johne disease. Some have hypothesized and debated for decades that M. avium subspecies paratuberculosis is the etiological agent of Crohn disease in humans without strong evidence. A recent publication found, a high prevalence of M. avium subspecies paratuberculosis antibodies in inflammatory bowel diseases when compared to patients with noninflammatory bowel diseases, 64% vs. 9.7%. Live M. avium subspecies paratuberculosis was only isolated from two Chron's disease patients. M. avium subspecies paratuberculosis has also been reported to trigger autoimmunity including multiple sclerosis and type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM).

In 2004 Mycobacterium chimaera were identified as having a unique genetic composition of the Mycobacterium avium complex but different from both M. avium and M. intracellulare. Recently contamination of the heater-cooler system during cardiac surgery resulted in some device-related infections due to M. chimaera.

The biochemical reactions with Mycobacterium avium complex are catalase-positive, negative for niacin, nitrate reduction and tween hydrolysis. The biochemical methods are inadequate for clinical use. Currently, molecular techniques have been applied and Mycobacterium avium complex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) multiplex developed, which can detect the individual components of the Mycobacterium avium complex. Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) and multilocus sequence typing (MLST) are some other ways to identify and diagnose Mycobacterium avium complex infections.