Statins are among the safest medications to lower lipids, with muscle injury being the most common injury.

Lipophilic statins (simvastatin, lovastatin, atorvastatin, and fluvastatin) may be associated with more adverse events than the more hydrophilic statins (pravastatin and rosuvastatin).

**Muscle Injury**

Statin-induced muscle injury can vary from myalgias to rarely myonecrosis or rhabdomyolysis.

Research has shown that vigorous exercise in those on statins may increase the risk of muscle injury. Creatine kinase (CK) is the measure for the diagnosis of severe myositis and myonecrosis. However, many patients will not have an elevation in CK. Thus, routine monitoring of CK is usually not recommended; however, it is useful to get a baseline CK level before initiation of treatment.

**Management of Muscle Injury**

Strategies include assessing drug interaction, vitamin D deficiency, and hypothyroidism, switching between statins, or a trial of an alternate-day regimen.

Ezetimibe can cause fatigue, diarrhea, headache, runny nose, body aches, back pain, chest pain, diarrhea, joint pain, sore throat, and elevation of serum transaminases.

Fibrate commonly causes dyspepsia and has also been shown to produce fatigue, vertigo, pancytopenia, and elevation of serum transaminases.

Nicotinic acid is often poorly tolerated, with flushing occurring in 80 percent of patients, along with pruritus, paresthesia, and nausea in about 20 percent of patients.

Bile Acid sequestrants cause gastrointestinal side effects, including nausea, bloating, cramping, and an increase in liver enzymes. Dyspepsia and bloating can be decreased if cholestyramine is completely suspended in liquid several hours before ingestion.

PCSK9 inhibitors can cause Local injection site reactions such as erythema, pain, and bruising. Neither muscle toxicity nor creatine kinase elevations have appeared in patients after administering PCSK9 antibodies.