Management of MALToma depends on whether the tumor is gastric or nongastric.

For gastric MALToma, the treatment of choice is Helicobacter pylori eradication if the patient tests positive for H. pylori. Four weeks after the completion of H. pylori eradication therapy, testing is necessary to confirm the elimination of infection. After eradication, patients must be monitored with serial endoscopies to evaluate the response to treatment, recurrence, and the development of gastric adenocarcinoma. Guidelines suggest performing endoscopy with biopsy every three months until achieving a complete histologic response, and then endoscopy every six months for at least the first two years, and then endoscopy every 18 months. Surveillance endoscopies can stop in asymptomatic patients once two sequential endoscopies show no abnormalities on biopsy. Proton pump inhibitors and antibiotics are very effective in eradicating H. pylori infection. Studies show that approximately 20 to 30 percent of patients do not respond to H. pylori eradication therapy and require a second course of H. pylori-directed therapy to achieve eradication. If there is no response to H. pylori eradication therapy or the gastric MALToma does not correlate with H. pylori. These cases are treated with localized radiation therapy if the involved site can be encompassed in a single radiation field. Radiation therapy is more effective in achieving a complete histologic response and has lower relapse rates but has the potential for more complications. If MALToma persists after radiation therapy or the involved site is not amenable to radiation therapy, systemic therapy with pharmacologic agents is recommended. These agents are described below with treatment for nongastric MALTomas. These systemic therapies are not curative but may control symptoms and prolong survival. Gastric resection surgery (total or partial) is reserved for those with complications such as bleeding, perforation, or obstruction, but gastrectomy is associated with high morbidity and higher recurrence rates than seen with radiation therapy.

Treatment of nongastric MALTomas depends on the site and stage of the disease. For Stage I-II disease at a radiation conducive site, the tumor is treated with locoregional radiation therapy. Rituximab is the alternative for the early-stage disease at a radiation non-conducive site. Surgery, which is typically used for diagnostic purposes only, can play a role in the treatment of tumors in areas not amenable to radiation therapy (e.g., lung). The addition of adjuvant chemotherapy has not demonstrated improved survival rates in early-stage non-gastric MALToma. The late-stage (III and IV) disease is either treated by rituximab alone or a combination of rituximab and chemotherapy. The decision to use combination therapy depends on patient values and the goals of treatment. The addition of chemotherapy results in prolonged progression-free survival but does not improve overall survival and has associated problem of increased toxicity. Patients with mild symptoms may prefer single-agent rituximab. Combination therapy can be used for refractory disease following single-agent rituximab or for severely symptomatic patients with bulky disease, or those who place a high value on a longer treatment-free period. The regimen most commonly used with rituximab is either rituximab plus bendamustine or rituximab plus CVP (chlorambucil, vincristine, prednisone).