A thorough understanding of the nasal and paranasal anatomy is the key to safe endoscopic sinus surgery. There is a significant variance in the paranasal anatomy among different individuals and different sides. Therefore, studying computerized tomography and other radiologic studies before proceeding with surgery is of utmost importance.

The external nose consists of nasal bones, upper later cartilages, and lower lateral cartilages. The internal part of the nose is divided into two nasal cavities by the septum.

Each nasal cavity has a medial wall, which is the vertical septum and a lateral wall. The crista galli, cribriform plates, and the sphenoid body form the roof of the nasal cavity.  The floor consists of the palatine process of the maxilla and the horizontal process of the palatine bone.

The septum is a rigid structure and consists of bony and cartilaginous parts. The septal cartilage forms the anterior part of the septum. The perpendicular plate of the ethmoid is found postero-superiorly, the vomer postero-inferiorly, and the crest of the maxillary and palatine bones form the base of the septum. The septum is covered by mucosa and has an extensive blood supply that runs between the mucosa and the perichondrium. The arteries that supply the septum consist of the sphenopalatine artery, which is a branch of the maxillary artery, the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries originating from the ophthalmic artery, the septal branch of the superior labial artery deriving from the facial artery, and the septal branch of the ascending and greater palatine arteries branching from the maxillary artery. Little’s area is a vascular area where several arteries anastomose and form the Kiesselbach’s plexus; it is a common area of anterior epistaxis.

The lateral nasal wall has bony outgrowths, which are the turbinates. There are three to four turbinates on each side. The superior, middle, and if present, the supreme turbinate derive from the ethmoid bone and can, therefore, contain conchas.  As for the inferior turbinate, it derives from a separate bone. The turbinates are covered by mucosa, and they play a vital role in the filtration, humidification, and regulation of the flow of inhaled air.

Inferior to every concha, there is a nasal passage, also called the meatus. The inferior meatus is the passage where the nasolacrimal duct drains through the Hasner’s valve. The middle meatus is the most complex and is the main passage through which most paranasal sinuses (frontal, maxillary, and anterior ethmoid sinuses) drain. Within the middle meatus, the first lamella that is identified is the uncinate process, which is a projection from the ethmoid and is attached to the lacrimal bone anteriorly, the inferior turbinate inferiorly, and has a two-dimensional opening posteriorly, also identified as the hiatus semilunaris. Superiorly, the uncinate can have three different attachments: the lamina papyracea, the middle turbinate, or the ethmoid sinus roof. The hiatus semilunaris is the crescent-shaped space between the ethmoid bulla superiorly and the uncinate inferiorly, and is the area where the secretions drain from the sinuses into the nasal cavity; this structure expands antero-superiorly into the ethmoidal infundibulum.

The ethmoid sinuses are bordered by lamina papyracea laterally, fovea ethmoidalis superiorly, and by nasal cavity medially. The ethmoid sinuses are divided into anterior and posterior cells by a basal lamella. The anterior cells drain in the middle meatus while the posterior cells drain in the sphenoethmoidal recess of the superior meatus. The most anterior cells, the agger nasi, are located at the superior attachment of the middle turbinate. The ethmoidal bulla is the largest ethmoidal cell and is always found posterior to the hiatus semilunaris. Posterior to the basal lamella, the posterior ethmoidal cells are found; these are larger in size and smaller in number compared to the anterior cells. The blood supply to the ethmoid sinuses derives from the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries; while the venous drainage is directed to the superior ophthalmic vein or pterygopalatine plexus.

The maxillary sinuses are located between the floor of the orbits superiorly, and the alveolar processes of the maxilla inferiorly. The maxillary sinus ostium is located in the medial wall of the sinus and most commonly opens into the posterior third of the ethmoid infundibulum. It is also usually located on the superior aspect of the medial wall; therefore, it is important not to penetrate the sinus superior to the ostium to avoid violation of the medial orbital wall.

The sphenoid sinuses are paired spaces, located within the body of the sphenoid bone, and separated by a septum. The sphenoid ostium is located in the anterior wall of the sinus and drains into the sphenoethmoidal recess within the superior meatus. The sphenoid sinus is surrounded by several structures, including the internal carotid arteries, the cavernous sinuses, and the optic, vidian, maxillary, oculomotor, trochlear, and abducent nerves. The sphenoid sinus provides a pathway to endoscopically access the skull base, pituitary, optic nerve, and many other structures.

The frontal sinuses are the most superior sinuses and are situated between the inner and outer tables of the frontal bones. Both frontal sinuses are separated by a septum. The frontal sinus ostium is located in the medial aspect of the floor of the sinus; it drains into a frontal recess. The drainage of the frontal recess can flow into the ethmoidal infundibulum or medial to it based on the superior attachment of the uncinate.

The recent classification of frontal sinus anatomy includes:

- Anterior cells: agger nasi, supra agger cells (superior to agger nasi cells), supra agger frontal (extend into the frontal sinus)

- Posterior cells: supra bulla (above bulla ethmoidalis), supra bulla frontal (above bulla ethmoidalis extending into frontal sinus), supraorbital ethmoid (above the roof of the orbit).

- Medial cells: frontal septal ( attached or in the frontal septum)

The blood supply derives from the supraorbital and supratrochlear arteries (branches of the ophthalmic artery), the venous drainage is via the superior ophthalmic vein.