SD often presents following other symptoms and signs of RF, but it can occur alone. Isolated attacks, without other RF symptoms, are common in recurrent Chorea attacks. Typically, the first episode occurs 6 to 8 weeks after an episode of GABHS pharyngitis. The features of the chorea include involuntary movements, poor tone and muscular weakness, and psychological features. The involuntary movements are the cardinal signs of SD and are characterized by the abrupt onset of symptoms that usually affect all four limbs. Other motor symptoms include gait disturbances, loss of motor control, deterioration of handwriting, development of cognitive or emotional disorders. Facial grimacing or tongue chorea may develop as well as the "milkmaid sign" which is a relapsing grip such as occurs with the handgrip while milking a cow. Tics are common in SD. Vocal tics occur in 70% of patients and are believed to be related to chorea of the pharynx and larynx. Dysarthria is common as well as decreased verbal fluency due to the involvement of bulbar muscles. Deep tendon reflexes can either be sustained due to chorea or pendular secondary to hypotonia.

Behavioral problems are common, with obsessions and compulsions present in up to 70% of patients, and 16.7% meet the criteria for obsessive-compulsive disorder. Hyperactivity and attention deficit disorder has been found in up to 45% of patients. Psychosis has been reported in the acute phase of the illness. Carditis occurs in up to 80% of patients. PANDAS (pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with strep) is a controversial diagnosis in which patients develop a rather acute onset of OCD and tics that persist despite treatment.