**Pre-op Evaluation**

Well-motivated and mature patients who can tolerate lying still for several hours and cooperate during testing are the best candidates for awake craniotomy. The procedure should be explained to the patient so that he feels comfortable during the intra-operative period. The anesthesiologist should discuss the rationale for awake craniotomy, steps of the procedure, expected degree of pain and discomfort, tasks required for testing, and the possibility of adverse events. Patients undergoing awake craniotomy should be prepared psychologically in addition to medical optimization.

Premedication for craniotomy should be individualized based on the patient's level of anxiety, baseline neurologic status, comorbidities, and the anesthesia plan. Patients having seizure mapping should not receive benzodiazepines or any medications that suppress epileptiform activity. Patients must take their usual steroid, anti-epileptic, or anti-hypertensive medications.

**Monitoring**

Standard ASA monitors, including electrocardiogram, pulse oximeter, non-invasive BP, ETCO2 monitor, and temperature monitors, are used. The intra-arterial line is frequently used for beat-to-beat BP monitoring and ABG analysis.  Central venous catheterization may be done for infusion of fluids and vasoactive agents. For craniotomy in a sitting position, precordial Doppler helps detect venous air embolism. Monitors should be placed on the same side as brain lesions to avoid interfering with contralateral sensorimotor monitoring. A processed EEG monitor (bispectral index ) may be used to regulate the dose of anesthetic agents and for rapid awakening for intraoperative language testing.