Muscarinic receptor antagonists (MRAs) function by competitively blocking the cholinergic response manifested by acetylcholine (ACh) binding muscarinic receptors on exocrine glandular cells, cardiac muscle cells, and smooth muscle cells. Therefore, muscarinic receptor antagonists are heavily involved with the parasympathetic nervous system and act on different types of muscarinic receptors resulting in a wide array of clinical indications. The normal function of the parasympathetic nervous system is often recalled via the mnemonic device of "rest and digest." This is in contrast to the "fight or flight" nature of the sympathetic nervous system. Parasympathetic functions include decreasing heart rate, increasing digestive activity, permitting urination, narrowing pulmonary airways, and sexual arousal. Muscarinic antagonist agents counter these parasympathetic actions.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) encompasses a group of lung diseases that share the same pathophysiology of airway obstruction. These diseases include emphysema, bronchiectasis, asthma, and chronic bronchitis. In COPD, the increased parasympathetic activity via the vagus nerve results in increased secretion of ACh. The high levels of ACh act on bronchial smooth muscle and submucosal glandular cells, resulting in increased bronchial inflammation, mucus plugging, and bronchial smooth muscle constriction.

Organophosphates are chemicals that function as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors leading to hyperstimulation of cholinergic nicotinic and muscarinic receptors due to increased levels of ACh. Common scenarios that involve organophosphate toxicity include pediatric ingestion, suicide attempts, and farmers who suffer exposure to organophosphates in pesticides. Moreover, organophosphates can be used as nerve agents in bioterrorism. Organophosphate toxicity presents as outcomes of muscarinic receptor hyperstimulation: diarrhea, diaphoresis, increased urination, miosis, bronchospasm, bradycardia, emesis, lacrimation, and salivation. Organophosphate toxicity also causes increased nicotinic receptor hyperstimulation resulting in muscle paralysis. An immediate administration of the FDA-approved muscarinic receptor antagonist known as atropine treats the cholinergic muscarinic side effects of organophosphate toxicity. Atropine alleviates the signs and symptoms of organophosphate muscarinic toxicity by acting as a competitive antagonist of the muscarinic receptor.

Anesthesiologists frequently use muscarinic receptor antagonists to reverse non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBA) after a surgical procedure. Neostigmine is the most common agent employed for reversing non-depolarizing NMBA and functions by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase, resulting in an increased amount of ACh in the neuromuscular junction. Clinicians can administer the muscarinic receptor antagonist glycopyrrolate to attenuate the muscarinic side effects of the increased ACh from neostigmine administration. Glycopyrrolate minimizes the muscarinic side effects of neostigmine, such as salivation, lacrimation, diarrhea, bradycardia, and bronchoconstriction. Therefore, neostigmine with glycopyrrolate results in overcoming the paralysis of skeletal muscles caused by non-depolarizing NMBA without the manifestation of the cholinergic muscarinic side effects. Moreover, atropine and glycopyrrolate are muscarinic receptor antagonistic agents used by anesthesiologists to induce bronchodilation to manage severe bronchospasm that is refractory to treatment. Such efforts include 100% oxygen with hand ventilation, deepening of the anesthetic via administering a bolus of intravenous (IV) propofol or ketamine, and albuterol administration.

Other indications of muscarinic receptor antagonist agents include use in the treatment of Parkinson disease, nausea, motion sickness, urinary incontinence, and irritable bowel syndrome. These drugs can be categorized based on their duration of action into long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) or short-acting muscarinic antagonists (SAMAs).

Antimuscarinic agents appear in multiple therapeutic drug classes, including anticholinergics, antihistamines, antidepressants, and antipsychotics.