Gestational diabetes management begins with nonpharmacologic measurements like diet modifications, exercise, and glucose monitoring. The ADA recommends nutritional counseling by a registered dietitian and development of a personalized plan based on the patients BMI. In some settings, in which dietitians are not able, the physician can provide recommendations based on the three major nutritional concepts: caloric allotment, caloric distribution, and carbohydrate intake.

The amount of exercise recommended in GDM is 30 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise at least five days a week or a minimum of 150 minutes per week.

If the patient glycemic control is not adequate despite optimal adherence to diet and exercise, it is recommended to begin pharmacologic treatment. The ADA first line of treatment for GDM is insulin. The therapy with insulin has been considered the standard therapy for gestational diabetes management when adequate glucose levels are unachievable with diet and exercise.

Insulin can help achieve an appropriate metabolic control, and it is added to the management if fasting blood glucose is greater or equal to 95 mg/dL, if 1-hour glucose level is greater or equal to 140 mg/dL, or if 2-hour glucose level is greater than 120 mg/dL.

The oral hypoglycemic agents, metformin and glyburide, are increasingly being used among women with gestational diabetes, despite the lack of FDA approval. Glyburide can initiate at a dose of 2.5 mg, and the maximum dose is 20mg. Metformin therapy should start at a dose of 500 mg, and the maximum dose is 2500 mg.

Basal insulin dose can be calculated using the patient’s weight formula, 0.2 units/kg/day. If the blood glucose level becomes elevated following a meal, rapid-acting insulin, or regular insulin can be prescribed before the meal, starting the dose with 2 to 4 units.

In the first trimester, the total daily insulin requirement is 0.7 units/kg/day, in the second trimester it is 0.8 units/kg/day, and in the third trimester, it is 0.9 to 1.0 units/kg/day.

The patient should divide the total daily dose of insulin into two halves; one half given as basal insulin at bedtime, and the other half divided between three meals and given as rapid-acting, or regular insulin before meals.

Lispro and aspart have approval for usage in pregnancy. The short-acting insulin is associated with less hypoglycemia.

The long-acting insulin detemir has received approval for the usage in pregnancy. Long-acting insulin causes less nocturnal hypoglycemia.