Clinical symptoms of CO toxicity are largely non-specific and involve multiple organ systems; thus, physicians need to maintain a high clinical suspicion to make this challenging diagnosis. The most common complaint of patients presenting with CO toxicity is a headache. Dizziness, weakness, and nausea are also common, followed by confusion, difficulty concentrating, and shortness of breath. Loss of consciousness and chest pain are infrequent but suggest severe toxicity. The triad of cherry-red lips, cyanosis, and retinal hemorrhages are rare. Symptoms of CO toxicity range from mild, constitutional symptoms that may mimic a viral illness to severe to extreme presentations (comatose, hemodynamically unstable, respiratory depression, even cardiac arrest). Increased cardiac output to compensate for hypoxia can cause tachycardia and tachypnea and arrhythmias, and pulmonary edema. Decreased oxygen release due to the left-shift of the hemoglobin dissociation curve plus compensatory tachycardia can lead to myocardial ischemia. Keep in mind, those with underlying pulmonary or cardiac disease can experience worsening of their chronic symptoms with CO exposure.

As always, a comprehensive history and physical exam are key to the diagnosis. Inquire about the use of gas appliances in the home, propane stoves, exposure to fires, and source of heat if applicable. Ask about occupation and consider exposures in the workplace as construction workers or painters who may use gas-powered paint sprayers. Determine if other close contacts, coworkers, or family members are experiencing symptoms and have a heightened suspicion for CO toxicity when multiple people from the same household or setting present with similar complaints.

As above, carbon monoxide toxicity causes hypoxia and significant inflammatory changes and oxidative stress, including free radical production, inhibition of aerobic metabolism, damage to myelin, and apoptosis upon reperfusion. Organs with high oxygen demand (heart and brain) are the most prone to damage; thus, clinically apparent neurological and cardiac complaints should be of concern. Those exposed should have a comprehensive neurological exam. Neuropsychiatric testing should be considered to assess subtle deficits, such as difficulty with concentration, short-term memory loss, motor or gait problems, or changes in mood. In the acute setting, symptoms may not be perceptible; however, risk factors for long-term neurological damage include early and apparent neurologic abnormalities and sustained loss of consciousness. Thus anyone presenting as such needs a referral for follow-up.