Essential investigations advised in the evaluation of a patient are complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C–reactive protein, full biochemical count (including thyroid function tests and calcium), creatine kinase (more than 1000iu/l are very unusual in MND patients), immunoglobulins and serum electrophoresis. The electromyography, nerve conduction studies, MRI of the brain, and spine are also advised.

Nerve conduction studies can be used in assessing the type of pattern of involvement, the existence of demyelination or focal motor conduction block, and the existence of subclinical sensory abnormalities.

The diagnosis of ALS is based upon recognition of a specific pattern of weakness, ruling out other etiologies that may present with similar symptoms and ascertainment of disease progression. Various diagnostic criteria include the El Escorial, Airlie house, Awaji, and ALS diagnostic index.

While the categories of diagnostic certainty, ranged from suspected ALS to definitive ALS in the El Escorial criteria, the Airlie house criteria demarcate these clinical features and laboratory supported findings into categories ranging from definitive ALS to possible ALS.

**Biomarkers:**

Various biomarkers such as neurofilament light peptide and phosphorylated neurofilament heavy neuropeptides in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) have been used to differentiate ALS from its mimics, namely, cervical myelopathy, multifocal motor neuropathy, and inclusion body myositis.

Though abnormalities on FDG PET (F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography) imaging and spectral electroencephalography have identified selective network disruptions in structural and functional connectomes (corticospinal, orbitofrontal, frontostriatal and orbitotemporal circuits), they have not been found to be clinically useful in establishing a diagnosis of motor neuron disease with certainty.