**Clinical Workup**

Parents’ complaints of a child reading books by placing them near their face, making frequent mistakes when taking class notes, being unable to watch television from a distance of 3 feet, and having repeated headaches raise suspicion of refractive errors.

Adolescent children report clear complaints of defective far vision. Complaints of headache and eye pain should be evaluated for refractive error as a cause. Patients with astigmatism complain of asthenopia, which manifests as headaches, diurnal variations in vision, occasional diplopia, and cervical pain. Frequent squinting or deviation of the globe with loss of near vision is a common symptom observed in clinical practice.

**Medical History**

History-taking guides appropriate management. Inquiry regarding a family history of myopia, keratoconus, and retinal complications is essential.

**Diffuse Torchlight Examination**

The Purkinje images of the cornea provide information regarding phobia and tropia. The Hirschberg reflex is typically observed slightly nasal to the center of the cornea in orthotropic eyes. Furthermore, in the Purkinje images of exotropic eyes, the Hirschberg reflex is significantly nasal to the center of the cornea.

All patients with myopia were evaluated for strabismus. Exotropia is commonly observed in patients with moderate-to-severe grades of myopia. In an observational study conducted by the Mayo Clinic, 90% of patients with intermittent exotropia had myopia.

Disparities in the size of the two globes provide information on anisometropia. Eyes with a high number of refractive errors tend to have larger globe diameters, which can be identified by the amount of scleral exposure.