The management of IgA nephropathy involves first confirming the diagnosis, followed by a renal biopsy. Secondary causes of IgA nephropathy should be ruled out. The amount of proteinuria, eGFR, blood pressure, and histological appearance is important in formulating the management plan. Treatment aims to induce remission and prevent the development of complications.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers are used to manage proteinuria and lower blood pressure. Salt intake is restricted to control blood pressure. The blood pressure target is 130/80 mmHg.

Immunosuppression with corticosteroids or steroid-sparing agents is used to reduce the rate of progression.

For the few who progress to develop end-stage renal disease (ESRD), renal transplantation is an option. There is still the risk of IgA nephropathy in the transplanted kidney. Treatment with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker may delay the progression of recurrent disease in allografts.

**Conservative Therapy**

The role of conservative therapy in reducing proteinuria and slowing the rate of renal function decline in IgA nephropathy cannot be overemphasized. In the Supportive Versus Immunosuppressive Therapy of Progressive IgA Nephropathy (STOP-IgAN) study, around one-third of patients did not need immunosuppressive therapy after completing a 6-month run-in trial of optimization of conservative therapy.

The role of renin-angiotensin system (RAS) blockade in IgA nephropathy is now well established. Dual RAS blockade should not be used due to the risks of hyperkalemia. Weight reduction may reduce proteinuria in IgA nephropathy.

**Corticosteroids**

There are many studies supporting that corticosteroids reduce proteinuria in IgA nephropathy. In an old study, patients received corticosteroid therapy or supportive therapy alone. The use of RAS blockade was random, and the run-in period of optimizing conservative treatment was not carried out. In this trial, 5-year renal survival was greater in the corticosteroid group.

**Rituximab**

Although evidence for rituximab efficacy in other glomerular diseases is significant, early results in IgA nephropathy are not encouraging. A pilot study assessed the efficacy of rituximab versus conservative management in patients with proteinuria. No favorable effects on proteinuria or renal function were observed.

**Mycophenolate**

Data around the efficacy of mycophenolate are equivocal, such that current guidelines recommend against using this agent in IgA nephropathy.

**Combination Therapy**

Corticosteroids, in combination with an additional agent, are generally reserved for progressive disease. A single-center, randomized, prospective trial with “high-risk” IgA nephropathy demonstrated better renal survival in patients receiving prednisone in combination with cyclophosphamide/azathioprine as opposed to no immunotherapy.

**Novel Agents**

A novel potential therapy for IgA nephropathy is a formulation of oral budesonide. This agent can potentially act locally at the lymphoid tissue of the mucosa in the distal ileum and proximal large intestine to modulate IgA production. Higher first-pass metabolism theoretically minimizes systemic effects.