Management in the emergency department is supportive. It is essential to provide pain control, antiemetics, IV hydration, nasogastric tube, and possibly antibiotics depending upon the patients' presentation. Patients who you suspect to have a diagnosis of intussusception should be made NPO in anticipation of surgical intervention.

Adult intussusception necessitates surgical intervention because of the high incidence of malignancy.

The location, size, and cause of the intussusception and the viability of the bowel determine the choice of surgical procedure. In most cases, laparotomy diagnoses the cause of intussusception. The laparoscopic or open procedure depends on the clinical condition of the patient and especially on the surgeons advanced laparoscopic experience.

The following approach is adopted based on the location of the lesion.

**“Colo-Colic intussusception:”**The treatment of the colo-colic variety of the intussusception is often debatable. Since most of the adult intussusception almost always have underlying pathology, laparotomy rather than the reduction is also preferred.et al. supports the reduction approach before the resection while Azar et al. highly emphasized the resection before the reduction.

**“Gastroduodenal intussusceptions:”**The treatment of gastroduodenal intussusceptions requires the reduction of followed by the surgical resection of the lead point typically.

**“Coloanal intussusceptions:”**In coloanal intussusceptions, the physicians often agree on the reduction of the lesion followed by the surgical resection. This approach is also useful for the patient’s future quality of life as it leads to sphincter-saving. However, reducing the lesion can be challenging and can also lead to the dissemination of the malignant cells. For the resection, most of the physicians, perform the abdominal approach, although, in the recent era, clinicians are also utilizing the perianal and anal approach more frequently. The development of various transanal platforms for the introduction of instruments like Geloport and SILS has made it much more straightforward for the physicians to perfume the surgical resection transanally.

**Key points during the surgical approach:**

- When attempting reduction, a key feature is to milk the intussusceptum out of the intussuscipiens.

- Always use gentle manual pressure; never pull out the intussusceptum. It can lead to the iatrogenic perforation.

- In cases when the operative reduction is successful, an appendectomy can often be performed, but the blood supply of the appendix will be a crucial factor to this approach.

- Most of the data does not favor cecopexy as the risk of the recurrence is 5% even after the resection.

- Finally deciding about the laparoscopic versus the open approach is also a debatable issue. The selection is the laparoscopic approach is based on the surgeon’s expertise and the overall patient’s condition.