The pericardium is composed of two layers: a visceral layer and a parietal layer. These two layers are naturally separated by a small amount (up to 50 mL) of fluid, which provides lubrication, reducing friction on the epicardium of the heart while equalizing forces over the surface of the heart to buffer increased variation in transmural cardiac pressures. Additionally, it permits transmission of intrathoracic pressure changes to the heart. Any supraphysiologic collection of fluid between these two layers is described as an effusion. These effusions may be transudative, exudative, sanguineous, or chylous. Inflammation of the pericardium secondary to any number of diseases leads to scarring and fibrosis, which eventually causes loss of elasticity of the pericardium. This fibrosis prevents expansion of the pericardium, leading to external compression of the heart and impeded filling.

Causes of effusion and constriction overlap. In the developed world, causes include idiopathic, viral, post-procedural, radiation, drug-induced, connective tissue disease, post-myocardial infarction (Dressler syndrome), malignancy, trauma, and uremia. In the developing world, the most common cause is tuberculous pericarditis. Specifically, in regions where tuberculosis is common, tuberculosis is a frequent cause of effusive-constrictive pericarditis. In one study, patients most likely to develop constrictive pericarditis after an episode of acute pericarditis had a fever, a chronic course of pericarditis, nonviral/nonidiopathic etiology, a large pericardial effusion, tamponade, use of steroids, or failure to respond to NSAID therapy.