Plasmacytomas are treated with radiation therapy (RT), surgery, and chemotherapy as required, given the disease condition.

**Radiotherapy**

Plasmacytoma is radiosensitive, and radiotherapy is the treatment of choice in SPB and EMP, which helps achieve an 80% control rate.

Fractionated radiotherapy dose of 40-50 Gy over a duration of 4 weeks is given at the rate of 1.8 to 2.0 Gy per fraction.

Conformal RT with parallel fields is commonly used to cover planning target volume (PTV). However, intensely modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) may be used to spare important structures like eyes and glands.

The treatment field includes the tumor along with a 1.5 to 2.0 cm tumor-free margin. Furthermore, some authors recommend including the whole bone-in RT margins due to fear of recurrence, while others recommend the partially involved bone to be included in radiation therapy.

**Surgery**

Some patients get partial or complete removal of tumors for diagnostic purposes. For therapeutic purposes, surgery combined with RT provides better progression-free survival (PFS). Radical surgery of head and neck plasmacytoma should be avoided as these tumors are highly radiosensitive, and radical surgery is mutilating. In other areas, surgery should be done where feasible. Moreover, surgery is also indicated for vertebral instability, fractures, or neurologic involvement. RT can also be delayed after surgery. However, surgery without RT shows increased rates of recurrence.

**Chemotherapy**

In most studies, chemotherapy shows no beneficial effect on disease control or prevention of complications. Chemotherapy does not decrease the incidence of progression of plasmacytoma to multiple myeloma (MM), but it does increase the duration of progression to MM. Adjuvant chemotherapy may be considered for tumors greater than 5cm and in tumors unresponsive to RT.

**Autologous Stem Cell transplantation (ASCT)**

ASCT is indicated in patients with high risk, recurrent and large numbers of solitary plasmacytoma. Trials have been conducted in patients with recurrent SPB in the radiation zone, distal recurrence, and high-risk plasmacytomas, showing promising results.