The initial workup includes a complete blood count, along with a reticulocyte count. This will help to determine if the pancytopenia is secondary to decreased production. The mean corpuscular volume would point towards megaloblastic anemia. A peripheral blood smear can show abnormal cells such as blasts, dysplastic leukocytes, and immature cells. These abnormal cells may be related to conditions described in table 3. The diagnosis related to abnormal cells may require further investigations:

- Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy

- Cytogenetic testing (fluorescent in situ hybridization [FISH] or karyotype) of bone marrow or peripheral blood

- Flow cytometry of bone marrow and/or peripheral blood

- Molecular studies (e.g., mutation analysis, gene expression profiling)

- The workup should also include vitamin B12 and folate levels, liver chemistry, and lactate dehydrogenase.

Infectious workup should be done as pancytopenia can be associated with infections such as HIV, malaria, and tuberculosis.

In pancytopenia cases secondary to an acute viral infection, no further workup should be performed as most resolved rapidly. Follow-up laboratories can be performed to confirm the resolution of the pancytopenia. Similarly, in severe infections with sepsis, further workup should not be performed as pancytopenia is most likely the result of sepsis. The termination of the infection/sepsis will correct the pancytopenia.

Further evaluation for undiagnosed hepatitis and autoimmune conditions or malignancies should be pursued if suspected.

Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy can be done if no specific etiology is found to evaluate the status of the bone marrow stem cells. Bone marrow aspiration establishes the diagnosis of pancytopenia in 75% of cases.

**Table 3. Abnormal cells on blood smear with associated conditions**