The treatment and management of patients who present with warfarin toxicity can vary greatly depending on a number of clinical factors. Different categories of the patient presentation will be discussed separately. For these recommendations, coagulopathy is defined as INR > 1.4. Warfarin toxicity is defined as INR > 3.0 or >3.5 in a patient with a mechanical heart valve. Unintentional toxicity in patients who are treated with warfarin for an underlying condition (most common presentation).

The following suggests treatment strategies for a patient without significant bleeding (patients with bleeding will be discussed separately):

*It is not recommended that patients without bleeding receive FFP or Prothrombin Complex Concentrate (PCC)

Intentional ingestion of warfarin/superwarfarin in patients not currently on anticoagulation:

Any patient with an intentional ingestion of warfarin/superwarfarin warrants full evaluation regardless of the reported amount ingested.  It is recommended that patients undergo measurement of PT/INR and PTT during initial presentation.  For acute exposures, patients should receive serial INR assessments every 12-24 hours. If INR remains normalized at 36 hours and there are no signs of bleeding, no further testing is generally necessary. Patients with elevated INR displaying evidence of coagulopathy during evaluation, do not need to be started on vitamin K at unless the INR is greater than 10 or they have evidence of bleeding. There is no reason to prophylactically administer vitamin K and it is associated with increased length of stay and false reassurrance of normalization of INR, as the duration of action of warfarin is much longer than vitamin K.

Activated charcoal can be considered in patients who are awake and alert and present within 1 hour of ingestion.

Patients with acute or chronic toxicity and active bleeding:

Any patient with a coagulopathy due to a vitamin K antagonist and life-threatening bleeding should receive the following treatment:

1. 4-factor Prothrombin Complex Concentrate*, if available or 3-factor PCC and Fresh frozen plasma.  If 3 or 4 factor PCC not available, administer FFP alone.

2. Intravenous Vitamin K10mg.

3. Tranexamic acid administration should be considered.

*Prothrombin complex concentrate use has been considered controversial though can normalize an INR.  In addition to the potential for fatal thromboembolic events following administration of activated PCC, the overall thromboembolic rate associated with PCC has been noted to be approximately 0.9%.

**Plasma transfusion has been noted to be used in patients with intracranial hemorrhage who require immediate reversal of warfarin coagulopathies.  Specifically, 15-30 ml/kg has been noted to restore clotting factor levels to a baseline of 30-50%.

- In any case with major bleeding due to warfarin toxicity, a hematologist or toxicologist should be consulted.

Unintentional ingestion in patients who are not chronically anticoagulated, including pediatrics:

- In any healthy patient with a single accidental dose of prescribed warfarin or a superwarfarin rodenticide <,1mg isolated ingestion does not need any testing or evaluation.

- In any patient who is pregnant or currently anticoagulated, it is recommended that a baseline Pt/INR be established and rechecked in 48 hours.