Traditionally refeeding syndrome is evaluated by clinicians individually when enteral feeding is initiated after prolonged periods of being in a metabolically starved state. Recent recommendations on screening and surveillance of these patients focus on conserving calories and careful repletion of electrolytes. Additionally, in critically ill burn patients who are also at risk for refeeding syndrome, enteral feedings should be utilized rather than parenteral if the patient can tolerate it. Supplementation with glutamine and L-arginine has also been helpful for the reduction of systemic bacteremia, immune maintenance, and gut flora preservation in such patients.

Different management recommendations have been established; however, they remain controversial due to a lack of objective data and quantification standards. ASPEN guidelines include checking magnesium, phosphorus, and potassium levels before nutritional replenishment. High-risk patients should have electrolyte levels monitored every 12 hours for the first three days, and electrolytes should be replete based on the standard of care. ASPEN guidelines for nutritional replenishment begin with 100 to 150 g of dextrose or 10 to 20 kcal/kg in the first 24 hours and then increasing by 33% of their overall replenishment goal every 1 to 2 days.

NICE (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence) also recommended a parallel replacement of electrolytes with the commencement of feeding.

ASPEN’s proposed guidelines also recommend 100 mg of thiamine supplementation before the use of dextrose-based solutions. Routine thiamine checks are thought to have limited value. No recommendations are proposed for fluid, sodium, or protein restriction, often instituted in critically ill patients. Monitoring guidelines include checking vitals q 4 hours for the first 24 hours following nutritional replenishment and checking daily weights, input, and outputs.

The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence has also forwarded guidelines to identify high-risk patients for refeeding syndrome. Their guidelines recommend all critically ill patients should undergo a formal nutritional assessment, screening for previous alcohol use, and check for recent weight fluctuations. These guidelines recommend clinical evaluation in addition to the evaluation of baseline phosphate, sodium, magnesium, and potassium levels. Their replenishment recommendations are more specific to each electrolyte. They include “potassium (2 to 4 mmol/kg/day), phosphate (0.3 to 0.6 mmol/kg/day), and magnesium (0.2 mmol/kg/day intravenously or 0.4 mmol/kg/day orally).”

Thiamine at a dose of 100 mg should be given at least 30 minutes before starting nutritional replenishment and continued twice daily for 7 to 10 days to prevent neurological complications during nutritional rehabilitation.

Ultimately, replenishment strategies should identify high-risk patients and allow for close monitoring of electrolyte derangements. This approach helps to minimize the clinical sequelae associated with refeeding syndrome and sudden replenishment.