# Definition/Introduction

During the last decades, it has become deeply understood that drugs administered to the mothers during pregnancy might have detrimental effects on the physical development of the fetus. Thalidomide is a well-described example of how a seemingly innocent, over-the-counter medication for the morning sickness could exert such a deleterious effect on the fetus, such as miscarriages, and physical deformities.

# Issues of Concern

**Neurological Medications**

Medications for neurologic conditions are among the drugs with the highest teratogenic potential. One of the most commonly prescribed drug categories in pregnant women is antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), used primarily to prevent seizures, but also for neuropathic pain, migraines, and psychiatric disorders. AEDs in low doses can cause cognitive defects and, in higher doses, cause structural malformations. Phenobarbital, an inducer of CYP450 2B and 3A genes, at a molecular level, produces free radicals and causes DNA bases transversion while macroscopically, results in impaired growth, motor development, and fetal mortality.

**Antimicrobial Medications**

Antimicrobials are among the most generously prescribed medications during pregnancy and lactation.

Tetracyclines and fluoroquinolones are drug categories that should be avoided during pregnancy. Quinolones and fluoroquinolones, a very effective group of bactericidal antimicrobials, act by inhibiting the bacterial DNA gyrase or the topoisomerase IV enzyme. They have correlated with renal, cardiac, and central nervous system toxicity.

**Anticoagulants**

Coumarin derivatives, e.g., warfarin antagonize vitamin K, and inhibit γ-carboxylation of glutamyl residues, reducing protein binding ability with calcium. This inhibition during fetal development could explain the skeletal abnormalities, the stippled calcification of epiphysis, and the nasal hypoplasia.**Antithyroid Medications**

Maternal hyperthyroidism is still managed with antithyroid drugs during pregnancy. Propylthiouracil (PTU), methimazole (MMI), and carbimazole inhibit the TPO-mediated iodination of tyrosine residues in thyroglobulin and thus hinder the synthesis of T4.

**Vitamin A**

Vitamin A, in large doses, can also be teratogenic. A pregnant woman can receive an excessive amount of vitamin A by eating excess food or by taking nutrient supplements with Vitamin A or drugs containing retinoids.

**Hormonal Medication**

Diethylstilbestrol (DES) is a nonsteroidal estrogen drug that acts by inhibiting the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. DES was being prescribed in pregnant women for three decades, to prevent pregnancy miscarriage. Research later showed that it could potentially be a carcinogen or even a teratogen upon prenatal exposure.

# Clinical Significance

The pharmaceutical management of pregnant women requires special consideration and close collaboration from physicians, to prevent any harmful effects for both the mother and the fetus. Having the disastrous sequelae of thalidomide in mind, clinicians should be quite cautious while prescribing any drug to pregnant women and be aware of the new data about drug safety during pregnancy.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The healthcare team, i.e., clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists, must work together to make sure that pregnant patients correctly take their medications, and importantly, to discuss any serious drug side effects which they encounter, e.g., muscle pain, jaundice, bleeding, etc. A complete medication list for the patient is necessary before prescribing a medication to prevent clinically significant drug interactions, and a pharmacist can perform medication reconciliation to answer any questions or address concerns other healthcare team members may have. In addition, the healthcare team needs to discuss with the pregnant patient potential risks that medication therapy could have on the developing unborn child especially in the case of patients receiving antiseizure medication treatment.