**Idiopathic Aneurysms**

Significant controversy exists as to the exact nature of idiopathic aneurysm formation.   Whether aneurysm development is a question of nature versus nurture remains unanswered. Postmortem studies of the cerebral vasculature of aneurysm patients have revealed multiple defects in the media at multiple arterial bifurcations.  Histological exam routinely demonstrates a fragmentation of both the internal elastic membrane and the muscularis layer of the media.  Within the aneurysm pouch, the smooth muscle is generally absent, but the internal elastic membrane may continue for a variable length into the neck of the lesion.  The basement membrane underneath the endothelium is also frequently thickened and reticulated.   What remains within the wall is typically an endothelial lining, fibrous tissue, adventitia, inflammatory infiltrates, and hemorrhage of varying ages.  Calcifications are also commonly encountered.  The site of rupture is usually at the apex of the lesion with a small diverticulum often seen at the site of perforation.  Most reported cases of pediatric aneurysm seem to indicate that the histology of childhood lesions resembles that of adult saccular aneurysms.

Saccular aneurysms most often occur at the bifurcation of the internal carotid artery or one of its intermediate branches.  Not only are these branching points physically more susceptible to injury as a result of high shear forces, but pathologic analysis has also demonstrated that the number of internal elastic membrane fenestrations is frequently also highest at these areas with an injury to the internal elastic lamina Usually the initial pathophysiological alteration subsequently resulting in aneurysm formation.

What is less clear is the exact mechanism leading to this fragmentation of the elastica.  Whereas developmental defects of the muscularis layer of the media are a common finding in the cerebral arteries of normal patients, their frequency is still far greater than is the incidence of aneurysm formation.  Crompton, in a summary of 149 autopsies, noted that the size and the number of these medial gaps appears to increase with age.

Aneurysms of childhood have correlated with various collagen vascular diseases and connective tissue disorders.  The cerebral vasculature is distinguished from systemic vessels by the thinness of its walls and lack of perivascular support.  Type I and type III collagen predominate in the intracranial circulation and provide the major load-bearing capabilities of the blood vessels.  Approximately half of the adult aneurysm patients are lacking or deficient in type III collagen.   Similar findings have also been observed in the aneurysm walls of young children. Østergaard has postulated that because type III collagen deficiency produces an increased distensibility of the vessel wall, the larger size of childhood aneurysms could be explained by the occurrence of a more compliant aneurysm wall lacking in such fibers.

Another early theory proposed that childhood aneurysms arose from remnants of small vascular trunks stemming from arterial bifurcations.  They believed that saccular aneurysms arose from the stumps of vessels that disappear when the fetal cerebrovascular network matures to form the adult system of major arterial trunks.  Such vestigial or incompletely aborted nubbins could become progressively dilated to form aneurysms over time.  Isolated reports have described children with aneurysms in which only a medial defect with an intact elastica was present. Nonetheless, substantial corroborative proof of this theory is to date lacking. Given both the histologic and clinical features of childhood aneurysms, it would seem an attractive hypothesis to assume that these lesions are mainly congenital. On the contrary, Stehbens in his careful analysis of the literature reviewed the age incidence, associated conditions, prevalence of hypertension and atherosclerosis, histology, and electron microscopic structure of childhood cases and concluded that a purely degenerative pathogenetic model could explain aneurysm formation in these children. Early damage from hypertension, birth injury, trauma, and in utero insults may play a significant role in such cases.

Atheromatous degeneration and hemodynamic factors are thought to further weaken the vessels of congenitally predisposed patients. However, in our own experience and that of the literature, most children with intracranial aneurysms have little or no atheromatous changes near the aneurysm. The majority of children diagnosed with aneurysms are normotensive.  However, childhood arterial hypertension does exist as secondary phenomena in children with aneurysms who also have an aortic coarctation or polycystic kidney disease. Though the coexistence of these processes with aneurysms may be simply fortuitous, the possibility that arterial hypertension may contribute to the formation of aneurysms in these children cannot be excluded.

There are postulations that “intrinsic” defects might cause variable vessel wall dysfunction producing transient or permanent failure to repair subsequent “insults.”  The growing body of literature supports the role of both “intrinsic defects” and acquired “insults” in the development of aneurysmal disease in children. The balance between these “defects” and “insults” and the ability of the vessel wall to repair and compensate for these changes may predict whether an aneurysm forms, grows, ruptures, thromboses or regresses.

**Traumatic Aneurysms**

In cases where a history of closed head injury is present, a traumatic injury to the vessel wall may lead to subsequent aneurysm formation.  Such injury of the arterial wall may occur with increased frequency at certain locations within the cranium thus leading to the clinical observation that traumatic childhood aneurysms often occur at stereotypical sites.  These include the anterior cerebral artery distribution and its distal branches resulting from injury along the falx, the posterior cerebral artery near the free edge of the tentorium cerebelli, and the middle cerebral artery along its course on the sphenoid ridge.  Some authors have postulated a traumatic origin for many lesions in unusual locations characteristic of childhood cases.  For example, an increased prevalence of P2 segment aneurysms has frequently been reported in children.  Meyer et al. postulated that these lesions might develop during times of increased intracranial pressure early in development (i.e., during delivery) when herniation of the posterior cerebral artery over the tentorium could cause vessel injury. True traumatic aneurysms have only an intact layer of adventitia in their walls with the remaining normal structures undergoing disruption.  False traumatic aneurysms result from a fibrous organization around a prior hematoma encasing the parent vessel.  False lesions often develop after direct penetrating injury as in the case of depressed skull fractures or of penetrating injuries such as gunshot and stab wounds.  The histology of the lesions ultimately has little bearing on the clinical management of such lesions.

**Infectious Aneurysms**

Originally termed “mycotic” aneurysms by Sir William Osler in 1885, the majority of infectious childhood aneurysms result from bacterial rather than fungal infection, which is quite rare.  Mielke in his comprehensive review of the literature up to 1981 found only 13 confirmed cases of fungal intracranial aneurysms.  Aspergillus, Candida, and Phycomycetes species were, in descending order, most commonly implicated.  With few exceptions, the patients were immunocompromised with a near one-hundred percent mortality rate after diagnosis of their aneurysm. Karsner in his analysis of infectious aneurysms classified primarily three forms.  The first, being the most frequent, occurs in the setting of bacterial endocarditis with subsequent embolization; this is commonly described as the “intravascular” variety of an infectious aneurysm. The second type involves a direct extension from an adjacent nidus of infection.  This extravascular source may be secondary to meningitis, cavernous sinus thrombophlebitis, adjacent osteomyelitis, sinus or postoperative infection.  For such lesions, the anatomical location of the proximal carotid and other large proximal vessels at the base of the brain make them particularly vulnerable to injury.  The third group requires the diagnosis of an infectious aneurysm with stereotypical radiologic and histologic findings in the face of no other obvious inflammatory lesion elsewhere.

Alpha Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Pseudomonas, and Haemophilus species are encountered most frequently in children with bacterial intracranial aneurysms. The interval from the embolic event to the time of aneurysm formation can be surprisingly short with the entire course of embolism, local arteritis, aneurysm formation, and hemorrhage usually occurring within 2 days in Molinari’s experimental animal models.  Necrosis and destruction proceeded from the adventitial surface to the media with the internal elastic membrane and intima being involved last.