There is no question that opioids are important drugs for the management of moderate to severe chronic pain, but at the same time, these drugs also have a number of adverse effects, one of which is the NBS. Because the connection between opioids and increasing abdominal pain is not always recognized, these individual are often prescribed higher doses of opioids which makes the syndrome even worse. This lack of awareness leads to a vicious cycle of pain, repeated emergency department visits and hospital admissions, use of escalating doses of opioids, increased costs, and risk of more adverse reactions. The only definite way to make the diagnosis of NBS is to make a correlation between the use of opioids and the pain intensity. The use of opiates is undergoing scrutiny in the US but in the meantime, all healthcare workers who prescribe opiates need to be aware of NBS. The pharmacist may be the first one to recognize the high doses of opiates and should educate the patient about the potential adverse effects. The nurse may also be the first one to note the presence of severe constipation and abdominal pain. Once NBS has developed, there is no good effective treatment. A pain consultant and a gastroenterologist should be consulted in the management of these patients. No matter what treatment one utilizes, it is important to enroll the patient in a long-term psychotherapy program to prevent relapse and improve the quality of life.

**Outcomes**

Recent studies indicate that narcotic bowel syndrome appears to be more prevalent than once thought. Because of improved awareness and better recognition of the connection between opioid dose and abdominal pain, healthcare workers have now started to address the disorder. Now that there is more awareness of NBS, there is hope that more research will be conducted to determine trigger factors and the best way to manage the condition. However, there are not many long-term studies of patients managed for NBS. Whether withdrawal of opioids leads to better pain control and an improved quality of life remains debatable. There remain a significant number of patients with NBS who remain undiagnosed and are managed unnecessarily with other pharmacological therapies such as proton pump inhibitors, laxatives, and antacids. Until more comprehensive guidelines on the management of pain without opioids are developed, NBS will continue to persist.