# Introduction

The innate and adaptive immune system forms the basis of immunity in human beings. Innate immunity is a generalized and non-specific response to pathogens, while adaptive immunity induces pathogen-specific, more sophisticated, and long term responses.

Helper T cells activate macrophages and cytotoxic cells and stimulate antibody synthesis in B lymphocytes. Cytotoxic cells are involved in the direct killing of intracellular pathogens, and the elimination of mutated and cancerous cells. These immune responses are generated by T cells when they recognize an antigen, which is presented to them by antigen-presenting cells. The antigen is a peptide fragment generated by antigen-presenting cells when they degrade the foreign protein. To be recognized by a T cell, the antigen must bind a protein called the Major histocompatibility complex (MHC). Cytotoxic T cells recognize antigen bound to MHC protein type 1.

T lymphocytes originate from hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow and migrate to the thymus to maturate. They enter thymus at corticomedullary junction and move towards the cortex while undergoing developmental changes to accumulate in the subcapsular zone. These newly arrived intrathymic immature T cells are known as double-negative cells because they lack expression of CD4, CD8, and T cell receptors on their surface. These cells differentiate to express CD4 and CD8 on their surface and have a T cell receptor. Due to the expression of both surface markers, these cells are referred to as double-positive cells.

# Structure

T cell receptors on the cell surface and lytic granules in the cytoplasm are the two most important components of cytotoxic T cells. The lytic granules are modified lysosomes containing two cytotoxic proteins, the perforin and serine proteases called granzyme. These cytotoxic effecter proteins are secreted when the T cell is activated. T cell receptors are membrane-bound polypeptide structures formed by alpha and beta chains linked by a disulfide bond. It has three distinct regions; an extracellular part which has an antigen-binding site, a positively charged transmembrane region which anchors it to the plasma membrane, and short intracytoplasmic tail. Alpha and beta chain region which form the extracellular portion is composed of one variable and one constant region. The hypervariable domain of both chains forms the antigen-binding site. During T cell development in thymus alpha and beta chain gene segment rearrange to develop antigen diversity.

Cytotoxic TCR is associated with transmembrane glycoprotein CD8, which acts as a co-receptor. Activation of a cytotoxic T cell involves recognition of antigen on MHC class 1 by T cell receptor and a co-stimulatory signal. The co-stimulatory signal is an interaction between the CD28 molecule on the T cell surface and a protein known as B7 on antigen-presenting cells.

# Function

Virus depends on the host cell metabolic machinery to survive. Its intracellular existence protects from antibodies action. Expression of antigen on virally infected cells forms the important source of cytotoxic cell activation, which induces apoptosis of host cells leading to the death of a virus.

Cytotoxic T cells appear to be involved in the killing of some bacteria, parasite, and fungi. Granulysin is the protein involved in the killing of these pathogens, which may be present inside or outside the cell. The killing of extracellular microbes involves the release of granulysin when CTL recognize these microbes when they directly get in contact with them. When a microbe is present inside the cell CTL release granulysin intracellularly, this recognition is usually not dependent on MHC. Grnulysin disrupts the integrity of cell membrane inducing lysis of the cell.

# Pathophysiology

Human cytotoxic T cell responds to HIV infection by releasing cytolytic proteins and chemokines. Although HIV targets CD4 T cells, under the threat of the human immune system, HIV adopts several mechanisms to escape the cytolytic effect of cytotoxic T cells. Mutation in amino acid synthesis leads to variation in antigen expression and decreased recognition of infected cells by CD 8 cells. Several HIV proteins decrease MHC type 1 expression and have a pro-apoptotic effect of CD 8 cells. These immune evasion adaptations cause persistent HIV infection due to weak cytolytic response by CD 8 cells.

The inability to eliminate pathogens in chronic infection is described as an Exhaustion of T cells. This cytotoxic function loss is induced by the expression of inhibitory receptors on CD8 T cells. These inhibitory receptors impair T cell receptor signaling pathways, blocking its activation and propagation.

Destruction of muscle fibers in polymyositis is executed by perforin and granzyme, which is evident by heavy infiltration of CD8 T cells in the endomysial inflammatory infiltrate.

# Clinical Significance

Viral infection, drug toxicity, and resistance are unwanted outcomes in transplant patients. T cell immune therapy is under investigation as a possible strategy to control new viral infection and reactivation of latent viruses due to immunosuppressive drugs. This new development could also decrease unwanted drug toxicity and resistance.