# Introduction

To understand the principles of cardiac stroke volume (SV), it is necessary first to define the concept of cardiac output. Cardiac output (CO) is the blood volume the heart pumps through the systemic circulation over a period measured in liters per minute.

- CO = SV x HR

The definition of stroke volume is the volume of blood pumped out of the left ventricle of the heart during each systolic cardiac contraction. The average stroke volume of a 70 kg male is 70 mL Not all of the blood that fills the heart by the end of diastole (end-diastolic volume - EDV) can be ejected from the heart during systole. Thus the volume left in the heart at the end of systole is the end-systolic volume (ESV). The SV volume may be calculated as the difference between the left ventricular end-diastolic volume and the left ventricular end-systolic volume (ESV).

- SV = EDV - ESV

Critical care physicians employ several variables when monitoring severely ill hypovolemic patients. Utilizing stroke volume as a hemodynamic variable compared to other commonly used parameters is becoming increasingly popular in assessing cardiac pump function and organ perfusion as it is subject to less influence from compensatory mechanisms.

- LVEF = SV/EDV

# Issues of Concern

In a healthy person considered to be hemodynamically stable, cardiac output is sustained to reduce a mismatch between oxygen delivery to tissue and organ demand. For example, to meet the oxygen demands that occur during situations of a low-exercise aerobic load (not maximal load) cardiac output increases due to a linearly increasing heart rate and non-linearly increasing stroke volume response.

# Mechanism

The mean arterial pressure (MAP) calculates as the product of cardiac output (CO) and systemic vascular resistance (SVR). Of these three parameters, CO and SV change dynamically with blood pressure being the regulated variable. This is because there must be enough blood pressure to force blood around the circulatory system and perfuse the tissues.

- MAP = CO x SVR

When cardiac output decreases, for example, during an acute myocardial infarction, systemic vascular resistance must increase to maintain a relatively normal mean arterial pressure. As the cardiac output is the product of heart rate and stroke volume, both these parameters may be manipulated to maintain adequate perfusion and match the body's global metabolic needs.

There are three variables affecting stroke volume, which include contractility, preload, and afterload.

# Pathophysiology

In a hypovolemic state, an immediate decrease in venous return, and in turn, preload, initially causes a rapid decline in cardiac stroke volume.

# Clinical Significance

Hypovolemia results in inadequate left ventricular filling volume.

For critically ill patients in hypovolemic shock, stroke volume optimization algorithms are increasingly becoming utilized to monitor for early signs of hypovolemia. Critical care specialists currently use several physical examination findings during their clinical assessment to monitor a patient's volume status. Some of these include assessing axillary hydration status, mucous membrane color, sunken eyes, capillary refill time, and mentation status.

There are several new methods of measuring stroke volume that are efficient and becoming increasingly accessible. External Doppler imaging is considered the most popular and can be performed using an ultrasound probe placed along the chest wall cavity. This method is less commonly performed in critically ill patients as it is technically difficult, and the required serial measurements are impractical. In sedated patients such as those in the operating room or intensive care unit, esophageal Doppler imaging may be obtained by placing a probe in the esophagus and collecting Doppler signaling data from the descending aorta. In intubated patients, endotracheal bioimpedance can obtain the stroke volume and cardiac output from measuring the impedance signal from the ascending aorta. Some several other techniques and devices may be implemented to continuously assess for stroke volume using electrodes that will not receive coverage in this article.

Heart failure is among the most prevalent chronic conditions in the elderly population and is the fastest-growing clinical cardiac disease.

HFpEF is clinical signs of HF with LVEF over 50% whereas HFrEF is having clinical signs of HF with LVEF below 40%.