The majority of acetabular fractures require open reduction and internal fixation.  Indications for non-operative treatment include[11]:

- All stable, concentrically reduced fractures not involving the superior acetabular dome

- Fractures in which the intact part of the acetabulum is large enough to maintain stability and congruency, and those with secondary congruency

- Roof arc measurement: greater than 45 degrees on AP, iliac oblique, obturator oblique

- Low anterior column, low transverse, low T shaped

- Both column with secondary congruence (no traction)

Evaluation of the vertex (the most superior portion of the roof) on CT scan can help identify fractures that are amenable to non-operative management.  Evaluation involves scanning from the vertex to 10mm inferiorly.  If the CT scan shows no fracture lines involving this area, the fracture can be a candidate for non-operative management; displacement cannot exceed 2 mm.

Fractures treated non-operatively require bed rest initially for comfort.  Once pain allows, immobilization should follow.  Begin with foot-flat partial weight bearing (<10kg); radiographs obtained weekly for the first 4 weeks.  Progress to full weight bearing by 6 to 12 weeks (once adequate fracture healing).  Prolonged traction (4 to 12 weeks) if fracture indicates surgery, but the patient is not a surgical candidate.

Indications for ORIF include all fracture patterns that result in hip joint instability of incongruity, bone/soft tissue incarcerated within the joint, or in situations in which non-operative treatment is not a satisfactory option, total hip arthroplasty of percutaneous fixation should be a considered approach.

Percutaneous fixation is gaining popularity, especially as an adjunct to ORIF,  or in sicker patient’s or where extensive approaches not suitable

- The patient is supine or lateral, c-arm on the same side as the fracture

- Post. Column: leg held with the hip/knee flexed, leg in slight external rotation, palpate ischial tuberosity. The guidewire is placed in the center of tuberosity and drilled up PC. Frequent iliac and obturator obliques need to be taken to guide wire placement

- Anterior Column: C-arm rotated to show an inlet-iliac oblique view and an outlet-obturator oblique view; For antegrade, a starting point between the tip of the greater trochanter and thick part of the iliac crest (usually 4 to 5 cm back from ASIS). Then the wire placed into superior ramus; for retrograde, pin placement is against pubic tubercle through mini-Pfannenstiel; aimed just posterior and inferior to AIIS, and wire is passed through superior ramus

Timing for ORIF is usually 3 to 5 days after injury; delays over 3 weeks associated with poorer outcomes.

**Selection of Approach**

- Based on fracture type, the elapsed time from injury, and magnitude and location of maximal fracture displacement

- Mainstay approaches are: Kocher-Lagenbeck (KL), ilioinguinal, iliofemoral (IF), and extended iliofemoral

- KL is used for the posterior column, II and IF for the anterior column; rely on indirect manipulation for reduction of any fracture that transverses opposite column; the second approach used if an unsatisfactory reduction

- Extended IF affords access to all aspects of acetabulum; most often used for delayed treatment

**Reduction and Fixation**

- Except for both column fractures, standard fracture reduction sequence is first to reduce and stabilize displaced column fractures and then reduce any wall fracture

- After definitive fixation of reduced fragments, entire construct stabilized with buttress plates

- For both column fractures, first reduce and stabilize one of the columns to the axial skeleton (iliac wing), then the other column, and later, if present, the wall component. The entire construct then gets stabilized with buttress plates

- Columns may be stabilized in young, healthy bone using screws alone; osteopenic bone and all wall fractures require buttress plating