The diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus is made on upper endoscopy. During the exam, the endoscopist must first ascertain the esophagogastric junction (EGJ) marked by the proximal extent of the gastric folds. Patients are suspected of having Barrett's metaplasia if an abnormal-looking salmon-colored mucosa is seen extending above the EGJ into the distal esophagus. Classically it has been categorized into long or short segment disease. An international working group developed a grading system of Barrett's esophagus, known as the Prague C and M criteria, which recognizes the circumferential and maximal extent of the metaplastic epithelium. It has high overall validity for the endoscopic assessment of Barrett's esophagus. However, the clinical value of the system is yet to be established. Therefore, patients are managed by the same principles, irrespective of the length of Barrett's metaplasia.

Once Barrett's esophagus is identified, a four-quadrant random biopsy sampling technique is employed, and biopsies are obtained every 2 cm throughout the length of visible Barrett's metaplasia. Areas of dysplasia usually do not have visible endoscopic changes. Histologically, they are patchy in nature, and therefore there is a substantial sampling error for the biopsies. Many endoscopic techniques have been developed in recent years, including narrowband imaging or chromoendoscopy to enhance the detection of dysplasia. These multimodal endoscopic techniques are promising; however, more clinical information is needed to inculcate them in regular practice.