Understanding the anatomical alterations the gastrointestinal tract undergoes, is the key to grasping the mechanism of action of weight loss surgery. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) and laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (LRYGB) are the 2 main types of surgeries that are current standards of care in weight loss surgery.

With LSG the less complex; the lower portion of the stomach is divided and removed from the patient. The new smaller stomach or “sleeve,” forces the patient to eat smaller portions, and consume fewer calories. Patients become full after smaller portions than they could previously tolerate because the stomach is a fraction of the size it was before surgery. In addition to this mechanical benefit from having a smaller stomach, researchers believe that there is a hormonal benefit. Several hormones that affect satiety and hunger are produced in the removed portion of the stomach. The combined effects of mechanical and chemical changes that take place in the digestive system following LSG lead to dramatic weight loss and cure in many patients.

The second type of surgery, LRYGB is a more involved procedure where the transit of food along the gastrointestinal (GI) tract is rerouted to achieve a change in the absorptive capacity for calories. The stomach is divided into a small pouch that connects to the small intestine further down the GI tract. This effectively creates a new path for food to travel in which the proximal portion of the small intestine is skipped or “bypassed,” meaning that portion of the bowel will never come into contact with that food and hence, fewer calories are absorbed.

Other proposed mechanisms of action that contribute to weight loss after RYGB are changed in the gut microbiota, bile acids, and energy expenditure. Although these have been observed in several animal models, it is unknown exactly how these changes lead to weight loss. At this point, these are associations that have not been proven to have causality. Abundant research has been conducted to try and replicate the chemical benefits of weight loss surgery, which has been relatively unsuccessful.