**Nonoperative Treatment**

- Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, ice, rest or immobilization, and physical therapy. Immobilization can include cast or controlled ankle motion boot. Modification of shoe wear can also help unload the peroneal tendons with the use of a lateral heel wedge.

- If this does not provide any improvement steroid injection around the peroneal tendon sheath can help with pain as well as assist with diagnosis.

- PRP injections with ultrasound guidance have shown improved functional outcomes with tendinopathy in the study by Dallaudiere. Four hundred eight patients showed 23 patients with peroneal tendon disorders.

Non-operative treatment should be for 4 to 6 months to allow resolution of inflammation

**Operative Treatment**

If conservative treatment has failed, operative management options of each type of disorder are as follows:

**Peroneal Tendonitis**

- Open Debridement and synovectomy

- Arthroscopic peroneal tendoscopy

**Peroneal Tendon Subluxation**

Treatment depends on the cause of the subluxation or dislocation. Goals are to restore the fibrocartilaginous rim, the superior peroneal retinaculum, and periosteum to the fibula and obtain smooth gliding of the tendon with adequate space for motion.

- If the superior peroneal retinaculum is torn then open or endoscopic repair or reconstruction is necessary.

- Avulsion fracture of the fifth metatarsal or fibular groove should entail fixation or repair.

- If the fibular groove is shallow endoscopic or open fibular groove deepening can be performed to provide a better structure for the peroneal tendons. This procedure usually addresses cases of chronic instability.

- If there is any hindfoot varus alignment, this should also be corrected to decrease stress on the peroneus longus with hindfoot osteotomy.

- Rerouting the peroneal tendons underneath the calcaneofibular ligament.

- Bone block procedures that involve performing osteotomy of the fibula lateralizing it to create a bony block for the tendons.

**Peroneal Tendon Tears**

Treatment depends on the degree of tendon torn and whether the tear is acute or chronic

- Debridement and tubularization- partial tears of less than 50%.

- Repair end to end of acute complete tears

- Side-to-side anastomosis or Pulvertaft weave with chronic tears

- Allograft reconstruction