Flap transfer complications can generally be divided into donor site and flap issues and further separated into acute and chronic complications. Donor site problems include bleeding and infection acutely, as well as scarring and functional loss, such as gait disturbance or hand contracture, on a longer-term basis. Each donor site will have specific complications unique to it; other examples include abdominal hernia from iliac crest free flap harvest, pathological wrist fracture from osteocutaneous radial forearm free flap harvest, and foot drop from peroneal nerve injury in fibula free flap harvest.

Complications associated with the flap itself predominantly involve acute compromise of the flap's blood supply and subsequent failure of the reconstruction. Generally, the larger the defect, the more significant the consequences of flap death.

When flaps do die, it is usually a result of vascular compromise, most often obstruction of the venous outflow.

One of the more common causes of vascular insufficiency is compression from a hematoma; if identified, it should be evacuated promptly. If a vascular problem arises in a free flap, the microvascular anastomosis can be revised in the hope of improving blood flow. If vascular insufficiency occurs in regional or local flaps, the inset may be revised to decrease tension or torsion on the pedicle. In cases of venous obstruction in any flap, medicinal leeches may represent a temporary solution while the flap reestablishes venous outflow. When leeches are applied, it is important to administer a fluoroquinolone antibiotic, such as levofloxacin, to prevent infection with Aeromonas hydrophila, a Gram-negative bacillus commonly found in leeches.

Numerous factors may increase the risk of early flap failure, including infection, inadequate blood pressure, nutrition status, and many others.