Duloxetine is contraindicated in patients with concurrent or recent (within two weeks) therapy with monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, uncontrolled angle-closure glaucoma, or hypersensitivity to duloxetine. Duloxetine should also be avoided in patients with liver failure or severe renal dysfunction. Clinicians should also avoid using duloxetine in patients receiving treatment with linezolid or intravenous methylene blue due to an increased risk of serotonin syndrome.

**Precautions and Warning in Special Population**

**Pregnant Patients**

Duloxetine is FDA pregnancy category C, which means risk to fetal development cannot be ruled out. In animal reproductive studies, duloxetine demonstrated adverse effects on embryo/fetal development. Therefore, the clinician should only prescribe duloxetine if the potential benefits justify the potential risk to the fetus.

**Breastfeeding Women**

Duloxetine is excreted in breast milk and may produce effects in the nursing infant. Some studies show the relative infant dose (RID) of duloxetine to be 2.3%. RID is the dose received via breast milk relative to the mother’s dose. A RID below 10% is acceptable when breastfeeding. Some sources recommend breastfeeding only if the RID is less than 5% if the mother is on psychotropic medication. Regardless, an infant breastfed by a mother receiving duloxetine requires monitoring for behavior changes, sleep disturbance, feeding changes, growth, and neurodevelopment.

**Elderly**

SSRIs and SNRIs have correlations with several cases of clinically significant hyponatremia in elderly adults. Caution is necessary when prescribing duloxetine in the geriatric population. However, dosage adjustment based on the age of the patient is not required.