Daunorubicin can only be administered intravenously through rapidly flowing infusions. Its administration cannot be subcutaneous or intramuscular as it can cause severe local tissue necrosis through the extravasation of the drug into the surrounding tissue. In the event of extravasation, the infusion should stop immediately, and cold compresses should be applied.

Generalized dosing for daunorubicin is as follows:

**Acute Lymphocytic Anemia (ALL)**

- 45 mg/m^2 IV for one dose on days 1 to 3 of each cycle. The maximum cumulative dose is 550 mg/m^2, except in cases with prior mediastinal X-ray therapy, then reduce the dose to 400 mg/m^2.

**Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML)**

- Patient less than 60 years old: 45 mg/m^2 IV for one dose on days 1 to 2 for 2 cycles. Starting with the third cycle dose 45 mg/m^2 IV for one dose on days 1 to 3 of each cycle. The maximum cumulative dose is 550 mg/m^2, except in cases with prior mediastinal X-ray therapy, then reduce the dose to 400 mg/m^2. This should be used in conjunction with cytarabine.

- Patient 60 years and older: 30 mg/m^2 IV for one dose on days 1 to 2 for 2 cycles. Starting with the third cycle dose 30 mg/m^2 IV for one dose on days 1 to 3 of each cycle. The maximum cumulative dose is 550 mg/m^2, except in cases with prior mediastinal X-ray therapy, then reduce the dose to 400 mg/m^2. This dosing is also in conjunction with cytarabine.

Renal dosing: if serum creatinine is greater than 3.0 mg/dL, the dose should be reduced by 50%.

Hepatic dosing: If serum bilirubin is between 1.2 and 3.0, decrease dose by 25%; above 3.0 decrease by 50%.

Always refer to institutional dosing protocols before order daunorubicin.