The ALT flap can be harvested as a skin flap (skin and subcutaneous tissue) using a subfascial dissection technique to yield thin or ultrathin flaps, if necessary. It can also be harvested as a fasciocutaneous flap, which is the classically described technique and also the most commonly performed; it can be harvested as a musculocutaneous flap by including the vastus lateralis or even as a fascia only flap. It can also be harvested as a chimeric flap by adding various other tissues, each with its independent vascular supply (including rectus femoris, tensor fasciae latae, or anteromedial thigh skin along with ALT skin).

Step 1 - Flap and perforator dissection: Flap dissection can be performed either in a suprafacial or subfascial plane, depending on the defect. Generally, the subfascial dissection technique is a more straightforward way to identify the cutaneous perforators supplying the flap; it is more commonly performed, and allows the surgeon to map the perforator anatomy and tailor the flap accordingly.

The incision is made on the medial border of the flap and carried down to the fascia. Once the subfascial plane is entered, the septum between the rectus femoris and vastus lateralis is identified as a yellow fat stripe. It represents the site where septocutaneous perforators may emerge. If no septocutaneous perforator vessels are encountered, then dissection is carried out laterally in the subfascial plane to look for musculocutaneous perforators arising from the vastus lateralis. All potential perforators are identified, and one or two vessels with larger calibers and strong pulses are chosen; they will become the primary supply to the flap.

Step 2 - Pedicle dissection and isolation: Once the perforator anatomy is confirmed, the rectus femoris is retracted medially to expose the septum entirely and trace the course of LCFA. The next step involves either a straightforward dissection, in the case of septocutaneous perforators, or a tedious dissection wherein the musculocutaneous perforators are traced proximally by painstakingly deroofing the vastus lateralis. During the intramuscular perforator dissection, numerous small muscular branches will be encountered, especially on the lateral and posterior sides of the perforator, and these vessels will have to be ligated. Dissection proceeds until the selected perforators' take-off from the descending branch of LCFA is reached. Alternatively, some muscle can be included with the flap, thereby avoiding this time-consuming and challenging step of perforator isolation. The motor nerve to vastus lateralis accompanies the descending branch of LCFA and must be preserved, although branches entering any muscle harvested may be included. Further proximal dissection of the LCFA is carried out depending on the length of the pedicle required for anastomosis with the recipient vessels. Another critical point to note in the proximal dissection is that the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve is usually found proximally along a line connecting the ASIS to the superolateral patellar border. This nerve must be preserved if not harvesting a sensory flap.

Step 3 - Flap modification/thining: When thin flaps are required for resurfacing certain areas like the dorsum of the foot, hand defects, and neck defects, primary defatting can be performed. The flap pedicle must remain intact during the defatting to ensure the flap remains viable throughout the process. The defatting must progress uniformly from the deeper larger fat globule layer to the superficial smaller fat globule layer, preserving an adequate cuff of tissue around the pedicle (at least 2 cm thickness) to prevent vascular injury and flap compromise. Flap thinning is predicated on preservation of the subdermal plexus, which is perfused by perforators supplying the flap, and in turn perfuses the skin.

Step 4 - Pedicle division & microvascular anastomosis: After adequate thinning of the flap, the next step is flap pedicle division, and the time is noted ("flap off" or "ischemia" time). Then the flap is transferred to the defect and temporarily inset with a few stay sutures in order to permit proper orientation of the flap pedicle and to prevent twisting of the vessels should the flap shift. The microvascular anastomosis is sewn between the flap vessels and the recipient vessels using 8-0, 9-0 or 10-0 nylon suture under the operating microscope. After completion of vessel anastomosis ('flap on' time noted), the adequacy of flow and any anastomotic site leaks should be evaluated. Flap perfusion and viability should also be confirmed by observing the color, warmth, and bleeding from edges of the flap.

Step 5 - Flap inset: After confirmation of vessel flow and flap perfusion, the final inset of the flap is performed. Suction drains or corrugated rubber drains are inserted beneath the flap. The site of the anastomosis is marked on the flap for postoperative monitoring. Dressings and a POP slab are applied with a 'flap window' for postoperative flap monitoring. Plaster of Paris is not required for head and neck applications of the ALT flap. Tight compressive dressings are avoided in order to prevent flap pedicle compromise.

Step 6 - Donor site closure: The donor site can be closed primarily, or if the donor defect is significant and primary closure would require excessive tension, a split thickness skin graft (STSG) can be applied. A vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) dressing can be applied over the donor site closure, especially if a skin graft is used; use of a VAC dressing improves take of skin grafts and helps to prevent wound dehiscence in primary closure.

In cases when ALT perforators are absent or not of good caliber (2%), there are four alternative options:

- Proximal dissection and exploration of the transverse branch of LCFA and harvest of the tensor fasciae latae perforator flap.

- Exploration of the rectus femoris branch (medial branch of descending LCFA) and raising of the anteromedial thigh flap.

- Elevation of a free vastus lateralis muscle flap.

- Explore the contralateral thigh or abandon the procedure and look for alternative donor sites.