Eclampsia is a serious disorder of pregnancy that can jeopardize the lives of both the mother and the fetus. Because the condition can affect many organ systems, an interprofessional approach to management is highly recommended. The nurse looking after a patient with eclampsia must be aware of the potential complications to make a prompt physician referral. The nurse should monitor vital signs and for progression. Any untoward complications should be immediately addressed with the clinical team. The pharmacist should assist in medication reconciliation and in making sure appropriate treatment doses are ordered. This is a challenging disease and relatively uncommon. The clinical team, including nurses, pharmacists, and clinicians, need to assist in patient and family education. Only through an interprofessional approach will the best outcomes be achieved. [Level 5]

**Outcomes**

Over the past 3 decades, the outcomes of eclampsia have improved chiefly due to improvements in healthcare. However, morbidity from the disorder still occurs. At least 20% of women with eclampsia will go on to develop hypertension in subsequent pregnancies, and another 2 to 5% will develop eclampsia in a future pregnancy. Overall, multiparous females are not only likely to develop hypertension but also have higher mortality compared to primiparous women. Because there is no reliable test to predict who will develop pre-eclampsia, all high-risk women are urged to take low-dose aspirin during pregnancy. Finally, all pregnant women should be educated about the signs and symptoms of preeclampsia and when to seek medical help.