Haemophilus influenzae is characterized as a small (0.3 micrometer to 1 micrometer), facultatively anaerobic, pleomorphic, and capnophilic gram-negative coccobacillus of the family Pasteurellaceae. It requires a medium containing two erythrocyte factors, i.e., factor X (hematin) and factor V (phos­phopyridine nucleotide), which are released after lysis of red blood cells, thereby favoring the growth of this organism on chocolate agar. Some of H. influenzae have a polysaccharide capsule depending upon which they are classified into 6 distinct groups designated as serotypes a, b, c, d, e, and f. These serotypes are detected based on the agglutination reaction to serum specific to them. H. influenzae type b (Hib) is noteworthy because of its polyribosyl ribitol phosphate (PRP) capsule, which accounts for 95% of invasive disease in children and >50% of invasive disease in adults.

The other capsular types are less common causes of infection. Most isolates are non-typeable (NTHi), which means that they lack a polysaccharide capsule, and therefore agglutination with antiserum does not occur. More definitively, tests like polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and matrix-associated laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) are done to determine capsule types. They can also help to differentiate true NTHi from Haemophilus haemolyticus and from those H. influenzae strains that possess a complete or partial capsule focus. Human beings are the sole natural host for this bacteria, and some NTHi strains are considered to be part of the normal flora of the upper and lower respiratory tract, the conjunctivae, and the genital tract.