The following protocol for a dipyridamole nuclear stress test is in the guidelines from the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology

**(1)**Blood pressure and 12-lead electrocardiogram monitoring should be performed every minute throughout the stress test, up to 3 to 5 minutes after the test or when the patient is stable.

**(2)**Dipyridamole is administered intravenously over 4 minutes at a standardized dose of 0.56 mg/kg, with the upper limit of the weight-based dose set at 250 lbs. or 125 kg.

**(3)**The radioactive tracer is then injected 3 to 5 minutes after complete infusion of the dipyridamole.

**(4)**Single-photon emission computed tomography or positron emission tomography is then performed 15 to 45 minutes after inducing the dipyridamole-mediated stress, producing images of the blood flow throughout the patient’s heart.

**(5)**The infusion of dipyridamole should cease and aminophylline administered (50 to 250 mg; at least 1 minute after [if] the radioactive tracer has been injected) if the patient experiences any of the following:

- Severe hypotension (systolic blood pressure of less than 80 mmHg)

- Symptomatic, persistent second-degree, or complete heart block

- Other significant cardiac arrhythmia

- Wheezing,

- Severe chest pain associated with an ST depression or signs of poor blood perfusion (e.g., cold skin, pallor, or cyanosis).

**(6)**Indeed, the stress test should always be stopped early at the patient’s request; and if there are technical problems with the imaging equipment.

Patients who are ambulatory may undergo low-level exercise combined with Dipyridamole infusion,  the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology guidelines stipulate the following protocol

**(1)**Blood pressure and 12-lead electrocardiogram monitoring should be performed throughout the stress test, up to 3 to 5 minutes after the test or when the patient is stable.

**(2)**Dipyridamole is administered intravenously over a period of 4 minutes at a standardized dose of 0.56 mg/kg, with the upper limit of the weight-based dose set at 250 lb or 125 kg.

**(3)**The patient then begins 4 to 6 minutes of submaximal exercise (e.g., 1.7 mph, 0% grade) soon after the dipyridamole has been infused, and the radioactive tracer is injected within this time, while the patient is exercising.

**(4)**The patient continues exercising for at least 2 minutes after the tracer is injected to allow its distribution throughout the myocardium.