Constipation (and inability to pass meconium in neonates) can lead to the increased enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin, causing hyperbilirubinemia and jaundice. Accelerated meconium evacuation through glycerin suppositories has been proposed in the management of hyperbilirubinemia. However, there was no effect on the total bilirubin levels in the patients, though it helped in an earlier passage of meconium.

An increased amount of oligosaccharides, like fructose and galactose, are being added to the formulations due to their prebiotic role in increasing the frequency of stool passage. In a randomized controlled study, 76 newborns were assigned to two groups: one with the formulation containing oligosaccharides (prebiotics) and the other with no oligosaccharides. The study showed a statistical significance of p less than 0.05 in the difference of the transcutaneous bilirubin levels in the prebiotic group compared to the control group.

Beta-glucuronidase enzyme inhibition by L-aspartic acid and enzymatically-hydrolyzed casein has been shown to reduce enterohepatic circulation in constipated babies.

Sn-mesoporphyrin is an inhibitor of the heme oxygenase enzyme involved in the catabolic pathway of hemoglobin metabolism. This therapy is still undergoing clinical trials and has not been approved for use by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

Therapies based on gene and cell transfer techniques, although experimental at present, might play an important role in the management of hereditary and metabolic syndromes.