Systemic lupus erythematosus can cause cutaneous vasculitis, cytopenias, arthralgias, positive RF, and glomerulonephritis. Further, there can be overlap with patients with underlying systemic lupus erythematosus developing cryoglobulinemic vasculitis. Systemic lupus erythematosus is usually associated with low complements, both C3 and C4, and not just isolated C4 depletion. Serum cryoglobulin detection and pathological evaluation are critical in differentiating these two conditions.

Rheumatoid arthritis is associated with joint pain and a positive RF. Rarely, leukocytoclastic vasculitis can be seen in rheumatoid arthritis as well. However, rheumatoid arthritis is associated with the presence of inflammatory arthritis and synovitis, which is usually absent in cryoglobulinemic vasculitis, where patients have arthralgias but usually lacks true synovitis. Further, anti-CCP antibodies are specific for rheumatoid arthritis and are not seen in cryoglobulinemic vasculitis. Renal involvement is rare in rheumatoid arthritis. Complements are usually normal in rheumatoid arthritis. Cryoglobulins will be absent.

Systemic sclerosis can cause cutaneous manifestations like digital ulcers and gangrene. However, other clinical features of systemic sclerosis, including sclerodactyly, calcinosis, interstitial lung disease, gastrointestinal dysmotility, are not seen in cryoglobulinemic vasculitis. Renal involvement in systemic sclerosis is rare and is manifested as scleroderma renal crisis which is different from cryoglobulinemic vasculitis induced glomerulonephritis. Both of these can be differentiated by kidney biopsy.

Henoch Schlein purpura (HSP) causes palpable purpura in lower extremities but can be differentiated by immunofluorescence of skin biopsy. In HSP, immunofluorescence usually shows the deposition of IgA and not immune complexes.