The nucleus gustatory is a paired structure found in the nucleus of the solitary tract located on both sides of the posterolateral portion of the medulla oblongata. The nucleus of the solitary tract or nucleus solitarius runs longitudinally and divides into two parts: a caudal part and a rostral part. The caudal portion primarily regulates the function of the cardiopulmonary center of the brainstem as well as regulating functions of the gastrointestinal system. The rostral portion is what is known as the gustatory nucleus, and receives inputs from chemoreceptors on the tongue and epiglottis via afferent cranial nerve fibers from VII, IX, and X. One notable difference in the two portions of the nucleus solitarius is the afferent inputs. The nucleus gustatory, in the rostral portion of the nucleus solitarius, receives inputs from cranial nerves VII, IX, and X, whereas the caudal portion of the nucleus solitarius lacks input from cranial nerve VII.

The function of the nucleus gustatory is to relay information regarding gustation from taste buds to the gustatory cortex. This process is dependent on the convergence of visceral afferent taste fibers from the cranial nerves and an intact pathway to the thalamus. Taste from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue travel along the chorda tympani, a branch of cranial nerve VII. It then moves toward the geniculate ganglion which houses the cell bodies of the first-order neurons in this pathway. The bipolar neuron found in this ganglion synapses in the medulla at the nucleus gustatory. Taste from the posterior one-third of the tongue travels along the lingual branch of cranial nerve IX to the petrosal ganglion. The bipolar neuron found here also serves as the first-order neuron in the taste pathway and synapses in the nucleus gustatory. Finally, taste from the pharynx, specifically the epiglottis, travels along the vagus nerve to the nodose ganglion. This ganglion also houses a bipolar neuron, and it is the last location for the cell body of a first-order neuron in the taste pathway. The vagus nerve continues until it synapses in the nucleus gustatory in the medulla. After receiving these inputs, second-order neurons in the nucleus gustatory project to the ventral posterior medial (VPM) nucleus of the thalamus. The third-order neurons found in the thalamus project to the gustatory cortex after synapsing in the thalamus with neurons from the nucleus gustatory.