An interprofessional treatment will involve an integrated care system combined with an evidence-based approach to manage and evaluate all joint activities. [Level 1]

In the event of surgical AVR, an interprofessional team utilizing a systematic, coordinated postoperative treatment plan would help deliver the best results possible. The function of nursing care, especially in the case of surgical wound infections, can not be underestimated. If the patient wants to be discharged home with a drain, consultation with a social worker and community nurses may be needed. In the event of deep vein thrombosis with long-term immobility in the hospital, physical therapy might be required. Although cardiothoracic surgeons, interventional cardiologists, and anesthesiologists perform primary roles during surgical and percutaneous AVR, cardiologists and intensivists in critical care play an important role in pre and postoperative treatment. Cardiovascular, operating room and critical nurses are integral to care. In the case of wound infection, the pharmacist must ensure that the patient is receiving the correct analgesics, antiemetics, and antibiotics, while the nurses play a crucial function in tracking vital signs, pre and postoperative care, and patient awareness. Patients undergoing transcatheter AVR have to be thoroughly evaluated for anatomical challenges and comorbidities that may affect the management strategy. Post-procedural monitoring of anticoagulation and prophylaxis for bacterial endocarditis for high-risk procedures is essential.

In conclusion, aortic stenosis can be caused by a congenitally abnormal valve or other acquired conditions such as rheumatic heart disease. Patients will have a prolonged asymptomatic period before developing symptoms such as chest pain, exertional dyspnea, or fatigue. Mortality drastically increases after the development of symptoms. Indications for AVR are based on the status of symptoms, LVEF, and other cardiac surgery indications. Surgical AVR and transcatheter AVR are the mainstays of treatment. [Oxford CEBM Level of Evidence - 1]