Clinical findings include fever, leukocytosis or leukopenia, purulent secretions, and worsening gas exchange. Chest X-ray with new or worsening pulmonary infiltrates, cavitation, air bronchograms, or pneumatoceles is a requirement. Microbiologic data are important, both for diagnosis and for guiding treatment. Samples of lower respiratory tract secretions are often obtained and sent for culture as well as blood cultures in all patients suspected of ventilator-associated pneumonia. However, many experts recommend against taking a culture from intubated patients as most are colonized after 48 hours, and the culture is of little clinical use.

In adults, specimens are obtained via bronchoscopy, lung biopsy, lung aspiration, protected specimen brushing (PSB), or transtracheal aspiration rather than by aspiration of tracheal content through an endotracheal tube.  However, use of bronchoscopic bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) or PSB to obtain secretions of the lower respiratory tract for quantitative bacterial culture is limited in children due to technical difficulties and potential for complication.  This problem is even more challenging in NICU patients.

Obtaining a microbiological specimen from neonates is often impossible, so the CDC has come up with purely clinical criteria for the diagnosis of ventilator-associated pneumonia among infants less than one year of age. These include

- Worsening gas exchange as evident by oxygen desaturations,

- Increased oxygen requirements,

- Increased ventilator demand and

- Three of the seven following findings: temperature instability, leukopenia or leukocytosis and left shift, new onset of purulent sputum or change in sputum character or increased respiratory secretions or increased suctioning requirements, apnea, tachypnea, nasal flaring with retraction of chest wall or nasal flaring with grunting, wheezing, rales or rhonchi, cough, bradycardia, or tachycardia.