Nocturia becomes more common and more severe with age. More than 50% of men and women over the age of 60 have been diagnosed with nocturia. While the overall rate is about the same between genders, there is a higher prevalence of nocturia in younger women than in younger men. This is reversed in older patients, where older men are more likely to have symptomatic nocturia than older women. The incidence of nocturia in men aged 70 to 79 years with 2 or more nightly voids is almost 50%, and with a rapidly aging population, the incidence of clinically significant nocturia will only increase.

Contributing factors will vary somewhat with gender. Women aged 40 or older have a 40% incidence of at least minimal nocturia, and pregnant women frequently have nocturia which almost always resolves spontaneously approximately 3 months after delivery.

The incidence of nocturia is highest in blacks and does not appear to be related to socioeconomic factors. Hispanics tend to have a somewhat higher incidence of nocturia than whites but less than the black population.

Obesity appears to be an independent risk factor that increases the incidence of nocturia by 2 to 3-fold.

Patients with nocturia and other lower urinary tract symptoms will often delay seeking help for these conditions. Voiding diaries are extremely useful and essential tools to evaluate nocturia and diagnose nocturnal polyuria, but they are rarely requested by most physicians treating nocturia despite universal recommendations in the literature to obtain them. Initial treatment is often arbitrary, with 59% of men receiving alpha-blockers and 76% of women getting anticholinergics, even though such treatments have shown only modest benefits in clinical trials, and the primary cause of nocturia for most patients (nocturnal polyuria) is best treated by other means such as nocturnal supplemental anti-diuretic hormone (desmopressin).