The tympanic membrane consists of three layers, a thin sheet of connective tissue covered by epithelium on both sides. Its lateral (outer) surface is covered by a thin epidermis, i.e., stratified squamous keratinized epithelium, that is continuous with the epidermis of the external acoustic meatus. The medial (inner) surface is covered by a simple cuboidal epithelium that is continuous with the epithelium of the mucous membrane of the tympanic cavity.

The fibrous layer is thickened at the edge of the inferior part of the tympanic membrane, forming a tough ligamentous ring, with which the tympanic membrane is lodged into the tympanic sulcus on the temporal bone. The manubrium of the malleus is attached to the medial surface of the tympanic membrane, and it pulls its anterior and inferior portion medially, giving it a conical shape. The central point of maximum depression is called the umbo, and it marks the end of the manubrium. When observing the lateral surface of the tympanic membrane, superiorly and anteriorly from the umbo, a line, the malleolar stria that corresponds to the manubrium of the malleus can be seen. Directly above the stria, the lateral process of the malleus bulges and forms the malleolar prominence. The part of the tympanic membrane above the malleolar prominence is not taut as it bridges the tympanic sulcus and is therefore called the pars flaccida (also called Shrapnell's membrane). The rest of the tympanic membrane, below the prominence, is taut and is called the pars tensa.

There are also microstructural differences in the lamina propria of the pars tensa and flaccida. While the pars tensa has organized radial and circular fibers, the pars flaccida instead has loosely arranged elastic collagen.

The tympanic membrane has a rather simple function, sound transmission, and amplification. Similar to the membrane on a drum, the tympanic membrane vibrates as it encounters sound. It then transmits these vibrations to the ossicles of the middle ear to be further passed on to the cochlea of the inner ear for transduction.