This section focuses on describing the clinical symptoms and pathophysiological findings that distinguish DLB with PD dementia, as those are the most common diseases associated with Lewy body deposition. The section also notes promising biomarkers for the early diagnosis of DLB or PD. DLB is the second most common type of progressive dementia after Alzheimer disease dementia. DLB predominantly shows greater cognitive, psychiatric, and autonomic deficits than PD, which includes severe and rapid fluctuations in verbal memory, frontal executive function deficits, attention, spontaneous visual hallucinations, delusions, orthostatic hypotension, prominent falls/gait disturbances, and more rapidly progressive cognitive decline compared to motor symptoms. Similarities with PD include the development of motor symptoms including rigidity, akinesia, mood disturbances, REM sleep behavior disorder, language, and visuospatial and constructive deficits, and cognitive impairment (develops later in PD patients). Resting tremors are more common with Parkinson disease than DLB. The typical rigidity, tremors, akinesia, and postural instability precede the cognitive deficits in PD dementia.

PET and postmortem studies have revealed more pronounced cortical atrophy, elevated cortical and limbic Lewy body pathologies, higher Abeta and tau loads in cortex and striatum in DLB compared to PD dementia. Specifically, gray matter cortical atrophy more frequent and more severe in DLB. White matter hyperintensities in the temporal lobe are more severe and more frequent in DLB. There is also a difference in functional connectivity and corticostriatal disruption with PD dementia being characterized by frontal cortical disruption and DLB with more parietal and occipital disruption. Additionally, amyloid and tau signal seems to be more prevalent in DLB on PET imaging and CSF profiles. Functional differences in advanced nuclear imaging are seen in DLB compared to PD dementia with decreased DAT binding in the caudate related to functional impairment. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) alpha-synuclein oligomers are increased in PD dementia in comparison to DLB. Overall, PET studies have failed to show any differences in cortical and striatal cholinergic and dopaminergic deficits.

Clinical management of both DLB and PD dementia includes cholinesterase inhibitors like rivastigmine. Atypical antipsychotic agents like quetiapine may improve psychosis in PDD/DLB, but the evidence for this is poor and adverse effects from such therapy are common and may be severe. Non-pharmacological interventions can also be effective but require further study. Currently, no disease-modifying therapies are available, although current efforts are on the way to find diagnostic markers that could identify these diseases sooner in hopes to start treatment sooner and prolong the disease progression. Many biomarkers including CSF oligomeric A-syn, DJ-1, lysosomal enzymes (e.g., glucocerebrosidase) show promise as a diagnostic biomarker of PD, but require the standardization of available assay, homogenous protocols, and surpass other methodological challenges to reach a large scale validation that can be reliable for clinical use.