The process of oxidative phosphorylation involves understanding fundamental concepts: electronegativity, the sources of reduced NADH and FADH2, and the anatomy of the mitochondrion.

- Electronegativity is the ability of an elemental atom to attract a bonding pair of electrons. Elements with a high electronegativity can attract electrons to their atomic nuclei more easily. Fluorine is considered the most electronegative element; however, oxygen is also highly electronegative and has a low molecular mass. Given its greater availability in the atmosphere, elemental oxygen is used as the final electron acceptor in oxidative phosphorylation.

- NAD+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) and FAD+ (flavin adenine dinucleotide) are free (non-membrane bound) electron carrier coenzymes that are present in the cell cytoplasm and mitochondrial matrix. They get reduced in several reactions, principally including glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid (citric acid) cycle, and beta-oxidation of fatty acids. The reduction of NAD+ and FAD+ generates energy-rich NADH and FADH2 that are shuttled to the mitochondrion, delivering high energy electrons to the protein complexes in the electron transport chain.

- The mitochondrion consists of inner and outer membranes, both of which are composed of phospholipid bilayers and integral membrane proteins involved in enzymatic action and molecular transport. The inner membrane has inward-facing fold-like projections known as cristae that vastly increase the surface area of the membrane to maximize the amount of energy production. The protein complexes involved in the electron transport chain are studded along this membrane. The inner membrane envelops the matrix, which houses mitochondrial DNA, ribosomes, and a multitude of enzymes and metabolites. The space between the inner and outer membrane is known as the intermembrane space; this is the site of hydrogen ion deposition for the protein complexes in the electron transport chain. The increased hydrogen ion (H+ ion) concentration (and effectual decreased pH) generate a membrane potential across the inner mitochondrial membrane.