Lumbar disc herniation frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma.  Approximately 80 % of the population sustains an episode of low back pain in their lifetime. Patients with lumbar disc herniation may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms such as low back pain and muscle spasm. While the physical exam may reveal that the patient may have a lumbar disc herniation, it is difficult to confirm without proper imaging studies.

While the primary care practitioner is almost always involved in the care of patients with a lumbar disc herniation, it is essential to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that include a pain specialist, a physiatrist, and a neurosurgeon. Collaboration, shared decision making, and communication are crucial elements for a favorable outcome. Physical therapists are essential to the initial management of patients with a lumbar disc herniation. The nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional group as they will monitor the patient's vital signs and assist with the education of the patient and family.

In the postoperative period for pain and wound infection, the pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the right analgesics and appropriate antibiotics. The radiologist also plays a vital role in determining the diagnosis. An interprofessional team that provides a holistic and integrated approach to preoperative and postoperative care can help achieve the best possible outcomes. The interprofessional care provided to the patient must use an integrated care pathway combined with an evidence-based approach to planning and evaluation of all joint activities.