The first step in managing patients with complicated cataracts involves arriving at an etiological diagnosis. Appropriate patient selection is important to identify those that will benefit from cataract surgery. Different forms of conditions have varied prognoses. Hence a proper diagnosis is the most important step. Since the majority of complicated cataracts develop secondary to uveitis, detailed management of uveitic cataracts is required.

**Medical Management**

The management should aim at the control of preoperative and postoperative Inflammation. The use of preoperative supplementary steroids reduces the risk of postoperative complications. The patient should be started on steroid treatment with topical drops, oral or periocular. The aim is to achieve adequate control of intraocular inflammation to avoid intraoperative and postoperative complications. To achieve a good visual prognosis postoperatively, the eyes at significant risk of complications should be identified, and appropriate management started. Eyes at risk of developing cystoid macular edema (CME) include chronic anterior uveitis secondary to sarcoidosis, eyes with earlier episodes of CME (e.g., intermediate uveitis).

In these situations, perioperative steroid prophylaxis should be given. Intraoperative steroids in the form of intravitreal preservative-free triamcinolone acetonide (4 mg in 0.1 ml) yield good control. The risk of recurrence of uveitis should be assessed in conditions such as Vogt-Koyanagi Harada disease, Behcet disease, and birdshot choroidopathy. In these situations, steroids can be given orally 1 mg per kg/day starting 3 days preoperatively, tapering according to the level of inflammation postoperatively. Topical prednisolone acetate 1% eye drops may also be used as well as periocular steroids. In eyes with infectious uveitis that tends to recur, such as ocular toxoplasmosis and herpes simplex uveitis, antimicrobial prophylaxis should be considered in the preoperative period. In these cases, oral acyclovir 400 mg twice daily or oral valacyclovir 0.5 mg four times daily should be started in the preoperative period and continued for 2 to 3 weeks postoperatively to prevent a recurrence.

**Surgical Management**

- Indications for surgery****in patients with uveitis include:
- Phacoantigenic uveitis (leakage of lens proteins leading to inflammation). Cataract removal is obligatory
- Visually significant cataract-the preoperative inflammation has to be controlled
- Dense cataracts that obscure the posterior segment visibility in cases of suspected posterior segment pathology
- Cataract that impedes adequate visualization of the posterior segment in cases where posterior segment surgery is indicated

- Timing of cataract surgery**:**For a successful surgical outcome, the eye needs to be quiet for at least 3 months prior to surgery. The disease should also be well-controlled in the postoperative period. This will curtail the risk of postoperative complications.

- Anesthesia- Local anesthesia such as a peribulbar block should be considered to avoid pain during iris manipulation and increase patient comfort.

- Surgical Incision – A scleral or temporal clear corneal incision of adequate length should be given to prevent iris prolapse.

- Capsulorhexis should be of an adequate diameter of about 5-6 mm, because a large diameter poses a risk of IOL decentration, whereas a small diameter is associated with capsular phimosis and posterior synechiae.

- Cataract surgery technique- Cataract extraction by phacoemulsification and in-the-bag Intraocular lens implantation is preferred for the uveitic cataract due to a reduced chance of inflammation. Phacoemulsification technique may vary depending upon the zonular status and the density of the cataract. An effort should be made to use less ultrasound power to prevent a posterior capsular tear. However, the surgical technique can be modified depending on the intraocular conditions. For eyes complicated by glaucoma, cataract surgery is not combined with trabeculectomy as the risk of bleb failure is high. Cataract extraction should be done first. When there are retinal complications such as epiretinal membranes or retinal detachment, cataract surgery can be combined with vitreoretinal surgery. In such cases, the decision for IOL implantation is to be taken by the surgeon.

- Intraocular lens**-**Ideally, an in-the-bag IOL implantation should be performed. However, anterior chamber IOL, sulcus fixated IOL, and scleral-fixated IOL are other options. The most suitable IOL for in-the-bag implantation and the anterior chamber is an acrylic, single-piece, square-edged IOL. This reduces the rate of complications such as postoperative cystoid macular edema, posterior synechiae, pupillary membrane, posterior capsular opacification as compared to silicone IOL.

**Surgical Challenges -**The various challenges faced intraoperatively include inadequate visualization due to a small pupil, synechiae, pupillary membranes, and corneal opacification. There is a high risk of intraoperative complications such as posterior capsular rent, zonular dehiscence, anterior chamber hemorrhage, and pigment dispersion. The common challenges faced include-

- Small pupil-  This situation can be tackled by using intracameral adrenaline diluted with a balanced salt solution. High molecular weight ophthalmic viscosurgical devices such as sodium hyaluronate 2.3% are also useful.

- Anterior or posterior synechiae - Peripheral anterior synechiae( PAS) should be managed before the posterior synechiae. PAS can be released by injecting high molecular weight viscoelastic, sweeping a 27 gauge cannula to separate the iris from the cornea and not detach the Descemet's membrane.  For posterior synechiae, iris synechiolysis, pupillary membrane removal, use of iris hooks, and other pupil expansion devices should be implemented.

- Zonular dehiscence- Should be managed using capsular tension rings.