Central and neuropathic causes of anhidrosis can occur anywhere along the neural track, as previously stated. There are diagnostic clues that will aid in locating the area of the lesion. If there is the involvement of the pons or medulla, the patient will have ipsilateral facial and neck anhidrosis.

Drugs that interfere with the synaptic transmission in the autonomic ganglia will lead to anhidrosis:

- Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antagonists such as hexamethonium and trimethaphan

- Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor antagonists such as atropine or scopolamine

- Calcium channel blockers

- Alpha-adrenergic blockers such as phentolamine

- Alpha2-adrenergic agonists such as clonidine

- 5-fluorouracil

- Topiramate

- Zonisamide

- Quinacrine

There are numerous causes of abnormalities in the sweat gland that cause anhidrosis. Among the various causes are several hereditary and acquired systemic diseases that present with generalized or localized anhidrosis. Males with X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia will have an absence of sweat glands, whereas female carriers will have hypohidrosis or reduced sweating.

Local tissue destruction can be the culprit of acquired localized anhidrosis. Tumors, radiation therapy, systemic sclerosis, burns, graft-versus-host disease, acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans, and Sjögren syndrome can distort the normal architecture of the skin with subsequent anhidrosis. Entities that lead to obstruction of the glands are also implicated in anhidrosis. Psoriasis, lamellar ichthyosis, miliaria, eczematous dermatoses, porokeratosis, and bullous diseases are examples of obstruction.