**Primary Factors Contributing to the Aging of the Midface**

- Gravity: posited to be the central factor in facial aging secondary to its downward pull on the poorly anchored superficial soft tissue envelope.

- Volume loss: includes fat, muscle, and bone loss

**Relevant Anatomy**

- Superficial cervical fascia: encompasses the majority of superficial facial fat and is continuous with the platysma muscle in the neck, SMAS in the midface, and galea in the upper face.

- Superficial musculoapeneurotic system: a fibrofatty layer that lies superficial to the parotidomasseteric fascia (which is contiguous with the deep cervical fascia), and is itself contiguous with the platsyma inferiorly, the temporoparietal fascia superior to the zygomatic arch, and the mimetic muscles medially.

- Deep cervical fascia: covers the deeper structures of the face, including the masseter, facial nerve, and buccal fat pad.

- Deep plane: this is the embryologic cleavage plane that separates the superficial soft tissue envelope (covered by the superficial cervical fascia) from the deeper structural aspects of the face (encompassed by the deep cervical fascia).

- Key retaining ligaments of the face and neck: zygomatic (strongest of all the facial retaining ligaments), maxillary, masseteric, mandibular, and cervical.

- Facial nerve: at risk for injury during facelift dissection, particularly at the temporoparietal, pre-parotid, and mandibular angle regions; the facial nerve runs deep to the SMAS and the mimetic muscles, except for the levator anguli oris, buccinator, and mentalis.

- Great auricular nerve: sensory nerve coursing over the body of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, located approximately 6.5 cm below the external auditory canal.