The first-line treatment and initial management for a patient with obesity are lifestyle interventions. This would include counseling the patient on nutrition, exercise, sleep, stress, and developing health goals. When considering a patient for an intragastric balloon, the BMI guidelines differ between Europe and the US. However, in both circumstances, patients must have attempted previous weight loss and management with diet and exercise. In Europe, a patient with a BMI of 27 kg/m^2 is the threshold, but in the US, it is a BMI of 30 kg/m^2.

In Europe, a patient with a BMI of 27 to 35 kg/m^2 or in the US with a BMI of 30 to 35 kg/m^2, an intragastric balloon can be considered an early intervention therapy to induce weight loss. These patients do not meet the eligibility criteria to undergo bariatric operations, but early intervention would benefit from preventing or even treating obesity-related illnesses. If a patient has a BMI of 35 kg/m^2 with one or more of the aforementioned obesity-related medical conditions or a BMI greater than 40 kg/m^2, bariatric surgical intervention would be the treatment of choice. Approximately 1 to 2% of these patients who meet these criteria undergo surgical intervention given risks associated with surgery.

In this circumstance, although the patients are eligible for bariatric surgery, alternative interventions to help induce weight loss, like intragastric balloon therapy, can be used. Suppose a patient has a measured BMI that is greater than 50 kg/m^2. In that case, a patient can be considered high risk for either an anesthesia-related complication or a technical complication during surgical intervention. This is secondary to the large amounts of intra-abdominal fat and hepatomegaly.

These patients can be considered for an intragastric balloon as a bridging intervention before undergoing a bariatric operation. Having notable preoperative weight loss can decrease the complexity of the surgery and the associated risks with the surgery at hand. Out of the noted criteria for intragastric balloon placement, it is used primarily for those not meeting the BMI criteria for bariatric surgery. When counseling a patient who qualifies for bariatric surgery, this should be encouraged as it has superior weight-loss efficacy and durability compared to lifestyle changes alone. Further research is needed to evaluate the intragastric balloon as a bridging therapy to bariatric operations.