**Stages of Charcot**

Common classifications that map the phases of Charcot include the Eichenholtz classification and the Sanders and Frykberg classification.  Eichenholtz classifications describe the three stages of disease progression based on clinical and radiographic findings. The Sanders/Frykberg classification is used to type and class the five common anatomical locations of Charcot in the foot.

**Eichenholtz**

**Stage 0 Pre-Charcot/Prodromal**

- Clinically: red, hot, swollen foot. No deformity.

- Radiographically: no changes yet are seen. Normal radiograph

**Stage I Development/Destruction**

- Clinically: Erythema, foot edema, elevated temperature, no pain

- Radiographically: Boney debris at joints, fragmentation of subchondral bone, joint subluxation, and/or fracture-dislocation

**Stage II Coalescence**

- Clinically: Decreased signs of inflammation

- Radiographically: Worsening of stage 1 features.  Absorption of boney debris with new bone formation. Coalescence of large fragments with sclerosis of bone ends.  Some increased stability

**Stage III Consolidation**

- Clinically:  Resolution of inflammation.  Changes in overall foot architecture due to underlying final bony remodeling that can lead to new pressure points which are at risk of ulceration

- Radiographically: Remodeling of affected bones and joints

**Sanders and Frykberg**

- Metatarsophalangeal to interphalangeal joints: 15%

- Tarsometatarsal joints: 40%

- Naviculocuneiform joint, navicular-cuneiform, talonavicular and calcaneocuboid joints: 30%

- Ankle and subtalar joints: 10%

- Calcaneus: 5%