The patient’s skin is prepared for surgery in standard fashion. The axillary node biopsy is done prior to any breast surgery planned for that day. If blue dye will be in use in addition to a radiotracer, it is injected either near the tumor bed without radiographic localization or under the areola. This is done just before the start of the procedure because the blue dye is a much smaller molecule than the radiotracer, and it moves faster in the lymph system. Breast massage helps facilitate the movement of the blue dye. If radiotracer has been injected prior, the gamma probe is an option to plan the site for incision, which is usually lateral to the pectoralis major muscle. The gamma probe then guides dissection through the subcutaneous fat and into the axillary fat pad to the node that registers on the gamma probe. When also using blue dye, this node is usually also blue. Care should be taken not to angle the gamma probe toward the site of injection on the breast as this can falsely elevate the amount of radioactivity picked up by the probe and can cause dissection to be misguided. Once the node is identified and retrieved, a reading from the node off of the field is taken, and a reading of background is taken within the wound. If the background reading is high, then the search for an additional node should continue. After obtaining hemostasis, the wound is closed per surgeon preference. Frozen section of the lymph node is not necessary if completion axillary dissection is not planned based on the result.

If using only blue dye, the incision is at the lateral border of the pectoralis muscle, and the blue node can usually be located by direct visualization only.