Apart from the recycling of substrates, lysosomes are involved in other crucial functions to cellular homeostasis.

Lysosomes have three major components:

1. Luminal proteins which are either acid hydrolases (enzymes) or their activators.

2. Membrane-integral proteins:

- Structural proteins(amino acid and lipid transporters).

- Ion-channels like calcium channels.

- Trafficking and fusion machinery.

- Membrane catabolic enzymes.

- Vesicular ATPase which functions both as a proton pump and nutrient sensor.

3. Lysosomal associated proteins.

Abnormalities in one or more of the above components can disrupt lysosomal functions and result in LSDs.

The degradation function of lysosomes has three components. Among them, phagocytosis and endocytosis concern extracellular particles. The former leads to the formation of a phagosome and the latter an endosome. The process of degrading endogenous substances is called autophagy. It results in an autophagosome that is then extruded out of the cell by exocytosis.

Besides, lysosomes contribute to the formation of filopodia by fusion with the cell plasma membrane. They also play crucial roles in specialized secretion and plasma membrane repair (by donating membrane). They sense nutritional and other environmental cues. They are dynamically involved in cellular homeostasis, switching between anabolism and catabolism.

Lysosomes extensively communicate with the endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, peroxisomes, and exchange both information and content.

Microtubules are the cell's roadways facilitating transportation. Lysosomes move bidirectionally along these using the motor proteins dynein and kinesin.

Lysosomes production is a transcription regulated process.

Lysosomes have a vital role in:

- Antigen presentation

- Regulation of inflammation

- Autoimmunity

They may be a common denominator for many neurodegenerative, metabolic diseases, and cancer apart from LSDs.

The structural and enzymatic proteins are encoded for by specific genes; mutation in the gene encoding the enzyme results in its deficiency or absence. The corresponding substrate is not catabolized and accumulates within the lysosomes. It leads to swelling of the cells and, over time, organ dysfunction. The compounds upstream accumulate as well, while those downstream are, decreased or absent. It is based on the biochemical tests that show absent or deficient enzyme and high levels of upstream compounds.

When an enzyme activator or structural protein is defective, there is no dearth of the enzyme. The reaction cannot proceed normally, and upstream compounds accumulate, are not moved out of the cell; therefore, accumulating and causing dysfunction. If they manage to leak in excess into the extracellular space, they may leak into body fluids and aid in diagnosis.

Complex cellular substrates undergo degradation into smaller molecules in the lysosomes recycled for further use by cells. Stepwise enzymatic reactions catalyze the degradation of these compounds. A deficient enzyme or accessory protein will prevent the forward reaction and lead to substrate accumulation. The accumulated compounds are excreted and form the basis for measurement in the urine.

In MPS, these compounds are GAG, linked to carbohydrates or, when linked to aminoacids proteoglycans (PTG). The tissue distribution varies with these compounds. Keratan sulfate is present in the cornea, cartilage, intervertebral disks, dermatan sulfate in the heart, blood vessels, and skin. Heparan sulfate is present in the lungs, blood vessels, and on the surface of cells and explains the multiorgan involvement and organ predilection. Similar pathways exist for sphingolipids and other LSDs.