Upon diagnosing a newborn with ARMs, initial management should focus on hydration and avoidance of sepsis. Surgical intervention is not needed emergently, and newborn should undergo thorough diagnostic evaluation in the first 24 to 36 hours of life.

The patient may need to undergo a diverting colostomy or surgical repair. This decision has its basis on the complexity of anorectal malformation, associated anomalies, and any metabolic abnormalities developing soon after birth.

When a diverting colostomy is necessary, a descending or sigmoid colostomy is preferred and brought out through the left lower quadrant of the abdomen. Performance of colostomy results in diversion of stool stream and allows for delayed repair as the urgent concern of bowel obstruction and/or sepsis from fistula has been addressed. It also provides for a more accurate diagnosis of the level of the rectal pouch as a contrast pouchogram is not possible through the distal limb of colostomy.

Posterior sagittal anorectoplasty (PSARP) is currently the gold standard procedure for the repair of most ARMs. Pena et al. described PSARP.

Immediate postoperative care usually deals with pain control and need to keep a urinary catheter (Foley or suprapubic) in some patients undergoing genitourinary repair. After two weeks of repair, patients need to undergo anal dilation to avoid stricture at the level of the skin. Over the subsequent 6 to 12 months, once achieving adequate dilation and skin stricture has not developed, it is possible to close the colostomy. Patients usually struggle with perineal skin maceration and diaper rash after colostomy closure as the skin gets exposed to multiple bowel movements for the first time. Education of parents regarding anal dilations and management of diaper rash is vital to obtain good results. It takes a few months for patients to achieve a stable pattern of bowel movements.