Restoration of satisfactory digital function after an unrepaired flexor tendon laceration or failed repair remains one of the most challenging clinical and operative dilemmas in hand surgery. Tendinous injuries may permanently impair hand function, negatively impacting productivity and diminishing quality of life. Thus, maximizing the restoration of hand function is crucial. The best results are associated with early repair. Flexor tendon repair should be performed in an operating room under optical magnification with extensile exposure, thus permitting the injury to be defined in its entirety. Tendon retrieval is done via atraumatic techniques, accurately orienting the tendon while minimizing direct handling and manipulation. The FDP tendon should not be advanced more than 1 cm.

Subsequent sutures should be placed to allow for accurate coaptation of the tendon ends, with chosen suture method delivering a stable, smooth repair that feely glides within the tendon sheath. Completing the repair with a circumferential suture adds strength. Postoperative hematoma formation is prevented by accurate and thorough hemostasis. At the time of repair, ensuring full excursion of the flexor tendon repair is useful in guiding therapy and can be facilitated by performing the tendon repair using local anesthesia in an awake setting. Proper splint placement and postoperative rehabilitation are as crucial as the initial operative technique. The primary objective in treating flexor tendon injuries should be for the patient to return to work and day-to-day functions as early as possible, with minimal loss of function.

There is no alternative to a dedicated hand therapist in this environment. Clear communication by way of surgeons, nurses, and hand therapists working as an interprofessional team to optimize patient-centered care, and postoperative therapies, increase patient safety, and improve team performance, is of the utmost importance. Thie interprofessional paradigm will result in optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]

This educational activity reviewed the anatomic relationships of flexor tendons within the hand, described the associated intricacies of hand physiology, explained the key components of a thorough hand examination in diagnosing flexor tendon injuries, highlighted diagnostic modalities and adjuncts, and summarized operative principles correspondent to various zones of flexor tendon injuries while outlining the optimal healthcare team relations and establishing individualized postoperative rehabilitation protocols for enhanced patient outcomes.