Lumbar puncture for cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) analysis is the primary diagnostic tool for PAM, whereas tissue diagnosis is essential for GAE. Unfortunately, amebic meningoencephalitis is very rarely diagnosed before autopsy. Laboratory findings suggestive of PAM include leukocytosis with a left shift. The CSF opening pressure is very high. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) white cell count ranges from 300 to 26,000 cells/mm with polymorphonuclear predominance. CSF red blood cells are usually seen, and hemorrhagic fluid is seen as the disease progresses. Hypoglycorrhachia and elevated protein are characteristic.

A definitive diagnosis is made by observation of motile trophozoites on centrifuged CSF wet mount preparation. Giemsa or trichrome stains help in identifying morphologic features of the trophozoites. The diagnosis can also be made by using laboratory testing for Naegleria fowleri nucleic acid in CSF, biopsy, or tissue specimens or Naegleria fowleri antigen in CSF, biopsy, or tissue specimens.

To establish the diagnosis of GAE, brain tissue demonstrating trophozoites and cysts is needed. Moderate granulomatous inflammation with prominent vascular involvement is typically present on brain biopsy. CSF parameters show mild pleocytosis with lymphocytic predominance, high protein concentration, and low or normal glucose concentration. Rarely, Acanthamoeba trophozoites may be seen on the Giemsa stain of the CSF sediment. Head computed tomography (CT) scanning or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should precede lumbar puncture if clinical signs of focal CNS involvement or elevated intracranial pressure (ICP) are present.

Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain shows the presence of single or multiple space-occupying lesions with ring enhancement. Computed tomography may show progressive hydrocephalus, meningeal thickening, pseudotumoral lesions, largely isolated lesions, or multifocal ring-enhancing lesions. On post-mortem examination, significant edema and hemorrhage of the brain are seen.