The balance between the lungs' expanding and collapsing forces determines the size of an alveolus at any specific point in time. Lung recoil is the term used to describe the tendency of alveoli to rebound after being inflated. The primary determinant of lung recoil is surface tension, which is a force imposed by water molecules at the surface of liquids. It occurs whenever there is an air-liquid interface, as in the case of the interior lining of alveoli, and acts to minimize the surface area. The other principal determinant of recoil is the composition of the lung tissue itself, which has a high content of collagen and elastin fibers giving it large elastic properties. Even though these collapsing forces are crucial to exhale air after an inspiration, they must be counteracted by expanding forces at end-expiration to prevent alveolar collapse.

Water is a polar molecule with its oxygen atom being more negatively charged than the two covalently-bonded hydrogen atoms. The electronegativity of oxygen creates a more negative charge on one side of the molecule and a more positive charge on the other side. When surrounded by other water molecules, the negatively charged regions attract the positively charged ones. These bonds create a force called surface tension that pulls water molecules closer to each other. Since water lines the interior surface of alveoli, surface tension pulls the water collection as well as the alveoli inwards. Without a mechanism to counter this force, the alveolus would collapse.

Humans, along with many other mammals, possess a mechanism that serves to lower the surface tension of water within alveoli and the distal airways. Specifically, type II pneumocytes secrete a substance called surfactant that helps decrease surface tension. Pulmonary surfactant is composed of approximately 90% lipids and 10% proteins. The proteins found in surfactant play a diverse range of roles, many of which are a topic of research, and are beyond the discussion of this article.

The phospholipid most commonly found in surfactant is called dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC). While some additional lipids and proteins play a role in surface tension regulation, DPPC remains the one mostly produced by type II pneumocyte.

Another relevant concept to discuss with regards to surface tension is the Law of Laplace. It was initially thought that the pressure needed to counter the collapsing force of surface tension in an alveolus was directly proportional to twice the surface tension and inversely proportional to the radius of the alveolus (P= 2T/r).

Nonetheless, the idea of pressure in a sphere being directly proportional to twice the surface tension and inversely proportional to the radius (P=2T/r) is an important one to contemplate. Imagine having two spheres with different sizes. As the radius of the sphere decreases, the pressure increases as per Laplace's Law. Now, If the two spheres were connected with a tube, the smaller one should empty into the larger one based on the pressure difference. In other terms, smaller alveoli should empty into larger ones based on Laplace's law, causing the lungs to collapse. Luckily, this is not the case in the lungs. It turns out that as the radius of the alveolus decreases, the effect of surfactant increases as surfactant molecules get more concentrated in smaller alveoli compared to larger ones, thereby maximizing their impact on lowering surface tension.