Treatment of parapneumonic effusion includes appropriate antibiotic therapy together with drainage of pleural fluid as indicated.

Parapneumonic effusion is classified into 4 groups based on risk for the poor outcome:

- Category 1 (very low risk): The effusion is small (less than 10-mm thickness on decubitus) and free-flowing. No thoracentesis is indicated.

- Category 2 (low risk): The effusion is small to moderate (equal to 10 mm and less than half the hemithorax) and free-flowing with negative culture and Gram stain regardless of the prior use of antibiotics and pH equal to 7.20.

- Category 3 (moderate risk), in which one of the following criteria is present:  the fluid equal to half the hemithorax, loculated effusion, thicken pleura on contrast-enhanced CT scan, positive Gram stain or culture or pH less than 7.20.

- Category 4 (high risk): This is when pleural fluid is in the form of pure pus.

Patients with category 1 and category 2 may not require drainage. In patients with category 3 and 4, drainage is recommended. Fibrinolytics, VATS, and surgery may be indicated for managing patients with category 3 and category 4 parapneumonic effusion not responding to less invasive drainage methods.

**Antibiotic Therapy**

It must cover the suggested causative organisms of pneumonia according to the clinical setting. The duration of antibiotic therapy depends on many factors, for example, the sensitivity of the organism, extent of pulmonary parenchymal and pleural disease, response to initial therapy and adequacy of drainage.

**Chest Tube Drainage**

Chest tube drainage is generally preferred for patients with uninoculated effusions and free-flowing fluid. Chest tubes are ideally inserted under ultrasound or CT-guidance. The choice of a thoracostomy tube size is controversial. Imaging performed within 24 hours is essential for documenting the correct position of the chest tube. Chest tubes are left in place until the drainage rate is less than 50 ml per day and the empyema cavity has closed.

**Fibrinolytic Agents**

The intrapleural administration for fibrinolytic agents (for example, streptokinase and tissue plasminogen activator) or fibrinolytic plus mucolytic agents aiming for facilitating the drainage of the loculated parapneumonic effusion is controversial.

**Thoracoscopy**

Thoracoscopy is an alternative therapy for loculated empyemas when antibiotics and tube thoracostomy fail for the drainage. Thoracoscopy disrupts the intrapleural adhesions and allows the drainage of the pleural fluid.

**Decortication**

Decortication is indicated when persistent (present after 6 months) pleural peel is formed, leading to significant pulmonary restriction.

**Rib Resection and Open Drainage of Pleural Space**

A vertical incision through the chest wall with rib resection (1 to 3) is done to allow pleural fluid drainage. A chest tube is left in place (about 60 to 90 days). Open drainage of the pleural space may be considered when the previous methods fail, and when the patient is too ill to tolerate decortications.