# Continuing Education Activity

Pyogenic (suppurative) flexor tenosynovitis is a devastating infection within a closed space. Pyogenic flexor tenosynovitis necessitates an urgent treatment to preserve a viable and functioning finger, usually by surgical washout. The delayed diagnosis and treatment of this condition are associated with poor outcomes. This article highlights the surgical anatomy, pathogenesis, clinical picture, potential complications, and management of pyogenic flexor tenosynovitis by an interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the clinical signs of pyogenic flexor tenosynovitis.
- Describe the etiology of pyogenic flexor tenosynovitis.
- Explain the possible complications and prognosis of pyogenic flexor tenosynovitis.
- Outline treatment options for pyogenic flexor tenosynovitis, as used by the interprofessional team.

# Introduction

Pyogenic or suppurative flexor tenosynovitis (PFT) is a severe bacterial infection within the closed space of the digital flexor tendon sheaths.

The detection of the four Kanavel signs on physical assessment has high sensitivity (91.4 to 97.1%) to diagnose pyogenic flexor tenosynovitis.

**Anatomy of Flexor Tendon Sheaths**

The knowledge of the anatomy of hand flexor tendon sheaths is crucial for better understanding and management of PFT.  Each flexor tendon sheath comprises two layers; an inner visceral layer and an outer parietal layer. The visceral layer closely covers the flexor tendon forming the epitenon.

As the PFT develops, pus accumulates within the flexor sheath synovial space, causing high pressures up to 30 mm Hg within the flexor sheath closed space.

The flexor tendon sheaths for the index, middle, ring, and little fingers terminate at the level of flexor digitorum superficialis tendon insertion in the distal phalanx.  In the thumb, the flexor tendon sheath ends at the level of flexor pollicis longus tendon insertion. Proximally, the flexor sheaths of the index, middle, and ring fingers extend to the A1 pulley at the level of the neck of the metacarpal bone. The sheath of the flexor pollicis longus tendon communicates with the radial bursa proximally. The little finger flexor sheath communicates with the ulnar bursa in about 80 % of the population.

# Etiology

**Route of Infection**

Most patients present with a****finger penetrating injury involving the flexor tendon sheath causing direct bacterial inoculation.

**Causative Organism**

Staphylococcus aureus is the most common bacteria causing PFT and was isolated in about 75% of cases.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of PFT is about 2.5% to 9.5% of all hand infections, and it is usually preceded by a penetrating hand injury.

# History and Physical

The health care professionals should obtain a detailed history to cover the following:

- The history of any hand penetrating injury to the volar aspects of the digits should be identified. The mechanism of injury may guide the identification of the causative organism of the infection. Penetrating hand injury is usually preceding the PFT presentation by 2 to 5 days.

- The duration between symptom onset and the patient presentation should be precisely identified. Treatment options can be guided by the duration and severity of the PFT symptoms. Delayed patient presentation and treatment after PFT is associated with poor outcomes and increased finger amputation risk.

- The social history obtained should cover the patient's occupation and the dominant hand, and this information will guide the rehabilitation requirements and postoperative support.

- Medical comorbidities should be recognized and optimized before the surgical intervention as appropriate. Also, it has been reported that patients who develop PFT and have a medical history of diabetes mellites, renal failure, and or peripheral vascular disease are at higher risk of poor outcomes.

# Evaluation

**Clinical Assessment**

The diagnosis of PFT is mainly based on physical findings and clinical suspicion. The detection of the four Kanavel signs on physical assessment has high sensitivity (91.4 to 97.1%) to diagnose PFT.

The painful passive extension is the earliest sign of PFT, while the flexor sheath tenderness is the last sign to be detected. Fever is present in only 17% of the affected patients. The affected hand should be examined to identify any penetrating wound. The presence of erythema, swelling, and tenderness over the thenar eminence palm raise the suspicion of the proximal spread of infection to the radial bursa. Infected ulnar bursa presents with pain, swelling, and erythema over the hypothenar eminence.

**Diagnostic Imaging**

- The hand anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique view X-rays should be obtained to rule out any retained foreign body. The presence of signs of osteomyelitis in the obtained X-rays suggests chronic infection.

- Hand ultrasonography (US) is a cheap and non-invasive method to confirm the diagnosis of PFT. The US can visualize the flexor tendon and detect the presence of fluid collection within the flexor sheath. However, the US is operator dependant and cannot differentiate pus from blood.

- Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is rarely required to diagnose PFT. MRI can identify the extent of the infection but cannot differentiate PFT from other inflammatory conditions.

**Laboratory Tests**

- Inflammatory markers, including white cell count (WCC), C-reactive protein (CRP) level, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) level, are usually raised in the PFT setting. However, these tests are non-specific to diagnose PFT but can be helpful to monitor infection and response to the given treatment.

- Pus and necrotic tissue cultures are very beneficial to identify the causative organism and direct the antibiotic therapy according to the sensitivity.

- Blood culture should be obtained if there are signs of sepsis or hematogenous spread of the infection to isolate the causative organism.

# Treatment / Management

**Non-operative Treatment of PFT**

PFT could be treated non operatively if the patient presents early after suffering from the hand penetrating injury within 48 hours, with less dramatic Kanavel signs. Non-operative treatment measurements to treat PFT include intravenous antibiotics, high arm elevation, and splinting. Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be prescribed to cover the suspected organisms until the results of the culture are available. The non-operative management of PFT necessitates close monitoring of the infection by repeated hand examination and laboratory inflammatory markers. If no clinical improvement is noticed or there is worsening of the Kanavel signs, an urgent surgical washout should be performed.

**Operative Treatment of PFT**

Various surgical approaches and techniques have been reported to treat PFT. The flexor tendon sheath can be washed out with closed irrigation via two volar incisions. However, severe PFT with delayed presentation and tissue necrosis may require more invasive surgical treatment with debridement and open irrigation.

**Closed Flexor Sheath Catheter Irrigation**

Flexor sheath irrigation can be performed through two small volar incisions. The proximal incision is made over the level of the A1 pulley and the distal proximal to the distal interphalangeal crease.

**Open Flexor Sheath Irrigation and Debridement**

Open flexor sheath washout can be performed via a single extended volar incision to expose the entire flexor sheath. Two types of incisions have been described for open flexor sheath washout: a straight mid-axial incision and a zigzag incision, also known as Bruner incision (Figure 1).

# Differential Diagnosis

**Felon (Distal Pulp Space Infection)**

The felon is a closed space infection of the distal finger pulp that commonly affects the thumb or the index finger. Felon or pulp space infection is usually caused by Staphylococcus aureus infection due to penetrating injury to fingertip pulp. However, this infection may result from mixed organisms or gram-negative bacteria in case of immunosuppression.

**Interphalangeal Joint (IPJ) or Metacarpophalangeal Joint (MPJ) Septic Arthritis**

IPJ or MPJ septic arthritis usually presents with signs of infection localized to the affected joint. The range of motion of the affected joint is generally restricted and painful due to joint effusion and capsular distention.  The other cardinal Kanavel signs of PFT, including finger fusiform swelling and flexor sheath tenderness, are usually absent.

**Herpetic Whitlow**

This is a rare viral infection of the fingertips caused by the herpes simplex virus. Herpetic whitlow presents with painful blisters filled with clear fluid that may combine to form bullae. Herpetic whitlow requires treatment by antiviral medications, e.g., Acyclovir, and does not require surgical intervention.

**Hand Cellulitis**

Hand cellulitis is a diffuse inflammation of the hand without underlying pus collection.

# Staging

Michon classified PFT according to the severity of infection into three different stages:

- Stage 1: Serous exudate starts to accumulate within the flexor sheath.

- Stage 2: The flexor sheath is filled with purulent fluid.

- Stage 3: The flexor tendon, flexor sheath, and the pulleys’ system show signs of necrosis.

# Prognosis

PFT may result in poor outcomes with finger amputation and spread infection if appropriate treatment has not commenced early. 10 to 25% of the affected patients may not gain the full active range of movements.

# Complications

**Fingers Stiffness and Restricted Range of Motion**

Stiffness after PFT can be a result of the infection process or secondary to the washout surgery. The inflammatory process in PFT may cause adhesions of the flexor tendons, thickened joint capsules, and damaged pulleys. Early active exercises for the affected finger are recommended to minimize the risk of stiffness. Flexor tenolysis of the affected digit may be required to restore the range of movement after complete subsidence of the inflammatory process.

**Flexor Tendon Scarring and Subsequent Rupture**

The high pressure within the flexor sheath interferes with the flexor tendon blood flow and nutrition. Unhealthy scarred flexor tendons lose their elasticity and may rupture with further activity.

**Soft Tissue Necrosis and Finger Ischemia**

Critical ischemia of the affected finger may result from the interruption of the blood flow due to the high pressure in the finger or secondary to arterial thrombosis induced by the inflammatory process.****

**Hand Horseshoe Abscess**

Horseshoe abscess formation may result from the spread of the infection from PFT of the thumb or little finger in patients who have communicated ulnar and radial bursae.

**Finger Amputation**

Finger amputation at various levels can be inevitable because of the deep infection, significant soft tissue, or functionless stiff finger.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients should be counseled and educated about the PFT and the prognosis. The health care professional should use precise and nonmedical terminology to explain the necessity of the treatment and potential complications as a part of the informed consent. It is essential to make a clear statement that this condition is considered an emergency and necessitates urgent treatment to preserve the involved finger and hand viability and function. The patient may be warned about the possible significant complications resulting from the infective process, mainly the restricted motion and the risk of amputation. Patients who have an infection in the dominant hand will need extra support during the rehabilitation process and may need longer to recover.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Pyogenic flexor tenosynovitis is an emergency that requires timely diagnosis and prompt treatment. The effective management of this potentially devastating infection requires an integrated approach from the health care team. The available diagnostic tools, including laboratory tests and imaging modalities, especially hand sonography, can be beneficial in confirming the diagnosis and monitoring the infection severity. However, the health care professional should be able to make this diagnosis based on the cardinal Kanavel signs.

Early communication with an orthopedic or plastic surgeon is a must to formulate the best management plan. The role of nurses in perioperative care and infection monitoring for PFT is crucial and cannot be undermined. Postoperative care demands an integrated approach from doctors, nurses, hand therapists, and social workers. Rehabilitation after PFT requires early involvement of the hand therapist and early onset of active range of movement exercises.