**Bleeding**

The patient should be monitored closely for signs and symptoms of bleeding. Advanced age, female sex, and concomitant use of antiplatelet drugs are the most common risk factors for bleeding. Bleeding is less common with enoxaparin, so monitoring factor Xa is unnecessary in most cases. If bleeding is suspected, an anti-factor Xa level can be measured to adjust the dose accordingly, but it does not correlate with an impact on clinical outcome. Renal failure and obesity are the most common indication to monitor enoxaparin as it increases the chances of bleeding.

Enoxaparin has a good safety and side effect profile. Dose adjustment is necessary for advanced age and renal insufficiency. A therapeutic dose is usually 1 mg/kg every 12 hours, but dose adjustment is required if the patient is over 75 years old. ACCP guidelines suggest that the anti-Xa levels should be measured 4 hours after enoxaparin administration at a steady state.

**Thrombocytopenia**

Thrombocytopenia can occur, but it is less common than conventional heparin. If the patient develops heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), the drug should be discontinued, and the platelet count monitored.

**Renal impairment**

Enoxaparin dose requires adjustment with a creatinine clearance of less than 30 mL/minute.

**Surgery**

According to the American College of Chest Physicians, a last presurgical dose of enoxaparin should be administered at least 24 hours before surgery. Treatment can be restarted 12 hours after surgery if indicated.