The incubation period of tetanus is approximately 8 days but ranges from 3 to 21 days.

Neonatal tetanus is seen in children less than 1 month, and has a shorter incubation period. Within the first 7 days, the infant is irritable, develops severe rigidity, and has a poor outcome. Neonatal tetanus still remains a major cause of death in developing countries. It is often due to unsterile transection of the umbilical cord following delivery, in addition to a lack of maternal vaccination.

Generalized tetanus is the most recognizable and well-known form and is characterized by specific clinical findings including trismus, dysphagia, nuchal rigidity, opisthotonus (backward arching of the head, neck, and spine), risus sardonicus (sustained spasm of facial muscles that resembles a grin), systemic rigidity, and tonic contractions. Patients can also experience airway compromise presenting as dyspnea and eventually airway obstruction and apnea. The patient often develops excruciating pain from these contractions which can result in tendon rupture and fractures. The clinical presentation of tetanus can sometimes have an early phase that includes symptoms of autonomic over-activity (irritability, restlessness, sweating, and tachycardia).

Local tetanus is somewhat rare and presents with muscle contractions in a localized body region.

Cephalic tetanus is a form of local tetanus that can present as dysphagia, trismus, and focal cranial neuropathies and sometimes mistaken for a cerebrovascular accident. These cases are rare and may occur after an ear infection or head trauma.