Although iron deficiency is one of the oldest and most common medical disorders, the condition still has not received adequate clinical attention and evaluation. Many children, elderly patients, and pregnant women continue to have undiagnosed iron deficiency anemia or remain under-treated. Evidence from an interprofessional panel of clinicians reveals that iron-deficiency anemia has a high prevalence in hospitalized patients. It is associated with worse outcomes, including more extended hospital stays and poor quality of life. There are also risks for those who receive blood transfusions. The panel has recommended several strategies in early diagnosis, treatment, and follow up of these patients.

- Laboratory technologists determine serum ferritin, transferrin, vitamin levels, and function of the real system.

- Hematologists determine the cause.

- Pharmacists determine the best formula for iron and the presence of adverse effects. Replacement therapy is either with intravenous or oral formulas of iron, with red cell transfusions reserved for emergency situations. Each has its benefits and limitations.

- Nurses ensure compliance with treatment and educate patients on symptoms and signs of the anemia.

- Internists follow and monitor patients.

**Guidelines**

The United States Preventive Services Task Force has concluded that the evidence is not sufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for iron deficiency anemia in pregnant women and children ages 6 to 24 months.

**Outcomes**

Most studies on iron replacement therapies were done several decades ago. Many of these studies were not randomized, and the follow-up appointments were short. Reports of treatment of iron deficiency anemia are all based on expert opinion, but there is a clear benefit of treatment during the short term.