As the use of neuroleptic agents increases for both psychosis and non-psychiatric conditions, knowledge of the risks of their utilization is of critical significance. An interprofessional team of neurologists, psychiatrists, primary care, emergency physicians, pharmacists, and specialty trained nurses can best prevent and treat neuroleptic toxicity. Pharmacists and other providers counsel patients regarding common side effects. This can aid in improved compliance; patient education about dangerous side effects can lead to earlier recognition and care, which may improve outcomes. Additionally, providing patients with information regarding potential side effects allows patients to play a more active role in their care, opens a dialogue between the patient and their healthcare team regarding which side effects may be more intolerable or unacceptable to the patient, and may help providers select the most appropriate medication for each patient. Neuroscience and psychiatric nurses monitor patients, administer treatment, and inform the team of any changes in patient status. Recognition that even a single dose of antipsychotic medication can result in side effects underscores the importance of alternate methods of control of agitated patients in the acute setting, including verbal de-escalation and alternative medications such as benzodiazepines. Every effort should be given to oral dosing of agitated patients, as parenteral administration of neuroleptic agents increases adverse reactions. This is again highlighted with the use of neuroleptic agents in the delirious elderly patient, which has been well-studied and shown to increase mortality; the use of neuroleptic agents can be minimized in these settings by aggressive and proactive modifications of the patient's environment to reduce their risk of delirium. Such interventions include providing the patient with eyeglasses and hearing aids as indicated, minimizing stimulation and disturbances at night, and maintaining consistent sleep-wake cycles. As with appropriate stewardship of all medications, the most critical factor in the use of neuroleptic agents is the knowledge of when they may be unnecessary, superfluous, or harmful.