Patients should have their hemoglobin A1c and body weight monitored during scheduled follow-up visits. Follow-up intervals will vary depending on the local standard of care for diabetes management and/or obesity treatment. Hemoglobin A1C monitoring can be done as soon as every three months, depending on the patient and their A1C goal.

It is important to note that hemolytic anemia, G6PD deficiency, and pregnancy) can lead to discrepancies between the A1C result and the patient's true glycemic status. Given the significantly improved insulin sensitivity while on tirzepatide, patients who also use insulin should be instructed to monitor their blood sugars more closely.

It is important to note that hemolytic anemia, G6PD deficiency, and pregnancy) can lead to discrepancies between the A1C result and the patient's true glycemic status.

Monitoring for side effects, such as gastrointestinal-related symptoms, may also be necessary, especially as the prescribed doses increase. In addition, the asymptomatic elevation of lipase and amylase levels can be seen in patients using tirzepatide. Still, no clinical data suggests any utility in monitoring these markers without symptoms.

Routine monitoring of serum calcitonin or thyroid ultrasound is of uncertain value for early detection of medullary carcinoma of the thyroid in patients treated with tirzepatide. In addition, such monitoring may increase the risk of unnecessary procedures. However, monitor for the thyroid nodules on physical examination, and if serum calcitonin >50 ng/L, then further diagnostic assessment of the patient for medullary carcinoma of the thyroid is required. Patients with a personal or family history of medullary thyroid carcinoma or MEN 2 should not be prescribed tirzepatide.

Integration of quality of life(QOL) assessment into routine care provides the optimum clinical care for patients with DM-2. Monitoring of  Diabetes-Dependent Quality of Life (ADDQoL), Diabetes Quality of Life (DQoL), and Short Form-12 (SF-12) help monitor the QOL in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.