Chorioretinitis is usually due to an infectious etiology. The extent of ocular involvement varies depending on the organism. Toxoplasma gondii is the most common cause of infectious posterior uveitis worldwide. Infection usually occurs by either consumption of tissue cysts present in raw or undercooked meat or by ingesting oocysts in the feces of cats. It can be transmitted transplacentally.

**Congenital Toxoplasmosis:**In congenital toxoplasmosis, the mother is often asymptomatic or has mild constitutional manifestations. The severity of fetal involvement is related to the gestational period at which infection occurred, with more severe in early trimesters, when fetal death may result. In the first trimester rate of transmission to the fetus is around 10 to 25%, in the third trimester the transplacental transmission is approximately 60 to 80%. However, fetuses infected in early pregnancy are more likely to show clinical signs of infection.

**Acquired Toxoplasmosis:**Most infections are thought to occur congenitally and can remain asymptomatic for several years and can become clinically evident commonly in the second through fourth decades. In the inactive stage, it can present as quiescent atrophic chorioretinal scars, which appear as pigmented lesions in clusters. In 70 to 80% of cases, it can occur as a unilateral focal chorioretinal lesion.

In immunocompetent patients, the parasite can occur as a tissue cyst and can cause chronic infection. In patients with HIV, toxoplasmosis reactivation occurs when cell-mediated immunity fails. In HIV patients, with CD4 count less than 100, cotrimoxazole or dapsone and pyrimethamine can be given for six months.

**Congenital CMV:**Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the most common congenital viral infection in the United States. Congenital CMV infection presents with ocular manifestations like chorioretinitis, cataract, and optic atrophy along with jaundice, petechiae, hepatosplenomegaly, hearing loss, periventricular calcifications, ventricular calcifications, and microcephaly.

CMV retinitis occurs in severely immunocompromised AIDS patients, with a CD4 lymphocyte count less than 50cells/micro L. CMV can cause necrotizing retinitis, retinal vasculitis, and optic neuropathy, with minimal vitritis. The characteristic fundus appearance of white retinitis lesions with hemorrhages is called "pizza-pie" appearance. It can cause anterior uveitis in healthy adults.

**Ocular toxocariasis:**It results from the nematodesToxocara canis and Toxocara cati. It usually affects young patients. It is unilateral in 90% of cases. The child can have leukocoria, eye pain, strabismus, and profound monocular loss of vision.  It commonly causes chronic endophthalmitis, granulomas in the posterior pole, or peripheral retina. Tractional retinal detachment can occur in these patients. Atypically it can cause diffuse chorioretinitis. It can be diagnosed based on the history of contact with pets and the characteristic ocular features. Retinoblastoma is an important differential diagnosis to be considered, which has a similar presentation. Serological tests like ELISA for the detection of anti-Toxocara excretory-secretory antigen IgE levels can confirm the diagnosis.

**Ocular syphilis:**It has earned the name the great masquerader as the clinical presentation is diverse, with various inflammatory presentations such as iritis, chorioretinitis, vitritis, scleritis, neurosyphilis with Argyll Robertson pupil, and panuveitis. The most common presentation is iritis or iridocyclitis. In syphilis patients with HIV, placoid lesions have been described called acute syphilitic posterior placoid chorioretinitis.

**Ocular Tuberculosis (TB)**is extrapulmonary tuberculosis commonly seen in endemic countries like India. The presentation can be variable, with lesions involving any layer of the eye. It can present as granulomatous anterior uveitis. Posterior segment manifestations including retinal vasculitis, multifocal serpiginous choroiditis, multifocal choroiditis, choroidal tubercles, tuberculoma, subretinal hypopyon, and subretinal abscesses are present.

**Ocular histoplasmosis syndrome**occurs in regions endemic for Histoplasma capsulatum. It can present with asymptomatic chorioretinitis**,**discrete oval–round whitish lesions less than 400 micrometers in diameter that may develop into classic punched out histo spots or choroidal neovascular membrane, which can cause central vision loss.

Chorioretinitis has also been described in congenital infections with the Zika virus, rubella, and varicella-zoster virus.

Zika virus is a neurotropic virus that can cross the placenta and infect the fetus. Classical findings include microcephaly, ventriculomegaly, cerebellar hypoplasia, lissencephaly with hydrocephalus, and fetal akinesia deformation sequence called arthrogryposis. Infants with the Zika virus have vision-threatening fundus abnormalities like macular chorioretinal atrophy, focal pigmentary changes, and optic nerve abnormalities. Diagnostic confirmation is by Zika RNA with PCR.

Congenital Varicella-Zoster virus infection can cause microphthalmia, chorioretinitis, and cataract in 44 to 52% of cases.

EBV (Epstein Barr virus) uveitis: EBV uveitis can present as iritis, whereas posterior segment involvement may include multifocal choroiditis with punched-out areas of pigment epithelial changes and vitritis.

**Non-infective posterior uveitis with systemic illness:**

**Sarcoidosis:**It is a multi-system disease characterized by noncaseating granulomas in tissues, with a high incidence reported in African American women. It can cause granulomatous anterior uveitis, periphlebitis, with candle wax drippings and yellow waxy spots, vitritis, snowball opacities, and snowbanking. Chorioretinal granulomas, placoid lesions, and optic nerve head granuloma are presenting features.

**Bechet’s disease**presents with recurrent anterior and posterior uveitis, recurrent oral or genital ulcers, and skin lesions. Ocular manifestation can be seen in 70% of cases of Behcets disease and is one of the main diagnostic criteria of the disease. It can cause nongranulomatous anterior uveitis. Posterior segment involvement characteristically shows by vitritis/media haze, retinal vasculitis, hyalitis, necrotizing retinitis, and chorioretinitis.

**Non-infective posterior uveitis without systemic illness (white dot syndromes)**

Common non-infective posterior uveitic entities include the white dot syndromes (WDS), named according to their clinical appearance and behavior. Laboratory investigations are not routinely needed for their diagnosis. Fundus fluorescein angiogram (FFA), indocyanine green angiogram (ICGA), optical coherence tomography (OCT), and multimodal imaging are used to evaluate WDS.

**Birdshot chorioretinopathy (BSCR)**/vitiliginous choroiditis: More than 90% of the patients with BCR are HLA-A29 positive. The term “birdshot” is because the lesions scattered around the optic disc and radiate to the equator resembling the shotgun scatter of birdshot.

**Acute Posterior Multifocal Placoid Pigment Epitheliopathy (APMPEE)**: It is a bilateral inflammatory retinal/choroidal disease characterized by a sudden loss of vision caused by the sudden appearance of multiple yellow-white, flat inflammatory lesions lying deep within the sensory retina, Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and the choriocapillaris. The lesions of APMPPE are unique but may be confused with viral retinitis, syphilis, serpiginous choroiditis, and toxoplasma retinochoroiditis. In APMPPE, lesions are flat, and there is no significant vitritis. Fundus Fluorescein Angiography (FFA) shows an early hypofluorescence of the white placoid lesions with late staining.

**Multiple Evanescent White Dot Syndrome (MEWDS)**: MEWDS is an inflammatory chorioretinopathy characterized by the presence of white/gray lesions deep in the retina. It is a rare disorder seen in healthy young women. It can also demonstrate optic disc edema, mild vitritis, panuveitis, diffuse choroidal thickening. A characteristic granular appearance of the fovea is present. Contrary to other white dot syndromes, it is usually unilateral. FFA shows early and late hyperfluorescence at the lesions.

**Serpiginous Choroiditis (SC)**: It is a rare progressive recurrent bilateral disease that affects the outer retina, retinal pigment epithelium, choriocapillaris, and inner choroid. The lesions are gray or gray-yellow areas that begin either in the peripapillary region or macula. FFA demonstrates early hypofluorescence and late hyperfluorescence of active lesions.

**Multi-Focal Choroiditis/Punctate Inner Choroidopathy (MFC and PIC)**: They occur predominantly in myopic women, usually involving both eyes. The presence of cystoid macular edema /choroidal neovascular membrane is associated with poor visual prognosis.

**Masquerade syndromes**: Malignancies like intraocular lymphoma and leukemia can present with uveitis. Choroidal melanoma and cancer-associated retinopathy must be ruled out in non-resolving and atypical presentations of uveitis.