Parkinson's disease (PD) is the most common cause of parkinsonism. It is a gradually progressive disorder that manifests as asymmetric parkinsonism. There is dopaminergic neuronal loss in the midbrain due to neuronal degeneration, and this results in a decrease in dopamine levels, especially in the post-commissural putamen and other regions of the basal ganglia. PD typically responds to levodopa therapy.

Secondary causes of parkinsonism typically do not respond to levodopa therapy. These include

**Normal-pressure Hydrocephalus (NPH)**

It manifests with the classic triad of ataxia, urinary incontinence, and dementia. Parkinsonism may sometimes be the presenting symptom in NPH.

**Vascular Parkinsonism (VP)**

Critchley was the first to describe VP as a separate entity in 1929. Previously, clinicians referred to VP as arteriosclerotic parkinsonism, lower-body parkinsonism, and vascular pseudo-parkinsonism.

VP usually occurs due to an underlying vascular disorder, most commonly hypertension that leads to subcortical infarcts, white matter ischemia, and also large vessel infarcts. Diffuse white matter ischemic lesions present bilaterally can lead to the destruction of thalamocortical functioning reducing the impulses sent to the higher centers via the basal ganglia, resulting in disruption of motor movements. Imaging studies usually help to support the symptomatic diagnosis of VP.

**Drug-induced Parkinsonism (DIP)**

Medications that block the dopamine receptors and interrupt the transmission of dopamine are known to cause secondary parkinsonism. The risk factors for the development of DIP include the route, potency, and dose of the drug administered. Individuals who are on medications administered via the intramuscular route or in the form of suppositories are more likely to develop DIP, especially at lower doses as compared to administration via the intravenous route.

**Toxin-induced Parkinsonism (TIP)**

Prolonged exposure to heavy metals and industrial toxins can result in parkinsonian features. Toxins result in vast neurological damage resulting in parkinsonism as compared to that seen in PD.

**Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy**

A repeated head injury can often present with parkinsonian features.

**Brain Tumors**

Several brain masses are responsible for the development of parkinsonian features. These include meningioma, astrocytoma, craniopharyngioma, and sometimes even metastatic brain tumors.

**Juvenile Parkinsonism (JP)**

It is a rare entity seen in individuals who are less than 21 years of age. The clinical manifestations show similarity to PD but an earlier age of onset.

- Hypoxia

- Postencephalitis

- Metabolic

Other genetically determined causes of parkinsonisms, like Huntington's disease in the juvenile form, or certain spinocerebellar ataxias, can start clinically as a rigid-akinetic syndrome (parkinsonism). Due to its rarity and specificity, this article will not cover these entities.

**Parkinson-plus Syndromes**

- Multiple system atrophy

- Cortical-basal ganglionic degeneration

- Progressive supranuclear palsy

- Shy-Drager syndrome

- Progressive Pallidal atrophy