The normal menstrual cycle and paracrine and endocrine mechanisms function through the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis (HPO axis). They are under neuroendocrinological control. The gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is released in a pulsatile manner from the hypothalamus. Ovarian and uterine changes include follicular development and endometrial growth, respectively, which are essential for reproduction. In response to endogenous gonadotropin stimulation, there is rupture of the mature follicle, which releases secondary oocyte, known as ovulation. In the fallopian tubes, this secondary oocyte interacts with spermatozoa which leads to zygote formation. Implantation of this zygote into the uterus is called pregnancy.

Anovulation due to HPO axis dysfunction has been classified by WHO (world health organization) as under:

- WHO class 1: Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism

- WHO class 2: Normogonadotropic hypogonadism

- WHO class 3: Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism

- WHO class 4: Hyperprolactinemia

Medications for ovulation induction have a major role in the production of the dominant follicles and endometrial growth. In addition, they prevent androgen to estrogen conversion, act as an antagonist on estrogen receptors; help in insulin sensitization of tissues; and direct stimulation of the hypothalamus through gonadotropins. Laparoscopic ovarian drilling is an adjunct second-line treatment.

These medical and surgical treatments aim to improve the chances of conception in otherwise infertile couples. In addition, this review highlights the role of ovarian reserve assessment, ovulation induction, and various techniques necessary for women having infertility due to anovulation.