Patients with microscopic polyangiitis may present with constitutional symptoms, including insidious onset fever, arthralgia, myalgia, and weight loss. Other manifestations include urinary abnormalities, cough with or without hemoptysis, skin findings consistent with palpable purpura, mononeuritis multiplex, seizures, other non-specific neurological complaints, abdominal pain, gastrointestinal bleeding, chest pain, ocular pain, sinusitis, and testicular pain. Some patients may present with acute onset of fulminant disease with frank hemoptysis, hematuria, or even renal failure.

**Renal Manifestations**

The major renal feature of MPA is rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN).

**Pulmonary Manifestations**

Pulmonary involvement can be observed in 25 to 55% of cases. In a large study, 80% of MPA patients were observed to have symptoms of pulmonary involvement, and 92% were found to have radiographic changes.

**Skin Manifestations**

Skin lesions are seen in 30 to 60% of patients with MPA and are the initial presenting feature in 15 to 30% of patients.

**Gastrointestinal Manifestations**

Abdominal pain is the most frequently observed gastrointestinal symptom in MPA. While gastrointestinal bleeding may occur in some cases, massive hemorrhage is rare.

**Neurological Manifestations**

Neurologic involvement is common in MPA, and peripheral neuropathy is more frequent than central nervous system involvement. Predominant peripheral nervous system features include distal symmetrical polyneuropathy and mononeuritis multiplex. Sural nerve biopsy reveals necrotizing vasculitis in up to 80% of cases, and nerve conduction studies show acute axonopathy.

Physical examination may show ulceronodular skin lesions of the extremities, fever, tachypnea, and tachycardia. Skin examination findings include leukocytoclastic angiitis and its palpable purpura, livedo reticularis, skin ulcerations, necrosis and gangrene, necrotizing nodules, digital ischemia, and urticaria. A pulmonary examination may be significant for rales or bronchial breath sounds in pulmonary capillaritis cases, and a neurological exam may show motor or sensory deficits localized to a particular dermatome. Cardiovascular findings include hypertension, signs of heart failure, myocardial infarction, and pericarditis. Gastrointestinal bleeding, bowel ischemia, and perforation are gastrointestinal examination findings. The ocular examination can reveal retinal hemorrhage, scleritis, and uveitis. Other physical findings will vary depending on the involved capillary bed.