Sharks may bite to eat, protect territory, or as a startle reaction. In general, shark attacks are rare. Recommendations from the Global Shark Attack File that can help decrease the likelihood of shark attacks include:

- Seek advice from local people before engaging in water activities where shark attacks have occurred.

- Remain aware of your surroundings.

- If you suddenly become uneasy while in the water, leave immediately.

- If you see a shark, do not harass or touch it, no matter its size

- If swimming or surfing do not enter the water when sharks are present and leave the water the water slowly and quietly if they are sighted or if you are requested to do so by a lifeguard or other professional

- Do not swim, surf, or dive alone

- Do not stray far from shore

- Do not swim at night.

- Avoid swimming in waters with low visibility, such as murky or turbid water.

- Avoid swimming close to river mouths.

- Be cautious when swimming in the breakers.

- Do not swim close to sandbars.

- Be cautious crossing channels between sandbars or on the edge of steep drop-offs.

- Avoid swimming or surfing near jetties.

- Avoid swimming in areas where birds are diving into the water.

- If schools of fish are milling nearby, do not attempt to chase them from the area.

- If baitfish are leaping at or above the surface, leave the water immediately.

- If spearfishing or collecting shellfish, do not attach your catch to a stringer at your waist and stay alert when removing a fish from your spear. If wade-fishing, do not carry bait on your person.

- If spearfishing, change locations frequently.

- Avoid areas where any type of fishing activity is taking place or offal is dumped into the sea.

- The presence of porpoises and dolphins may indicate sharks are hunting in the area.

- Leave the water when pods of dolphin cluster or head inshore

- Avoid swimming, surfing, or diving in the vicinity of pinniped haul-outs or rookeries.

- Avoid high contrast swimsuits

- Refrain from excess splashing or making quick, abrupt movements in the water.

- Do not swim with dogs or horses.

- If a shark approaches uncomfortably close, keep it at bay with your speargun or a shark billy. Do not attempt to spear the shark unless you think a bite is imminent.