The prevention and treatment of LGV proctocolitis will require a cooperative multispecialty approach, including nurses and clinicians, along with support from local outreach programs and government agencies. As was evidenced in the early 2000s, the ESSTI alert system in Europe was successful in providing clinicians with local alerts of disease activity and helped coordinate outbreak control. Since prompt recognition is critical, similar systems should be fostered in the United States, and clinicians should be encouraged to report to local agencies. As STIs continue to rise at alarming rates, clinicians across all specialties must continue to educate patients on safe sexual practices as well as how to identify the signs and symptoms of the disease. Initiating and supporting high-risk community outreach groups and screening initiatives for high-risk populations may reduce the stigma of testing and promote eradication. Overall, lifestyle choices, sexual preferences, and HIV co-infection remain the strongest risk factors for developing LGV. Frequent reiteration of safe practices by multiple providers across multiple specialties may reinforce the importance of and promote ongoing healthy patient practices. [Level V]

LGV infection diagnosis and management require an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, mid-level practitioners, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level V] In most cases, the clinician (physician, NP, PA) will diagnose and prescribe treatment, although they will often require a close consult with infectious disease specialists. Pharmacists can verify agent antibiotic coverage and dosing, and report back to the nurse or clinician if they have any concerns. Nursing can dispense education and counseling to promote symptomatic recognition and/or preventative strategies; this should also have reinforcement from the physicians and the pharmacist. The pharmacist should also verify the patient's current regimen has no drug-drug interactions, and if there are any, let the nursing staff or clinicians know immediately. Nurses and pharmacists can both verify patient compliance and counsel patients on their medications or the dosing/administration of the same, and report any issues back to the prescribing clinician, who can make changes to the patient's drug regimen based on patient needs. These interprofessional strategies are the types that lead to optimal outcomes. [Level 5]