Corns are primarily diagnosed on clinical presentation. It is helpful to look at other lesions on an individual's skin to see their body's response to physical trauma. It is also easier to diagnose corns by inspection and palpation because of their rough hyperkeratotic texture. History should also include an account of physical activities.

Corns usually present as flesh-colored dry, hard, rough papules with a whitish center (called the core). They are located over a bony prominence. They are painful on walking and standing but are asymptomatic to touch. As the overgrowth and thickening of keratin builds up, corns can grow and cause severe pain with ambulation.

There are two main variants of corn:

- Hard corn ('heloma durum') – This is the most common type of corn, usually located over the lateral and dorsal aspect of the fifth toe as well as on the dorsal aspect of the interphalangeal joints of the lesser toes.

- Soft corn or interdigital corn ('heloma molle') – this lesion is a painful hyperkeratotic lesion, primarily seen in the interdigital web spaces, especially the fourth space. This location often leads to maceration of the corn, with sometimes the occurrence of a bacterial or fungal infection or ulceration.

Some authors add to these two variants a third one, called seed corn, which manifests as multiple nonpainful keratotic plugs within plantar calluses in non-pressure-bearing areas of the soles.

Corns sometimes are difficult to distinguish from plantar warts. In corns, the plantar skin lines may be observed within the lesions, unlike plantar warts. Furthermore, if the physician exerts a digital pressure perpendicularly to plantar corn, this latter will come into contact with the bony prominence, and the patient will feel pain. This maneuver is generally nonpainful in the case of warts. Finally, the absence of capillary dotting, called "Auspitz's sign" after paring hard corns distinguishes them from plantar warts. Dermoscopy can also be an additional tool to distinguish corns and plantar warts.