The prostate is a glandular and muscular organ located just below the neck of the bladder and at the base of the urethra. The prostate's muscular function helps regulate urinary flow and prevents retrograde ejaculation, but its primary function is to produce a prostatic secretion that is added to the semen. Prostatic secretions include acid phosphatase, a prostatic growth regulator that helps release chemical energy from compounds in the semen; prostate-specific antigen, a protease that acts to liquefy the semen after ejaculation; transglutaminase, an enzyme that promotes liquefaction of semen; citric acid; zinc; and calcitonin, which improves sperm motility.

The prostate gland is situated within the pelvic cavity, immediately anterior to the rectum, below the inferior edge of the symphysis pubis, above the triangular ligament but below the inferior margin of the symphysis pubis. The prostate's peak contacts the triangular ligament and is oriented downwards, while its base is below the bladder's neck.

The prostate comprises 5 lobes: 2 equally sized lateral lobes and the anterior, posterior, and median lobes. The prostate is separated from the rectovesical fascia by a plexus of veins and is encased in a thin capsule composed of fibrous tissue. Muscular tissue can be found immediately below the capsule and surrounding the urethra.

The arterial supply to the prostate is principally from the internal iliac circulation, specifically, the internal pudendal, inferior vesical, and hemorrhoidal or middle rectal arteries. The prostatic artery is the terminal branch of the inferior vesical artery. The prostatic artery is typically only 1 to 2 cm long before dividing into capsular and urethral branches. The venous drainage of the prostate is from the prostatic venous plexus and the dorsal vein of the penis into the internal iliac veins. The prostatic nerve supply is via the pelvic plexus and inferior hypogastric plexus.