Every medical examination begins with history. The medical history should include a personal history of cutaneous or systemic cancer, immunosuppression, fair skin, radiation therapy, a family history of cancer, history of excessive sunlight exposure, and the presence of any non-healing or recurrent cutaneous lesions.

Patients should be asked about any eyelid lesion with symptoms of itching, bleeding, ulceration, blistering, chronicity, change in color, change in size, and loss of typical eyelid architecture (e.g., loss of eyelashes).

Examiners should ask about the location, onset, character, and time course of eyelid lesions, as well as any prior treatments or previous occurrence of the lesions. Perform eyelid and adnexal exams in ambiently-lit rooms with an additional dermatoscope, slit lamp, or pocket flashlight. Note the Fitzpatrick skin type of the patient and ascertain whether there is a significant difference in skin tone between sun-exposed and sun-protected areas.

Clinicians should assess for lesions with irregular pigmentation, ulceration with crusting or bleeding, telangiectatic vessels, or loss of eyelashes or cutaneous rhytids.

Examination under magnification using a slit-lamp or dermatoscope is helpful for better characterization of the lesion. Measure each suspicious lesion in millimeters in vertical and horizontal dimensions. Palpate the edges of the lesion to assess for involvement or fixation to deeper tissues.

Eversion of the lower lid and double-eversion of the upper lid is vital to ascertain the involvement of the conjunctival and fornices. Assess the preauricular, postauricular, submandibular, and submental lymph nodes for lymphadenopathy. Photograph the lesion to document its appearance.

If the patient has any suspicious eyelid lesion, referral to a dermatologist is warranted to ensure a full-body dermatologic examination. The presence of one skin cancer often portends the presence of another pre-cancerous or cancerous lesions elsewhere.