Sympathomimetic agents are useful in a wide variety of indications across numerous clinical settings. For this reason, many types of healthcare team members such as physicians, nurses, or pharmacists must be knowledgeable of the adverse effects, contraindications, and toxicity management. Patients must receive education from the team and be encouraged to immediately seek help if there is an overdose. [Level 5]

Due to the high rates of complications, the supervision of a physician with extensive experience with sympathomimetics is the recommended approach for administering catecholamines. The physician should also consult with a pharmacist to preclude any potential drug-drug interactions or additive effects with these medications; the pharmacist can recommend alternative agents or other modifications to the regimen to achieve therapeutic goals and minimize adverse effects. All healthcare team members should consult with a pharmacist regarding any concerns.

More sensitive monitoring with intra-arterial blood pressures is necessary for the administration of high-dose catecholamines. [Level 4] Nursing staff need to be well-versed in recognizing adverse events associated with sympathomimetic drugs. Since they will have more contact with the patient on an ongoing basis than other providers, the ability to monitor the patient effectively will fall under their duties. Nursing should be able to alert the doctor or contact the pharmacist with any questions or concerns.

Best practice involves an interprofessional approach, with physicians, pharmacists, and nursing collaborating in a team effort to optimize patient care. [Level 5]