Current treatment is mainly supportive and follows guidelines for cerebral ischemia, atherosclerotic vascular disease, and acute traumatic spinal cord injury. The primary focus is to address the underlying cause, which includes fever and glycemic control, management of anticoagulation, antiplatelet and thromboprophylaxis therapy.

Risk factors associated with more severe spinal cord strokes include hypertension, diabetes mellitus and elevated blood glucose on admission (regardless of whether the patient has diabetes mellitus). Cardiovascular risk factors are well-established etiologies of cerebral stroke. Treatment and prevention of these risk factors should be essential in acute spinal cord stroke management.

Management in most cases is primarily limited to improvement of symptoms and prevention of future complications. The patient needs to receive education on how to adapt to their new body and condition. Impairments during hospitalization and after discharge must be addressed, including limitations in mobility and activities of daily living, bladder, bowel and sexual dysfunction. Pressure ulcers, pain, and spasticity are common complications that require appropriate management. After discharge, patients must obtain and be able to safely use the necessary adaptive equipment so that they can optimize their functional independence. A particular focus must be given to the patient's psychosocial function and participation to achieve increased independence, quality of life, and ultimately a better prognosis.

Studies have shown the benefit of lumbar CSF drainage along with the elevation of mean arterial pressure from 60 to 90 or 100 mmHg in avoiding ischemic injury during vascular repair surgery.  Surgical maneuvers such as aortic cross-clamping and retraction can produce acute elevations in CSF pressure, which hinders venous outflow leading to ischemia. Hence, this ischemia may be reversible in some cases by utilizing CSF drainage while supporting systemic blood pressure.