Renin is an essential and effective physiological regulator of blood volume; however, it also plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of various conditions. An important condition to note here is hypertension. Through the overactivation and overexpression of renin from JG cells, the body retains too much fluid, causing increased blood volume and blood pressure. For example, in the presence of atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis, the kidneys may falsely perceive a decrease in renal perfusion, inappropriately releasing renin despite the patient having a physiologically normal fluid status, which may lead to accelerated hypertension. Current first-line pharmacological management methods for hypertension in such conditions involve the inhibition of RAAS. Examples include ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers, which act on later steps of the cascade to inhibit the physiological consequences of RAAS overactivation. These drugs are highly effective but also limited in their action due to the inhibition of subsequent reactions following renin release. Although successfully inhibit the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II, ACE inhibitors do not affect renin - this means renin levels will eventually increase in compensation to the effect of these drugs, implying the eventual and inevitable return of hypertension.

These potential adverse effects result from the intermediate inhibition of RAAS, which is resolvable via the use of a newer generation of antihypertensive agents called direct renin inhibitors (DRIs). These play a significant role in managing hypertension by directly blocking the rate-limiting step of the RAAS. By inhibiting renin, it is possible to inhibit all molecules further along the cascade, including the release of angiotensin I, angiotensin II, aldosterone, and ADH. An example is aliskiren, which the FDA approved in 2007 to be used as a monotherapy or in combination with other hypertensives. However, due to the overwhelming lack of evidence and cost-effectiveness compared to ACE inhibitors, it is not a first-line medication.