**Erenumab**: The only contraindication for the use of erenumab is hypersensitivity to drug or excipients. The current commercially available form of erenumab makes use of substances such as latex. Allergic history to such substances should also be obtained before administration.

**Eptinezumab, galcanezumab, fremanezumab:**These drugs are contraindicated in patients with serious hypersensitivity to these or any of their excipients.

Studies have also shown the development of anti-drug antibodies (ADAs) against erenumab, eptinezumab, galcanezumab, and fremanezumab, with the highest prevalence of the same being in the case of eptinezumab. This reaction may also reduce the efficacy of these drugs in the long term.

**Rimegepant**: The contraindications for use of rimegepant include,

- History of hypersensitivity to rimegepant especially delayed serious hypersensitivity reactions.

- In patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh C), the plasma concentrations of rimegepant were significantly higher; thus, the use of rimegepant in such cases should be avoided.

- Avoid the use of rimegepant in patients with end-stage renal disease (CLcr < 15 mL/min).

- Avoid concomitant administration with potent CYP3A4 inhibitors.

- Avoid concomitant administration as well as a second dose of rimegepant within 48 hours if the patient is on moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors.

- Avoid concomitant administration with P-gp or BCRP Inhibitors.

**Ubrogepant**: The contraindications for the use of ubrogepant include,

- Co-administration of ubrogepant with a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor is contraindicated.

- If the patient is on moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors such as ciprofloxacin, cyclosporine, grapefruit juice, an initial dose of 50mg may be taken. But avoid the use of the second 50 mg dose within 24 hours.

- A loss of ubrogepant exposure, and thus efficacy, is expected in patients taking strong CYP3A4 inducers such as rifampin, barbiturates, and phenytoin. So, avoid concomitant use.

- If ubrogepant and moderate or weak CYP3A4 inducers are given concomitantly, dose adjustment is recommended.

- Ubrogepant acts as a substrate of P-gp and BCRP efflux transporters, but clinical drug interaction studies with inhibitors of only P-gp and/or BCRP (such as carvedilol, quinidine) were not conducted. Therefore, dose adjustment is recommended when administering these concomitantly.

- Avoid the use of ubrogepant in end-stage renal disease (CLcr <15 mL/min).