Management may differ based on the diagnosis of the patient. For instance, a study found that enterally fed preterm infants would benefit from abdominal massage twice a day, whereas cancer patients with elimination issues may benefit from Sitz baths.

Non-invasive interventions such as repositioning the patient, providing counseling in regards to a high fiber diet rich in prunes, stool softeners, removing drugs that may be causing gastrointestinal or genitourinary side effects, and abdominal massage can aid the patient in elimination. Additionally, more invasive interventions such as the use of suppositories, urinary catheters, enemas, bowel and bladder training, and management can also help clients who have failed initial interventions.

Urinary catheterization for retention is possible with the use of ointments such as zinc oxide and topical agents to keep the skin protected. A recent meta-analysis found that periurethral cleaning with water before urinary catheterization is as effective as using anti-septic agents and does not increase the risk of UTI's.

Various enemas can also be used depending on the issue; cleansing enemas are used before procedures like colonoscopies to clean the colon of fecal material for optimal visualization, retention enemas may help lubricate the rectum and deliver medication, and lastly, return-flow enemas are often used after anesthesia to stimulate peristalsis.

If less invasive techniques are unsuccessful, colostomies, or urostomies are options. However, given that these are invasive procedures, there is an increased risk of complications such as infections, B12 deficiency, dehiscence, and necrosis, and these patients require thorough monitoring.

Invasive methods may lead to long term adverse outcomes. A study found that decreasing the use of the invasive practices routinely adopted in nursing homes (laxatives, enemas, rectal exploration) improved constipation in nursing home residents.