Early treatment of discoid lupus lesions may lead to the total clearing of skin lesions, but treatment failure results in permanent scarring. Hair loss, depressed scars, and pigmentary changes are often disfiguring, particularly in darker-skinned people. Some general measures, such as sun avoidance, avoidance of photosensitizing medications, and liberal application of sunscreen are encouraged because cutaneous lesions are known to be exacerbated by sunlight.

Current first-line treatment for DLE consists of photoprotection in conjunction with topical or intralesional corticosteroids and topical calcineurin inhibitors.

Acute exacerbations of DLE are treated with the application of a super high or high potency topical corticosteroid.

Antimalarials are immunotherapeutic and are considered first-line systemic therapy for CLE. Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) and chloroquine with or without quinacrine are currently utilized in the treatment of DLE. HCQ is preferred over chloroquine due to the lower risk of side effects, specifically retinal toxicity. Quinacrine is known to cause hematological abnormalities. Hydroxychloroquine is usually started at 200 mg/day and increased to 200 mg two times a day in 1 to 2 weeks if there are no side effects. The maximum dose of hydroxychloroquine should not exceed 5 mg/kg of real body weight per day, given its association with retinal toxicity.

Other treatment modalities, such as retinoids, vitamin A analogs with anti-keratinizing and anti-inflammatory effects, are sometimes used in CLE, but documentation in the literature is limited. Topical retinoids such as tretinoin 0.05% cream or tazarotene 0.05% gel are utilized to treat hypertrophic DLE.

Methotrexate at a dose range of 10 to 25 mg/week is utilized for DLE lesions. Clinical improvement is noted within 2 to 4 weeks of use, with the resolution of the lesions in about 6 to 8 weeks.

Thalidomide, a potent teratogen, has been used in the treatment of DLE. An early report of its use in treating DLE of 60 individuals treated with 50 to 100 mg per day found complete or marked regression in 54 individuals (90%) with disease relapse in 71% of individuals with medication discontinuation.