In 80 percent of the cases, some underlying cause leads to the development of Budd-Chiari syndrome, and the majority are related to a hypercoagulable state. This aspect of Budd-Chiari syndrome must be considered for diagnosis and treatment.

**Myeloproliferative Disorders**

Almost half of the cases of Budd-Chiari syndrome are related to some type of myeloproliferative disorder like polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia because these disorders are almost always accompanied by some type of hypercoagulability.

**Malignancy**

10% of Budd-Chiari syndrome cases are related to malignancy, which causes either direct compression or invasion of vessels. These, along with hypercoagulability, lead to venous thrombosis and obstruction. The most common cancer related to the Budd-Chiari syndrome is hepatocellular carcinoma, followed by cancers of the adrenal gland, renal cell carcinoma, leiomyosarcoma, right atrial myxoma, and Wilms tumor.

**Lesions of the Liver**

Sometimes, infection or a space-occupying lesion of the liver leads to the compression of the vasculature. Hepatic cysts, adenomas, cystadenomas, invasive aspergillosis, and aortic aneurysm are common lesions that lead to Budd-Chiari syndrome.

**Pregnancy and OCPs (oral contraceptives)**

Oral contraceptives and pregnancy lead to a hypercoagulable state and are responsible for about 20 percent of cases of Budd-Chiari syndrome.

**Idiopathic**

20% of the cases are idiopathic

Other hypercoagulable states responsible for Budd-Chiari syndrome include:

Factor V (Leiden) mutation that leads to protein C resistanceAntiphospholipid antibody syndromeAntithrombin deficiencyProtein C deficiencyParoxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria