**Root Canal Sealers**

**Zinc Oxide Eugenol Sealers**

Zinc oxide eugenol (ZOE)-based sealers are the most used sealers in clinical endodontics. They present as a powder-liquid or a two-paste preparation.

Notable properties of ZOE sealers include absorption if they are extruded into the surrounding tissues and anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial effects.

**Calcium Hydroxide Sealers**

Calcium hydroxide is a widely used material in clinical dentistry due to its therapeutic properties for dental pulp in procedures such as pulp capping and apexification.

Several calcium hydroxide-based sealers are available, which vary in terms of antibacterial effect, cytotoxicity, and solubility.****Their sealing capacity to provide an appropriate seal has proven similar to ZOE sealers.

**Glass Ionomer Sealers**

Clinicians advocating for the use of glass ionomer (GI) sealers as an obturation material do so due to their dentin-bonding properties.

**Resin Sealers**

Resin sealers are non-eugenol sealers that provide excellent adhesion to the canal walls.

**Bioceramic Sealers**

Bioceramic sealers are biocompatible materials that use either calcium silicate or calcium phosphate as their main constituent.

MTA is activated with the introduction of water and produces a highly alkaline mixture with a pH of 12 and beneficial hydrates of calcium silicate. These hydrates make MTA an excellent endodontic material as they form on the surface of existing calcium silicate particles and continue to grow inwards, effectively creating a barrier.

**Core Obturation Materials**

**Silver Cones**

Silver cones (also referred to as silver points) are a historic obturation material that is no longer used in modern endodontics. The original basis for their use stemmed from the belief that they had an oligodynamic property (heavy metals' capacity to exert a bactericidal effect) that led to the destruction of intracanal microbes.

**Gutta-Percha**

Gutta-percha (GP) is the most commonly used core obturation material in modern endodontics.

The popularity of gutta-percha as an obturation material stems from its variable chemical composition. GP exists in two crystalline phases, alpha, and beta, and can cycle between these phases when heated is applied or removed. The alpha phase of GP occurs when it is heated and produces a tacky material that can flow under pressure. Alternatively, the beta phase is when the GP is unheated, forming a solid mass of compactable material.

Gutta-percha has many advantages, such as ease of manipulation, radiopacity, low toxicity, and plasticity. But, it does not bond to dentin and shrinks when cooled.

Gutta-percha cones are available in standardized 0.02 taper as specified by the International Organization of Standardization (ISO) and non-standardized sizes.

**Bioceramic Materials**

Bioceramics, in particular MTA, can also be utilized as a core filling material. In addition to the aforementioned chemical properties of MTA, it is commonly used as an endodontic material due to its many beneficial characteristics. These include a long set time, a low relative compressive strength, high fracture resistance, and both antibacterial and antifungal properties.

**Other Core Materials**

There are various other core obturation materials commercially available; however, no statistical difference in terms of reduction in leakage has been noted between them and gutta-percha.