The prognosis of the patients in terms of fertility varies greatly. In many cases, assisted reproductive techniques can help with biological reproduction, but these therapies can be expensive and take time with no guarantee of a successful pregnancy in the end. For this reason, a careful and frank discussion should be held with the patient and his family about the time, costs, and reasonable expectations for a successful pregnancy. Karyotype analysis and genetic counseling should be offered to all men with azoospermia or severe oligospermia.

If micro-TESE fails to retrieve any viable sperm, further attempts at assisted reproduction are unlikely to be successful, although there is a small chance of finding viable sperm with a second attempt. Men who have complete deletions of the AZFa, AZFb, or AZFc regions will have virtually no chance of successful sperm retrieval.

Neither hormonal concentrations, histological diagnosis, testicular volume, age, testosterone, LH, nor FSH levels are sufficiently reliable enough to predict the presence of sperm on micro-TESE although there is a slight overall suggestion that higher FSH levels might indicate a somewhat better successful retrieval rate.

There is no specific marker in serum or seminal fluid that has so far proven useful in reliably predicting the presence of sperm in non-obstructive azoospermic men with either Sertoli cell-only syndrome or maturational arrest.

It may be possible at some future time to use somatic cells (in patients who have no germ cells) and induce changes that make them pluripotent stem cells.

Experimentally, testis-specific mRNA transcripts from seminal fluid may ultimately be a better way of classifying non-obstructive azoospermia than standard histopathology, which can be obtained non-invasively.

Azoospermia has been associated as a risk factor for the development of future cancers.