Insults and injury to the brain and the Broca area may lead to Broca's aphasia. Also known as expressive aphasia, it is non-fluent aphasia characterized by partially losing the ability to produce spoken and written language. Their speech will still contain important content, but they may omit articles, prepositions, and other words that only have grammatical significance. Thus, they are said to have "telegraphic speech." The aphasia can vary in severity, and in some cases, patients may only be able to speak in single-word sentences. In other words, these individuals know what they are trying to say, but they cannot say it. Patients will also lose the ability of repetition, as an intact Broca area, Wernicke's area, and arcuate fasciculus are required to repeat words or phrases. These patients do not entirely lose their ability to comprehend, but they exhibit an increased effort of speech. This is because language comprehension is primarily a function of Wernicke's area, located in the posterior superior temporal gyrus. Therefore, they are typically aware of their deficits, and Broca aphasia patients are likely to become frustrated and often develop depression. It is also essential to differentiate dysphasia from dysarthria. Those with dysarthria have problems speaking because of an inability to move mouth and tongue musculature, while expressive aphasia is more issues with word-finding.

Broca area has correlations with the speech disorder of stuttering. This condition is also known as stammering, where speech fluidity is interrupted by unintentional prolongations and repetitions of syllables, words, and phrases. Those affected also have instances where they cannot produce sound, as demonstrated by blocks and silent pauses. When examined with fMRI, hypoactivity is visible in the Broca area with hyperactivity in motor areas. Stuttering may not be as severe as Broca's aphasia, but it can be very frustrating to those affected by it.

Exceptions and variations following insult to the Broca area have occurred in some patients. For example, some patients who have suffered damage to the area, and their language expression is intact, while some patients noted to have Broca aphasia have no lesions to that region; this makes it possible that there are other areas of the brain that have a role in language expression. Damage to the Broca area can also lead to transient mutism, suggesting it may not be entirely dedicated to processing but also phonation/vocalization.

Impairments to the Broca area most frequently occur in instances of reduced blood supply to the region, with the greatest instance of this being strokes. Both ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes in the area of the middle cerebral artery can cause damage to the Broca area. Due to its large size and direct route from the internal carotid artery, the middle cerebral artery is the most regularly affected blood vessel in strokes. Therefore, Broca aphasia presents in many patients who have suffered such cerebrovascular accidents. Other lesions, such as direct trauma, tumors, or infectious masses, can be located in the area, which would have the capability to reproduce Broca aphasia.