Use Boyle's law to calculate how much oxygen time remains in an E-sized cylinder. Boyle's law states that at a fixed temperature (room temperature) of an ideal gas, the pressure is inversely proportional to volume. Boyle's law can be further rearranged to state that pressure times volume equals a constant. The following is the formula:

- P1 * V1 = P2 * V2.

One could compare a cylinder of gas at a filled volume (V1 = 660 L) and pressure (P1 = 2200 psi) to the current pressure (P2) read on the cylinder. This would provide the information needed to solve for the current volume (V2) remaining in the tank in liters. The following is the formula:

- P2/P1 * V1 = V2, or

(Measured pressure remaining using the integrated pressure gauge in psi/2200 psi) * 660 L = Liters of oxygen remaining in the tank.)

This Volume (V2) can be used to determine the amount of unit time remaining on the cylinder, given the current flow rate of the gas.

- V2/Flow rate = unit time remaining, or

- Liters of oxygen remaining in the tank/oxygen setting in liters/minute = Minutes of oxygen remaining

The same formulas can be used in cylinders containing a pure gaseous form. However, calculations for nitrous oxide are only applicable once the pressure drops below 745 psi due to the presence of liquid and gaseous forms within the tank. The pressure will remain constant until 75% of the 1590 L gas is consumed, which is approximately equal to 400 L remaining within the cylinder. From this point until empty, the above formulas apply. Prior to this point, the cylinder must be weighed to determine the amount of gas remaining within the cylinder.

The transportation of gas cylinders is highly regulated by local, state, and federal agencies in most countries. In the United States, the Department of Transportation is the governing authority. Further, there are manufacturer guidelines to ensure that the cylinders have been tested and are safe. Some of the tests that cylinders undergo include tensile strength, hydrostatic testing, impact testing, burst testing, and pressure cycling. Once the cylinder is manufactured, it must have all the vital information permanently etched onto the cylinder.