Imaging has a key role in the evaluation and management of these patients. Routine radiographs of the affected joint are the initial imaging obtained. Radiographs show an ovoid lucency affecting the subchondral bone with subjacent sclerotic bone. Occasionally the bony fragment may be visualized within the subchondral defect or, if displaced, elsewhere within the joint. Radiographs are unable to determine the stability of the osseous fragment and underestimate the lesion size. MRI is typically used to confirm the diagnosis when an abnormality is identified on radiographs in differentiating a developmental ossification variation from OCD and to aid in treatment planning, helping to determine if the lesion is likely to be stable at the time of arthroscopy.  MRI is highly sensitive and specific in the evaluation of fragment stability; therefore, it is recommended for patients in whom stability is a clinical concern.

Initially described by De Smet in reference to the knee on T2 weighted images of the knee the following four signs on MRI are associated with OCD lesion instability

- Line of hyperintense signal equal to the fluid at the fragment bone interface measuring 5 mm or more in length,

- A discrete round focus of hyperintense signal deep to the OCD lesion measuring 5 mm or more,

- Focal defect in the overlying cartilage measuring 5 mm or more, and

- Hyperintense signal equal to the fluid that traverses the articular cartilage and the subchondral bone which extends to the lesion.  These same findings can be applied to any joint with an OCD lesion to evaluate for stability.   These criteria have high sensitivity and specificity in the determination of OCD lesion stability.  MRI arthrography can be beneficial in difficult cases. CT arthrography, although not as sensitive, can be obtained in the patient when MRI is contraindicated.

MRI is also useful in the monitoring of treatment of these patients following diagnosis if conservative management or surgical treatment is chosen.  The recommended time interval to perform MRI to evaluate healing is an institutional protocol and surgeon dependent. MRI findings that suggest healing following conservative management include: decrease or resolution in the surrounding bone marrow edema pattern, a decrease in lesion size, decrease or the resolution of the hyperintense T2 signal rim or cyst-like foci, and ingrowth of bone within the bed of the OCD lesion with osseous bridging.  Following surgery, MRI allows for noninvasive evaluation of the repair of the articular surface and the bone cartilage interface.