# Continuing Education Activity

Kidney transplantation is currently the definitive treatment for patients with end-stage kidney disease (ESKD). Compared to dialysis, kidney transplantation is associated with reduced mortality and improved quality of life. Rejection of the kidney is one of the leading causes of allograft loss. This activity reviews the epidemiology, etiology, classification, diagnosis, and management of chronic kidney transplant rejection and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition. It specifically focuses on the immune mechanisms of chronic kidney transplant rejection, the characteristic histopathological lesions of immune-mediated chronic rejection, how to differentiate chronic rejection from other causes of renal allograft dysfunction, and how to effectively diagnose and manage patients with chronic rejection.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology and classification of chronic kidney transplant rejection.
- Describe the characteristic histopathological lesions of chronic active antibody-mediated and t cell-mediated rejection.
- Review the current diagnostic approach to a patient with suspected chronic kidney transplant rejection.
- Explain the role of the interprofessional team is the prevention and management of chronic kidney transplant rejection.

# Introduction

Kidney transplantation is currently the definitive treatment for patients with end-stage kidney disease (ESKD). Compared to dialysis, kidney transplantation is associated with reduced mortality and improved quality of life.

# Etiology

CKTR can be due to cell-mediated or humoral immune response and usually occurs in patients with insufficient immunosuppression or medication nonadherence.

Non-immune risk factors for late allograft loss include delayed graft function, immunosuppressive medication toxicity, recurrence of primary kidney disease, diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia.

# Epidemiology

Alloimmunity is one of the most frequent causes of graft loss. Nankivell et al. reported a 25.8% incidence of subclinical rejection at 1-year post-transplant.

# Pathophysiology

CKTR is, by definition, immune-mediated and generally divides into chronic active antibody-mediated rejection (CAAMR) and chronic active T cell-mediated rejection (CATMR).

Cell-mediated injury can involve both the renal tubulointerstitial or arterial components. Antigen-presenting cells (APC) present donor antigens to T cells, which then cross the microcirculation of the donor's kidney and enter the interstitium. Several cytokines are then produced, including interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), triggering a cascade of inflammation leading to tubulitis, the hallmark feature of CATMR.

# Histopathology

At the histopathological level, CKTR affects all parts of the kidneys, including the arteries, interstitium, glomeruli, and tubules. CAAMR leads to microvascular remodeling in both the glomerular or peritubular capillaries. Glomerular microvascular remodeling leads to TG, which is characterized by double contouring of glomerular capillary walls. Other histopathological features of antibody-mediated injury include peritubular capillary basement membrane multilayering and arterial intimal fibrosis.

CATMR involves mainly the renal interstitium and arteries, leading to tubulitis and chronic allograft arteriopathy, respectively. Tubular inflammation leads to IFTA. Chronic allograft arteriopathy manifests primarily as arterial intimal fibrosis. Since DSAs in CAAMR can stimulate fibrosis of the arterial intima, it is challenging to differentiate arteriopathy secondary to CAAMR and CATMR on the histological level.

# History and Physical

The diagnosis of CKTR starts with clinical evaluation through a thorough history taking and a comprehensive physical exam. Important items to ask for during history taking include medication nonadherence, recurrence of the original cause of nephropathy, previous transplantation, prior AR, and baseline HLA sensitization. Unexplained decreases in immunosuppression levels can also point towards nonadherence as a cause for CKTR.

# Evaluation

Early diagnosis of CKTR is imperative for early and successful treatment. As discussed above, the diagnosis of CKTR starts with clinical evaluation. The Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) guidelines recommend biweekly clinic visits 3 to 6 months post-transplant, monthly visits 7 to 12 months post-transplant, and every 2 to 3 months after that.

Laboratory tests can help differentiate different causes of allograft dysfunction. Kidney allograft function assessed by serum creatinine (Cr) and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) requires measurement at or before each visit. The eGFR is suggested to be a more accurate indicator and predictor of graft function and long-term graft loss, respectively.

DSA is typically measured in an HLA laboratory using flow cytometry and the single antigen bead technique. Positive DSA is a relatively good marker for CAAMR. A decrease or disappearance of DSA can be used to monitor response to treatment.

Doppler ultrasonography (US) is a non-invasive and relatively inexpensive tool to assess kidney allograft vasculature. Resistance indices over 0.8 at three months have links to deterioration in graft function.

A biopsy is imperative for diagnosing CKTR. Graft histology (as described previously) provides visual evidence of the underlying pathology of graft dysfunction. C4d complement fragment deposition in the peritubular capillaries is a marker for antibody-mediated tissue injury.

The Banff classification, originally founded in 1991 and later updated in 2007, 2009, 2013, and 2017 established specific criteria for the diagnosis of kidney allograft rejection.

I) CAAMR (all criteria must be present):

1. Histological evidence of chronic tissue injury (one or more of the following):

- Transplant glomerulopathy without evidence of thrombotic microangiopathy or glomerulonephritis

- Severe multilayering of the glomerular basement membrane on electron microscopy

- New-onset arterial intimal fibrosis

2.Evidence of antibody interaction with vascular endothelium (one or more of the following):

- Linear C4d deposition of peritubular capillaries

- Moderate or severe microvascular inflammation in the absence of glomerulonephritis

- Increased gene expression of gene transcripts strongly suggests antibody-mediated rejection

3. Positive DSA antibodies to HLA and non-HLA antigens.

II) CATMR is classified as follows (after ruling out other causes of IFTA):

- **Grade IA:**More than 25% interstitial inflammation of the cortex with “moderate tubulitis” in 1 or more tubules, excluding severely atrophic tubules.

- **Grade IB:**Greater than 25% interstitial inflammation of the cortex with “severe tubulitis” in 1 or more tubules, excluding severely atrophic tubules

- **Grade II:**Chronic allograft arteriopathy indicated by neointima formation, intimal arterial fibrosis, and mononuclear infiltration

# Treatment / Management

The management of CKTR remains challenging, mainly due to irreversibility at the time of diagnosis. Management, therefore, focuses on the prevention and early management of AR rather than treating CKTR. Adequacy of immunosuppression and patient adherence are pivotal for preventing AR, which later translates into a lower incidence of CKTR. Optimizing HLA matching reduces the chances of early allograft injury, further decreasing the risk of chronic allograft loss.

Most immunosuppressive regimens in the United States include a CNI, an antimetabolite, and corticosteroids. Although extremely effective, CNIs carry a high risk of chronic nephrotoxicity. Two methods that were suggested to balance efficacy and toxicity are (1) Guiding dosage by monitoring blood drug levels and (2) CNI sparing strategies. The four main approaches to minimize CNI exposure are CNI minimization, conversion, withdrawal, and avoidance.

**CNI Minimization:**Minimization refers to lowering target blood trough levels of CNIs, with or without another immunosuppressive agent. A systematic review and meta-analysis showed that CNI minimization was associated with a relatively low risk of AR and overall improved allograft function.

Combining low dose CNI with mycophenolic acid (MPA) preparations also reduced the risk of AR with no difference in mortality. Pairing CNI minimization with a mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor (such as sirolimus or everolimus) did not increase the risk of biopsy-proven AR. It led to an improvement in kidney function in some studies. It is worth noting, however, that full dose CNI plus mTOR inhibitor therapy increases the risk of nephrotoxicity.

**CNI****Conversion:**Conversion refers to switching CNI to another maintenance drug. Converting from CNI to an mTOR inhibitor showed improvement in kidney function, which was more observed with the conversion from cyclosporine compared to tacrolimus.

**CNI****Withdrawal:**Withdrawal refers to tapering CNIs until completely discontinued. CNI withdrawal with either MPA or mTOR inhibitor-based regimens was associated with an increased risk of rejection. Early withdrawal (<6 months post-transplant) was associated with an increased risk of graft loss, with insufficient evidence for both rejection and a decrease in renal function. Late withdrawal with the continuation of MPA preparations was associated with an overall greater risk of rejection.

**CNI****Avoidance:**Avoidance refers to CNI free regimens planned from the start. Initial trials to avoid CNIs while using daclizumab or anti-thymocyte globulin were associated with an increased risk of AR, which required reintroduction of CNIs in some patients.

Belatacept, a novel fusion protein that inhibits T cell activation, was also compared to CNI based regimens. Vincenti et al. randomized patients into three groups; a cyclosporine, an intensive belatacept, and a less intensive belatacept-based regimen. Patients were followed for seven years. Patients on belatacept-based regimens showed a 43% reduction in risk of graft loss and death, compared to cyclosporine. Kidney function improved in both belatacept-based regimens, while it declined with cyclosporine.

Non-immunological management of CKTR includes tight control of blood pressure and lipid levels.

# Differential Diagnosis

CKTR requires differentiation from other causes of late kidney allograft dysfunction:

**Calcineurin Inhibitor (CNI) Toxicity**

CNIs are among the most widely used immunosuppressive medications in kidney transplantation. The introduction of cyclosporine and tacrolimus in the early 1980s and late 1990s, respectively, lead to improved clinical outcomes.

**BK-Virus Associated Nephropathy (BKVAN)**

BKVAN is also a significant cause of late allograft dysfunction and requires differentiation from CKTR. BKVAN occurs when the BK virus, a polyomavirus, propagates in the face of immunosuppression. Most transplant centers screen for BK virus in the bloodstream during the first year post-transplant, and particularly high-level viremia tends to correlate with BKVAN. Histologically, BKVAN can present with tubulointerstitial scarring similar to CKTR. Suspicious biopsy findings need confirmation by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detection of viral DNA in the blood, characteristic intranuclear viral particles on electron microscopy, and/or BK virus detection using immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization (e.g., staining for the SV40 large T antigen).

**Recurrent or De-Novo Glomerular Disease**

Recurrent glomerulonephritis (GN) causes approximately 8.4% of late renal allograft loss.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of CKTR and late allograft loss depends on the degree of fibrosis and reversibility of rejection at the time of diagnosis. Denisov et al. suggested that measuring hemoglobin, creatinine, and proteinuria 1-year post-transplant can be beneficial in the prognostication of kidney transplantation.

# Complications

The main complication of CKTR is allograft loss, which leads to kidney failure and possibly death, especially in patients who are poor candidates for repeat kidney transplantation. Patient complications include anxiety and depression, with an increased risk of mortality and worse quality of life with dialysis re-initiation. Kaplan et al. reported a less than 40% chance of at least 10-year survival in patients with kidney allograft failure.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Renal transplant recipients require counseling and education regarding each of the following:

- The importance of medication adherence in maintaining a healthy allograft and prolonging its viability

- The importance of regular follow up with their transplant nephrologist

- The risk factors and causes of chronic kidney transplant rejection

- The signs and symptoms of chronic kidney transplant rejection

- The complications and consequences of chronic kidney transplant rejection

- The available treatment options for chronic kidney transplant rejection

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Chronic kidney transplant rejection poses a risk of allograft loss, increasing patient morbidity, and mortality. Acute rejection is a significant risk factor for chronic rejection. Thus, an interprofessional team approach to diagnosis and management is crucial.

Evaluation starts with a thorough history taking and ordering the necessary lab tests ordered by the specialist/clinician. Immunosuppression medication levels need regular monitoring; this should include the services of a board-certified pharmacotherapy pharmacist. The pharmacist can also verify dosing and perform medication reconciliation. Renal ultrasonography is an inexpensive and non-invasive tool that can aid diagnosis. A biopsy is often necessary for definitive diagnosis and ruling out other causes of allograft injury. The management of chronic kidney transplant rejection remains challenging, mainly due to irreversibility at the time of diagnosis. Management, therefore, focuses on the prevention and early management of acute rejection rather than treating chronic rejection. Patient adherence to immunosuppressive medications is essential in preventing acute rejection and late allograft loss; nursing staff is critical to following and assessing patient compliance. Improving health care professionals' knowledge of how to promptly evaluate and treat this condition will help improve patient outcomes. Early and effective communication between the patient, primary care clinician, pharmacist, and transplant nephrologist is crucial for early diagnosis and treatment to prevent allograft loss. Transplantation nurses monitor patients, provide education, and document these for the team. These interprofessional case dynamics are vital to achieving optimal outcomes for patients with CKTR. [Level 5]