**Saw Palmetto**

Saw palmetto is indigenous to the southeastern United States. Historically, it was used by Native Americans to treat genitourinary symptoms, relieve inflamed mucous membranes, increase testicular function and increase breast size.

**Garlic**

Garlic (Allium sativum) is among the most researched herbal supplements and is the second most used complementary therapy.

**Gingko Biloba**

Ginkgo biloba is commonly used to improve memory and cognition in the elderly suffering from impaired cerebral circulation. Mitochondrial dysfunction is one theory proposed as the leading cause of cognitive decline.Gingko biloba leaves are flavonoids and terpene trilactones.Gingko biloba significantly improved cognitive function in dementia patients.Gingko biloba. Specifically, Gingko biloba was shown to improve endocrine homeostasis, regulate hormone sensitivity, maintain endothelial microvascular integrity, and proteolyze tau proteins.

**Echinacea**

Echinacea is a native species to eastern and central North America. Historically, Native Americans used Echinacea for treating colds, bronchitis, flu, and respiratory infections.Echinacea is known as an immunostimulant, boosting both innate and specific immunity. It has also demonstrated antiviral, anti-inflammatory, and antimicrobial effects.Echinacea extract significantly increased expression of CD80, CD86, and MHCII, upregulated markers of classically activated macrophages (M1), and the production of IL-6 IL-12p70, IL-1beta, nitrous oxide (NO), and TNF-a. Intracellular bactericidal activity and enhanced phagocytosis were also observed.Echinacea was as effective as oseltamivir with fewer adverse events and reduced risk.

**Black Cohosh**

Black cohosh (Actaea racemosa) is commonly used to treat premenstrual syndrome (PMS), dysmenorrhea, menopausal symptoms, and in particular, hot flashes. It has also seen increased use in women who have breast cancer.

**Ginseng**

Ginseng is used commonly to boost energy, enhance physical and mental performance, treat erectile dysfunction, and strengthen the immune response. Ginseng is a generic term that represents several species in the genus Panax. These include Panax quinquefolius L (American ginseng), Panax ginseng, and Panax japonicus (Asian ginseng). Ginseng is composed of a diverse amount of active compounds that affect many metabolic pathways. Of those, ginsenosides have been shown to have clinical significance. They are found in the plant's roots but have also been reported to be abundant in the berries.

Ginsenosides and their metabolites are known to modulate signaling pathways of metastasis, angiogenesis, inflammation, oxidative stress, and stem/progenitor-like properties in breast cancer cells.

**Hawthorn**

Hawthorn (Crataegus monogyna) is commonly used for heart-related conditions, specifically as a supportive treatment for angina, atherosclerosis, heart failure, angina, atherosclerosis, and high blood pressure. Hawthorn's effects on the heart were first reported in the first century AD and have been well established.

**St. John's Wort**

St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum) is commonly used to treat mild-to-moderate depression. St. John's Wort as a medicinal herb is traceable back to the ancient Greeks who used it to treat burns, as an astringent to arrest diarrhea, and as a diuretic.

At a daily dosage of 300 to 1200 mg, St. John's Wort was more efficacious than standard antidepressant therapy in patients with mild-to-moderate depression.Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).

**Goldenseal**

Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) has long been used for its antiseptic qualities and activity against colds, the flu, and inflammation of the nares. It is indigenous to eastern North America and southeastern Canada. Native Americans used the roots of goldenseal to treat skin and eye infections and gastrointestinal irritation.Staphylococcus aureus, preventing damage to human skin keratinocytes.Mycobacterium species, including M. tuberculosis.Herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 by modulating host cell activation of the NF-kB and MAPK pathways.

**Feverfew**

Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) is commonly used for migraine headaches and menstrual cramps. It is native to Asia Minor but cultivated worldwide. Major active compounds found in feverfew include sesquiterpene lactones, 3b-hydroxy parthenolide, parthenolide, canin, and artecanin.