Guyon canal syndrome is usually diagnosed clinically. There may be a history of repetitive trauma (e.g., cyclists handlebar) or direct injury to the hand (e.g., fracture of the hamate). Signs and symptoms can be purely motor, purely sensory, or mixed depending on the zone of the distal ulnar nerve lesion as discussed above. Motor complaints may include weakness/paralysis of the intrinsic muscles of the hand innervated by the ulnar nerve, which may present as a weakening of the handgrip and clawing of the fourth and fifth digits. Hypothenar atrophy may be present in more advanced cases. Differentiation between ulnar nerve compression at Guyon canal (wrist) vs. cubital tunnel (elbow) can be done by testing the strength of intrinsic (hand) vs. extrinsic (forearm) muscles supplied by the ulnar nerve respectively. Sparing of the dorsal surface of ulnar dermatome (dorsal medial hand and two fingers) points to Guyon canal syndrome. This occurs because this region is innervated by the dorsal ulnar cutaneous branch which comes off about 5 cm proximal to the Guyon canal entrance. **Tinel sign**involves reproducing symptoms by tapping at the site of suspected nerve compression and can also be used for localization.**Froment sign**, which by definition entails thumb IP joint hyperflexion (via FPL, innervated by AIN) to compensate for an inability to adduct the thumb.

When the fifth digit is observed in an over-abducted position at rest, this is known as **Wartenberg sign**, which can be seen in ulnar nerve palsy as a consequence of denervation of the palmar interossei muscles that are normally responsible for digit adduction. Sensory involvement will produce pain and/or paresthesias of the medial palm and ulnar half of the fourth digit and the entire anterior side of the fifth digit.

**Allen Test**evaluates the arterial supply of the hand, which is useful when Ulnar Artery Thrombosis is suspected.

The severity of symptoms can range from very mild to very severe on a spectrum of 1 to 5: very mild (1), mild (2), moderate (3), severe (4), and very severe (5).

Duration of symptoms can be acute (within one month), subacute (two to three months), or chronic (more than three months).