**Eyelid Lamellae**

The upper and lower eyelids consist of an anterior and posterior lamella. The orbital septum separates these lamellae superiorly. The anterior lamella is made up of the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and orbicularis oculi muscle. The posterior lamella consists of the tarsal plate and conjunctiva.

**Tarsal Plates**

The tarsal plates are part of the posterior lamellae of the eyelid. The tarsal plates are responsible for providing structural integrity to the lid margin. The upper lid tarsal plate is around 10 mm in height, whereas the lower lid tarsal plate is around 4 mm in height.

**Canthal Tendons**

The medial and lateral canthal tendons anchor the tarsal plates to the orbit, suspending the tarsal plates. The lateral canthal tendon consists of a superior and inferior crus. The posterior reflection of these attachments connects to Whitnall’s tubercle, which is located 2 mm deep to the lateral orbital rim. The medial canthal tendon has a superior and inferior crus, as well as anterior and posterior reflections that attach to the anterior and posterior lacrimal crests.

**Postseptal Fat Compartments**

The upper eyelid contains only 2 fat pads, the preaponeurotic and the nasal fat pad. The interpad septum separates these compartments. The nasal fat pad contains fat that has a distinctly white color when compared to the other fat compartments of the eyelid. The lower eyelid contains three postseptal fat compartments. These are the nasal, central, and lateral fat pads. The inferior oblique muscle separates the nasal and central fat pads. The central and lateral fat compartments are separated by a component of the Lockwood ligament.

**Tear Trough**

This anatomic area also referred to as the nasojugal groove, is created by the attachment of the orbital retaining ligament, or orbital malar ligament, to the skin. This ligament originates from the inferior orbital rim and runs from the medial canthus to the medial corneoscleral limbus.

**Levator Apparatus**

The upper lid levator apparatus consists of the levator palpebrae superioris muscle and the underlying Müller’s muscle, which originates from the levator muscle. The latter is sympathetically innervated, while the levator muscle itself is innervated by the superior division of the oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III). The confluence of both of these muscles inserts as the levator aponeurosis on the superior aspect of the tarsal plate. Fibers from the levator palpebrae superioris insert onto the skin of the upper lid approximately 8 to 10 mm above the superior edge of the tarsus.

**Lacrimal Apparatus**

The lacrimal apparatus consists of the secretions of the lacrimal gland which are subsequently collected by the lacrimal canaliculi and lacrimal sac. These secretions, which form the aqueous layer of tears, then empty down the nasolacrimal duct to a meatus just inferior to the inferior concha. The lacrimal gland may contribute to an excessive fullness of the upper lateral aspect of the eye. While suspending it may improve aesthetic outcomes, any manipulation of this apparatus can alter tear secretions and contribute to dry eyes.