Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) may be complicated by thyroid dysfunction. A recent study has shown that thyroid dysfunction is seen in up to 23.3% of patients with coronary artery disease and both overt and subclinical hyperthyroidism in 2.5%.

Pregnancy and concurrent thyroid pathology can pose medical management challenges. PTU is recommended in pregnant women presenting with hyperthyroidism due to methimazole’s association with congenital defects. Close monitoring is recommended with PTU administration, as overcorrection can potentially cause fetal hypothyroidism. The thyroid hormone is particularly important due to its role in fetal neurodevelopment. Recent literature indicates that previously recommended TSH cutoffs in pregnant women lead to overcorrection of thyroid disease in pregnant patients.

Neonatal thyrotoxicosis results from fetal tissue exposure to excessive thyroid hormone. There are typically two variants of neonatal thyrotoxicosis: autoimmune-mediated and non-autoimmune-mediated. Autoimmune fetal hyperthyroidism involves the transplacental passage of TSH receptor-stimulating antibodies. Hyperthyroidism is usually transient as symptoms cease 5 to 6 months after birth following clearance of maternal antibodies. Non-autoimmune fetal hyperthyroidism is associated with an activating mutation of either the TSH receptor or the GNAS gene (leading to McCune-Albright syndrome). Unlike the autoimmune etiology, the non-autoimmune variant is permanent, long persisting after birth.