Spider angiomas are characteristically found on the face, neck, upper chest, and arms in adults, corresponding to the distribution of superior vena cava. In children, lesions are common on the upper extremities. They may also be present on the backs of the hands and fingers. However, it must be emphasized that spider angiomas can also be seen in locations other than the skin, such as the mucosa of the oral cavity and gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Its characteristic appearance diagnoses spider angioma. Large spider angiomas may be pulsatile with blood flow toward the periphery secondary to the local increase in arterial blood supply. Bleeding from these lesions is unusual unless picked or scratched. Skin temperature over a spider nevus is higher than surrounding skin. The blood pressure measures 50 to 70 mm Hg in these small arterioles.

The direction of blood flow can be illustrated by applying pressure over the body of spiders with a glass slide (diascopy), leading to pallor with refilling following the release of pressure. No other angiomas show this phenomenon. Due to the varying sizes of spider angioma and for the ease of description, they can be graded from grade 1+ (readily recognizable containing a body, legs, and surrounding erythema) to grade 4+ (visible pulsations with a hand lens, and raised central punctum with many obvious “spider legs” radiating from it). Pregnant patients may present with numerous spider nevi which are harmless and usually resolve after childbirth. Patients with the chronic liver disease will typically have symptoms like jaundice, fluid retention, confusion, and on examination, shifting dullness, icterus, findings related to cause of cirrhosis, and stigmata of liver cell failure.