The precise mechanism of action of ILE is unknown, though there have been several proposed theories. The early “lipid sink” theory by Weinberg et al. suggested that a lipid compartment gets created in the blood into which the lipophilic bupivacaine may dissolve, thereby removing bupivacaine from the aqueous plasma circulation.

The “lipid sink” hypothesis had garnered widespread acceptance and was the basis for extrapolating ILE therapy with other lipophilic drug toxicities.

A static lipid phase reservoir would become rapidly filled before removing enough drug from the plasma circulation to recover toxicity. Instead, ongoing research better supports ILE as a dynamic “lipid shuttle” or “lipid subway.”., heart and brain), then 2) redistributes to muscles for storage and the liver for detoxification.

Besides scavenging, animal and human models have indicated cardiotonic and postconditioning effects from lipid infusion. Lipid directly increases cardiac contractility, which improves cardiac output and increases preload through simple volume expansion. Studies have also found a lipid-induced effect on vascular resistance separate from cardiac mechanisms. Contractility and vascular tone improve only when the local anesthetic concentration in the heart falls below sodium channel blocking thresholds.

LAST experiments suggest a similarity with cardiac ischemia-reperfusion injury at the cellular level, which seems to be mitigated by the cardioprotective effects of lipid through multiple biochemical pathways.