# Introduction

Healthcare providers must comprehensively understand oxygenation, which involves calculating the Alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient (A-a gradient) and comprehending its implications for individuals and potential diseases. Differentiating between arterial hypoxemia and hypoxia and identifying associated conditions and appropriate treatments are vital skills. Additionally, the risks associated with hyperoxemia and hyperoxia will be emphasized to highlight the potential harm caused by excessive oxygen administration.

The activity will also provide an overview of the 3 common dyshemoglobinemias, with a particular focus on carbon monoxide poisoning, a condition frequently encountered in clinical settings. Furthermore, participants will learn about pulse oximeters, including their purpose and how they differ from co-oximeters, enabling healthcare providers to make informed decisions regarding oxygenation monitoring.

By engaging in this activity, healthcare providers can enhance their competency in understanding and managing oxygenation-related issues, enabling them to deliver optimal care and improve patient outcomes.

# Function

**Definitions Generally Used**

- Oxygen saturation: The proportion of hemoglobin inside red blood cells that can bind oxygen. This generally means functional hemoglobin or functional arterial oxygen saturation.

- SaO2 is arterial saturation measured by ABG. This entity excludes certain dyshemoglobinemia and only includes effective hemoglobins. SaO2 is expressed as 100% X (O2Hb)/(O2Hb + Hb).

- SpO2 is oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry using light wavelength. Commercially available oximeters use 2 light-emitting diodes (LEDs) that emit light at the 660 nm (red) and the 940 nm (infrared) wavelengths.

- The pressure of any inspired gas (P gas) is equal to the partial pressure of the gas times the barometric pressure. The normal partial pressure of oxygen at sea level is simply the fractional inspired of oxygen (FiO2) (0.21) times the barometric pressure (760 mm Hg at sea level), which is 160 mm Hg or 159 (if one uses 0.2093 as the FiO2).

- The A-a gradient (or difference) is defined as the alveolar oxygen content minus the arterial oxygen content obtained from an arterial blood gas (ABG). Theoretically, there should be no gradient, but in reality, there is at least a 5 mm Hg or more gradient. The alveolar oxygen content comes from at least 300 to 400 million or more alveoli present at birth and tends to be a calculated value.

**Alveolar oxygen tension (PAO2)**

It is essential to understand how the alveolar oxygen equation is developed.

PAO2 = (Patm – PH20) FiO2 – PaCO2/RQ where Patm is atmospheric pressure and RQ is the respiratory quotient.

Patm is equal to 760 torrs at sea level, and the PH2O is the partial pressure of water vapor pressure in humans of 47 mmHg at body temperature (37 degrees Celcius). The room air FiO2 is 0.21. The respiratory quotient (RQ) varies from 0.707 to 1.0 and is usually estimated as 0.80 for an average diet (that includes carbohydrates, protein, and fat).

Based on these assumptions, the following calculation is made:

PAO2 = (760 mm Hg – 47 mm Hg) 0.21 – 40 mm Hg/0.8 = 150 mm Hg – 50 mm Hg = 100 mm Hg. Therefore at sea level on room air, the only variables that should change to get the PAO2 or alveolar oxygen are the arterial PaCO2 and the RQ. Assuming an RQ of 0.8 (volume of CO2 released/volume of O2 consumed) means the PaCO2 is the only variable that changes. The common exceptions would be at high altitudes and hypoventilation, where the PA02 decreases.

**Arterial Oxygen Tension (PaO2)**

PaO2 refers to the small amount of oxygen dissolved in the plasma after it diffuses from the alveolar spaces in the lung. PaO2 is usually obtained from an arterial blood sample. The PaO2 measurement is useful, especially when false values of SpO2 are suspected (such as in dark skin, dyshemoglobinemia, or severe anemia).

**Alveolar-Arterial Oxygen Gradient or (A-a) Gradient**

The difference between the PA02 and PaO2 is known as the alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient. This varies from about 5 to 25 mm Hg. It is calculated as the PAO2 (100 mm Hg) – PaO2 (approximately 95 mm Hg in a healthy young and nonsmoking person) equals 5 mm Hg. Therefore, the A – a difference (or A-a gradient) on room air last sea level is calculated as follows:

PAO2 [(760 mm Hg– 47 mm Hg) 0.21 – 40 mm Hg/0.8 = 150 mm Hg – 50 mm Hg] – PaO2 (95 mmHg) = 5 mm Hg (or more with age).

For older individuals, there are formulas to adjust for age to calculate the A-a difference, such as [A-a difference adjusted for age= A-a difference (age/4) + 4].

A normal PA02 is about 100 mm Hg, with the arterial Pa02 varying from about 95 mm Hg to as low as 75 mm Hg (or lower, depending on who one talks to). It is well known that the arterial PaO2 in mm Hg on room air decreases with age.

If on room air, the difference is probably closer to 100 mmHg. Also, once the saturation is 100%, all 4 oxygens on each hemoglobin molecule have one oxygen and are full. Therefore, the only way to further increase oxygen transport is to increase hemoglobin.

Also, if the A-a gradient is calculated with inspired oxygen greater than room air, the alveolar PA02 will increase faster than the arterial PaO2 resulting in an increasing A-a gradient. This is normal. Another point is that the A-a gradient on room air can increase faster with disease (and not just age). This is important to remember.

**Arterial Hyperoxia**

Arterial hyperoxemia refers to a high PaO2 in arterial blood.2 of >300 mm Hg post-cardiopulmonary arrest.2 is now considered risky in acute myocardial infarction, as noted in the DETOX-AMI trial (Hofmann et al) and others.

**Arterial Hypoxia**

Hypoxia is where oxygen at the tissue and organ level is unavailable to provide adequate homeostasis.2 in arterial blood. An actual value is a PaO2 <60 mm Hg on pulse oximetry or an ABG saturation <90%. The ABG is still the gold standard because pulse oximeters can read up to 2 mm Hg above or below the true value.

Arterial hypoxia symptoms include anxiety, confusion, tachypnea, and dyspnea. Chronic low oxygen, particularly with cancer, results in hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) cell synthesis, which allows oxygen-deprived cells to survive and proliferate. When there is no hypoxia, von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) changes and binds to HIF, which is degraded.

VHL does not change when hypoxia is present, and HIF is not changed. Hypoxia treatment includes exogenous oxygen to return to normal levels, then treating the underlying disease. All causes of hypoxia can cause cell death, or there can be recovery. There are at least 4 common causes of hypoxia which are:

- Hypoxemic hypoxia: Hypoxemia is present and may cause weakness and fatigue; it is the most common cause of hypoxia. Oxygen therapy and treatment of the underlying disease are the treatments of choice.

- Anemic hypoxia: This is due to either low hemoglobin or deshemoglobminemia (methemoglobinemia, sulfhemoglobinemia, and carboxyhemoglobinemia) (functional anemia).

- Histotoxic hypoxia (reduced oxygen-carrying capacity): The inability to use available oxygen due to cyanide toxicity.

- Circulatory hypoxia (stagnant hypoxia) or ischemic hypoxia: Heart failure is often a problem. In this instance, one needs to treat the underlying cause of heart failure.

- Other mechanisms of hypoxia: Increased O2 extraction or pseudo hypoxemia (due to hyperleukocytosis in patients with hematological malignancies who are susceptible to acquired infections).

**Oxyhemoglobin Dissociation Curve (ODC) and Oxygen-Myoglobin Dissociation Curve and Binding**

Oxygen in blood is transported primarily by hemoglobin; only about 2% is dissolved and follows Henry’s Law. Usually, 4 oxygen molecules are bound to each hemoglobin tetramer when the molecule is completely saturated. A sigmoid shape occurs when plotting oxygen tension on the x-axis and oxygen saturation on the y-axis.

The curve tends to be flat at high oxygen tensions in the pulmonary circuit because oxygen saturations are close to 100% or 100%. The curve goes from flat to much steeper at low oxygen tensions as oxygen is added to hemoglobin. With the addition of each new oxygen molecule to hemoglobin, the conformation of hemoglobin changes, which facilitates the binding of the next oxygen molecule. This property is called binding cooperativity. The p50 is when 50% of the hemoglobin molecules are bound with oxygen.

A normal p50 is from 26 to 27 mm Hg. A high p50 indicates a low oxygen affinity for hemoglobin and vice versa. The high p50 also means easy delivery of oxygen to the tissues. This is seen with acidosis, elevated temperature (exercise), increased 2,3 BPG (stays high in stored blood for at least one week), and increased temperature. (see table). The converse is also true. A low p50 (high oxygen affinity for hemoglobin) is seen with CO poisoning, methemoglobin, and fetal hemoglobin. The high oxygen affinity with fetal hemoglobin allows it to take oxygen from the mother for its own use.

**Table. Left versus Right Shift in the Sigmoid Oxyhemoglobin Dissociation Curve**

**Factor Type**

**Factor Change-2**

**Factor Change-3**

**Oxygen Avidity by factor change**

2,3 BPG

Increased, Right shift

Decreased, Left shift

First 2, Then 3

Acidity

Increased, Right shift

Decreased, Left shift

First 2, Then 3

pCO2

Increased, Right shift

Decreased, Left shift

First 2, Then 3

Temperature

Increased, Right shift

Decreased, Left shift

First 2, Then 3

Myoglobin is found in skeletal muscle and has a higher affinity for oxygen than other adult hemoglobin. This entity becomes saturated at lower oxygen levels and holds onto oxygen until oxygen in the muscles is very low. The delayed release of oxygen slows the start of anaerobic metabolism and lactic acidosis. The myoglobin molecule is a single polypeptide chain, and the oxygen-myoglobin dissociation curve is logarithmic and not sigmoidal. Myoglobin is not capable of cooperative binding.

CO-oximetry is also useful in rare congenital or acquired conditions responsible for dyshemoglobinemias, such as methemoglobinemia and Sulfhemoglobinemia.

# Issues of Concern

**Clinical Presentation of Hypoxia**

Hypoxia symptoms are nonspecific and vary depending on severity, cause, and which parts of the body are affected. When oxygen is low, the patient might feel dyspneic. However, hypoxia may be asymptomatic. Hence patients with advanced chronic respiratory conditions, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), may experience symptoms with resting, exertional, and nocturnal hypoxemia which include:

- Headache

- Restlessness

- Confusion

- Anxiety

- Tachycardia

- Tachypnea

- Dyspnea

**Goal-directed Oxygen Therapy**

Based on current evidence, it is recommended to avoid PaO2 levels exceeding 300 mm Hg to mitigate potential adverse effects, including neurotoxicity and reperfusion injuries.

A recent study by Girardis et al demonstrated that in critically ill patients (with an ICU length of more than 72 h), a conservative protocol for oxygen therapy (to maintain SpO2 between 94 and 97% and median PaO2, 87mm Hg) versus conventional therapy (SpO2 between 97 and 100% and PaO2, 102 mm Hg) resulted in lower ICU mortality. In addition, there has been growing evidence that hyperoxemia could be harmful such as in patients with acute coronary syndromes and following cardio-respiratory arrests.

Likewise, in patients with ARDS, oxygen administration above goal (defined as PaO2 >80 mm Hg and FiO2 >0.5) was reported to lead to worse clinical outcomes at different levels of ARDS severity.

**Accuracy of SpO2 in screening for eligibility for long-term O2 therapy (LTOT)**

Oxygen therapy is recommended for eligible patients with evidence of chronic hypoxia, such as COPD, who have moderate-to-severe hypoxia (SpO2 <88% at rest).2 89-93% or isolated exertional desaturation not exceeding 90%) did not improve all-cause mortality or hospitalization in patients with COPD.

The ability of SpO2 to provide accurate values f oxygenation is limited to mild degrees of hypoxia as the correlation between it and PaO2 is not linear and becomes more variable with more severe hypoxia (SaO2 <88%).2 can lead to significant misclassification in certain conditions, such as in individuals with dark skin (non-white races such as black and Asian).2 has been reported to fail to accurately identify PaO2  values in the hypoxia ranges (<55 mm Hg) and hence the inability to adequately detect LTOT eligibility.

# Clinical Significance

**Pulse Oximeter Analysis**

This is a quick, inexpensive, portable, lightweight, noninvasive method for measuring a person’s continuous oxygenation status and is sometimes called the fifth vital sign. In 95% of cases, this method is accurate within 4% and usually uses transmissive pulse oximetry. These instruments are 2-wavelength devices that measure only two hemoglobin types. These hemoglobin types are oxyhemoglobin and hemoglobin not bound to oxygen. These are two equations with 2 unknowns. The device uses 2 light-emitting diodes emitting light at 660 nm (red) and 940 nm (infrared).

These 2 wavelengths pass through a finger, earlobe, or foot to a photodetector. The red region or oxyhemoglobin (O2Hb) absorbs less light than hemoglobin (Hb), while the reverse is true with infrared. A ratio of these two absorbances at these wavelengths is calibrated against arterial blood gas saturations from a co-oximeter in normal volunteers and is stored as a calibration algorithm. This algorithm within the device is then called up when needed, and the pulse oximeter estimates the saturation.

One problem is that the normal volunteers tend to be white, and it has been shown that pulse oximeters may tend to be under-read in dark-skinned subjects.

The advantage of pulse oximetry is that despite being quick and noninvasive, no study has yet noted a difference in mortality.

Eleven years later, 100% of patients undergoing bariatric surgery had hypoxemia (hypoxemia defined as a sat <90% for at least 30 s in this study).2 was 37 + 3 mm Hg (no hypercarbia).

The gold standard is still the ABG which gives the best saturations. In addition, ABGs provide more information related to pH, pCO2, and acid-base status and are often needed. Despite its pros and cons, pulse oximetry has taken the nation by storm in the last 25 years and is here to stay. There are more benefits than negatives. When using pulse oximetry and co-oximetry, it is important for healthcare providers to consider the presence of certain dyshemoglobinemias, which are conditions where oxygen-binding moieties are unable to effectively bind oxygen. The 3 notable dyshemoglobinemias that need to be considered in this context are CO poisoning, methemoglobinemia, and, although rare, sulfhemoglobinemia.

Fractional SaO2 = Sometime called FO2Hb; it is the same as SaO2 (functional arterial saturation) when there is no dyshemoglobinemia.

When there is a dyshemoglobinemia, fractional saturation measures all hemoglobin, and the formula is 100% X (02Hb)/(02Hb + Hb + COHb + MetHb + Sulfhemoglobinemia).

The partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2): The pressure of oxygen in mm Hg in the blood can be obtained with an ABG with normal values from 75 to at least 95 mm Hg.

CO-oximetry requires arterial blood gas and is divided into functional and fractional oxygen saturations (SaO2). Functional SaO2 includes hemoglobins that bind to oxygen.

- Functional SaO2 = (O2Hb)/(O2Hb + Hb) X 100%. Normal Value: 95 – 100%.

Fractional SaO2 is important because it includes all hemoglobin, ie, those that don’t bind oxygen (methemoglobin, carboxyhemoglobin, and sulfhemoglobinemia) and those that do (02Hb and Hb) and require one equation for each hemoglobin (wavelength).

- Fractional SaO2 = (02Hb)/(02Hb + Hb + COHb + MetHb) X 100%.

- Normal Value: 94 – 98%.

- Example 2: O2Hb = 10.0 mg/dL, Hb: 0.5 mg/dL. Methemoglobin: 2.0 mg/dL. COHb: 5 mg/dL.

- Answer: 10 mg/dL/17.5 mg/dL = 57%.

- FO2Hb = Fractional SaO2; it is lower than the regular SaO2 in dyshemoglobinemia.

Theoretically, functional and fractional hemoglobins are identical when only O2Hb and Hb are present. When the oxygen saturation level is below or higher than expected by pulse oximetry using a 2-wavelength system, consider co-oximetry to ensure no dyshemoglobinemia is present.

Oxygen Content (CtO2) = SaO2 X CtHb mg/dL X (1-FCOHb-FmetHg) +

Pa02 X 0.003 ml 02 per gm Hg/dL

Normal CtO2 = 18.8 to 22.3 ml/dL -generally 2% dissolved oxygen and 98% on Hb.

Normal SaO2 = ct022Hb/ct (02Hb + HHb) X 100% = 95 – 100%.

One can increase Oxygen Content by transfusions, reducing dyshemoglobinemias, or giving oxygen.

Sa02 = percent of oxygenated hemoglobin relative to the amount of hemoglobin capable of carrying oxygen. Reference value = 95% to 100%.

Using 2 wavelengths, simple co-oximeters will give similar functional and fractional values in healthy young white individuals. Pulse oximetry estimates the saturation of hemoglobin and does not give estimates of actual Pa02 or other bound gazes, such as carbon monoxide (CO), which require different oximeters. The co-oximeter is a special spectrophotometer used to measure different oxygen saturations. This type of spectrophotometer is used to determine whether a dyshemoglobinemia is present.

**Arterial Hypoxemia - 5 Common Causes**

- Diffusion abnormality

Carbon monoxide is the tracer of choice to measure diffusion since it is diffusion limited. Nitrous oxide (NO) and oxygen are perfusion limited. Oxygen can become diffusion limited if the membrane becomes thickened, particularly if the 0.75-second normal capillary time drops with exercise (can drop to as low as 0.20 seconds with exercise). One can demonstrate that the thickening of the alveolar membrane results in a diffusion capacity for oxygen of less than ¾ of a second. The normal diffusion (DLCO) in the 2017 guidelines is no longer specified, but a value of 0.75 predicted or greater per an older guideline would probably be considered normal.

2. Right to Left Shunt (normal shunt <5%, from Thebesian and bronchial veins).

The 5 common mechanisms of hypoxemia: order listed from common to rare.



**Hypoxemia Type**

****

**Feature**

**A-a gradient**

**0xygen  response**

**Diseases**

1. V/Q mismatch

Normal V/Q ratio (0.80)

****

Elevated

Good

Asthma, COPD

2. Decreased      ventilation



Elevated PaCO2

Normal

Good

Obesity, drug overdose.

3. Shunt

<5% is normal.

Elevated

Poor response, especially if the shunt

is 30% or more.

ARDS, pneumonia

4.  Diffusion

Thickened alveolar membrane

Elevated

Good

Interstitial Lung Disease

5. High Altitude

Greater than 2,000 meters

Normal

Good

Acute mountain sickness.

All but a high right-to-left shunt respond well to oxygen. In addition, if there is a shunt with relative hypoxemia, increasing oxygen to the area can increase oxygen carrying capacity of blood that passes it. A shunt will not respond at all to oxygen, only when ventilation is close to zero or zero.

3. V/Q abnormality

The most common abnormality seen overall and in obstructive lung diseases. The most important point is that, in general, high V/Q areas (V/Q as high as 3) cannot make up for low V/Q areas.

4. Hypoventilation

Hypoventilation presents with an elevated arterial PaC02 and a normal A-a gradient that responds well to oxygen. Neurologic disease and drug overdoses are two common causes.

5. Altitude

Both barometric pressure and the A-a gradient decrease with an increase in altitude. Therefore, there will be no negative effect with increasing elevation. Increasing altitude responds well to oxygen. High altitude is the rare 5th leading cause of hypoxemia.

Generally, the alveolar oxygen stays constant at about 100 mm Hg, and the arterial oxygen starts at about 95 mm Hg or less and goes down with age (time). This reduction is partly due to normal shunting and to a slight reduction in the A-a gradient that occurs when standing upright since the normal V/Q ratio is about 0.80 and not one. These are at least two reasons why the A-a gradient can never be zero.

**Carbon Monoxide (CO) Poisoning**

CO poisoning is one of the most common dyshemoglobinemia that can cause errors in conventional pulse oximetry using two-wavelength techniques. In CO intoxication, the pulse oximeter Sp02 is within normal limits, but the actual saturation of oxygenated hemoglobin is much lower.2Hb) at 660 nm. This means that carboxyhemoglobin can falsely elevate the Sp02 measurements.

Therefore, with CO poisoning the pulse oximeter saturation is elevated to normal due to the elevated CO binding to hemoglobin and not due to oxygen binding to hemoglobin. Therefore not measuring the carboxyhemoglobin level makes the diagnosis of CO poisoning challenging and requires a high level of suspicion, especially since the symptoms are vague and the saturation levels on the pulse oximeter seem normal.

**Evaluation with Co-oximetry**

A complete work-up is necessary, including electrolytes, blood count, BUN, creatinine, urine toxicology and urinalysis, troponin, and electrocardiogram (ECG). A prolonged Q-T interval or ischemia is sometimes seen on the ECG. A chest radiograph and brain CT should also be done since sometimes the globus pallidus or other areas of the brain can be affected. An ABG with co-oximetry needs to be done on an arterial or venous blood sample to make the diagnosis. Arterial ABGs give more information about low oxygen in the blood with CO poisoning.

**Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy**

If indicated, co-oximetry can be considered. Overall, mortality with hyperbaric oxygen has been equivocal. Late neurologic findings are common. In one well-done randomized controlled trial, the result shows that three hyperbaric oxygen treatments done within 24 hours reduce cognitive sequelae at 6 and 12 months.

# Other Issues

Detecting CO poisoning is challenging without a high index of suspicion because the symptoms are so nonspecific.

Signs and symptoms of CO poisoning can include:

- Headache

- Dizziness

- Weakness

- Nausea and vomiting

- Shortness of breath

- Confusion

- Blurred vision

- Loss of consciousness

CO poisoning can be dangerous for people who are intoxicated or sleeping and can be lethal.

Studies have shown that pulse oximeters may underestimate saturation in individuals with dark skin.

Pseudohypoxia: This condition is commonly seen as a complication of hyperglycemia due to uncontrolled diabetes.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Pulmonary, critical care, anesthesiologist, and respiratory therapists should possess a certain level of understanding regarding the A-a gradient, including its calculation and the potential implications of its levels (normal, low, or elevated).2 range between 94-96%) to avoid increased mortality and adverse outcomes.

Pulse oximeters are readily available in different clinical settings. All healthcare workers, including physicians, mid-level practitioners, and nurses, should learn to use these devices and interpret the information they provide.

Race correction for dark skin should be a factor, particularly in intensive care units.