The glucagonoma syndrome is heralded by the triad of weight loss, diabetes mellitus, and necrolytic migratory erythema. NME is thought to be the presenting symptom of the disease in roughly 70% of patients.

On physical examination, patients with necrolytic migratory erythema will show erythematous scaly lesions with centrifugal growth, often with concomitant lesions in different stages of healing. The rash is prominent in areas of increased friction and pressure, such as the intertriginous areas (i.e., inguinal creases, popliteal fossa), perineum, buttocks, groin, lower abdomen, and distal extremities. It is also commonly seen in a periorificial distribution. Patients will often complain of intense pruritus and/or pain associated with the rash. NME often appears first as intensely erythematous, well-demarcated plaques or patches with irregular edges.

These lesions will then blister centrally, forming flaccid bullae that erode and crust, eventually healing with hyperpigmentation. As the central portion of the wound heals, the surrounding erythema may expand outward, with new vesicles developing along the advancing serpiginous edges; eventually, these lesions may coalesce. The lesions of NME are cyclical, typically waxing and waning for about ten days; upon inspection, various lesions are seen in different stages of healing.

The lesions of NME can be complicated by superimposed infection, most commonly by Staphylococcus aureus and Candida albicans.

Commonly associated with the characteristic skin lesions are the mucocutaneous findings of angular cheilitis, glossitis, and stomatitis, which are present in roughly 30% of patients. Onychoschizia and other nail changes have also been seen in association with NME.

The other systemic findings in glucagonoma syndrome include diarrhea, neuropsychiatric changes, anemia, and a tendency toward venous thrombosis.