# Continuing Education Activity

Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is a condition defined as elevated serum or plasma bilirubin (unconjugated) levels above the reference range of the laboratory. Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia usually results from dysregulation in the bilirubin metabolism that includes increased production, impaired hepatic uptake, and decreased conjugation of bilirubin. In newborns, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is very common, and increased bilirubin (unconjugated) levels can cause life-threatening kernicterus. This activity describes the pathophysiology and management of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. It also highlights the importance of teamwork in the management of patients with this disease.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the physiology of bilirubin metabolism. 
- Explain how to differentiate unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia from conjugated hyperbilirubinemia.
- Identify the several causes of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia and summarize the available treatment options.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.

# Introduction

Hyperbilirubinemia is a condition defined as elevated serum or plasma bilirubin levels above the reference range of the laboratory, and it is due to disorders of bilirubin metabolism. Depending on the form of bilirubin present in serum, hyperbilirubinemia can be further classified as unconjugated (indirect) or conjugated (direct). Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (albumin-bound) usually results from increased production, impaired hepatic uptake, and decreased conjugation of bilirubin.

# Etiology

Bilirubin, a yellow-orange bile pigment, is the catabolic product of heme metabolism. Approximately 85 percent of the heme moiety comes from the hemoglobin degradation of red blood cells, while the remaining derives from the ineffective erythropoiesis and the breakdown of other hemoproteins such as cytochromes, myoglobin, and catalase.

Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia arises in one of the three major pathophysiologic conditions or a combination of them:

- Increased bilirubin production

- Impaired bilirubin uptake

- Impaired bilirubin conjugation

Increased bilirubin production and consequential unconjugated hyperbilirubi­nemia can result from increased catabolic degradation of hemoglobin and other heme proteins, typically due to accelerated hemolysis, a large hematoma, dyserythropoiesis (e.g., megaloblastic and sideroblastic anemias), or sometimes due to destruction of transfused erythrocytes. In these conditions, patients with normal liver function efficiently conjugate and excrete the excess bilirubin.

The impaired hepatic uptake of bilirubin can be the result of decreased bilirubin delivery to the liver and inefficient uptake of bilirubin by hepatocytes, usually resulting from reduced hepatic blood flow (congestive heart failure and portosystemic shunts) and drugs/contrast administration. The unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia induced by several drugs (rifampin, flavaspidic acid, novobiocin, and various chole­cystographic contrast agents), generally resolves within 48 hours of drug discontinuation.

Impaired bilirubin conjugation can result from hereditary defects, including Gilbert syndrome and the Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I and II, that cause a decrease or loss of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1) activity, an enzyme responsible for conjugation of bilirubin with glucuronic acid.

# Epidemiology

Approximately 50% of full-term and 80% of preterm infants develop jaundice in the first 2 to 4 days after birth when serum bilirubin levels are greater than or equal to 5mg/dL.

# Pathophysiology

Jaundice is evident when the serum bilirubin level exceeds 3mg/dL. Gilbert syndrome and Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I and II, are hereditary non-hemolytic unconjugated hyperbilirubinemias that result from the mutations in the UGT1A1 gene and impair bilirubin conjugation. In Gilbert syndrome, UGT1A1 enzyme activity is 10 to 30% of normal, which results in mild unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia with bilirubin levels below 5 mg/dL.

Individuals with Crigler-Najjar type II (CNS2) have less than 10% of the normal UGT1A1 activity, resulting in bilirubin levels of 5 to 25 mg/dL. Kernicterus is rare in Crigler-Najjar type II, but patients with increased bilirubin levels (greater than 15 mg/dL) have high chances of its occurrence.

# History and Physical

Patients with unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia may present with jaundice or other signs, or the condition may be noticed in the asymptomatic patient by the finding of high levels of bilirubin in the serum during routine blood testing. As far as the differential diagnosis of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is involved, it requires a detailed history and physical examination of patients for the evaluation. The assessment of the patient’s clinical history includes; age at the disease manifestation, ethnic origin/race, hereditary disorder, family history of anemia or jaundice, recently used medications, diet history, and history of liver disease.

Approximately 50% of neonates present with physiologic jaundice during the first five days after birth. Nonphysiologic, Lucey-Driscoll syndrome, or maternal serum jaundice in neonates results from maternal serum during the initial four days after delivery.

# Evaluation

The initial assessment of the patient presenting with jaundice depends on whether hyperbilirubinemia is the result of unconjugated or conjugated bilirubin. A urine test positive for bilirubin indicates conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Conjugated bilirubin is soluble in water; therefore, it can be excreted via urine but not unconjugated bilirubin due to water insolubility. Further, first-line laboratory testing should include measurement of the serum total bilirubin levels with fractionation (direct with indirect obtained by subtraction from total), followed by serum aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) levels, complete blood count (CBC) with an examination of the smear, a reticulocyte count, a direct Coombs test, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and haptoglobin levels.

A complete blood count is a beneficial test for the determination of hemolysis, which is characterized by the presence of damaged red blood cells and increased reticulocytes on the smear. In patients, when the serum total bilirubin levels exceed 3.0 mg/dL, jaundice becomes clinically apparent. Hyperbilirubinemia is unconjugated when the conjugated bilirubin level is less than 15% of the TB. While in conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, conjugated bilirubin level is high and more than 20% of the total bilirubin. Generally, patients with carotenemia also present yellow skin but have no elevation in serum bilirubin levels. During the physical examination, carotenemia due to excess carotene intake, e.g., carrots, peaches, etc., can be distinguished from jaundice due to the absence of scleral icterus in carotenemia and with the pigmentation of soles and palms and other areas. Computerized axial tomography (CT) and ultrasonography scanning are useful tools in differentiating cholestasis (intra-hepatic and extra-hepatic) from hepatocellular disease in the assessment of a patient with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, which is not the focus of the review.

# Treatment / Management

**Neonatal Jaundice**

In most cases of mild neonatal jaundice, no treatment is necessary, and it resolves on its own within a few weeks. In cases of moderate or severe jaundice (TB over 15 mg/dL), phototherapy is a safe option. During phototherapy, the infant’s skin is exposed to light in the blue-green spectrum (460-490 nm) in a way that transforms bilirubin into lumirubin, a water-soluble isomer, and reduces its toxicity by increasing its elimination in both the urine and stool.

In some cases, infants carry antibodies from the mother that can result in the quick breakdown of neonatal red blood cells (due to differences in the blood type), intravenous transfusion of an immunoglobulin (IVIG) that can reduce the levels of antibodies may be the choice of treatment. In a rare instance of severe neonatal jaundice, when other treatments do not work, exchange transfusion of blood may be performed.

**Gilbert Syndrome**

The most crucial part for clinicians in the management and care of patients with Gilbert syndrome (GS) is to recognize that it is relatively benign with a good prognosis. The diagnosis of GS requires normal liver function tests, elevated bilirubin levels, and genetic testing to confirm the disorder further. Owing to the benign and inconsequential nature of this syndrome, the use of medications is not justified for its treatment. There exists an increased risk of side effects and toxicity from the use of certain drugs such as acetaminophen and irinotecan that are conjugated by the liver.

**Crigler-Najjar Type II Syndrome**

Patients with Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II respond to phenobarbital therapy. Since CNS2 is milder, phenobarbital is effective in reducing plasma bilirubin levels in these patients by 25 %. In some cases, patients with severe hyperbilirubinemia may need phototherapy or exchange transfusions. However, often, patients affected with type II syndrome may not require any therapy but may need routine monitoring. The goal is to maintain TB below 15 mg/dL.

**Crigler-Najjar Type I Syndrome**

Unlike CNS2, patients with CNS1 do not respond to phenobarbital therapy due to the absence of the enzyme. Rapid treatment of kernicterus is needed to prevent devastating neurologic sequelae. The emergent treatment for bilirubin encephalopathy relies on repeated plasma exchange transfusions followed by long-term phototherapy.

Oral calcium phosphate may be a valuable adjuvant to phototherapy in Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome, by interrupting the enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin.

Plasmapheresis is also being employed to lower bilirubin levels in the blood rapidly.

In patients with Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I, orthotopic liver transplantation may be considered a definite form of therapy and should be performed before the onset of neurologic damage.

**Pharmacologic management**

Patients with Crigler-Najjar type II syndrome do not require any treatment and can be managed with phenobarbital. Also, for Gilbert syndrome, no medical therapy is needed, and phenobarbital has been effectively shown to decrease bilirubin production. The common medications used for the treatment of patients with Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome are phenobarbital, calcium (infusions), ursodeoxycholic acid, metalloporphyrins, chlorpromazine, and cholestyramine.

Phenobarbital increases both the conjugation and excretion of bilirubin by stimulating the gene for the UGT1A1 enzyme, which induces the production of conjugated bilirubin and thereby reduces the serum bilirubin levels by 25%. Ursodeoxycholic acid increases the flow of the bile, the elimination of bile into the gastrointestinal tract, thereby reducing the total serum bilirubin levels.

Metalloporphyrins like tin-mesoporphyrin (SnMp) inhibit the activity of the heme oxygenase enzyme, which is a rate-limiting step in the production of bilirubin from heme metabolism.

# Differential Diagnosis

Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia can be caused by dysregulation in bilirubin metabolism that includes bilirubin production, uptake in hepatocytes, and conjugation. The clinician should distinguish unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia from other conditions with similar clinical manifestations. Hemolytic anemias and resorption of hematoma significantly increase the levels of unconjugated bilirubin. Hemolytic anemias may lead to a mild increase in bilirubin levels with or without clinical symptoms. Hemolytic disorders such as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, sickle cell anemia, thalassemia, iso-immune mediated hemolysis, and autoimmune disorders should be a consideration during diagnosis.

Inherited disorders of the enzyme glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1) such as Gilbert syndrome and Crigler-Najjar syndromes (CNS1 and CNS2), may impede the complete conjugation of bilirubin and thereby cause varying degrees of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, depending on inhibition of enzyme with each disease. In addition to inherited disorders, other conditions such as portosystemic shunts, congestive heart failure, liver damage, dyserythropoiesis, and hyperthyroidism can also contribute to impaired bilirubin conjugation and should merit consideration during diagnosis. Additional considerations in the diagnosis of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia include drugs interfering with bilirubin uptake or conjugation (rifampicin, probenecid, or other rifamycin antibiotics, ketoconazole, amitryptiline, and protease inhibitors), chronic liver diseases, thyrotoxicosis, infections, and physiologic neonatal jaundice resulting from the immature conjugating ability of the UGT1A1 enzyme.

# Prognosis

The prognosis in neonatal jaundice is excellent if the patient receives the recommended standard of care. In most cases, jaundice gets better within one or two weeks. In some cases, such as breast milk jaundice and maternal serum jaundice, jaundice can persist for several weeks. Thus, the patient’s serum bilirubin levels need to be monitored closely, with adequate adjustments in treatment made accordingly to prevent persistent hyperbilirubinemia and thereby its consequence, kernicterus and bilirubin induced neurologic dysfunction. The prognosis of patients with ineffective erythropoiesis, which causes the overproduction of bilirubin is also excellent and depends on the cause. Patients with Crigler Najjar syndrome type I have a high risk of kernicterus, and thereby present a poor prognosis and need intensive, aggressive management. However, the prognosis of Crigler Najjar syndrome type II patients is more favorable and rarely associated with kernicterus. Gilbert syndrome is a benign condition, and patients with this syndrome have an excellent prognosis. An individual affected with this inherited disorder can live a normal life. Recent studies have shown that a person with Gilbert syndrome has a low risk of cardiovascular diseases, possibly due to an increase in bilirubin ameliorating oxidative stress.

# Complications

Extreme hyperbilirubinemia (TB of 25 to 30 mg/dL) can cause bilirubin encephalopathy, Kernicterus, which is usually characterized by the deposition of unconjugated bilirubin (yellow stain) in brain cells. Neuronal necrosis/damage occurs in the basal ganglia, hippocampus, hypothalamic nuclei, diencephalon, midbrain responsible for neurohumoral and electrolyte control, brainstem nuclei accounting for oculomotor and auditory function, and in the cerebellum depositing as a bilirubin-phosphatidylcholine precipitate. Vision, hearing, speech, cognition, gait, and language are typically affected.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients and their families should receive education regarding jaundice and its consequences. Patients need to understand the role of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia in the manifestation of jaundice and its severity. Patients require counseling regarding the physical appearance or symptoms of jaundice. In the case of neonatal jaundice, parents will need to know about the cause of physiologic or non-physiologic jaundice and the treatment options available for it. Patients with any change in mental or neural behavior should immediately consult with a physician. Future parents with a family history of inherited Crigler-Najjar syndromes should seek genetic counseling. Education on the autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance must be provided to the patients and families.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The treatment of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia requires interprofessional teamwork, as it can result from multiple disorders or diseases. As far as the differential diagnoses of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia are involved, it necessitates good coordination between primary care physicians, gastroenterologists, hematologists, a pediatrician, and other specialists. A detailed history of the patient's medications that causes liver dysfunction is critical for the treatment. The outcome of most patients with unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is excellent when they receive the treatment according to the accepted guidelines with no or minimal neural and developmental sequelae.