- Various histopathologic lesions are indicative of the prognosis. The extent of crescentic involvement on microscopic findings is indicative of the prognosis. Usually, a focal lesion with more than 50% normal glomeruli has a more favorable prognosis, almost 90% or more renal survival after 5 years follow up after treatment. Whereas more than 50% of glomeruli with cellular crescent has a less favorable prognosis of around 75% renal recovery at 5 years follow up. When more than 50% of glomeruli are globally sclerosed, the renal recovery is less than 25% up to 5 years follow-up period. Variants include cellular, fibrocellular, and fibrous crescent. The extent of chronic tubule-interstitial fibrosis lesions can also impact the prognosis inversely. The disruption of Bowmen’s capsule is associated with poor outcomes.

- The time of initiation of the treatment is very crucial for stopping the rapidly progressive irreversible damage. The early the treatment initiated, the better is the outcome.

- Age and gender do not affect the overall prognosis greatly. Children usually tend to do well after the treatment as compared to the elderly.

- The magnitude of proteinuria has not been shown to affect short-term prognosis, but persistent proteinuria despite treatment is indicative of poor long-term outcomes.

- Renal function at the presentation is reflecting the severity of the disease, and the higher serum creatinine, anuria, requirement of dialysis is associated with the poor outcome after the treatment and progression to renal failure.

- The pretreatment antibody level affects the prognosis. The higher the anti-GBM Ab level at the time of diagnosis is associated with the poor renal outcome. Whereas the ANCA level has a complex association with the renal outcome.

- DRB 1* 15 allele is a risk factor for Anti -PR3 ANCA vasculitis. HLA DR-2 and/or B-7 has a possible association with the severity of the disease and the outcome.

- RPGN associated with drugs and infection is associated with a better outcome.