SGLT-2 are proteins expressed in the proximal convoluted tubules of the kidneys that exert their physiologic function by reabsorbing filtered glucose from the tubular lumen. All four SGLT-2 inhibitors reduce the reabsorption of filtered glucose, decrease the renal threshold for glucose (RTG), and promote urinary glucose excretion. SGLT2 inhibitors lower HbA1c by 0.7%.

By inhibiting the SGLT-2-dependent glucose and sodium reabsorption, there is an increase in distal tubular sodium load; the resultant inhibition of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and reduction of afterload and preload is cardioprotective.

SGLT2 inhibitors reduce afterload by arterial vasodilation and preload by natriuresis and diuresis and decrease uric acid levels. Canagliflozin slowed the advancement in serum NT-proBNP and troponin-I levels in patients with type-2 DM. SGLT2 inhibitors also alter cardiac fuel metabolism, shifting away from carbohydrate utilization to ketogenesis. Favorable hemodynamic effects and reduction in cardiac biomarkers may explain the beneficial effect of SGLT-2 inhibitors in patients with heart failure.

According to the 'thrifty substrate' hypothesis, under mild, persistent hyperketonemia, during SGLT2 inhibitor treatment, β-hydroxybutyrate is actively transported and taken up by the heart through specific transporters, such as the monocarboxylate transporter (MCT) system. β-hydroxybutyrate is then oxidized instead of fatty acids and glucose.

The mechanism by which SGLT2 inhibitors may be nephroprotective is by increasing distal sodium delivery and inhibiting tubuloglomerular feedback leading to afferent vasoconstriction and a decrease in intraglomerular pressure. Reduction in intraglomerular pressure leads to a decrease in albuminuria. Interference with proximal glucose reabsorption and proximal sodium reabsorption results in natriuresis SGLT2 inhibitors decrease effective circulating volume, decrease blood pressure, and induce some weight loss. Additionally, SGLT2 inhibitors alter factors that promote inflammation and fibrosis, lowers kidney hypoxia, and alter mitochondrial metabolism in kidney tissue.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**SGLT inhibitors are well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. The effect of food on SGLT2 pharmacokinetics is not statistically significant; ertugliflozin, dapagliflozin, and empagliflozin may be administered with or without food. However, to reduce postprandial plasma glucose elevation due to delayed intestinal glucose absorption, it is recommended that SGLT2 inhibitors should be taken before the meal.

**Distribution:**SGLT2 inhibitors have high plasma protein binding (PPB). Dapagliflozin has 91% PPB; empagliflozin has 86% PPB and ertugliflozin has 93% PPB. Canagliflozin has the highest at 99% PPB. The Plasma protein binding is not significantly changed in patients with renal or hepatic impairment. The volume of distribution of canagliflozin(83.5L), dapagliflozin(118L), ertugliflozin(85.5L), and empagliflozin(74L) suggests extensive tissue distribution.

**Metabolism:**SGLT2 inhibitors undergo biotransformation by UGT(uridine 5'-diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferases) mediated glucuronidation. Cytochrome P450 mediated metabolism of SGLT2 inhibitors is minimal. UGT1A9 plays an essential role in the metabolism of SGLT2 inhibitors. Canagliflozin is primarily metabolized by UGT1A9 and UGT2B4; ertugliflozin by UGT1A9 and UGT2B; dapagliflozin by UGT1A9 and empagliflozin is extensively metabolized by UGT2B7, UGT1A3, UGT1A8, and UGT1A9.

**Excretion:**SGLT2 inhibitors are filtered from plasma at the glomerulus and attach to the luminal membrane of the proximal convoluted tubule. The SGLT2 inhibitors attach to SGLT2 at the luminal membrane of the early segments of the nephron and prevent up to 60% of glucose reabsorption. SGLT2 inhibitors have a long elimination half-life allowing once-daily administration.