One rare but serious complication of angioplasty is iatrogenic coronary artery perforation (CAP) due to underlying complex lesion, occurring in 0.1% to 0.8 % of total cases undergoing angioplasty. CAP can be due to angioplasty guide wire perforation, balloon oversizing, and use of atherectomy devices. Management of CAP depends on the severity of the lesion, hemodynamic status, and Ellis class type of CAP. Class 1 is usually benign while class 3 is associated with higher chances of cardiac tamponade and need for emergent cardiac surgery. The mild CAP can be managed with an anticoagulation reversal (protamine sulfate in case of heparin use), prolonged balloon inflation, polytetrafluoroethylene-covered stents (CS), and trans-catheter embolization by autologous fat particles. CS use comes with the cost of stent thrombosis, and few cases of coronary arteriovenous fistula have also been reported due to CS failure. Complication of CAP is ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction, and early or delayed cardiac tamponade with or without hemodynamically instability which can require emergent pericardiocentesis.

In-stent restenosis (ISR) is defined as the reduction in vascular luminal diameter after percutaneous intervention (PCI). The underlying pathophysiology of ISR depends on the type of stent used during PCI. In case of POBA, it is acute in onset because of elastic recoil and vascular remodeling. BMS has the unique phenomenon of Neointimal Hyperplasia. DES has late stent thrombosis due to multiple underlying pathological causes such as decreased vascular re-endothelialization, polymer coating hypersensitivity, and increased fibrin deposition secondary to metal inducing chronic inflammation. In a meta-analysis, it was evident that patients with unstable angina or acute coronary syndrome who underwent PCI are more likely to develop ISR due to chronic inflammation which is predicted by higher C-reactive protein level (CRP) in these patients as compared to patients with stable angina who underwent PCI. Stent fracture (SF) is an infrequently reported adverse outcome of DES use during PCI which can either occur periprocedural or later on when drug elution has been completely done. SF has also been linked to the development of ISR and stent thrombosis. Irrespective of the type of intervention done during PCI, ISR can also be due to neoatherosclerosis. All of the causes mentioned above of ISR present with angina symptoms or acute coronary syndrome due to compromised blood flow to the myocardium and may require reintervention such as coronary artery bypass graft surgery or re-PCI. This reintervention is called target lesion revascularization. The incidence of ISR in the pre-stent era was 32% to 55% of all PCI done, 17% to 41% for BMS, and for second generation DES and DEB it dropped to less than 10% of total PCI done. Such a low rate is due to the evolution of stents under strong criticism and advanced technology.