**Dilated Fundus Examination**

As mentioned, CHRPE lesions are rarely found in the posterior pole. Therefore, most cases cannot be detected without evaluating the retinal periphery via dilated examination or non-mydriatic retinal imaging. One or both procedures are virtually always performed as part of a comprehensive eye exam. Most biomicroscopes are equipped with a red-free filter that may be useful in differentiating between choroidal nevi and CHRPE lesions. Nevi will disappear with red-free, while CHRPE will remain visible.

**Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT)**

OCT shows hyperreflectivity and thickening of the RPE corresponding to the abnormally elongated RPE cells. Thickening of the RPE results in underlying choroidal shadowing. There is retinal thinning overlying the lesion and loss of the photoreceptor layer.

A study by Francis et al. found evidence of associated choroidal atrophy when lesions were imaged with SD-OCT. They found that the inner layers of the choroid, i.e., the choriocapillaris and Sattler's layer, were atrophied in 97% of their cohort. Larger diameter lesions were more likely to involve the outer choroid, i.e., Haller's layer; 53% of patients showed outer choroidal involvement.

**Fluorescein Angiography (FA)**

FA reveals hypofluorescence of lesions secondary to the "block effect" - this term refers to the signal blockage due to the hypertrophic RPE cells anterior to the choroidal vasculature preventing visualization of normal background fluorescein leakage. If present, lacunae within the lesion will appear hyperfluorescent.

**Fundus Autofluorescence (FAF)**

Lesions appear strongly hypoautofluorescent when imaged with FAF; however, lacunae (if present) appear slightly hyperautofluorescent.

**B-Scan Ultrasonography**

B-scan is not diagnostic for CHRPE but may be used to determine the thickness of the lesion. It is most commonly 0.5-1.0 mm thick.

**Visual Field Analysis (VFA)**

Although it is possible for patients to manifest a visual field defect corresponding to the area of the CHRPE, they are unlikely to be detected with VFA. Most lesions are more peripheral than the testing area of Humphrey visual field analyzers. Depth of the defect (absolute vs. relative) is generally related to the size of the lesion; however, some studies suggest that younger patients generally manifest relative visual field defects, while older patients manifest absolute defects.