**Boston KPro Type I**

- Remove thickened corneal epithelium to aid visualization.

- Mark the center of the cornea with gentian violet. An RK marker can be used to aid suture placement later.

- If doing concurrent pars plana vitrectomy, the ports can be pre-placed. A core anterior vitrectomy is generally done in aphakic patients.

- In phakic patients, lens extraction is done as well, with or without implantation of an intraocular lens.

- KPro is assembled before the trephination of the patient's cornea. The donor cornea is trephined to measure 8.5-9.0 mm. A central 3 mm hole is trephine on the donor corneal button. This can be done before the outer diameter punch is used. The front plate is placed face down. The donor button is placed over the front plate stem, with the backplate placed over the stem resting on the cornea endothelium. This is secured in place with the titanium locking ring.

- A paracentesis is made, and viscoelastic injected into the anterior chamber. The patient's recipient cornea is trephinated. Usually, the diameter is 0.5 mm less than the donor cornea graft. At this point, any additional procedures are usually undertaken due to better visualization, e.g., lens extraction, implantation/removal of the intraocular lens, open-sky anterior vitrectomy, trimming of glaucoma drainage devices.

- The donor button with KPro is sutured with interrupted 10.0 nylon (9.0 nylon can also be used) and checked for integrity.

- A pars plana core vitrectomy (PPV) is sometimes performed after suturing is complete, especially if there is posterior segment pathology (hemorrhage, retinal detachment, epiretinal membrane). Long-term patients who have had combined PPV and KPro had fewer complications.

- Intracameral antibiotics and a soft contact lens are placed at the end of the procedure.

**OOKP**

**Stage I**

- The mucous membrane covering needs to be harvested. A preoperative oral hygiene regime is started after the decision to operate is taken. The size of the removed MMG is around 3 to 4 mm diameter to cover the anterior surface of the globe to the recti muscles' insertions. The parotid duct opening is spared, along with hemostasis and sutured closure of the graft site.

- All remaining limbal stem cells, corneal epithelium, and Bowman's layer covering the globe require removal. The conjunctiva is recessed up to the recti muscles with the use of minimal cautery. Tenons capsule is used to cover up a non-vascularised cornea.

- The MMG is sutured onto the episclera with interrupted or running suture close to the recti insertions without overstretching.

- The tooth chosen should have the largest root. The gingiva is dissected, and the tooth with root and surrounding alveolar bone is harvested with a bone saw. The ideal size of the dentoalveolar lamina is 15 to 16 mm in length and at least 3mm in thickness. The gingiva is removed and extensive rinsing with povidone-iodine to reduce bacterial contamination.

- A diamond-coated flywheel is used to remove half of the root. All tissues from the dental pulp canal are also removed.

- An opening for the optic cylinder is drilled in the dentine at a perpendicular angle, ideally centered or where there is more bone tissue.

- The optic cylinder power is calculated (50 to 60 diopters for an aphakic eye) and cemented into the opening after the dentine is dried with oxygen.

- The tooth crown is removed, and the osteoodontoacrylic lamina (OOAL) implant is inserted into a subcutaneous pouch for 3 months to aid revascularisation and growth of connective tissues, usually in the orbitozygomatic area inferior to the lower lid of the contralateral eye.

**Stage II**

- The OOAL is explanted from the subcutaneous pouch and assessed for integrity and bone absorption.

- The connective tissue is removed from the dentine surface, which will make contact with the corneal surface.

- The MMG is partially lifted off the anterior globe and a flap fashioned, with the inferior limbus base attached to retain the blood supply.

- A Flieringa ring is sutured to the sclera with traction sutures at 3 and 9 o'clock pre-placed to lift the ring at the time of lamina insertion.

- The center of the cornea is trephined to the same diameter as the posterior optical cylinder. Decentration here can cause a visual field decentration.

- Removal of the iris, lens, and anterior vitreous is necessary to avoid postoperative secondary glaucoma or severe inflammatory membranes.

- Pre-placed sutures around the prosthesis are done before inserting the optical cylinder into the cornea, with the dentine surface facing the cornea. Air is injected through a 30G needle into the globe for inflation. Interrupted sutures fix the prosthesis to the corneoscleral surface.

- More sterile air is injected to seal the cornea trephination. The patient should posture on their back for 4 to 5 days after the operation.

- The buccal mucosa flap is replaced to cover the lamina after a central trephination to allow the optical cylinder to be exposed.

- Lifelong topical antibiotic therapy and aseptic sterile cleaning of the optical cylinder are advised. Eye ointment should be used if there is lagophthalmos present. A scleral shield can be worn to reduce dehydration and for improved cosmesis.