# Continuing Education Activity

Asplenia means the absence of a spleen. Asplenia can occur in a variety of clinical settings, and it can refer to an anatomic absence of the spleen or functional asplenia secondary to a variety of disease states. The spleen is one of the primary extramedullary lymphoid organs. It is located in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen. Normally, the spleen is not palpable on physical exam and measures on average 10.65 by 5.16 cm. Normal spleen size can vary by gender and race. For example, men on average have larger spleens than females, and whites, on average, tend to have larger spleens compared to African American individuals. This activity reviews the pathophysiology and diagnosis of infections in patients with asplenia and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the causes of asplenia.
- Recall the type of infections that can occur in patients with asplenia.
- List the treatment and management options available for infections in patients with asplenia.
- Discuss interprofessional team strategies for improving care and outcomes in patients with asplenia.

# Introduction

Asplenia means the absence of a spleen. Asplenia can occur in a variety of clinical settings, and it can refer to an anatomic absence of the spleen or functional asplenia secondary to a variety of disease states. The spleen is one of the primary extramedullary lymphoid organs. It is located in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen. Normally, the spleen is not palpable on physical exam and measures on average 10.65 by 5.16 cm. Normal spleen size can vary by gender and race. For example, men on average have larger spleens than females, and whites, on average, tend to have larger spleens compared to African American individuals.

Functionally, the spleen’s primary physiologic role is the filtration and processing of senescent blood cells (predominantly red blood cells or RBCs) and immunologically helps protect against encapsulated microorganisms and respond to infectious pathogens. It contains both hematopoietic and lymphopoietic elements, providing a basis for extramedullary hematopoiesis when necessary.

Asplenia can be caused by damage to the white pulp, the red pulp, or both. The spleen is a direct and indirect site of potential toxicity that can secondarily arise from underlying disease processes or infection.Neisseria meningitides or Streptococcal pneumoniae, among many others, can become life-threatening if untreated in patients with anatomic or functional asplenia.Purpura fulminans.

# Etiology

Asplenia can be acquired, functionally reduced despite its anatomic presence, or in those who congenitally lack a spleen at birth. Most commonly, acquired asplenia is due to surgical removal or trauma. According to a survey by the National Hospital Discharge Survey in the United States done in 2005, approximately 22,000 splenectomies were performed.

A variety of benign and malignant hematologic disorders can result in the potential need for splenectomy. Some examples include hereditary spherocytosis, sickle cell disease, thalassemia major or intermedia, refractory immune thrombocytopenia (ITP), myeloproliferative disorders (e.g., severe or symptomatic splenomegaly in myelofibrosis), certain types of autoimmune hemolytic anemias, lymphoproliferative disorders, and rarely in thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP).

Congenital asplenia may be isolated or as a clinical sequela of broader (albeit rare) clinical syndromes such as Ivemark syndrome. This syndrome is classified under heterotaxy syndrome. It is associated with asplenia or hypoplasia of the spleen, malformation of the heart, and abnormal arrangements of organs of the chest and abdomen.

In addition to the more common causes of asplenia, many other etiologies have been described in the literature affecting various body systems as listed below.

- Gastrointestinal (GI) disorders such as Celiac disease, Whipple disease, and inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) can be associated with hypofunction of the spleen.

- Infectious disease states and acquired immune deficiency syndromes including HIV.

- Hepatic disorders such as alcoholic liver disease, cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and hepatorenal syndrome.

- Rheumatologic conditions such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have been associated with reduced spleen function.

# Epidemiology

The epidemiology of asplenia differs depending on its etiology. Nearly 100% of sickle cell anemia patients (i.e., those with hemoglobin SS disease) will develop asplenia, and they are prone to overwhelming post-splenectomy infection.

Other diseases associated with reduced function of the spleen include celiac disease, with an estimated prevalence of 33% to 76%, Whipple disease is 47%, and alcoholic liver disease is 37% to 100%.

Remark syndrome is seen in 1 in 10,000 to 40,000 cases.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of asplenia also varies depending on the underlying etiology and comorbid conditions. In many benign hematologic disorders, for example, functional asplenia is caused by persistent and recurrent hyper sequestration of red blood cells (RBCs) leading to RBC entrapment. This entrapment leads to splenic enlargement and then later atrophy. Profound atrophy of the spleen is also known as autosplenectomy. Autosplenectomy is usually seen in sickle cell anemia patients, especially those with HgbSS disease.

Many GI disorders can lead to functional asplenia. For example, in cases of hepatic dysfunction or failure, asplenia can develop due to the disruption of the normal hepatic circulation, such as in portal hypertension. Alcohol consumption has been known to cause a direct toxic effect on splenic tissue.

# Histopathology

Histologically, atrophy of the spleen is evident by degeneration of white pulp (i.e., decreased periarteriolar lymphatic sheaths, or PALS, decreased follicles, germinal centers, and marginal zones). Decreased amounts of hematopoietic components characterize red pulp atrophy.

Cytologically, the presence of Howell-Jolly bodies and pitted red blood cells visible upon review of a peripheral blood smear may be suggestive of asplenia or reduced function of the spleen. Other non-specific cytologic findings include absolute monocytosis, lymphocytosis, and/or thrombocytosis.

# History and Physical

Patients with asplenia can be asymptomatic, while some can present with malaise, fatigue, fever, and/or encephalopathy. On physical examination, a normal spleen is not palpable.  When enlarged, it can typically be palpated below the costophrenic border on deep inspiration.  In patients with various degrees of functional asplenia (autosplenectomy), the spleen will usually not be palpable due to chronic atrophy.

Patients may also present with signs or symptoms indicative of underlying infection. Severe infection due to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Neisseria meningitides are the most common bacterial infections recognized in these patients. As such, it is important to assess for nuchal rigidity in these patients if they present with fever. In particular, pneumococcal meningitis can be up to four times more fatal in asplenic patients compared to other forms of bacterial meningitis, and over six times more likely to result in poor health outcomes.

# Evaluation

As noted, analysis of the peripheral blood smear may demonstrate the presence of Howell-Jolly bodies providing the clinician with a clue of underlying splenic dysfunction (e.g., congenital or functional asplenia). To confirm physical exam findings and establish the anatomic presence (or absence) and measurement of the spleen various imaging modalities can be utilized including abdominal ultrasound (US), CT, MRI, or spleen scintigraphy.

# Treatment / Management

As noted, patients with asplenia are at a significantly increased risk of severe bacterial infection, especially from encapsulated microorganisms. As a result, efforts have been made over the last decade to improve the prevention, early detection, and management of infections encountered in asplenic patients. The most common bacterial pathogen leading to infection in patients with asplenia is Streptococcus pneumoniae. According to one study by Waghorn et al., up to 87% of asplenic patients were found to have been infected with Strep. pneumoniae.Haemophilus influenzae type B vaccine (Hib), and the quadrivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine 14 days before surgery.

Vaccination must continue in the postoperative period, and 5 years after the surgery it is recommended that patients receive the PPSV-23 and then again at age 65. The meningococcal conjugate vaccine should be repeated every 5 years.

Overwhelming post-splenectomy infection is common especially in children younger than 16 years old due to their immune immaturity.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of asplenia includes hyposplenia. Hyposplenia shares many of the clinical features as asplenia and may precede further functional decline or autosplenectomy. Unlike asplenia, hyposplenia may be reversible if the underlying condition is treated. For instance, in patients with Celiac disease who develop hyposplenia, the spleen can return to normal function if the celiac disease is better controlled.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of asplenia is poor if left unrecognized, as patients will be at higher risk of infection without proper vaccination. Antibiotic prophylaxis and vaccinations are the recommended management in many asplenic patients and those with acquired immunodeficiency and asplenia.

# Complications

The most common medical complication in asplenic patients is an overwhelming post-splenectomy infection (OPSI). As noted, asplenic patients are at higher risk of infection with encapsulated microorganisms (e.g., streptococcal pneumonia). According to Kirkineska and colleagues, OPSI results in massive bacteremia caused by encapsulated microorganisms. The primary source of infection is not commonly identified, there is a short prodromal phase, and septic shock occasionally associated with disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC) can occur.  Up to 60% to 70% mortality rate has been observed in patients with OPSI if not appropriately managed.

In a normal functioning spleen, the red pulp filters blood and removes old red blood cells; it causes phagocytosis of infected erythrocytes which helps to form a defense against intraerythrocytic parasites.

The white pulp of the spleen has both T-cell and B-cell compartments which help with adaptive immunity and antibody production. The spleen provides the largest B cells which help in the humoral immune response.

Because the spleen functions as a reservoir for non-circulation and undifferentiated monocytes, splenectomy causes a lack of this reserve. According to Swirski et al., these undifferentiated monocytes stored in clusters in the red pulp, respond to myocardial injury and help in wound healing.

Apart from its role in immunity, the spleen also has a role in vascular and thrombotic complications. Vascular complications were also observed mostly in patients with hematologic diseases like beta-thalassemia. In a survey done by Taher et al., they found that in patients with asplenia due to beta-thalassemia, the prevalence of thrombotic events was 1.65%.

Due to the risk of thrombosis in patients with asplenia, another complication reported is pulmonary hypertension. According to Hoeper et al., the incidence of pulmonary hypertension in patients with asplenia is 8% to 11.5%, and numbers are even higher in patients with hemoglobinopathies.

Patients also can develop adrenal hemorrhage also known as Waterhouse-Friedrichsen syndrome and purpura fulminans.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The primary goal in all asplenic patients is to provide adequate preventive medicine. Patients with asplenia need to understand the complications involved, especially the risk of serious infection which can result in premature death. Vaccinations and the use of prophylactic antibiotics (in certain clinical circumstances) need to be emphasized. Specifically, patients with asplenia should be up to date on their pneumococcus, meningitis, Haemophilus, and influenza vaccinations. Recommended prophylactic antibiotics typically include amoxicillin and penicillin.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The three most common causes of splenectomy include traumatic, neoplastic, and hematologic.