# Continuing Education Activity

Shy Drager syndrome refers to a progressive neuromuscular disorder that affects the nervous system. It falls on the multiple system atrophy spectrum of disease. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of Shy Drager syndrome and explains the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of Shy Drager syndrome.
- Describe the evaluation of Shy Drager syndrome.
- Review the management available for Shy Drager syndrome.
- Summarize the importance of communication and coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the care of patients with Shy Drager syndrome.

# Introduction

Shy Drager syndrome was originally classified in 1960 as a neurological disorder that resulted in orthostatic hypotension of unknown etiology.

# Etiology

The exact cause of multiple system atrophy and its subtypes is unknown. However, there are several hypotheses that have been heavily researched and proposed. The vast majority of proposed disease mechanisms encompass the accumulation of intracellular alpha-synuclein. More recently, mitochondrial dysfunction and inflammation have been suggested in its pathogenesis.

Further studies are ongoing and suggest that the excess alpha-synuclein is either a result of genetic overexpression in oligodendrocytes of affected patients or a result of increased uptake from the surrounding extracellular environment.

# Epidemiology

The number of new cases of multiple system atrophy overall has been approximated between 0.6 to 0.7 per 100,000 people each year. Each subtype demonstrates a region-specific pattern. MSA-C is largely concentrated in Japan, while MSA-P tends to dominate new cases of MSA in Western countries. The clinical onset of MSA becomes apparently most often in the sixth decade of life.

# History and Physical

Motor dysfunction, dysautonomia, and sleep disorders form the backbone of the history and physical exam findings present in patients with MSA. Parkinsonism features are predominated in MSA-P and are characterized by physical exam findings that include postural instability, tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia.

# Evaluation

The gold standard diagnosis of multiple system atrophy can only be carried out post mortem. It is based on the intracellular build-up of alpha-synuclein and accompanying neurodegenerative changes in the accompanying brain structures. The MSA diagnosis used in practice is, therefore, pieced together based on its clinical features. Formal diagnosis requires the presence of adult-onset (over age 30) parkinsonian or cerebellar ataxia, the presence of autonomic failure in the urinary or cardiovascular system, and one additional supporting feature of MSA.

MSA and Parkinson's disease parallel many of the same clinical symptoms but differ in their response to levodopa. A poor response to levodopa is found in MSA, while patients with Parkinson's respond well to levodopa. This distinction is useful clinically to separate the conditions and is often used as a supporting feature in MSA diagnosis.

# Treatment / Management

As of now, no cure for multiple system atrophy exists. The combination of symptom management and emerging research of novel therapies can give affected patients hope for the future. Symptomatic management is targeted at the predominant features of how MSA or its subtypes manifest.

Midodrine and fludrocortisone have been used to treat orthostatic hypotension with physical therapy as a supplement for additional motor symptoms.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have also been explored in the treatment of MSA. A 2019 phase I/II clinical trial utilized intrathecal implantation of MSCs in 24 patients with MSA at quantities varying from 10-200 million. Derived from adipose tissue, MSCs use demonstrated a statistically significant decreased rate of disease progression.

The myeloperoxidase (MPO) inhibitor verdiperstat was shown to decrease microglial activation and neuronal rescue in a mouse model of MSA. A phase 3 placebo-controlled human trial on the efficacy of verdiperstat in improving the quality of life for patients with MSA is currently underway.

# Differential Diagnosis

Multiple system atrophy can present with either cerebellar or parkinsonian dominant features. In addition to Parkinson's disease itself, the differential diagnosis for MSA includes neurological disease affecting the cerebellum, including Friedreich ataxia and other spinocerebellar ataxias.

# Prognosis

The prognosis for patients diagnosed with multiple system atrophy is poor, with an average life expectancy of 6 to 10 years after initial diagnosis.

# Complications

The complications of multiple system atrophy are a direct result of an impaired neurological system. Disruptions in sleep due to sleep apnea are frequently reported due to sleep apnea and stridor.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The pathology of MSA mimics many other neurological diseases. It is therefore integral that a thorough history and physical exam should be performed to rule out other similar diseases. In addition, the role of early levodopa as both a diagnostic and a partially therapeutic agent should be strongly encouraged. This would both help elucidate underlying disease pathology faster and result in expedited treatment of either disease. Furthermore, due to the limited life expectancy and treatments available following diagnosis, end-of-life planning in addition to therapy, expectations should be incorporated into every treatment plan.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

MSA presents patients with a myriad of unique challenges in activities of daily living. It is, therefore, critical that an interprofessional team work together to coordinate care in an effort to decrease the burden of treatment. Many studies have demonstrated a patient benefit in the use of technology to improve health care coordination amongst providers. [Level 1]