The widespread use of neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBA) was a significant milestone in the development of anesthesia.  Before the introduction of NMBA, anesthesia was induced and maintained with intravenous and inhalational agents.  The introduction of NMBA led to a significant conceptual change in the practice of anesthesia.  Anesthesia was redefined to include a triad of

- Narcosis

- Analgesia

- Muscle relaxation

Native peoples in South America used curare for hunting game and killing prey. The evolution of NMBA began when Spanish explorers, known as the Conquistadors, returned home bringing tales of ‘flying death”.  The South American Indians used arrows and darts coated with curare.  In 1562, a writer in the court of King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella was the first person to write about the poisoned arrow in a book titled De Orbe Novo.

Sir Walter Raleigh, a British explorer, and adventurer described the use of poisoned arrows in modern-day Venezuela in his book titled “Discovery of the Large, Rich and Beautiful Empire of Guiana.  The word ‘Ourari’ came into use by one of Sir Walter Raleigh’s lieutenants.

Another pioneer in the discovery and use of curare was Edward Bancroft.  He brought samples of crude curare from South America back to the Old World.  Sir Benjamin Brodie showed that when injecting small animals with curare, they stop breathing but can be kept alive by inflating their lungs with bellows.  This observation led to the conclusion that curare causes the cessation of breathing by paralyzing the respiratory muscles.

Charles Waterton was the manager of a large sugar plantation estate in South America.  He became very interested in the effects of wourali (a South American term for curare) used by the native population.  In 1814, Charles Waterton showed the effects of wourali on three donkeys.  The first donkey was injected in the shoulder and died soon afterward.  The second donkey had a tourniquet applied to the foreleg was injected with wourali distal to the tourniquet.  The donkey lived while the tourniquet was in place but soon after removal it died.  The third donkey appeared to be dead after injection with wourali but was resuscitated using bellows. Charles Waterton's experiment confirmed the paralytic effect of wourali.

Another milestone in the development of NMBA relates to the work done by the French physiologist Claude Bernard (1813-1878).  Bernard showed that when injecting curare into frog legs, the muscle in the leg will not contract when the nerve is directly stimulated but will contract with direct stimulation to the muscle itself.  This experiment showed that the curare acts on the neuromuscular junction.

Neurologist Walter Freeman learned of curare and suggested that Richard Gill, a patient suffering from multiple sclerosis, try using it.  Richard Gill brought twenty-five pounds (11 kg) of raw curare from Ecuador.  The raw curare was given to Squibb and Sons in an attempt to derive an effective antidote to curare.  In 1942, two scientists working for Squibb and Sons, Wintersteiner and Dutcher, isolated the alkaloid d-tubocurarine.  Soon thereafter, AH Holladay, also working for Squibb and Sons, developed a standardized commercial preparation of curare that was named Intocostrin.

Neuropsychiatrist E Bennett, a pioneer in the field of convulsive shock therapy, used curare to minimize the risk of spinal fracture during the procedure.  During the 91st Congress of the American Medical Association, Bennet presented a film describing his use of curare in this setting.  Lewis Wright, a participant at the Congress and employee of Squibb and Sons, was intrigued by the film.  He donated some Intocostrin to E.A. Rovenstine of New York University who passed the medication on to E.M. Papper, one of his residents.  The administration of Intocostrin caused a cessation of breathing in two patients who received it. Papper and colleagues manually ventilated both patients overnight.

In 1942, Harold Randall Griffith and his resident Enid Johnson at the Homeopathic Hospital in Montreal administered curare to a young patient undergoing an appendectomy.

The 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s saw the rapid development of several synthetic NMBA.  Gallamine was the first synthetic NMBA used clinically. Scientists later developed suxamethonium, pancuronium, vecuronium, atracurium, and rocuronium.

NMBA divide into two groups:

- Depolarizing NMBA

- Non-depolarizing NMBA

In modern medicine, uses for NMBA are:

- Muscular relaxation before the initiation of airway management

- Therapeutic hypothermia after cardiac arrest

Management of patients with

- Acute respiratory distress syndrome

- Increased intraabdominal pressure

- Increased intracranial pressure

- Status asthmatics

- For patients on mechanical ventilation who require muscular relaxation to prevent patient-ventilator asynchrony, also known as “bucking” the ventilator

- Muscular relaxation for a surgical procedure

- Adjunct therapy for patients undergoing electroconvulsive therapy