There are many findings when it comes to anemia presentation.

**MCV below 80:**

Iron deficiency anemia presents with conjunctival pallor, fatigue, cold intolerance, and cold distal extremities, koilonychia, occasionally pica, glossitis, dry, cracked lips, and cheilosis. These patients will generally describe an event with chronic blood loss, chronic inflammation, exposure to lead paint, or a family history of thalassemias. Anemia of chronic disease presents with the disease that is causing chronic inflammation such as arthritis in rheumatoid arthritis or malignancy. Also, these diseases can be asymptomatic. However, these patients may have a family history of cancer, autoimmune disease, or rheumatologic disease that can assist in the diagnosis.

Additionally, thalassemias can present with “chipmunk” facies due to bone marrow expansion and extramedullary hematopoiesis. This process can also present with hepatomegaly and splenomegaly on physical examination. An X-ray may display skeletal deformities. These patients will more than likely have a family history, including one or both of their parents. Patients with lead exposure are commonly exposed to lead paints, especially children in an older home consuming the lead-based paints. Adults are likely to report exposure through occupations such as miners, pipefitters, auto shop workers, and ceramic glazes. Lead poisoning can present with lead lines on the gums and on long bones metaphysis, abdominal pain, peripheral neuropathy, most commonly fibular and radial nerve neuropathies, and fatigue. Children can present with encephalopathy. Because sideroblastic anemia can result from lead poisoning or even by chronic alcohol use, it presents as the underlying etiology.

**MCV over 100:**

Patients with vitamin B12 deficiency may report a strict vegan lifestyle without supplementation, short bowel syndrome with a history of small bowel resection, pernicious anemia with presentation of nausea, increased flatulence, diarrhea, weight loss, and anorexia, malabsorptive symptoms like steatorrhea, foul-smelling stools, diarrhea, weakness, and/or weight loss. Vitamin B12 deficiency takes many years to manifest due to hepatic storage for approximately three to six years. As a result, when this condition does present, it tends to affect the neurologic system due to its necessity in fatty acid synthesis for myelin sheaths. Patients demonstrate signs of subacute combined degeneration: cerebellar ataxia, bilateral hemiplegia, and decreased vibration and discriminative touch sensations. Folate deficiency can present with glossitis but has few other symptoms seen. However, if pregnant with a folate deficiency, the neonate can suffer from neural tube defects such as spina bifida occulta. These patients will deny the use of supplemental vitamins while pregnant. Also, chronic alcoholism can be a factor in history for a folate deficiency. Orotic aciduria presents early in life with failure to thrive and slow development reported in patients with a family history. Non-megaloblastic anemias present as their underlying causes such as hepatic insufficiency. These patients may also report chronic alcoholism, which is the most common cause. Additionally, they can report symptoms of jaundice, fatigue, spider angiomas, palmar erythema, ascites, peripheral edema, and even easy bleeding and bruising, to name a few symptoms. Diamond Blackfan anemia presents in the first year of life with facial and hand malformations growth retardation and predisposition to malignancies.

**MCV 80-100:**

Both intrinsic and extrinsic hemolytic normocytic anemias can present similarly. Patients have darkened urine secondary to increase urobilinogen. Intravascular hemolysis due to microangiopathic hemolytic anemias or paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria can present with hemoglobin and hemosiderin in the urine. Many of these diseases are spontaneous, but patients with malaria can report recent travel to endemic areas, recent camping and Ixodes tick bite for babesiosis, undercooked ground beef for hemolytic uremic syndrome, and SLE,  and foamy urine indicating proteinuria with epistaxis and hypertension in a pregnant woman over 20 weeks gestation for HELLP syndrome. Aplastic anemia can present with pallor, purpura, petechiae, increased risk of mucosal bleeding, increased risk of infection, and fatigue secondary to pancytopenia.