**Cromolyn Sodium Dosage Forms**

- Oral solution: 100 mg/5 mL

- Nasal spray: 5.2 mg/1 actuation

- Ophthalmic solution: 4% (10mL)

- Inhalation solution: 10mg/1mL

**FDA-approved Indications**

- **Asthma Prophylaxis**
- Metered-dose inhaler: 2 oral inhalations (800 mcg/spray) 4 times daily at regular intervals, may need to titrate
- Nebulizer: 20 mg (1 vial) via nebulization four times daily at regular intervals
- In patients who develop acute bronchoconstriction when exposed to environmental pollutants, toluene diisocyanate, and in response to exercise, etc., cromolyn sodium should be administered shortly prior to exposure to the precipitating factor.

- **Mastocytosis**(systemic)
- Empty ampule into a glass of water and drink 30 mins before meals and bedtime
- Children > 12 years old and adults: 200 mg PO four times daily; 30 minutes before meals. May increase to 40 mg/kg/day if control fo symptoms not seen within 2 to 3 weeks
- Pediatric

- < 2 years old: safety and efficacy not established
- 2 through 12 years old: 100 mg PO four times daily; not to exceed 40 mg/kg/day. Give 30 minutes before meals and at bedtime.

- **Allergic Rhinitis**
- Nasal inhalation: 1 spray/nostril 3 to 6 times/day

- **Keratitis/Vernal Conjunctivitis/Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis**
- 4+ years old: 1 to 2 drops in each eye 4 to 6 times daily, at regular intervals

**Non-FDA Labeled Indications**

- Food allergy and IBD

- Children > 12-years-old and Adults: 200 mg PO four times daily; may double dose if inadequate symptom control within 2 to 3 weeks. Do not exceed 400 mg PO four times daily
- Pediatric

- < 2 years-old: not recommended
- 2 to 12 years old: 100 mg four times daily initially, may need to increase but do not exceed 40 mg/kg/day.

**Specific Population**

- Patients with Renal Impairment: The manufacturer’s labeling does not have a specific dosage adjustment recommendation for patients with renal impairment.

- Patients with Hepatic Impairment: The manufacturer’s labeling does not have a specific dosage adjustment recommendation for patients with hepatic impairment.

- **Pregnant Women:**The drug is pregnancy category B; risk has not been ruled out. As per manufacturer labels, subcutaneous doses up to 540 mg/kg in mice (similar to maximum recommended daily oral dose in adults on the mg per square meter basis), 164 mg/kg in rats (oral dose less than the maximum recommended daily in adults on the mg per square meter basis), or at intravenous doses up to 485 mg/kg in rabbits (4 times the maximum recommended oral dose in adults on the mg per square meter basis)  produced no evidence of fetal malformations.

- **Breastfeeding Patients:**It is unknown if cromolyn sodium is excreted in breast milk.

- **Pediatric Patients:**As per available clinical data, the dose should not exceed 20 mg/kg/day for infants up to six months of age.

- **Geriatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of cromolyn Sodium are not systematically studied in geriatric patients.  However, due to the greater probability of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac functions, along with concomitant disease or other drug therapy in geriatric patients, the therapy of cromolyn sodium usually initiates at the low end of the dosing range.