In patients diagnosed with both cholelithiasis and choledocholithiasis, CBD clearance accompanied by a synchronized or consequent cholecystectomy is recommended. Two well-established safe approaches are step-wise ERCP and consequent surgery, or synchronized open or laparoscopic approaches to the CBD exploration, clearance, and cholecystectomy. Current studies have not determined significant differences among the mentioned approaches. In patients who are decided to be managed with laparoscopic cholecystectomy, the presence of choledocholithiasis and the successful removal either with cystic duct approach or with a direct choledochotomy should be documented with contrast cholangiogram intraoperatively. Both mentioned approaches demand a set of specialized instrumentation, and in case of lacking the demanding equipment, a consequent ERCP would be scheduled. Following a direct choledochotomy, the size of the CBD should be evaluated. While primary repair might be considered as acceptable management in the large CBDs, the smaller sized choledochal duct should be repaired over an appropriate size T-tube. The T-tube size ranges from 10 to 18 Fr. However, the T-tube length might be customized according to the specific length of the CBD to be implemented. The CBD condition should be checked weeks following the T-tube placement, and in unsuccessful endoscopic choledocholithiasis removal, probably due to the impacted stones, transduodenal sphincterotomy might be recommended. In complete unsuccessful cases of choledocholithiasis disimpaction, a surgical bypass method, including choledochoduodenostomy or Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy, would be preferred.

Placing a T tube in the CBD following a choledochotomy is technically complex.

Choledochotomy site closure around the tube exit should be done cautiously to avoid any tension. A 3-0 or 4-0 absorbable suture would be used to close the site. Non-absorbable suture would potentially serve as a nidus for a couple of complications, including stone formation and infection. The closure would be continued longitudinally along with the incision and CBD. Choledochotomy direction should be designed longitudinally in the anterior aspect of the duct to avoid any vascular damage. Consequently, the T-tube would be flushed to double-check both the complete tube patency and to exclude any leakage. T-tube fixation and the abdominal wall course should be selected in the shortest pattern.