The physiology of an erection can break down into arterial dilation and venous occlusion. In most cases, tumescence occurs following sexual stimulation. This process triggers sympathetic inhibition, parasympathetic activation, and release of pro-erectogenic neurotransmitters from cavernous nerves. The activation of the parasympathetic nerves leads to reduced intracellular calcium levels, causing cavernosal and arterial smooth muscle relaxation. This effect increases blood flow by approximately 20 to 40 times the expanding sinusoids of the corpora cavernosa. As these sinusoids enlarge, the outer portions of corpora near the tunica albuginea start to occlude venous outflow. The emissary veins get compressed between the sinusoids and the inelastic portion of tunica albuginea and help maintain tumescence.

The pressure in the corpora cavernosa will rise to averages around 100 mmHg in most men. The pressure in the corpus spongiosum is approximately one-third of that found in the corpora cavernosa. This difference is because of the weaker and more elastic tunica albuginea, which produces minimal venous occlusion. Contraction of the ischiocavernosus and bulbospongiosus muscles increase pressure within all three chambers and the glans of the penis during the rigid erection phase. Intercourse and repetitive penile stimulation create a strong contraction of these muscles and force additional blood into all chambers, increasing rigidity. This process is known as the rigid erection phase, during which pressure within the erectile chambers can reach several hundred mmHg.

The intracorporeal pressure begins to decrease only in the second phase of detumescence. The first phase has a transient increase in pressure as trabecular smooth muscles within the sinusoids start to contract against an occluded venous system. During the second phase of detumescence, expansion of the emissary veins begins to drain the sinusoids, and a slow decrease in intracorporeal pressure occurs. The last phase of detumescence reveals a fast drop in pressure from fully restored venous drainage and baseline arterial flow.