**Workplace Evaluation**

Before any type of preventive measure can be undertaken it is important to evaluate the workplace.  For example, the emergency room is very different in its settings to the intensive care unit in terms of potential for violence and death.  In fact, in all hospitals, some areas are easily accessible and others are not.  For example, one can access the emergency room but it is not possible to enter a mental health department which usually has locked doors and requires a password to enter or exit.  To ensure that the healthcare facility is adequately prepared to deal with an active shooter incident each area of the hospital must undergo its own assessment, planning, and exercise.

While one can conduct multi-department assessment and exercise, this is also fraught with errors.  For example, one needs to know who is or are the shooters and who are the intended victims.  Exercise in the emergency room must always take into account the number of patients and visitors who may be present; whereas, in the mental health unit, it is usually one perpetrator, and the intended victim may be a staff member.  Furthermore, in the emergency room, one has to consider many exits and entrances; whereas in a place like the ICU there is usually one entrance and exit.  In the emergency room, it is hard to create a safe room because the area is usually wide open and often has several entrances.

**Active Shooter Response Options**

There are different active shooter response options that have been developed over the years with the predominance of the response types coalescing into several simple principals: Run, Hide, Fight.   ALICE Training Institute, Department of Homeland Security, Ready.gov, FEMA are several entities that have created active shooter response training.

- Figure out

- Hear shooting or radio announcement of intruder in facility
- Determine where the shooting is coming from
- Determine if able to get out of the facility safely, or if need to hide out

- Get out **(RUN)**
- Have an escape route and plan in mind
- Move quickly; don’t wait for others to validate your decision
- Leave belongings behind
- Encourage all others to follow.  Patients not bedridden should also be encouraged to leave the area
- Warn and prevent individuals from entering
- Survival chances increase if not where shooter is or to go where he / she can’t see you

- Call out

- Inform authorities

- Notify the hospital emergency number
- Call 9-1-1
- The emergency team which is supposed to manage the organization and planning in the event of an active shooter must be notified


- Tell them:

- Name of shooter (if known)
- Location of shooter
- Number of shooters
- Physical description of shooters
- Number and types of weapons
- Number of potential victim
- Follow dispatcher’s or police instructions

- Hide out **(HIDE)**
- Hiding place

- Ideally in a room that can be locked with objects to hide behind
- Avoid places that might trap you or restrict movement
- Be out of the active shooter’s view
- Be protective if shots are fired
- Select a “hardened” area during planning


- Cover windows of door if you can
- Blockade door with heavy furniture, filing cabinets, printers, desks, etc
- Turn off the lights and silence your phones
- Turn off noise-producing devices (games / TV)
- Get out of sight from the door and stay low
- Become totally silent

- Take out **(FIGHT)**
- This is an **ABSOLUTE**last resort
- Act as aggressively as possible
- Improvise weapons and throw items
- Yell and scream
- Commit to your actions
- Whether you’re alone or with a group you fight to live

When law enforcement officers arrive, do exactly as they instruct since they have no idea who the shooter is.  Avoid making quick movements and do not place your hands in your pockets.  Further, avoid screaming or yelling.  Follow the instructions on evacuation and go to the designated area.

**Planning**

Planning to counter an active shooter involves an interprofessional team with a multidimensional approach.  There is no one approach that works all the time and the threat must be continually assessed.

- Establish a framework in how to deal with an active shooter in the hospital

- Involve everyone in the facility

- One should develop multiple scenarios and practice routines

- Invite law enforcement to help develop a robust program and understand the risks

- Develop a culture of reporting without reprisals

**Facility Initiatives to Thwart Active Shooter Incidents**

- Develop a method of recognizing the problem and have a reporting system in place

- All security measures should be fully active, and this includes the following:

- Employees must wear a name badge with photo identification
- Employees should be able to report suspicious activity or an individual without fear of reprisal
- All badge or card access readers must have the ability to be reprogrammed to block a former employee from entering the hospital

- Establish staff reporting stations

- During an active shooting event, there must be maneuvers in place to keep all doors closed and/or locked

- Have an effective means of communication for all workers in the hospital

- Develop a protocol for evacuation

- Workers must be aware of emergency escape routes

- Ensure that there are safe locations if an escape route is blocked

- Education of employees on self-defense and harm reduction

**Should Employees be Trained to Counter Active Shooters?**

The reality is that most active shooting cases occur suddenly and are over in a matter of minutes.  Most employees usually are too afraid and often consider hiding in a safe place.  For employees who have a chance to hide this should be the first goal in mind rather than confronting the gunman.  Confrontation is only necessary where there is no other option left.  Both law enforcement and hospital policies recommend not confronting the gunman.

**What Type of Training is Useful when Confronting an Active Shooter?**

While law enforcement arrives, some of the tactics used to distract the gunman include the following:

- Try and interrupt the focus of the shooter

- Try and interrupt the rhythm and momentum of the shooter

- Try and interrupt the shooter from accessing any weapons in the vicinity

- If face to face encounter occurs, the individual should be taught to push the gunman’s weapon down and not sideways or up.

**Use of Bystander Intervention**

One way to stop an active shooter is with assistance from bystanders.  In almost every case of the active shooter, law enforcement takes a few minutes to arrive at the scene.  So should bystanders play a role in overpowering the shooter?  Most experts in law enforcement indicate that the use of bystanders to counter the active shooter is not recommended and is usually the last choice. However, if the bystander has a weapon and knows how to use it, then he or she may confront the shooter.  But for most people, countering the active shooter is not recommended.

Instead of fighting the active shooter, experts say that bystanders should try and help any injured victims.  While some have suggested that bystanders try and stop any source of bleeding, this is not something a non-health care worker can do.  Even most trained health care workers who have not been trained in emergency medicine or surgery would have no idea how to stop bleeding.  Plus, one also needs the right equipment, lighting, and assistance to stop the hemorrhage. Blindly placing clamps inside the body to stop bleeding is more likely to cause more complications and can even result in a lawsuit.  Thus, unless there is a surgeon or emergency room physician present, no attempt should be made to stop internal bleeding. Superficial bleeding can in many cases be stopped with digital pressure or a bandage. Instead of focussing on bleeding, one should try and ensure that the injured victim has a patent airway.  Since most shooting events are over in a matter of minutes, the next step is to call 911 or the operator to get medical help.

**Emergency Escape Routes**

Employees or former employees who become active shooters are fully aware of exits and entrances in the healthcare facility where they work.  So when it comes to developing escape routes, the following is recommended:

- Avoid all known or obvious escape routes as they may be booby-trapped.

- Exit the area immediately if possible and exit in groups in a single line.

- Do not use elevators as they may be disabled.

**Special Considerations**

There will always be some patients who cannot move, so they will have to be left behind, but someone should stay around if the patient is on the ventilator or acutely ill.  Patients in the NICU, ICU, dialysis unit, or the surgery recovery room usually cannot be moved, and moral dilemmas may occur as to whom to take and whom to leave behind.  Even those left behind need care.  For example, one simply cannot leave an infant on a ventilator and escape.  The hospital should have a policy for what to do in such circumstances because there is always the threat of litigation if someone sick is left behind.

**First Aid Kits**

When an active shooting incident occurs, some people are usually killed outright, and there is no chance of saving them. But then there are others who may be injured by the shooter or may have been hurt during the attempt to flee.  Some may jump from a building, others may break down windows to escape, or yet others may crawl through hazardous terrain.  When people are injured, there must be preplanned first aid kits around the hospital to provide oxygen, help stop any bleeding, warming blanket, or splint a fractured extremity. These first aid kits must be placed in all departments because one may never know when they may be required.  Further, these kits must be rechecked to make sure that the supplies are not expired or not functioning.  Hospital staff must know where these emergency kits are located and must have some basic training to manage emergencies. If there is a device or equipment, it must come with instructions so that even a bystander can put it to use.

**What should the readily deployable first aid kits contain?**

Many types of first aid kits are available for use, but one has to remember that during an active shooter incident, there is no time for formal medical or surgical procedures.  The kit should only contain the essentials so that the injured victim can be made more comfortable. Since the majority of people involved in active shooting incidents are non-healthcare professionals, the kit should contain the following:

- Emergency warming blanket

- Labels

- Instruction card in a simple language

- Marking Pen

- Occlusive bandages

- Petrolatum gauze

- Splint

- Tape board

- Tourniquet to stop bleeding****

**Communicate**

When an active shooting incident is taking place time is of the essence as most events are over in minutes. In many cases, valuable time is lost because of the panic and confusion which leaves people exposed and vulnerable.  Thus, it is vital that all communications regarding an active shooter be clear, concise and actionable to prevent worsening of the situation.  The best way to foil an active shooter is by eliminating the targets.

**Lucid Language Messaging**

Law enforcement suggests that the communication to the masses about an active shooter should be in simple language. Code words should not be used because many people may not know what they mean.  During an active shooting event, people are often hysterical and panicky and may not even remember what the code words mean.  The communication should provide accurate information about the shooter, location and give out clear instructions on where and how to proceed.

**Immediate Psychological Support**

An active shooting incident can be extremely traumatizing, and thus experts in mental health suggest that one should try and manage the immediate psychological trauma.  In many cases, some people can become irrational or very emotional which interferes with the evacuation and can place others at risk.  Psychological first aid should be offered right away, and the responders should try and limit the negative or distressing news that can instill more fear and panic.  Psychological first aid is ideal for any individual experiencing an overwhelming emotional response to a violent event. The individual may or may not have a prior mental health condition.  One does not have to be a healthcare provider to offer psychological first aid but use common sense and be realistic.  The aim is not to cure any type of emotional disorder but to limit the panic so that evacuation can proceed safely. All you have to do is calm the individual down.