The overall mortality in cardiac surgery is between 2% and 3%. Major complications include postoperative bleeding, stroke

Myocardial infarction following cardiac surgery is classified as type 5 myocardial infarction according to the universal classification of myocardial infarction. The incidence is between 5% to 10%. Diagnosing postoperative myocardial infarction is challenging since cardiac enzymes are routinely elevated due to manipulation during operation and symptoms are influenced by postoperative status. Therefore, other diagnostic modalities should be emphasized, for example, electrocardiogram (ECG) echocardiography, and coronary angiography to assess bypass patency. Echocardiography may show septal wall motion abnormalities not related to myocardial ischemia. Signs of refractory schock, arrhythmias are highly suggestive of myocardial infarction. Myocardial infarction following CABG can be divided into graft related and non graft related. Early graft dysfunction is observed in up to 3%. Non graft related causes include insufficient myocardial protection and embolization. Treatment strategy for type 5 myocardial infarction include conservative medical treatment, pci, and redo cabg.

Following mitral valve replacement (MVR), obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) can occur. This is described as systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the anterior mitral leaflet. Treatment is proposed in a step-wise manner. Starting with beta-blockers, increasing afterload with fluids, and allowing hypertension, and finally reoperation with different surgical techniques: edge-to-edge, posterior leaflet (PL) shortening, short neochord, sliding plasty, and ellipsoid excision of anterior leaflet (AL).

Fever, edema, and increased inlammatory markers can be routinely observed in patients in the postoperative ward. Thus, it might be challenging to differentiate patients with true infection and evolving sepsis.

Perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis is used to reduce postoperative infections. Guidelines recommend cephalosporine prophylaxis during the 24 to 48 hour perioperative period. Deep sternal wound infection (DSWI) is a unique postoperative complication of cardiac surgery occuring with a frequency of 0.4% to 4%. It may progress to mediastinitis resulting in great mortality. Treatment of DSWI consists of pathogen-specific antibiotics (frequently cultured strains include Staphylococcus aureus or Staphylococcus epidermidis treated with clindamycin or according to resistance pattern), surgical exploration, and application of negative-pressure wound therapy (NPWT).