There are 4 grades of radiation dermatitis and injury, ranging from erythema to necrotic ulcers.

- Faint erythema or dry desquamation characterize grade 1.

- Grade 2 exhibits moderate to brisk erythema, patchy moist desquamation, and it is mostly confined to the skinfold creases. There may be moderate edema at the injured site.

- Grade 3 consists of moist desquamation at sites other than skinfold creases; there may be bleeding the site of injury induced by minor trauma.

- Grade 4 consists of skin necrosis or full thickness wounds. There may be spontaneous bleeding at the involved injured site.

As the effects of radiation to the skin are cumulative, there are more severe skin injuries toward the end of the radiation. The degree of injury depends mainly on the radiation intensity and the patient's tissue sensitivity to the radiation.

The concept of radiation recall involves the skin recalling a previous radiation exposure to a particular area when chemotherapeutic agents such as doxorubicin or docetaxel are administered within 2 months of the radiation treatment.

The primary pathophysiology of the injury is hypoxia due to the progressive obliteration of the microvasculature (progressive endarteritis) and fibrosis. Impaired wound healing in a previously irradiated area occurs due to disruption of the natural progression of the overlapping wound healing phases (hemostasis, inflammatory phase, proliferative phase, and remodeling phase). These disruptive can be grouped into several categories: cellular depletion, extracellular matrix (ECM) alteration, microvascular changes, cytokine and growth factor dysregulation.

- Cellular depletion: ionizing radiation affects cells in the G2 and M phases of the cell cycle, causing cellular apoptosis and impaired cellular proliferation and migration, causing an overall decrease in cells number.

- Alteration in cellular proliferation: Ionizing radiation effects collagen content and collagen strength, both decreased in irradiated wounds; an increase in matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) unopposed by tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMP) will cause an abnormal degradation of ECM.

- Microvascular changes: This is caused by overall decreased in angiogenesis as well as physical changes of blood vessels caused by an increase in transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) causing an increase in endothelial fibrosis with subsequent obliteration of the vessel lumen resulting in tissue hypoxia.

- Cytokines and growth factors dysregulation:

- VEGF, bFGF: Angiogenic growth factors; decreased following radiation

- Nitric oxide: Potent vasodilator and induces collagen deposition; decreased following radiation

- TNF-alfa, IFN-gamma, IL-1, IL-6: Pro-inflammatory cytokines, prevent collagen deposition, induce TGF-beta1 through activation of macrophages/stromal cells; it is increased following radiation

- TGF-beta1: Key mediator of fibrosis, promotes chemotaxis, signals fibroblasts proliferation, prevents collagen breakdown, promotes microvascular changes. It is decreased following radiation.