**Nonoperative Management**

The initial management of LHB tendinopathy is nonsurgical. A period of rest and activity modification is beneficial in the acute setting, coupled with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).

**Physical therapy**

Successful physical therapy regimens target the underlying source(s) contributing to the LHB tendon pathology. Potential factors predisposing to biceps-related shoulder injuries include glenohumeral internal rotation deficit (GIRD) in overhead-throwing athletes/baseball pitchers, poor trunk control, scapular dyskinesia, and internal impingement.

Strengthening protocols should focus on restoring muscle balance across the shoulder girdle, including rotator cuff and periscapular muscle strengthening programs. Focused stretching on the anterior shoulder structures, including pectoralis minor, should also be considered. Other modalities, such as dry needling, have demonstrated promise in preliminary animal studies.

**Injections**

Corticosteroid injections are considered in the setting of persistent symptoms despite the aforementioned therapies. There is some controversy with respect to the type of technique used (ultrasound-guided versus blind injection) and the exact location utilized for the injection (subacromial, intra-articular, bicipital groove/sheath).  Theoretically, in the setting of concomitant shoulder pathologies, an intra-articular injection would also reach the LHB tendon in the bicipital groove, as the sheath is contiguous with the glenohumeral joint synovial tissue.

Direct injection is targeted to the sheath itself, and not the LHB tendon directly. Although not definitively documented, an intratendinous LHB tendon injection may predispose the patient to tendon rupture. In a 2011 randomized controlled trial (RCT) comparing injection accuracy (with post-injection CT imaging to confirm injection placement by location) of ultrasound-guided versus blind bicipital sheath injections at their location in the groove.  Potential injection location results included (1) solely in the tendon sheath, (2) inside the tendon, in the tendon sheath, and surrounding (but outside) the tendon sheath, and (3) confined to only the area outside the tendon sheath. The ultrasound-guided injections resulted in 87% accuracy for injecting the tendon sheath alone (location "1"). By stark contrast, the blind injection was accurate only 27% of the time, and one-third of the time, the tendon itself and the entire bicipital sheath were missed altogether.

**Surgical Management**

For this review, the management of SLAP injuries will not be discussed.

Indications for surgical management include:

- Intra-operative findings of an inflamed tendon (i.e., the “lipstick” lesion), significant fraying, tearing, or hypertrophy

- Partial-thickness tears of the LHB tendon (>25% to 50%)

- Medial LHB subluxation

- LHB subluxation with associated subscapularis tear, or bicipital groove soft tissue compromise

**Surgical Techniques**

**Biceps tenotomy
**

- Provides reproducible results in terms of pain relief

- Minimal postoperative rehabilitation

The technique involves an initial diagnostic arthroscopy. The glenohumeral joint is inspected for any coexisting clinical pathology. The biceps tendon is examined under direct traction to visually inspect the intertubercular groove portion, which is a prime location of pathology. Next, a probe is used to evaluate the LHB tendon stability in the bicipital groove. Stability can be further assessed by internally rotating the arm and evaluating for any medial/inferior subluxation of the LHB tendon. In the setting of LHB tendon instability, this maneuver will lead to tendon entrapment within the joint. The entrapment is relieved with external rotation of the arm.

Arthroscopic inspection of the tendon allows for the estimation of the relative percentage of the LHB tendon that is compromised. A popular classification system utilized for the intra-operative grade corresponding to the degree of LHB tendon macroscopic pathology is the Lafosse grading scale

- Grade 0: Normal tendon

- Grade 1: Minor lesion (partial, localized areas of tendon erosion/fraying, focal areas affect <50% of the tendon width)

- Grade 2: Major lesion (extensive tendon loss, compromising >50% of the tendon width)

Some surgeons solely debride the tendon in the setting of <50% tendinous compromise. Arthroscopic biceps tenotomy is performed by releasing the tendon as close as possible to the superior labrum. As long as the tendon is free from intimate soft tissue adhesions to surrounding structures, the tendon should retract distally toward the bicipital groove. If adhesions are present, all efforts should be made to mobilize the tendon in order to allow for retraction following the tenotomy. In cases where the LHB tendon is particularly hypertrophic and scarred to other soft tissue structures in the joint, this serves as a potential source of postoperative pain.

**Biceps tenodesis**

- The preferred technique in younger patients, athletes, laborers, and those patients specifically concerned with postoperative cosmetic deformity

- Optimizes the length-tension relationship of the biceps muscle; mitigates postoperative risk of muscle atrophy, fatigue, and cramping

Various locations for the tenodesis itself, in addition to fixation technique, used provide equivalent results in terms of patient satisfaction and clinical outcomes. Following a standard diagnostic arthroscopy, a spinal needle is used to “tag” the tendon near its entrance into the bicipital groove. Once this is tagged with Fiberwire, the tenotomy is performed, and the residual “stump” is shaved back to the superior labrum.

Next, the arthroscope is taken into the subacromial space, and the tagging sutures help localize the residual LHB tendon's location. The bicipital groove is then opened up with a cautery device until the LHB tendon is visualized. Following mobilization of the tendon to the medial aspect of the bicipital groove, the osseous groove is cleared of all soft tissue in preparation for fixation. One technique involves interference screw placement approximately 1cm distal to the superior extent of the groove. During the fixation of the tendon, care is taken to utilize an arthroscopic grasper to maintain ideal tension on the proximal extent of the LHB tendon. Once fixation is complete, any residual tendon that remains prominent from the fixation point is carefully resected.

An alternative to the arthroscopic (or suprapectoral) tenodesis procedure is the open subpectoral approach. Several studies have compared outcomes between the all-arthroscopic and open subpectoral approaches. Although advocates for the latter approach cite the theoretical advantage of being able to remove the LHB tendon from the bicipital groove completely, the majority of studies report similar patient-reported outcomes and no difference in patient-reported pain scores.