Adequate positioning of the patient is essential to make the patient comfortable and for the interventionist to perform the procedure safely. Many patients referred for the FGLP are generally hospitalized and have several comorbidities, and it is difficult for them to maintain still for a longer duration. In addition, many of them can have difficulty breathing or arm pain in certain positions.

**Prone Approach:**The patient should lie prone on the fluoroscopy table. Pillows straighten the lumbar lordosis when placed below the stomach. It also increases the interspinous distance, often narrowed due to degeneration. Secondly, it flattens the extra adipose tissue over the back and allows a shorter needle in most patients. A regular AP radiograph of the lumbar spine obtained before the procedure provides details of degenerative disease. Additionally, it is helpful to tilt the tube cranially by 10-15 degrees to align with the spinous process, mainly in older patients who have a reduced inter-spinous distance by degenerative disease. The prone position allows keeping the needle hub directly over the needle tip. It removes the parallax. A cross-table lateral view can confirm the depth and trajectory of the needle if a biplane camera is not available.

**Prone Oblique Approach:**The patient in the oblique lateral position and the spinous processes are not midline. The inter-laminar and inter-spinous spaces appear wider than in the prone approach. Many radiologists favor this approach as patients with comorbidities better tolerate this position; however, the trajectory of the needle is difficult to assess on the lateral view.

**Lateral Approach:**A lateral decubitus position is a preferred position**i**f the patient can't lie on their stomach because of obesity, backache, respiratory discomfort, shoulder pain, or medical conditions such as high blood pressure. The disadvantage is that this requires a newer biplane camera unit that is not universally available. Mobile single plane C-arm serves the same purpose, instead of newer biplane machines.

It is vital to make the wheal right at the site of entry. For example, a small metallic object or the tip of a needle marks the entry site with the help of fluoroscopy. Lidocaine HCL, 1% concentration, is injected using a 25 gauge needle for several millimeters into the subcutaneous tissue to create a wheal. After numbing the skin, local lidocaine via a 3.5 inch 25 gauge spinal needle is injected to gradually numb the deep fascia, muscles, and ligaments, periosteum under fluoroscopic guidance after confirming that the needle is not within the dura. Combining 1 ml of bicarbonate with 4-5 ml of lidocaine reduces the initial stinging of lidocaine. The LP needle should not be used to administer the lidocaine to avoid accidental injury to the spinal cord and nerves. Most physicians prefer 20 and 22 gauge needles with a length of 3.5 inches (8.8 cm). However, in some situations, such as individuals with obesity,  longer needles with a length of 14 cm (5.5 inches) are required. Longer needles are also difficult to steer. The larger gauge spinal needles, more than 22 gauge, are challenging to navigate. Only the introducer of the coaxial system with a smaller gauge such as 18 gauge is helpful to reach the thecal sac without penetrating. Then the 22 or 25 gauge needle is entered into the thecal sac via the introducer.The needle has a hub and beveled tip. The hub has a notch on the same side of the bevel. The notch of the needle acts as a marker and corresponds to the direction of the bevel. The sharp tip steers the needle. Hence, to direct the needle in the desired direction notch should be on the opposite side.

We insert the needle in the inter-laminar space, an oval area of radiolucency on either side of the spinous process. The entry site should be directly above the inter-laminar area and marked with a narrow tip surgical pen; if performed accurately, correct marking of the entry site dramatically reduces the procedure time and patient discomfort. We insert the needle with the notch on the opposite to the physician's side.Bracing hands against the patients' back during the needle advancement is essential to avoid patient movement and sudden jerks. We initially advance the needle every 1 cm before checking for the needle tip and the hub position on fluoroscopy and avoiding parallax as much as possible. Then we rotate the needle by 1/4th circle to ensure that the needle traverses in a straight line. The prone approach visualizes the entire length of the needle trajectory on the cross-table lateral view. So we do not hesitate to obtain a lateral radiograph whenever a biplane camera is not available. The deviation of the needle path from the desired course can result in repeat attempts and delays and patient discomfort.

Once the needle crosses the paraspinal muscles, we check the needle positioning every mm while the needle is advancing through ligamentum flavum. We frequently check for the CSF flow by removing the stylet. We recommend keeping the bevel parallel to the long axis of the nerves while penetrating the dura. After the dural puncture, you get the sensation of giving off. Then rotating the needle perpendicular to the nerves eases the CSF flow. It is important to remember that the stylet should be within the needle every time before advancing or rotating. Immediately deep into the ligamentum flavum, there is the thecal sac with variable amounts of epidural fat; hence the needle can quickly enter the thecal sac and impress the nerve, causing shooting pain in the extremity. We ask patients to speak up if they feel radiating focal sharp pain shooting down the extremity when the needle touches the nerve root. The pain should stop immediately after withdrawing the needle by 1 mm, and CSF should flow. If the pain does not subside even after removing for a few minutes, we recommend using a different approach.

The CSF pressure measured in a lateral decubitus position ranges between 6-20 cm of H20 in adults and greater in patients with obesity up to 25 cm H2O. If the patient is not in the lateral place, adding the length of the needle to the pressure is needed. The opening pressure of > 25 is diagnostic of idiopathic intracranial hypertension in an appropriate clinical scenario.