All patients on ART should have monitoring for the development of lipodystrophy, which can be performed by measuring abdominal girth, hip, and mid-upper-arm circumferences. Monitoring body weight and body mass index is of the utmost importance as identification, and early intervention is likely more effective than reversing fat accumulation.

The diagnosis of HIV-associated lipodystrophy is based on the characteristic physical appearance of the patient. Due to the increased incidence of metabolic abnormalities in patients with HIV-associated lipodystrophy, lipid profile and glucose tolerance should be evaluated, ideally before the initiation of antiretroviral therapy, and repeated every six months. Hemoglobin A1c may be useful; however, it may underestimate hyperglycemia due to increased red blood cell turnover in HIV infection. Liver and kidney function tests are necessary at regular intervals as well.

Objective evaluation of fat accumulation/loss can be obtained by radiographic imaging such as computed tomography, dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry, or magnetic resonance imaging; however, they have not been shown to be more sensitive than patient self-report and physical examinations, especially given the added cost of these tests.

**Recommended evaluation and monitoring strategies for HIV-associated lipodystrophy include:**

- Waist Measurement

- An abdominal circumference greater than 102 cm for men and 88 cm for women is considered abnormal and should warrant further evaluation for fat accumulation.

- Serial weight and body mass index (BMI) measurements

- This is particularly helpful when compared to an increased waist circumference.

- Routine fasting lipid profile

- Both lipoatrophy and lipohypertrophy have been associated with elevated triglycerides and decreased high-density lipoprotein cholesterol.
- Fasting lipid profiles should be checked prior to initiating antiretroviral therapy and annually thereafter.

- Routine testing for glucose metabolism