**Bacterial Keratitis**

For bacterial keratitis, patients are started on fortified topical antibiotics empirically until culture reports are available. Fortified cefazolin 5% or vancomycin and fluoroquinolones or tobramycin or gentamicin give complete coverage against both gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. For keratitis caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), topical vancomycin is the drug of choice.

Pseudomonas Keratitis: Direct smears on Grams staining shows gram-negative rods and culture grows Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The patient is started on topical fluoroquinolones hourly. Treatment is modified once the culture and sensitivity report is available. Oral doxycycline is added to halt the progression of collagenolysis.

Nocardia Keratitis:  Corneal smears are subjected to routine Gram staining and 1% acid-fast staining.

Atypical mycobacteria: Ziehl Neelsen stain is used to identify the organism in smears. Topical fortified amikacin (4%) is the treatment of choice.

**Protozoal Keratitis**

A clinician needs to have strong suspicion for making a diagnosis of Acanthamoeba keratitis based on the history and clinical features. Previous topical steroid use might increase the yield of the organism in smears and culture; however, it worsens the prognosis. As the clinical picture often mimics viral keratitis, pre-treatment with antivirals may alter the clinical picture. In Gram staining, the cysts are visible as multiple double-walled cysts with inner polyhedral lining. 10% KOH-mount and 10% KOH with 0.1% calcofluor white also demonstrate Acanthamoeba cysts. Non-nutrient agar seeded with E.coli is used for culture. Biguanides and pentamidine are the mainstays of treatment.Pseudomonas aeruginosa) for the development of acanthamoeba keratitis has also been described.

**Keratitis by Oomycete**

Pythium insidiosum on Gram staining and 10% KOH with 0.1% calcofluor white show fungus-like broad aseptate filaments with ribbon-like folds.Pythium insidiosum and may help in early diagnosis.****(500mg daily for 3 days in a week) was found to be effective in treating keratitis in the earliest report.Pythium keratitis was further substantiated by Bagga et al. in his study with these agents over 3 years.Pythium insidiosum to minocycline and tigecycline was also fairly acceptable.

**Fungal Keratitis**

Microsporidial keratitis: Microsporodial spores stain well with Grams, silver, and 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) with 0.1% calcofluor white. The keratoconjunctivitis variant has a self-limiting course.

Filamentous fungal keratitis: Routine microscopy with 10% KOH alone or 10% KOH with 0.1% calcofluor white reveal hyaline/ pigmented, septate (Aspergillus, Fusarium)/ aseptate (Mucor, Rhizopus) fungal filaments. Preferred culture media for fungal growth are Saboraud's and potato dextrose agar. Topical natamycin****(5%) is the drug of choice for filamentous fungal keratitis.****(1%) is added as an adjunct to natamycin inAspergillus keratitis, not responding to natamycin alone. Voriconazole is not given as a primary drug for fungal keratitis.Fusarium keratitis.

**Viral Keratitis**

Dual staining with Rose-Bengal and fluorescein stain is a very important clinical tool to make a diagnosis of HSV epithelial disease. Fluorescein stain makes the dendrites and geographical ulcers more evident by staining the base of ulcer, and Rose-Bengal stains the cells at the margin of the ulcer, which are loaded with viruses. The diagnosis of epithelial disease is mostly clinical.****and oral (acyclovir 400 mg 5 times daily ) is given for the initial three days.

The diagnosis of HZO is clinical. The skin lesions associated with corneal dendritiform lesion is very characteristic. Unlike the chickenpox lesions, here, the skin lesions are in the same stage. The ends of dendritiform lesions are tapering, unlike in dendritic ulcers in HSV epithelial keratitis. The pseudodendrites are because of swollen epithelial cells, so they do not take up fluorescein stain. Oral acyclovir (800 mg, 5 times daily for 1 week) is very effective in its treatment in the early stages.

Adenoviral keratitis: The diagnosis of adenoviral keratoconjunctivitis is primarily clinical. However, wherever in doubt, it can be confirmed using PCR techniques. Considering the contagious nature of the disease, maintenance of personal hygiene has a very important role in preventing its transmission. Topical 1% povidone-iodine, in combination with 0.1% dexamethasone, has shown good results.

**Non-infectious Keratitis**

**Local Causes**

Patients with ulcers related to trichiatic lashes, entropion, or distichiasis need early correction of pathology. The diagnosis is largely clinical. Either electrolysis of eyelash hair root follicle, lid everting procedures, or lid splitting procedures, respectively, need to be done without compromising the gross anatomical relationship.

Shield ulcer is an ulcer due to the mechanical effect of giant papillae. Diagnosis is obvious on lid eversion. Topical steroids, along with topical cyclosporine**(**0.05%) and lubricants, are sufficient enough to control the disease.

Patients with corneal ulcers related to sulcus subtarsalis foreign body needs immediate removal of a foreign body under topical anesthesia either on slit lamp or under the microscope in the operating room.

**Systemic Causes**

Rheumatoid arthritis: The diagnosis is largely by serological methods; however, clinical findings like finger deformities are suggestive. RA factor and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies (anti-CCP) are important serological markers.

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis: The clinical features are suggestive; however, the serological test is diagnostic. C-ANCA is the serological marker.

Xerophthalmia: Vitamin A supplementation, as per WHO guidelines, need to be done at the earliest.

Some patients do require surgical interventions, like the application of tissue adhesives, amniotic membrane transplantation, patch graft, or penetrating keratoplasty, to maintain the integrity of the globe. This holds for all keratitis reaching a fate of severe corneal thinning or perforation. Therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty is planned for limbus threatening infective keratitis.

Apart from various diagnostic and treatment modalities discussed above, now nanoparticles and antimicrobial peptides are being devised for sustained and targeted drug delivery.