Obstructive hydrocephalus develops from a block in CSF pathways. The obstruction most commonly occurs at the foramina Monro, the aqueduct of Sylvius, the fourth ventricle, and foramen magnum, but most tumors with a significant size can obstruct at any point of CSF pathways. Some of the most frequent tumors associated with hydrocephalus are ependymoma, subependymal giant cell astrocytoma, choroid plexus papilloma, craniopharyngioma, pituitary adenoma, hypothalamic or optic nerve glioma, hamartoma, and metastatic tumors. Posterior fossa tumors are commonly associated with the development of hydrocephalus.

Communicating hydrocephalus is caused by impaired absorption of CSF. The most common causes are post hemorrhagic or post-inflammatory changes. Subarachnoid hemorrhage accounts for one-third of these cases by blocking CSF absorption at the arachnoid granulations.

Hypersecretory hydrocephalus is caused by an overproduction of CSF, most likely due to plexus papilloma or rarely a carcinoma. These tumors are more common in children.

Normal-pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) is a type of communicating hydrocephalus with increased incidence in older age with a not fully understood pathogenesis. Impaired CSF dynamics cause it with slight or no increase in intracranial pressure (ICP).

Prenatal hemorrhage or infection can cause hydrocephalus. Some genetic forms of hydrocephalus may not be evident at birth. Almost 10% of all cases of hydrocephalus in newborns is due to brainstem malformation with stenosis of the cerebral aqueduct. Dandy-Walker malformation will be the cause in 2-4% of hydrocephalus in this age group. Arnold-Chiari type 1 and type 2, agenesis of the foramen of Monro, Bickers-Adams syndrome are common syndromes in newborns with hydrocephalus.