Cyclobenzaprine is a commonly used medication to manage muscle spasms. While the drug is effective, it has many adverse effects; healthcare providers must understand proper indication, dosage, and toxicity management. Ideally, clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) initiate cyclobenzaprine for appropriate indication. Similarly, the dentist may prescribe cyclobenzaprine for pain associated with temporomandibular joint disorders. Pharmacists should ensure proper dosing and report to clinicians in case of drug interactions. Nurses should monitor the pain levels and counsel the patient on adherence to therapy.

In case of acute cyclobenzaprine overdose, emergency medicine physicians and triage nurses should stabilize the patient. If EKG demonstrates QRS prolongation, the clinician should initiate sodium bicarbonate therapy. In severe overdose, ventricular arrhythmias and seizures may require MICU-level of care under the supervision of a critical care physician. As discussed above, the clinician should consider contacting the poison control center in refractory cases. A psychiatrist consult is required for deliberate poisoning of cyclobenzaprine.

As illustrated above, multiple healthcare providers manage the patient on cyclobenzaprine therapy; hence, clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), specialists, physical therapists, pharmacists, nurses, and other healthcare providers should collaborate closely. The clinicians should use the communication tool SBAR (situation, background, assessment, and recommendation) to improve patient safety.

A study on patients suffering from back pain concluded that clinicians could contribute to pain management through pharmacotherapy, red flag screening, and reassurance; physical therapists could play a crucial role in general exercise and motivation to stay active, and occupation therapists can focus on disability assessment. Thus an interprofessional team involving clinicians, physical therapists, and occupational therapists can significantly improve patient care.