**Respiration**

At rest, the pelvic floor maintains a cupuliform shape resembling the respiratory diaphragm and on contraction, the pelvic floor ascends anterosuperiorly (toward the pubis) and while on relaxation, it moves in a posteroinferior direction (toward the sacral bone and the ischium) with a displacement of about 3 cm. During this action, the coccyx undergoes anterosuperior and posteroinferior motion. The pubococcygeal line is measured between the pubic symphysis and the coccyx, while the anorectal angle is considered as the angle between the posterior margin of the rectum and the line running through the central axis of the anal canal. Both of these parameters can be measured using MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) of the pelvis. In healthy patients, the base of the bladder, the upper third of the vagina, and the peritoneal cavity must be on or adjacent to the pubococcygeal line, with the anorectal angles cranial or adjacent to the previously mentioned line. When the pelvic floor contracts, the viscera ascend and the anorectal angle becomes acute. The pelvic floor supports the male and female viscera and the rectum, allowing for optimal contraction. With contraction and relaxation, the musculature creates a series of pressure changes that assist the viscera in their respective functions. A proper contraction of the pelvic floor also allows sexual function and sexual activity. When the respiratory diaphragm is lowered by inhalation, the pelvic diaphragm moves caudally, thus allowing the respiration to encounter less resistance; while the opposite movement occurs during exhalation. Hence, the pelvic diaphragm influences breathing with its contractile status.

**Posture**

Another important function of the pelvic floor is the postural one, again together with the respiratory diaphragm and abdominal muscles. Muscle groups able to hold the thoracolumbar and lumbosacral column must be activated to allow twist movements of the trunk, to stand up or sit or simply to stay in orthostatism, and to cough and sneeze. Specifically, all the abdominal muscles (respiratory diaphragm, transverse and oblique), the pelvic floor (and other connected muscles such as obturators, piriformis, adductors), and the large gluteus must be simultaneously activated. There is myofascial continuity among the muscular mentioned districts. The diaphragm muscle, through the transverse muscle and the fascia, transversalis anteriorly, and the thoracolumbar fascia posteriorly merges with the anterior margin of the pelvic floor (pubis) and the posterior one (sacrum). The rectus abdominis and its fascial system merge at the level of pubic symphysis with the adductor muscles, both activated by the contraction of the pelvic floor. The pelvic floor is in anatomical continuity with the large gluteus, also involved in the pelvic contractions. Pelvic floor contractions allow the distribution of loads from the trunk and upper limbs to the lower limbs and vice versa during walking and in orthostatism, thanks to the mentioned anatomical connections. The same foot position is affected by the muscular tension of the pelvic floor, which affects the tone of the rotator muscles of the hip; the pelvic floor tension will affect the behavior of the adjacent contractile districts.