**Adverse Effects**

**Peripheral Nervous System**

The incidence of peripheral neuropathy, which presents in a typical glove and stocking distribution, and proceeds from a distal to a proximal fashion, with vincristine, is known to range between 35 to 45%.

Autonomic neuropathy, which presents with constipation, ileus, and abdominal cramps, may require pre-emptive laxatives.

Autonomic effects on the cardiovascular system may present as arterial hypertension or hypotension and orthostatic hypotension.

**Central Nervous System**

Acute or subacute encephalopathy, seizures, visual loss can occur with the administration of these drugs.

Jaw pain with a neuropathic component, which is non-responsive to traditional pain medications has been reported with the use of vincristine. There is a hypothesis that this pain results from the fifth cranial nerve (trigeminal nerve) involvement.

Vincristine induced vocal cord palsy, which is a potentially reversible phenomenon and subsides with the cessation of the drug, has also been reported in the literature.

**Hematological Toxicity**

Vincristine is usually a bone marrow sparing agent.

**Renal Toxicity**

Vinblastine and its active metabolite desacetylvinblastine, vincristine, and vindesine have a low renal excretion (between 10 to 15%).

**Hepatic Toxicity**

Since vincristine is primarily metabolized in the liver, dose adjustments are recommended with hepatic dysfunction with hyperbilirubinemia, particularly in cases with an elevation of the direct bilirubin fraction.

**Pulmonary Toxicity**

Acute dyspnoea and bronchospasm may occur with the concurrent use of vincristine and vinblastine with mitomycin-C.

**Gastrointestinal Toxicity**

Vinorelbine and its metabolites are associated with chemotherapy-induced autonomic neuropathy which may present with constipation and urinary retention, through activation of the muscarinic receptors.

**Cardiovascular Toxicity**

Apart from the cardiovascular autonomic effects which present as disturbances in the hemodynamic parameters, these drugs have also correlated with cardiac ischemic pain presenting with electrocardiographic abnormalities and myocardial infarction.

**Local Effects**

Vincristine and vinblastine are known to act as vesicants and cause chemotherapy-associated extravasation.

Recommendations include caution against the intramuscular, subcutaneous, and intraperitoneal use of vinca alkaloids. A bolus injection is recommended whenever possible, due to the risks associated with local administration. Local reactions related to the injection include erythema, pain, and discoloration.

**Other Rare Adverse Effects**

Alopecia is a rare adverse effect of these drugs.