**Pediatric**

The persistence of the rooting reflex commonly with other primitive reflexes after 4 to 6 months may suggest congenital cerebral palsy. If the rooting reflex persists, the infant may have drooling and a tongue that sits too forward in the mouth. The child will have difficulty swallowing and chewing because of the dysfunctional tongue. Other clinical manifestations include hypotonic or hypertonic muscle tone, asymmetric posture and gait, and delayed developmental milestones. The persistence of primitive reflexes in infancy may also be an early sign of cognitive-developmental delay or autism. Patients with cerebral palsy often develop other conditions, such as learning disability, seizures, and visual or hearing impairment.

The trigeminal cranial nerve (CN 5), which is responsible for facial sensation, is involved in the rooting reflex. In an infant with an intact CN 5, stroking or touching the corner of his or her mouth will initiate the rooting reflex. If the infant has CN 5 dysfunction, it may result in the absence of the rooting reflex. Congenital trigeminal anesthesia is a rare condition but can significantly impact multiple aspects of neonatal health.

**Adult**

Rooting reflexes can be observed in adult patients with frontal lobe pathology. They often present with other primitive reflexes that are normally suppressed by the frontal lobe of the cerebral cortex. Patients with a frontal lobe lesion are also incapable of making decisions, have different personalities, and are not able to control emotions or maintain social interactions. Causes of frontal lobe diseases include head trauma, frontal lobe tumor, multiple sclerosis, and dementia. Frontotemporal dementia most commonly occurs in patients between the ages of 45 and 65.