an interprofessional approach to neck infections

Deep neck infections are not uncommon in clinical practice. The problem is that they are sometimes missed, and this can have an enormous morbidity on the patient. Deep neck infections cannot only compromise the airways but also spread vertically to the brain, spinal cord, and the mediastinum. Because the majority of patients initially present to the primary care worker, it is important to have a streamlined process to ensure that the diagnosis is made promptly and the condition treated. Data from infections in the pediatric population reveal that by following clinical guidelines one can achieve a very low morbidity.

- Radiologist to help determine the location and extent of the infection, and even help with drainage

- ENT and/or thoracic surgeon to help with debridement

- Laboratory technologist to identify the organisms involved

- Anesthesiologist in case an airway is required

- Infectious disease expert on determining the choice of antibiotics

- Nurses to help monitor the patient’s vital signs, educate the family, and ensure infection precautions

- Pharmacists to help follow the different types of medications and prevent drug interactions

- Dietitian consult as the patient may not be able to eat and may require tube feedings

**Outcomes**

Since most deep neck infections are considered surgical emergencies, there are no randomized trials to determine the best procedure, antibiotic, or duration of treatment. The only definitive data is that surgery is recommended in almost all patients with neck abscess. The earlier the surgery, the better the outcomes.