Lumbar sympatholysis can be an effective treatment for individuals suffering from chronic pain in the lower extremity as a result of various causes. Sympathectomy can be performed by chemical neurolysis, radiofrequency ablation, or surgically with variations in technique. The most common indications for this procedure include lower extremity complex regional pain syndrome (formally known as RSD and Causalgia), vascular insufficiency in the leg, phantom limb pain, erythromelalgia (a rare condition causing episodic burning pain and redness usually in the feet, less commonly in the upper extremities and face or ears likely due to postganglionic sympathetic dysfunction as well as hypersensitivity of C-fibers resulting in abnormal skin perfusion and arteriovenous shunting), post-herpetic neuralgia, and hyperhidrosis. This activity reviews the lumbar sympatholysis technique, anatomy, and associated clinical considerations. It also highlights the role of the healthcare team in improving outcomes for patients who undergo lumbar sympatholysis.

**Objectives:**
- Review the indications for lumbar sympatholysis.
- Describe the common techniques in regards to lumbar sympatholysis.
- Describe the appropriate evaluation of the potential complications of lumbar sympatholysis.
- Review interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to ensure the appropriate selection of candidates for lumbar sympatholysis and to improve outcomes in patients undergoing lumbar sympatholysis.