The standard of care for VLUs relies on two strategies: compression therapy and direct wound management.

There are numerous conservative alternatives aimed at improving venous hypertension, such as medical compression, intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC), manual lymphatic drainage, and extracorporeal shockwave therapy. Compression therapy is the most practical, effective, and cost-conscious intervention for the treatment of VLUs.

IPC can be used in addition to compression therapy or in patients who are unable to tolerate the latter.

As an adjunct to compression therapy, treatment with pentoxifylline or micronized purified flavonoids is an effective ancillary measure.

Regarding direct ulcer interventions, these involve cleansing, debridement, infection control, application of dressings, and topical substances.

Although VLUs are often colonized, frank infections are less common. If infection is suspected in a new-onset painful ulcer with erythema, tenderness, warmth, and systemic signs (e.g. fever, chills), systemic antibiotic therapy should be considered. Tissue culture (as opposed to a swab) must be performed in fetid, purulent, or non-healing wounds to guide antimicrobial therapy.

Dressings maintain adequate moisture, offer physical protection, promote granulation and reepithelization. There are numerous absorptive (e. g. alginates), moisture-retaining (e. g. hydrocolloids), and antiseptic materials (e. g. silver) that can be applied to dry, exudative, and infected wounds, respectively.  Topical treatments are typically used as antiseptics (e. g. cadexomer-iodine), antimicrobials (e. g. silver sulfadiazine), and debriding agents (e. g. collagenase, hydrogels).

In a Cochrane meta-analysis, sucralfate and silver dressings were the most highly ranked treatments. Interestingly, the usage of silver dressings increased the probability of healing (RR 2.43, 95% CI 1.58 to 3.74) when compared with nonadherent dressings.

Adjunctive therapies are recommended for non-improving ulcers after 4 to 6 weeks of standard treatment.

Invasive management intends to obliterate or remove incompetent veins through various techniques, such as sclerotherapy, open vascular surgery, radiofrequency, and endovenous procedures. These are often reserved for advanced cases when standard therapies are insufficient.