As mentioned, an adequate interplay between host biology, reduction technique, and surgical stabilization is the key to achieve fracture healing. The development of a nonunion is multifactorial. Factors that contribute to the development of a nonunion include the following, listed here with known risk factors

**Fracture and Injury-Related Factors**

- High-energy fractures with significant comminution

- Type of fracture (closed/open)

- Location and pattern (highly comminuted or butterfly fragments)

- The extent of soft tissue injury

- Extensive soft tissue and periosteal stripping increase the risk of nonunion. The inner cambium layer of the periosteum contains osteoprogenitor cells that can contribute to fracture healing. 
- Reamed intramedullary nails cause injury to the endosteal blood supply. The periosteal blood supply has been shown to increase following reaming.

- Bone loss and fracture gaps (greater than 3 mm)

- Lack of cortical continuity

- Infection

**Biology and Patient-Related Factors (Local and Systemic)**

- Smoking (The most significant risk factor)

- Nutritional status

- Diabetes

- Inadequate blood supply

- Vitamin D deficiency

- Renal insufficiency

- Medications (steroids, NSAIDs, opiates, etc.)

**Surgical-Related Factors**

- Inadequate stabilization

- Biological factors are dependent on the patient host and surgical technique.

- Host factors that can affect the biology at the fracture site include the presence of underlying comorbidities (e.g. diabetes), medication (e.g. steroids, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs).

- Nonunions can also be caused by local infection.