The incidence of major complications like MI, stroke, and death is variable in various angioplasty procedures. Incidence is low (< 1%) in cardiac and femoral artery procedures but higher for carotid and abdominal aortic procedures. Individual patient's risks should be assessed and evaluated using the standard morbidity scoring scales like the Revised Cardiac Risk Index ( RCRI) or American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score. Predictors of worse outcomes are moribund statuses, cirrhosis, severe anemia, shock, Acute MI in the last 24hrs, renal insufficiency, cardiomyopathy, aortic or mitral valvular disease, heart failure NYHA Class III or IV, hypertension, and unstable angina.

**Local Complications:**Vascular complications are associated with about 6% of all angioplasty procedures.

**Bleeding:**The inability to obtain hemostasis can result in hematoma formation, pseudoaneurysm, and retroperitoneal bleeding. Bleeding complications are more common in women than men and more common in the femoral approach than the radial.

**Thrombosis:**Less common than bleeding, but occurs more with a brachial approach than femoral.

**Systemic Complications**

**Atheroembolism:**This occurs due to local trauma of arterial walls and disruption of atheromatous plaque in the transit arteries (femoral artery or aorta), which may result in small cholesterol emboli dislodging into the systemic circulation. Clinical manifestations include livedo reticularis, digital ischemia, acute kidney injury (AKI) with eosinophilic casts on urinalysis, cerebral infarction, and Hollenhorst plaques in the retina. Treatment is primarily directed at risk factor reduction and endovascular treatment for larger lesions. The overall prognosis depends on the degree of underlying atherosclerosis.

**Acute Kidney Injury:**Multiple factors may contribute to the AKI, including contrast exposure, atheroembolism, or reduced perfusion. Prevention with pre-procedural IV hydration and aggressive risk factor modification for atheroembolic events is advisable.

**Arrhythmia:**Percutaneous coronary interventions can result in a variety of conduction disturbances and arrhythmias due to irritation of the conduction system by the catheter. These include ventricular fibrillation, atrial arrhythmias such as atrial flutter or fibrillation with RVR, bradycardia (most often after injection of contrast material into the RCA), conduction disturbances (previous bundle branch block may develop into complete heart block or asystole). These are managed according to the ACLS algorithm for each type of arrhythmia.

**Infection:**Vascular procedures require strict sterile technique. Any infection of the access site or devices may result in severe bacteremia and sometimes even sepsis, depending on the microbial burden. All personnel involved in the procedure are required to wear masks, caps, gowns, gloves, and eyewear with strict handwashing and hygiene. All personnel is required to have Hepatitis B vaccinations. These have been emphasized in the updated 2006 Infection control guidelines by the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions.

**Radiation Exposure:**Serial imaging required for angioplasty procedures results in substantial radiation exposure, which theoretically increases the risk of secondary malignancies commonly myeloma, leukemia, thyroid, lung, breast, bone, and skin cancers. No clear epidemiologic studies document the association of particular cancers associated with angioplasty procedures, but future studies directed at data regarding angioplasty procedures and secondary malignancies are needed.

**Hypersensitivity reactions:**These are more common after drug-eluting stent placements, with the overall incidence being low.