Alexander disease most often affects infants and children. Patients usually present with macrocephaly, developmental delay, progressive quadriparesis, and seizures.

Traditionally, Alexander disease has been divided into four subtypes, which include neonatal, infantile, juvenile, and adult.

- Neonatal form: It is characterized by seizures, increased intracranial pressure, and severe motor dysfunction. Of note, unlike infantile, ataxia and hyperreflexia are not present. Death usually occurs within the first couple of weeks to years.

- Infantile form: The onset is before age 2, accounting for approximately 42 percent of all cases. This form is associated with seizures, ataxia, hyperreflexia, hydrocephalus, megalencephaly, feeding difficulties, and spasticity. It is possible to detect progressive psychomotor retardation with changes in developmental stages. Death typically occurs within weeks or several years of life.

- Juvenile form: Onset is usually slower than infantile form and is normocephalic. It is characterized by bulbar and pseudobulbar signs, such as speech difficulties and swallowing. Patients may also have spasticity and ataxia. A progressive worsening of intellectual faculties and epilepsy can be found. The survival is variable with death, which may occur in early adolescence or up to 20-30 years.

- Adult form: It is the least common form of the disease and has variable features. Some of these features, including pseudobulbar and bulbar signs (dysphasia, dysarthria, dysphonia), progressive ataxia, quadriparesis, dysmorphic features, and dysautonomia.

Alexander disease classification was revised in 2011 based on statistical analysis.

- Type 1: This type is typically more severe, with a median survival of 14 years. It is characterized by seizures, early-onset, macrocephaly, encephalopathy, motor delay, failure to thrive, and the typical imaging features (described below).

- Type 2: This type is usually less severe, with the median survival of 25 years. It is characterized by autonomic dysfunction, bulbar symptoms, eye movement abnormalities, lacking neurocognitive deficits, and the atypical neuroimaging features (described below).