# Introduction

Enzyme immunoassays (EIAs) use the catalytic properties of enzymes to detect and quantify immunologic reactions. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is a heterogeneous EIA technique used in clinical analyses.

In the most common approach to using the ELISA technique, an aliquot of sample or calibrator containing the antigen (Ag) to be quantified is added to and allowed to bind with a solid-phase antibody (Ab). After washing, an enzyme-labeled antibody is added and forms a “sandwich complex” of solid-phase Ab-Ag-Ab enzyme. Unbound antibody is then washed away, and enzyme substrate is added. The amount of product generated is proportional to the quantity of antigen in the sample.

Specific antibodies in a sample can also be quantified using an ELISA procedure in which antigen instead of antibody is bound to a solid phase. The second reagent is an enzyme-labeled antibody specific to the analyte antibody.

# Etiology and Epidemiology

Two different research teams simultaneously invented the direct ELISA; scientists Engvall and Perlman, and scientists Van Weemen and Schuurs. The ELISA was developed by the modification of the radioimmunoassay (RIA). This was done by conjugating tagged antigens and antibodies with enzymes rather than radioactive iodine 125. The new method was first employed in determining the levels of IgG in rabbit serum. Within the same year, scientists quantified human chorionic gonadotropin in urine using horseradish peroxidase. Since then, the ELISA method has been used in many different applications and has become a routine laboratory research and diagnostic method worldwide.

The first ELISA methodology involved chromogenic reporter molecules and substrates in generating observable color change that monitors the presence of antigen. Further advancement in the ELISA technique led to the development of fluorogenic, quantitative PCR, and electrochemiluminescent reporters to generate signals.

The latest development, in 2012, was an ultrasensitive enzyme-based ELISA that manipulates nanoparticles as chromogenic reporters. This technique can generate a color signal visible to the naked eye, with a blue color indicating positive results and red color indicating negative results. However, this method is qualitative and can determine only the presence or absence of an analyte and not its concentration.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

ELISAs are performed in polystyrene plates, typically 96-well plates coated to bind protein strongly.

There are four main general steps to completing an ELISA immunoassay. These steps are:

- Coating (with either antigen or antibody)

- Blocking (typically with the addition of bovine serum albumin [BSA])

- Detection

- Final read

Detection is carried out by adding a substrate that can generate a color. There are many substrates available for use in ELISA detection. However, the substrates most commonly used are horseradish peroxidase (HRP) and alkaline phosphatase (AP).

Between each of the above four steps is a “wash” of the plate using a buffer, such as phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and a non-ionic detergent, to remove unbound material. The wells are washed two or more times during each wash step, depending on the specific protocol.

In a usual ELISA protocol, a serial dilution of concentrations is placed in the wells of the plate. After the results are measured, a standard curve from the serial dilutions data is plotted with a concentration on the x-axis using a log scale and absorbance on the y-axis using a linear scale.

There are four major types of ELISA:

- Direct ELISA (antigen-coated plate; screening antibody)

- Indirect ELISA (antigen-coated plate; screening antigen/antibody)

- Sandwich ELISA (antibody-coated plate; screening antigen)

- Competitive ELISA (screening antibody)

**Direct ELISA**

Both direct and indirect ELISAs begin with the coating of antigens to the ELISA plates.

In a direct ELISA, the primary detection antibody binds directly to the protein of interest.

**Indirect ELISA**

The steps of the indirect ELISA are identical to the direct ELISA, except for an additional wash step and the types of antibodies added after the buffer is removed.

The indirect ELISA has a higher sensitivity when compared to the direct ELISA.

**Sandwich ELISA**

Unlike direct and indirect ELISA, the sandwich ELISA begins with a capture antibody coated onto the wells of the plate.

The antigen of interest is added to the plates to bind to the capture antibody and incubated for 90 minutes at 37^oC. The plate is rewashed, and the primary detection antibody is added to the plate and incubated for another 1 to 2 hours at room temperature, followed by a buffer wash. Then the secondary enzyme-conjugated antibody is added and incubated for another 1 to 2 hours. The plate is rewashed, and the substrate is added to produce a color change.

**Competitive ELISA**

The competitive ELISA tests for the presence of an antibody specific for antigens in the test serum.

# Diagnostic Tests

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays are applied in many diagnostic tests.

**Detect and Measure the Presence of Antibodies in the Blood**

- Autoantibodies (anti-dsDNA, anti-dsg1, ANA, etc.)

- Antibodies against infectious disease (antibacterial, antiviral, antifungal)

- Hepatitis A, B, C, HIV, etc.

**Detect and Estimate the Levels of Tumor Markers**

- Prostate-specific antigen (PSA)

- Carcinoembryonic Antigen (CEA)

**Detect and Estimate Hormone Levels**

- Luteinizing hormone

- Follicular stimulating hormone

- Prolactin

- Testosterone

- Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)

**Tracking Disease Outbreaks**

- Cholera

- HIV

- Influenza

**Detecting Past Exposures**

- HIV

- Lyme disease

- Hepatitis

**Screening Donated Blood for Possible Viral Contaminants**

- Anti-HIV-1/2

- Anti-HCV

- HBsAg

**Detecting Drug Abuse**

- Amphetamine

- Methamphetamine

- 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine

- Cocaine

- Benzoylecgonine

# Interfering Factors

Factors that can interfere with appropriate ELISA testing can occur at any phase of the testing process, beginning with specimen collection. The quality and integrity of the assay plate, coating buffer, capture antibody, blocking buffer, target antigen, detection antibody, enzyme conjugate, washes, substrate, and signal detection can all interfere with proper ELISA testing.

- Plate Assay: the shape and quality of the wells, the material of the plate, potential pre-activation, and even or uneven coating.

- Buffer: pH, contamination.

- Capture and detection antibody: incubation time, temperature, specificity, titer, affinity.

- Blocking buffer: cross-reactivity, concentration, contamination.

- Target antigen: conformation, stability, epitopes.

- Enzyme conjugate: type, concentration, function, cross-reactivity.

- Washes: contamination, frequency, volume, duration, composition.

- Substrate: quality/manufacturer.

- Detection: instrument-dependent factors.

- Reader/human error.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

Data gathered from ELISA tests can be quantitative, qualitative, or semiquantitative.

Once color changes are measured from the assay, the results are graphed either on paper or in software.

# Clinical Significance

ELISAs can be used in many settings, including rapid antibody screening tests for Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), detection of other viruses, bacteria, fungi, autoimmune diseases, food allergens, blood typing, presence of the pregnancy hormone hCG, laboratory and clinical research, forensic toxicology, and many other diagnostic settings.

In HIV testing, a blood or saliva specimen is collected for testing, typically using indirect ELISA-based tests.**,**Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV), which commonly infects the skin of children and young adults, can be detected by ELISA testing.

ELISA has also been used to detect desmogleins 1 and 3 and bullous pemphigoid antigen 180 autoantibodies implicated in pemphigus and bullous pemphigoid autoimmune blistering diseases, respectively.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

As with quantitative procedures, it is important to verify that the results of qualitative and semi-quantitative examinations are correct before reporting them to the requesting healthcare provider.

Positive and negative controls are recommended for many qualitative and semi-quantitative tests, including some procedures that use special stains or reagents and tests with endpoints such as agglutination or color change.

Keep the following in mind when using traditional controls for qualitative or semi-quantitative tests: test control materials in the same manner as testing patient samples; use a positive and negative control, preferably once each day of testing, or at least as often as recommended by the manufacturer; choose positive controls that are close to the cut-off value of the test, to be sure the test can detect weak positive reactions; for agglutination procedures, include a weak positive control as well as a negative control and stronger positive control.

Basic safety rules for laboratory conduct should be observed whenever working in a laboratory.

Protect all work surfaces with disposable absorbent bench top paper, discarded into biohazard waste containers weekly or whenever blood contamination occurs. Wipe all work surfaces weekly. All equipment should be regularly inspected for wear or deterioration. Equipment should be maintained according to the manufacturer’s requirements, and records of certification, maintenance, or repairs should be maintained for the life of the equipment.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

ELISA testing is an important part of medical care and scientific research. Collaboration between scientists, laboratory technicians, phlebotomists, clinicians, nurses, and other medical professionals is necessary for appropriate specimen collection, testing, interpretation, diagnosis, and effective patient education and treatment planning. ELISA technologies continue to grow and play a major role in clinical research allowing for the development of more diagnostic and screening tests. The continued evolution of ELISA testing is promising for the future of medicine and has improved early diagnosis of HIV and pregnancy detection.