Allopurinol is a relatively safe drug that has been used for over half a century. Still, recent studies in gout have shown significant underutilization of this agent and suboptimal dose use, insufficient to reach target serum uric acid concentrations in a considerable proportion of gout patients. A problem with allopurinol treatment for gout is therapy adherence. Emad Y. et al. found that the most common reason for lack of patient adherence to pharmacotherapy is: "patients wanting to lead a normal life."

Contrary to the common belief, recent studies have shown that allopurinol is safe in severe chronic kidney disease and can impede the progression of renal disease in patients with gout and chronic kidney disease.

There are, however, potential rare though severe adverse effects associated with allopurinol. The use of allopurinol requires management by an interprofessional healthcare team that includes clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), nurses, and pharmacists. Clinicians initiating allopurinol therapy should ensure no drug interactions and that xanthine oxidase inhibitor therapy is the optimal choice; if necessary, a pharmacist consult can assist in this evaluation. Pharmacists can also verify dosing and provide additional patient counsel regarding how to take the drug. The nursing team shall assist with verifying patient adherence and helping to monitor for adverse events and therapeutic effectiveness. All team members should document their observations in the patient's permanent health record, and be prepared to reach out to other team members when necessary, so alterations to the therapeutic regimen can be made. The best chance for allopurinol to have therapeutic success with minimal adverse events is via an interprofessional team approach. [Level 5]