The primary function of RNA is to create proteins via translation. RNA carries genetic information that is translated by ribosomes into various proteins necessary for cellular processes. mRNA, rRNA, and tRNA are the three main types of RNA involved in protein synthesis. RNA also serves as the primary genetic material for viruses. Other functions include RNA editing, gene regulation, and RNA interference. These processes are carried out by a group of small regulatory RNAs, which include small nuclear RNA, microRNA, and small interfering RNA.

**Small Nuclear RNA**

Small nuclear RNAs (snRNA) are non-coding RNAs that are responsible for splicing introns. The snRNAs join with proteins to form small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNP), which most commonly contain U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6 snRNA molecules.

**MicroRNA**

MicroRNAs (miRNA) are non-coding RNAs mainly involved in gene regulation. They are mostly processed from introns and are transcribed into primary miRNA from the host gene by RNA polymerase II. They are then modified by endonucleases, such as Drosha and Dicer into a mature miRNA. Studies have shown that miRNAs that bind to an untranslated region (3’UTR) on mRNAs suppress translation, while miRNA binding to promoter regions can upregulate transcription.

**Small Interfering RNA**

Small Interfering RNAs (siRNA) are double-stranded, non-coding RNAs that inhibit gene expression through RNA interference. They interfere with gene expression by degrading mRNA and preventing the translation of proteins. siRNAs form from long double-stranded RNAs with the assistance of Dicer. Once fully formed, siRNA binds to an RNA induced silencing complex (RISC) and cleaves mRNA through a catalytic RISC protein, Argonaute.