Sotalol is available both in oral and intravenous formulations. There is a dosage conversion between oral and intravenous sotalol. Oral sotalol 80 mg is equivalent to 75 mg of IV, and similarly, 160 mg oral is equivalent to 150 mg of IV. If infusing intravenously, the recommendation is to administer the drug slowly as a rapid infusion can cause hypotension.

The most effective dosage for preventing atrial fibrillation is 120 mg twice daily, depending on renal function. There is no statistically significant difference between intravenous and oral sotalol in different parameters like prolonging QT interval, atrial effective refractory period and right ventricular effective refractory period, sinus cycle length, and atrioventricular node relative and functional refractory periods.

**Use in****Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**Sotalol is excreted mainly through the kidneys. Therefore dose adjustment is required if the eGFR is less than 60 ml/min. The recommended initial dose of sotalol is 80 mg given twice daily if GFR is more than 60 ml/min, with the dose increased (generally allowing 2 to 3 days between dosing increments), up to 320 mg, given in 2 or 3 divided doses.

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no alteration in the clearance of sotalol in patients with hepatic impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Half-life decreases to 10 hours in pregnancy due to the increased glomerular filtration rate. Data show that sotalol should be avoided in pregnancy. Sotalol can be teratogenic and hence, is not often the first choice in pregnant females. Close fetal monitoring is necessary when used.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Sotalol is extensively excreted into breastmilk and has minimal safety data in breastfed infants. Other drugs are preferred to sotalol, especially while nursing a newborn or preterm infant.