Asterion is used only as a referral superficial anatomical landmark for neuronavigation, in addition to imaging modalities. It is more valuable in underdeveloped nations where advanced imaging techniques are not readily available.

A study was conducted on one hundred dried skulls to determine the reliability of the asterion as a landmark for the intracranial procedure. It was found to be positioned over the posterior fossa dura in only 32% of the right and 25% on the left. In 61% on the right and 66 % on the left, the asterion was located over the transverse or the sigmoid sinus. Thus a burr hole placed at the Asterion may open directly into the sinuses.

A study on one hundred skulls was conducted using a 2 mm drill bit perpendicular to the skull at the asterion. The distance of the asterion from the zygomatic process, the suprameatal crest, and the mastoid tip were studied. It was found to be located superficial to transverse sigmoid sinus junction in 87%, inferior in 11%, and superior in 2% of the skulls. The location and anatomical relations of the asterion might prove beneficial in microvascular trigeminal root decompression and petrosal approaches.

The asterion may also play a part in the placement of hearing implants. A study was conducted to find an alternative site for implantation of the floating mass transducer of a bone conduction hearing implant, which is ordinarily implanted on the mastoid. In patients with prior mastoid surgery or anatomical difficulties precluding appropriate placement of the mass transducer, an alternative method should be in place. A retrosigmoid approach was proposed, using pre-operative computed tomography scanning and avoiding the sigmoid sinus by targeting a point approximately 1.9 cm posterior and 1.7 cm inferior to the asterion, and 3.3 cm posterior and 2.1 cm superior to the mastoid notch.

Asterion meningiomas, although rare, arise at the junction of sigmoid and transverse sinuses, that is, the sinudural angle. Asterion meningiomas can be completely resected without complications. In a study on 7 patients, it was proposed that the non-dominant transverse/sigmoid sinus should be resected during these procedures, whereas more studies are needed to determine whether it is safe to resect a dominant transverse/sigmoid sinus.