**Posterior Pituitary/Renal Systems**

- The dehydrated state, an example of hyperosmolar plasma: When the body is dehydrated, there is less fluid in the plasma, making the plasma more concentrated. As a result of an increase in plasma osmolality, cells begin to have water flow out, and cells shrivel because they are now hypoosmolar compared to the surroundings. Neurons in the organum vasculosum terminalis and supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei of the thalamus act as osmoreceptors. When these neurons experience the stretch and negative pressure suction, which manifests as they shrink, they depolarize via transient receptor potential vanilloid (TRVP) cation channels. These channels increase the charge inside the cells and cause depolarization, which results in signaling the posterior pituitary to release antidiuretic hormone (ADH). ADH works at the renal collecting ducts and principal cells via the V2 receptors, which induce an increase in the intracellular cAMP. The increase in cAMP induces aquaporin two-channel insertion in the apical side of the plasma membrane, which creates a channel where water can be reabsorbed from the filtrate, leading to a reduced plasma osmolality and thus achieving homeostasis.

- The Hypo-Osmolar state: In this state, there is no stretch or negative pressure suction created in the cells responsible for osmoregulation. This state results in hyperpolarization of the cell and decreases ADH release from the posterior pituitary, allowing the kidneys to excrete more urine and increase the plasma osmolality back to the physiologic set point.

**Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone System (RAAS)**

Macula densa cells are present in the wall of the distal convoluted tubule of the kidney; their primary function is to sense the concentration of sodium chloride in the filtrate. Only two physiologic scenarios exist:

- The filtrate has a decreased NaCl concentration: The macula densa senses this, and it signals for the dilation of the afferent renal arterioles, which increases the hydrostatic pressure and increases the NaCl concentration. The macula densa also secretes prostaglandins, which signal the juxtaglomerular cells to release renin. Renin functions to convert angiotensinogen, made in the liver, to angiotensin 1 in the vasculature. Angiotensin 1 is inactive and will be converted to angiotensin 2 in the lungs by the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE).  

- Effects of angiotensin 2

- Signals the Posterior Pituitary to release ADH. See the mechanism above. 
- Contraction of vascular myocytes results in increased blood pressure, resulting in higher hydrostatic pressure, which increases filtrate production and filtrates NaCl concentration. 
- Angiotensin 2 increases sympathetic activity.
- Angiotensin 2 increases tubular NaCl reabsorption and Potassium and water excretion - the net result is an increased plasma NaCl concentration, which increases plasma osmolality.

- The filtrate has an increased NaCl concentration: In this scenario, the cells of the macula densa decrease their secretion of prostaglandins, which inhibits the RAAS pathway. See point 1 above.