A fat embolism can travel to most of the organs in the body. Fat embolism and fat embolism syndrome are multiorgan diseases that can damage the kidneys, heart, skin, brain, and lungs. Fat embolism typically manifests at around 24 to 72 hours after the initial insult.

**History**

The history should elicit the time and onset of symptoms. Also, since most cases of fat embolism and fat embolism syndrome are related to orthopedic trauma, the time and mechanism of the trauma and intraoperative maneuvers should be noted in the history.

Sickle cell disease and other forms of hemoglobinopathy can precipitate fat embolism syndrome. Patients should be asked about the history of sickle cell disease in family members as well as any complications of sickle cell diseases like acute chest syndrome, vaso-occlusive crises, or avascular necrosis of long bones.

History of drug ingestion or alcoholism that can trigger pancreatitis leading to fat embolism syndrome should also be clarified.

The symptoms in fat embolism and fat embolism syndrome are nonspecific. Patients might complain of the following:

- Pain related to bone fracture

- Nausea

- General weakness

- Malaise

- Difficulty breathing

- Headache

**Signs and Symptoms**

These include but is not limited to the following:

**Respiratory
**

- Tachypnea

- Tachycardia

- Diaphoresis

**Central nervous system**

- Agitation from hypoxia

- Restlessness

- Change in mental status

- Seizure

- Coma

**Skin
**

Petechial rash

**Eye
**

Retinal hemorrhage

**Physical Examination**

Examination of a patient with fat embolism syndrome should be very thorough. Particular attention should be paid to the general appearance of the patient.

**General appearance**

Most patients with fat embolism syndrome will be anxious, agitated and ill-looking.

**Respiratory system**

Assess for the presence of abnormal breath sound, work of breathing, and evidence of respiratory distress or impending respiratory failure.

**Cardiovascular**

The blood pressure and heart rate might be high in the beginning, but patients might suffer a cardiovascular collapse with ensuing hypotension

**Central nervous system**

Glasgow Coma Scale assessment (GCS). A GCS less than 8 is an indication to secure the airway and put the patient on mechanical ventilation. Symptoms involving the central nervous system in fat embolism syndrome is thought to arise from cerebral edema rather than from cerebral ischemia.

**Skin**

Usually, the presence of a petechial rash on the skin with all the risk above factors should alert the clinician about fat embolism syndrome.

**Eye**

A fundoscopic examination is necessary to check for the presence of retinal hemorrhage.