Complications following plastysmaplasty can be divided into early and late complications.

Early complications include hematoma, seroma, wound infection, marginal mandibular nerve injury/neuropraxia, cervical branch neuropraxia, great auricular nerve injury, wound infection, sialocele, and salivary fistulas.

Late complications include contour irregularities, asymmetrical fat removal, inadequate reduction, overcorrection, visible platysmal banding, and neck overskeletalization.

**Management of Complications**

Small hematomas can be drained percutaneously in the clinic. Still, significant expanding hematomas are a surgical emergency as they may cause airway compromise and skin flap necrosis. For this reason, they need to be expeditiously drained in the operating room and a continuous suction drain should be placed.

Marginal mandibular nerve injury or neuropraxia is the most common motor nerve injury and results in weakness of the ipsilateral lower lip due to denervation of the depressor anguli oris, depressor labii inferioris, and mentalis muscles. Re-exploration for marginal mandibular nerve injury is generally not indicated, as most of these injuries are traction injuries and resolve with time; they simply require regular follow up and reassurance. The use of botulinum toxin to weaken the contralateral lower lip muscles is a useful temporary measure while waiting for resolution of the neuropraxia.

Injury to the cervical branch of the facial nerve gives rise to a pseudoparalysis that mimics marginal mandibular nerve injury, as the platysma assists in the depression of the corner of the mouth and can also affect the ability of the patient to smile. These injuries can be differentiated from the marginal mandibular nerve injuries, as the patient will be able to evert the lip in pseudoparalysis because of functioning mentalis muscle. Full recovery occurs in the majority of these cases.

The great auricular nerve is the most commonly injured nerve in a neck-lift. Injuries to the GAN present as numbness around the pre-auricular region and ear lobe; sometimes injury can also lead to a painful neuroma and mass formation. Surgical exploration and excision of the neuroma are indicated in such cases. In many cases, sensation will return, but some hypesthesia often persists.

Persistent platysma bands can be treated non-surgically with the use of botulinum toxin or via re-excision and redraping of the neck skin. Contour irregularities can be corrected by fat grafting and redraping of the skin.