When obtaining a history from a patient with suspected chronic pelvic pain, there is often comorbid chronic pain — furthermore, possible signs and symptoms of allodynia or hyperalgesia, suggestive of central sensitization. The etiology of chronic pelvic pain can usually be determined by a full past medical and surgical history, as well as the patient's gynecological and labor history.

Chronic pelvic pain in women is often defined as persistent, noncyclic pain, but can also be cyclical. The patient's pain is located within the pelvis and has lasted greater than six months duration. The pain must also be unrelated to pregnancy.

The patient's history should include questions about precipitating and alleviating factors, including the association between menses and pain, urination, sexual activity, and bowel movements, and response to prior treatments. Pain may identify other areas where the patient experiences pain or may reveal a dermatomal distribution, suggesting a non-visceral source. Furthermore, the evaluation of mental health disorders should be completed, as well. Associated symptoms for patients with chronic pelvic pain include but are not limited to, gastrointestinal, urinary, sexual, and psychological, and menstrual symptoms. Also, impaired quality of life should be assessed. Patients with chronic pelvic pain can often experience motor or autonomic dysfunction.

Red flag findings that may indicate systemic disease include postcoital bleeding, postmenopausal bleeding or onset of pain, unexplained weight loss, pelvic mass, and hematuria. Physical examination, including a gynecological speculum and bimanual examination, and a full abdominal exam, should be completed. The external genitalia should be examined and an examination of the pelvic floor musculature for tenderness or hypertonicity should be done as well. On physical exam, evaluation for an adnexal mass, enlarged or tender uterus, lack of uterine mobility on bimanual exam should be completed. Pain upon palpation of the lumbar spine, sacroiliac joint, and pelvis should be noted.

For the Carnett test, the patient is asked to raise both of their legs off the exam table while in a supine position. The provider places their finger on the patient's painful abdominal area to determine whether the patient's pain increases with the legs are flexed, and the abdominal muscles have contracted. In myofascial pain, the patient is likely to experience more considerable pain with leg flexion, while visceral pain improves with leg flexion. Women with chronic pelvic pain have also been found to have up to five times more asymmetry of their iliac crest height and symphyseal levels.