# Continuing Education Activity

The human retina is the most metabolically expensive tissue in the human body. Processing visual input in the retina requires high quantities of arterial blood and, subsequently, venous drainage. The congregation of retinal venules forms the central retinal vein which flows into the cavernous sinus. The blockage of this venous drainage from the retina can be of 2 varieties: central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) or branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO). This activity describes the pathophysiology of BRVO and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Review the cause of branch retinal vein occlusion.
- Describe the pathophysiology of branch retinal vein occlusion.
- Summarize the treatment options for branch retinal vein occlusion
- Explain the pathophysiology of BRVO and the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

# Introduction

The human retina is the most metabolically expensive tissue in the human body. Processing visual input in the retina requires high quantities of arterial blood and, subsequently, venous drainage.

# Etiology

Branch retinal vein occlusion was first described by the German ophthalmologist Theodor von Leber in 1877. Since then, scientists have discovered that BRVO can have multiple underlying causes, including age, hypertension, diabetic retinopathy, or hypercoagulability.

# Epidemiology

Retinal venous occlusion (RVO) is the second most common retinal vascular pathology after diabetic retinopathy.

# Pathophysiology

The loss of vision in BRVO is caused by macular edema which can have multiple pathophysiologic mechanisms.

# Histopathology

Microscopic cross-section of the retinal vein will show a thickened, sclerotic vessel with a reduced diameter and reduced color saturation of the blood column.

# Toxicokinetics

Theories suggest increased acute phase reactants can lead to thrombus formation and subsequent BRVO, with C-reactive protein and pentraxin-3 being the most likely substances. Prolonged retinal ischemia in concert with inflammation and vascular dysfunction leads to documented increases in VEGF mRNA which can result in deleterious effects such as increased capillary permeability and neovascularization.

# History and Physical

Branch retinal vein occlusion is often asymptomatic. However, it may present with sudden-onset of painless vision loss or visual field defect correlating to the area of perfusion of the obstructed vessels. It is important to document a history of systemic hypertension, smoking, glaucoma, diabetes, or other systemic diseases and risk factors. Evaluation of patients for hypercoagulability may be beneficial. If the occlusion does not occur at an arteriovenous crossing, the possibility of underlying retinochoroiditis or retinal vasculitis should be ruled out. In patients with suspected BRVO, the blood pressure should be obtained and documented. The patient should also undergo a complete physical examination and systemic vascular workup including carotid doppler and transesophageal echocardiogram to rule out cardiovascular causes of vision loss.

# Evaluation

A complete dilated fundus examination including a slit lamp and indirect ophthalmoscopy exam to check for neovascularization should be performed. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the macula can also be used to check for macular edema. Early fundus features of BRVO on ophthalmoscopy include sectorial superficial retinal hemorrhages that rarely cross the horizontal raphe, cotton-wool spots, retinal edema, and dilated and tortuous retinal vein. Late features of BRVO on ophthalmoscopy include all of the signs mentioned above plus hard exudates, microaneurysms, sclerosed veins, telangiectatic vessels, collateral vascular shunt at the optic disc, narrowing and sheathing of the adjacent artery, vitreous hemorrhage, tractional retinal detachment, retinal neovascularization, optic disc neovascularization, and iris neovascularization.

Patients should have their fasting blood sugar, and hemoglobin A1C, lipid profile, complete blood count (CBC) with differential and platelets, PT/PTT, and ESR evaluated. It is appropriate to attain an intravenous (IV) fluorescein angiography after hemorrhage has cleared or sooner if neovascularization is suspected.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment for BRVO is the prevention of the complications that cause vision loss and treatment of those complications, primarily macular edema and neovascularization. The systemic risk factors should be optimized in consultation with the patient's internist. The 2 general approaches to treating BRVO are pharmacologic management or surgical intervention. Pharmacologic management of BRVO involves intravitreal injections of anti-VEGF therapy and/or corticosteroids. For anti-VEGF injections, one study showed patients with BRVO who were injected monthly with either 0.5 or 0.3 mg of ranibizumab versus those receiving sham injections showed greater than 15% improvement in best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) from baseline at 12 months.

The Branch Vein Occlusion Study (BVOS) established macular laser treatment as the standard of care for BRVO.

# Differential Diagnosis

Important differential diagnosis of BRVO includes diabetic retinopathy and hypertensive retinopathy. Diabetic retinopathy can be discerned from BRVO based on a few key features. Diabetic retinopathy is usually bilateral whereas BRVO is usually unilateral. Although both BRVO and diabetic retinopathy may present with dot blot hemorrhages and microaneurysms, only in diabetic retinopathy will extend across the horizontal raphe. Hypertensive retinopathy is the same; hemorrhages are not confined to a single sector, and the findings are usually bilateral.

# Prognosis

Branch retinal vein occlusion typically has a good prognosis: 50% to 60% of eyes have a final visual acuity (VA) of 20/40 or better even without treatment. One important prognostic factor for final VA appears to be the initial VA. Also, the extent of macular or foveal involvement in acute BRVO is an important factor in determining the prognosis. Patients with retinal ischemia at least 5-disc diameters in size have 36% chances of developing neovascularization of the retina or optic disc. Patients with retinal ischemia at least 5-disc diameters in size have a 60% to 90% chance of developing vitreous hemorrhage if laser photocoagulation is not performed.

# Complications

The primary complication of concern regarding BRVO is neovascularization. Patients with large areas of non-perfusion were found to have an increased risk of neovascularization.

Neovascularization of the iris occurs in 2% of patients. Patients may present with neovascularization may present with vitreous hemorrhage, floaters, loss of vision, retinal detachment, and glaucoma.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Given that systemic disorders such as hypertension and coagulation defects can cause BRVO, it is recommended that patients follow up with their primary care physicians for systemic evaluation and treatment. More important patients should be encouraged to stop smoking, maintain a healthy weight. and keep the blood glucose levels under control.