The prostate is an organ that functions in male fertility. It provides prostatic secretions to the ejaculate, composed of an alkaline solution and prostate-specific antigen, which liquefies the ejaculate. These prostatic secretions make up approximately 30% of the ejaculate fluid. The prostate is derived from the urogenital sinus and becomes stimulated by androgens.

The average prostate is approximately 33 grams in size.

The prostate enlarges due to testosterone exposure, and it continues to grow with age.

About 70% of men in their 60's and 80% of men 70 years or older have some level of benign prostatic hyperplasia.

The primary arterial supply to the prostate is from the internal iliac artery. The third branch of the internal iliac artery is the inferior vesical artery, of which the terminal branch is the prostatic artery. The prostatic artery is only about 1 cm long as it then splits into the capsular branch (which has perforating branches and surrounds the capsule) and the urethral branch (which enters the prostate at the 5 o'clock and 7 o'clock positions), supplying the median lobe while another branch turns distally, and supplies the periurethral tissue. There may also be contributing arterial branches from the middle hemorrhoidal and/or pudendal arteries near the prostatic apex.

The most critical anatomical landmark for TURP surgery is the verumontanum or "very," which represents the ejaculatory ducts. It is located posteriorly at 6 o'clock and is about 1 cm proximal to the external sphincter. The veru is the usual distal limit of resection except for very skilled surgeons due to its close proximity to the external sphincter muscle.

The external sphincter muscle is critical to postoperative continence and must not be injured during surgery as the internal sphincter is removed when performing a TURP procedure. The external sphincter is slightly tilted with the anterior edge (at 12 o'clock) leaning proximally or inwards toward the patient. This means that when resecting the roof of the prostate, great care should be taken not to remove tissue more distal than the very, which is directly opposite. This can be challenging as the veru is not visible when resecting the roof. Also, the prostatic tissue is relatively thin here, and there is a significant venous complex (the periprostatic venous plexus or Santorini's plexus) covering the anterior prostatic capsule, which can cause very troublesome bleeding if violated.