Methotrexate has a distinct mechanism of action regarding its use in chemotherapy and immunosuppression in autoimmune diseases. In cancer, methotrexate acts as an antifolate antimetabolite. Methotrexate is taken up into the cell by carriers called the human reduced folate carriers (SLC19A1), and it forms methotrexate-polyglutamate. Both the methotrexate and the methotrexate-polyglutamate inhibit the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase, which catalyzes the conversion of dihydrofolate into tetrahydrofolate, the active form of folic acid.

In autoimmune diseases, different mechanisms have involvement in choosing methotrexate as a drug of choice. It inhibits enzyme AICAR transformylase, leading to hindrance in Adenosine and Guanine metabolism, Adenosine accumulation; and due to anti-inflammatory action of adenosine, leads to repression of T-cell activation, down-regulation of B-cells, increasing activated CD-95 T cells sensitivity; and repression of methyltransferase activity, inhibition of the binding of beta-1 interleukin to its cell surface receptor.

Drug interactions- As methotrexate is highly plasma protein bound, any drug that displaces methotrexate from proteins can increase its blood levels.

Also, if any drug has effects on the renal clearance of methotrexate, its concentration may rise.

NSAIDs, salicylates, TMP, penicillin, warfarin, valproate, proton pump inhibitors, cyclosporin, cisplatin increases the risk of MTX toxicity in the blood; aminoglycosides, neomycin, probenecid reduces the absorption of MTX.

The most significant and serious interactions are with NSAIDs and PPIs since these are very common therapeutic choices.