In GI bleeding patients, whether upper or lower, the first step is assessing the severity of the blood loss, resuscitation, and proper monitoring of the condition. The management for unstable HP is started with supportive therapy with oxygen therapy, 2 IV bore-needle with fluid administration, prepare for blood transfusion. The next step is to identify and localize the bleeding source with imaging modalities followed by definitive therapy. The main goal for management is to eradicate the bleeding source.

For HP, many medications have been tested with no good results. Leaving the patient for only supportive therapy carries a 90% risk for mortality rate. The main two techniques include interventional radiology (IR) intervention or open surgery. The decision depends on the patient's clinical criteria and their presentation at the time of diagnosis. Mostly done, and the primary tool is an IR.

**Interventional Radiologist**

It is often performed in hemodynamically stable patients considered the initial management line and usually done in HP diagnosed through angiography. IR has a success rate of about 67% to 100% of the cases. Techniques include angiography with embolization via prosthetic material, balloon tamponade, or stent placement. Coil embolization is the most commonly used method which induces thrombosis within the aneurysmal vessels. Nevertheless, it can induce ischemia within the vessel if it has a poor collateral supply. IR intervention has a recurrence rate of 30% of bleeding following the embolization. Balloon tamponade and stent placement can be put as a bridge to perform elective surgery. No major complication was noticed with IR interventions other than femoral artery cellulitis in about 0.5%.

Failure of embolization may result from a failure to isolate the causative artery, spasm of the bleeding vessel, or the bleeding vessel's misidentification.

**Surgical**

Surgical interventions with laparotomy include distal pancreatectomy and/or splenectomy, central pancreatectomy, intracystic ligation of the blood vessel, aneurysm ligation, and bypass graft. They are usually considered in patients with :

- Hemodynamic instability and uncontrolled bleeding

- Negative angiographic results in highly suspicious cases

- Patients with a pancreatic abscess, gastric outlet obstruction, obstructive jaundice, or incapacitating pain.

- Hemorrhagic pseudocysts to remove the pseudoaneurysm and the pseudocyst.

- Failure of embolization and recurrent bleeding after embolization procedure.

- In severe cases, with or without pancreaticoduodenectomy.

In cases of the pseudocyst's poor anatomical position and If the resection is unfeasible, it is recommended to ligate the artery proximal and distal to the bleeding source. Alternatively, through cutting the drainage to the pseudocyst that enters the GI tract. Intraoperative US and pancreatoscopy might need to determine the source of bleeding and the extent of resection. Surgery has a success rate of 70% to 80%, with a risk of 10% to 50% mortality and a risk of recurrent bleeding to be 0% to 5%.

**Novel Therapy**

Several novel therapies include the endoscopic-guided US with or without doing cystogastrostomy using fibrin glue and histoacryl adhesives. These approaches provide a promising tool for management. The recurrence rate of bleeding remained low after this effective treatment. This approach gives a promising outcome, particularly in patients who do not show angiographic evidence and are allergic to contrast contraindication. Those who are poor candidates for surgery. The benefits and the safety still need to be studied.