Vaccines, a topic with renewed salience due to the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, are another medical product regulated by the FDA and known to have potential adverse reactions. Together with the CDC, the FDA operates the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). This system relies on voluntary reporting from healthcare providers to analyze post-licensure vaccine safety. Clinical trials evaluated by the FDA to grant licensure to a vaccine are rigorous and thorough, and they detect most complications. However, when a vaccine is administered on a larger scale, the expanded sample size and the ability for longer-term follow-up allow for the detection of adverse events not initially seen in clinical trials. For this reason, providers should report adverse vaccine reactions, however trivial they may seem. Although more mild reactions are reported voluntarily, per VAERS policy, healthcare providers must report any adverse event that might prohibit further dosing in the affected patient.

Even though it is not mandatory to report mild adverse reactions, doing so generates data useful to future public health research. As a dynamic database, VAERS generates nearly real-time statistics regarding adverse vaccine events. This dataset offers providers a prompt and economical means of analyzing vaccine safety. VAERS provides a rich data source that can be used in retrospective studies, sometimes leading to recall. One prominent example involved a new vaccine for Lyme disease. In 2001, an FDA panel convened to analyze purported associations between this vaccine and inflammatory arthritis. While they found no significant statistical correlation, their investigation prompted deeper statistical analysis of previously obtained VAERS data regarding the vaccine’s adverse reactions.

VEARS reporting has been instrumental in recording adverse events associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) vaccines. Although extremely rare, cases of anaphylaxis following the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine have been reported.