**Association with Posterior Triangle of the Neck**

The posterior triangle of the neck, located in the lateral cervical region, is an important anatomic location for surgeons and anesthesiologists. The contents of this anatomic region include the entire brachial plexus, cervical sympathetic ganglions, deep cervical lymph nodes, and the major vascular structures of the neck/upper extremity. Other nerves, such as the spinal accessory, phrenic, vagus, and cutaneous cervical nerves, course through the region. The posterior triangle of the neck forms from the sternocleidomastoid anteriorly, trapezius posteriorly, and clavicle as the base. The levator scapulae form part of the floor along with the splenius, scalenus, and anterior scalene muscles.

The location of the levator scapulae in the posterior triangle of the neck is pivotal when performing a cervical paravertebral block of the brachial or cervical plexuses utilizing a posterior approach. In the posterior approach to the brachial or cervical plexuses, a muscle-sparing needle trajectory is optimal to decrease pain and soft tissue injury associated with the procedure. The needle insertion can be between the levator scapula and trapezius muscles.

**Medial Angle**

The angle at the medial border, or spinovertebral angle, represents the insertion site of the levator scapulae. Research has noted that the right spinovertebral angle is greater than the left, and alteration of the angle may result in levator scapulae pathology from a directional change of the insertion site, possibly manifesting as neck stiffness.