Microdiscectomy complications range from iatrogenic injuries such as durotomy, nerve root injury, or instability, to recurrent disc herniations, hematoma, infections, or even other medical complications. Reported complication rates vary. The incidence of durotomy ranges from 0.7% to 4% in the literature but is undoubtedly higher in revision microdiscectomy cases.

Despite the benefits a microscope can add, many surgeons have been reluctant to adopt its use secondary to concerns regarding a potential increased risk of infection. Studies have confirmed that microscopes and surgical loupes, and headlamps can all be reservoirs of microorganisms.

**Complications pertaining to lumbar discectomy can be enumerated as:**

**Dural tear:**

Place a Patti neurosurgical sponge, and extend the laminectomy edges to expose the tear and primary repair with 5/0 non-absorbable suture. Use of biological glue**.**

A history of epidural steroid injections within 3 months of the surgery has a risk for intraoperative dural injury.

Excessive traction on the nerve while exposing the disc increases the risk of epidural bleeding and CSF leak.

**Iatrogenic Neuropraxia**.

**Epidural bleeding:**

- Compresses with Patti sponge for venous “lakes”.

- Use of hemostatic agents such as surgical and surgiflow.

**Vascular injury:**

- The reported incidence is less than 1%.

- Aorta and inferior venacava are at risk in L1-L4, the iliac vessels are at risk at L4-L5 and L5-S1.

- Large vessel injury**-**may require embolization or laparotomy.

**Disc not identified**:

- Confirm imaging dates (which should be less than 2 months old).

- Confirm the correct surgical level.

- Extend the surgical corridor.

**Failed-back surgery syndrome.**A recurrence rate of 3-15% and instability rate of 20% during ten years of follow-up have been observed.

**Recurrence.**

- The reported incidence of 3% to 15%.

- Most recurrences at the same level of herniation and on the same side.

- In one study Recurrence rate at 5-year follow-up was 6.27% .63% of them occurred within 6 months.

- Modic changes, disc height index (DHI), and facet orientation (FO) showed a significant co-relationship.

- Modic type-II and contained disks had higher odds of recurrence.

- Smoking, disc protrusion, and diabetes are significant predictors of recurrence.

- Obesity is a risk for the occurrence as well as recurrence of LDH.

**Reoperation:**

- In one study comprising 1850 patients, 130 patients underwent re-operation and were successful in 62%of them. Herniation at different levels, recurrences at the same level, and scar formation showed excellent results in 98%, 54%), and 38% cases respectively.

**Postoperative discal pseudo-cyst
****.
**

**Iliac arteriovenous fistula.
**

**Epidural hematoma.
**

**Retained Non-absorbable Haemostatic Material (RNHM)**such as gossypibomas and muslinomas.