Carbuncles typically present as an erythematous, tender, inflamed, fluctuant nodule with multiple draining sinus tracts or pustules on the surface. Most patients with a carbuncle will present to the emergency room, family physician office, or a dermatology practice. All of these entities encompass both physicians and nurses; thus, interprofessional communication is imperative to optimize outcomes.

Carbuncles have a predilection for individuals with a compromised skin barrier. Thus, maintaining a healthy skin barrier can reduce incidence and recurrence. In any hospital or long-term care facility, nurses often play a vital role in maintaining a patient’s skin health. This includes applying daily moisturizers, bathing, wound dressing, and administering oral and topical medications. Therefore, physicians must give nurses clear instructions for proper patient skincare to reduce the incidence and recurrence of carbuncles. To encourage standardization and promote understanding, physicians and organizations can implement the usage of skincare algorithms. An example is an algorithm for dry skin to be used by nurses when caring for patients. If a patient’s skin is dry, frequent bathing/washing should be avoided, and exposure to water should be minimized. Additionally, lipophilic products should be applied daily. With the use of algorithms for patient’s skincare, the number of skincare products will be reduced, and the skincare approach standardized, leading to a reduction in errors and improvement in outcomes.