With age, health-related comorbidities increase. Aging contributes to significant functional changes in organ systems and results in decreased homeostatic capacity. Aging also affects body composition, increased volume of distribution for fat-soluble drugs, reduced clearance of multiple medications. The ongoing changes in the body's physiology with aging are associated with an increased risk of adverse reactions to commonly used medications. The definition of polypharmacy is the simultaneous use of 5 or more drugs.

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is defined as cognitive decline more than expected for an individual's age and level of education but interfering notably with daily life activities. On the other hand, dementia is more severe and widespread with a significant effect on daily function. Multiple long-term follow-up studies have shown that most mild cognitive impairment progress to dementia or Alzheimer's dementia. People with MCI are 3 to 4 times more likely to develop dementia when compared to those with normal cognition.

Polypharmacy can be appropriate and inappropriate. Inappropriate polypharmacy primarily refers to over-the-counter medications, supplements lacking evidence-based indications, and interacting with other medicines, thus doing more risks than benefits. Clinical consequences of polypharmacy in older adults are adverse drug reactions, depression, disability, falls, frailty, increased healthcare use, postoperative complications, mortality, and caregiver burden.

Multiple drug-drug and drug-disease interactions are associated with polypharmacy in the elderly. Over a long time, the continued use of polypharmacy can also create new comorbidities, requiring more medications. This vicious cycle makes the elderly weaker, resulting in decreased strength, falls, increased dependence on others, increased morbidity, and mortality. An Italian multicenter cohort study conducted by Trevisan C et al. studied adults with MCI for one year. About 50% of study participants took >3 drugs per day; at the end of one year, the odds of dementia were sixfold higher in this group compared with similar adults taking < 3 drugs/day.

The odds of developing dementia were eightfold higher in people with > one drug-drug interaction and a five-fold high in the anticholinergic risk scale greater than or equal to 1. Drug-drug interactions contributed to the most association (70%) between the number of medications and MCI progression to dementia. About 4% of patients with MCI progressed to dementia. Anticholinergic drugs and other drugs categorized as potentially inappropriate medications are strongly associated with cognitive impairment. Older adults using anticholinergic drugs had a more significant decline in memory, psychomotor speed, and cognitive flexibility when compared to non-users. This effect was worse in apolipoprotein ε4 carriers (at-risk population for dementia).

The current evidence shows that physical frailty and cognitive impairment are very closely related. A prospective cohort study conducted by Dogrul et al. studied the association between physical frailty and cognitive function in older adults without dementia and depression and found that physically frail adults have poor MMSE and 3-word recall test scores. There is limited evidence to suggest a physiologic link between physical frailty and cognitive decline.

Based on observation studies, chronic inflammation, changes in energy metabolism, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction in stress response contribute to cognitive decline in physically frail people. The combined physical frailty and cognitive impairment are called mental frailty associated with increased mortality. Frailty and cognitive decline are associated with increased incidence of falls and further physical injuries.