**Fogging During the Initial MPMVA**

This procedure is carried out monocularly with the contralateral eye being occluded. By convention, the right eye is done first and the left eye second.  The fogging process is preceded by inserting the objective refraction findings. This could be based on:

- The retinoscopy results

- The autorefractometry results

- Former spectacle or contact prescription; the patient's visual acuity is noted immediately after this step.

The examiner then puts sufficient plus power over the objective findings (See fogging images). It has been advocated in the past that +0.75 DS is adequate for this. However, practice shows this may be insufficient to fog certain patients, especially those with significant latent hyperopia. It is expected that the patient's visual acuity should be 1 or 2 lines worse than the earlier visual acuity taken with the objective findings in place.

The patient should be asked to read the optotypes on the examination chart stepwise from the largest to the smallest possible. If the patient is found to be sufficiently fogged, the examiner moves to the defogging process. If the patient is found to be insufficiently fogged by correctly reading the optotypes to a level deemed too close to the pre-fogging levels, the examiner should increase the fogging and repeat this process until the patient is satisfactorily fogged.

The examiner then begins the defogging process by directing the patient's attention to the largest optotype and encouraging him to read downwards as the optotypes transition from larger to smaller ones. As expected, the patient should not get to the pre-fogging visual acuity. The examiner then proceeds to reduce the plus spherical power (or increase the minus powers) in the trial frame or phoropter.

The examiner should expect the patient to report an improved visual acuity with every +0.25 DS reduction (or addition of -0.25 DS) to the trial frame phoropter. The defogging process ends when the examiner notices that reducing the plus power does not improve visual acuity. For some acuity charts, one can stop the defogging process once the patient has correctly read all the letters on the smallest line, as long as that chart reaches a minimum of the 20/20 line.

**Fogging During the Binocular Balancing**

Binocular balancing tests help to balance the accommodation in the two eyes under simultaneous viewing with both eyes. Therefore, binocular balancing is only indicated for patients with binocular vision and similar visual acuities. The fogging process is again employed in binocular balancing using the modified Humpriss and the Humphriss immediate contrast techniques.

The distance monocular subjective findings are put into place before performing the modified Humpriss test. The left eye is traditionally fogged with enough plus power to blur the vision by about three lines worse than the eye being examined (right eye). The examiner then defogs the left eye to its MPMVA. This process is repeated for the left eye with the right eye fogged.

The final prescription obtained is taken to be a subjective refraction endpoint.