On exam, lesions of EED present as red–brown, yellowish, or violaceous papules, plaques, or nodules. They typically are symmetrically distributed and favor acral and periarticular sites, specifically the extensor surfaces of the elbows, knees, ankles, hands, and fingers. Additional sites of involvement include the face, retro-auricular area, axillae, buttocks, and genitalia. The trunk is usually spared. The lesions usually feel firm and are mobile over the underlying tissue, except typically on the palms and the soles.

Initially, the lesions are erythematous and soft but with time become red–brown or violaceous in color and firm to palpation secondary to fibrosis. Over the course of the disease process, the lesions can change in color as well as an increase in size and quantity.

Typically, the lesions are asymptomatic, but there have been reports of patients who experienced pruritus and burning or tingling sensations, especially early in the disease course. EED in the setting of HIV infection is characterized by nodular lesions, used palmoplantar, that progress to form bulky masses. Arthralgias may develop in underlying joints, but extracutaneous involvement is extremely rare. The exception includes ocular abnormalities such as scleritis, uveitis, autoimmune keratolysis, and peripheral keratitis.

The disease is chronic and has a relapsing and remitting course. The majority of cases resolve spontaneously over a period of 5 to 10 years, but the disease can last up to 40 years. EED lesions do not typically leave scars but can resolve with areas of hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation. No mortality due to EED has been reported.