Traditionally, refractory or recurrent pleural effusions were treated with repeated thoracentesis. This was associated with more pain and discomfort and poor quality of life, along with the high risk of complications. Then, pleurodesis was introduced, a method of obliterating pleural space. It is achieved via chemical or surgical pathways. Chemical pleurodesis involves instilling a sclerosing agent (talc, bleomycin, doxycycline) into the pleural space via a chest tube. The sclerosing agent promotes inflammation and later on fibrosis of the visceral and parietal pleural surfaces. Thoracoscopy or VATS can be used for mechanical abrasion of the pleural surfaces.

Pleurodesis was successful only in 60 to 70% of patients because it requires a completely expandable lung to ensure total apposition of the pleural surfaces. Unfortunately, the lung is not fully expandable in the majority of patients with MPEs. Patients with endobronchial lesions and interstitial fibrosis also have an un-expandable or "trapped" lung that will render pleurodesis unsuccessful in most cases.

Indwelling pleural catheters (IPC) have revolutionized the management of MPEs. FDA approved IPC in 1997. They are now the treatment of choice in patients with MPEs, and the evidence for their efficacy is growing for non-malignant pleural effusions as well.

**Advantages of IPC**

**Length of Stay**

The typical length of stay for pleurodesis is from 2 to 5 days; whereas, IPC is done as an outpatient procedure.

**Anesthesia**

Surgical pleurodesis is done under general anesthesia. Chemical pleurodesis is done via a chest tube placed under local anesthesia, but it is associated with significant pain due to a bigger incision. IPC is placed under local anesthesia and is very well tolerated. Most patients do not require anything stronger than over-the-counter NSAIDs.

**Second Procedure**

The prolonged (more than 6 months) survival in cancer patients has been associated with reduced efficacy of chemical pleurodesis of only 50%. Approximately 32% of patients require a repeat pleural procedure due to the failure of pleurodesis. In comparison, IPCs are successful more than 90% of the time.

**Symptom Improvement**

There is no difference in the improvement of dyspnea with both procedures within 6 months, but after 6 months post-procedure, IPC is superior to pleurodesis in relieving dyspnea and improving quality of life.

**Respiratory Failure**

Chemical pleurodesis work by inducing pleural and systemic inflammation. Sometimes this inflammation can be severe and leads to hypoxemia and respiratory failure. This complication is most commonly seen with talc, which is also the most effective chemical sclerosing agent. IPC insertion avoids this complication altogether.

**Pleurodesis**It is achieved in a median time of 11 weeks. Favorable factors include breast and gynecologic malignancies, complete re-expansion of the lung post IPC placement, positive pleural fluid cytology, and no history of chest wall irradiation.

**Cost-Effectiveness**

One study showed that IPCs are more cost-effective as compared to talc pleurodesis if expected survival is less than 3 months; however, not if survival is more than 3 months.