- Contraindications to furosemide use include patients with documented allergies to furosemide and patients with anuria.

- A boxed warning suggests the cautious use of furosemide as it is a potent diuretic, which can predispose to excessive loss of water and electrolytes, resulting in dehydration with electrolyte depletion.

- According to Beers Criteria, caution is necessary when administering diuretics to patients 65 years and older to avoid potential adverse effects of inducing hyponatremia by causing or exacerbating syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH); therefore, close monitoring of serum sodium is advisable at initiation or during the dose adjustment in older adults.

- Ototoxicity can occur with the use of furosemide, but the following conditions predispose patients to a higher risk of reversible or irreversible hearing impairment
- Use of a higher than the recommended dose of furosemide or a fast infusion rate of the drug,
- Hypoalbuminemia comorbid illnesses
- The concomitant use of ethacrynic acid, aminoglycosides, or other ototoxic drugs
- Patients with underlying severe renal impairment

- Caution is also necessary for patients with underlying liver disease, especially those with decompensated liver disease, as rapid electrolytes imbalance secondary to furosemide use can precipitate hepatic encephalopathy and hepatic coma. In patients with hepatic coma, the prescriber should delay giving furosemide until there is an improvement in the patient's mental status.

- Patients with the advanced renal disease with fluid overload should be closely monitored for oliguria, azotemia, and volume status. If either oliguria or azotemia develops, furosemide should be discontinued to prevent kidney injury.

- In patients with primary adrenal insufficiency with hypertension, diuretics are a practice clinicians should avoid to treat hypertension. Alternatively, the dosage of glucocorticoid/mineralocorticoid requires adjustment, and, if needed, the Clinician should prefer other classes of antihypertensive agents over diuretics to treat hypertension.

- High-risk patients for radiocontrast-induced nephropathy are more predisposed to having a worsened kidney function if furosemide is given before contrast administration than high-risk patients receiving gentle hydration before contrast exposure.

- Patients with a known history of urinary retention due to, for example, benign prostatic hyperplasia, neurogenic bladder with bladder evacuation abnormalities, or urethral and ureteral strictures should be observed closely during the initial days of furosemide treatment. After that, they require observation for worsening symptoms as excessive diuresis and urine retention can lead to acute urinary retention leading to acute kidney injury.

- The risk of hypokalemia increases with a high dose of furosemide, decreased oral potassium intake in patients with hyperaldosteronism states (liver abnormalities or licorice ingestion), or concomitant use of corticosteroid, ACTH, and laxatives.

- Furosemide at high doses, i.e., more than 80 mg per day, inhibits thyroid hormone binding to thyroid binding protein leading to a transient increase in free thyroid hormones that subsequently causes a mild decrease in total thyroid hormone.