For the best patient outcomes, there should be open communication between the healthcare team and patients regarding close monitoring for the development of adverse reactions.

- Patients should undergo proper screening of viral hepatitis and tuberculosis before initiating the drug. Patients should be advised to inform their clinicians of any signs and symptoms related to infection and especially if they travel to areas with increased prevalence of tuberculosis.

- Clinicians have to make sure patients are up to date on immunizations before initiation of the drug.

- Baseline CBC with differential, LFTs, and RFTs should be acquired before initiating the drug, and regular monitoring should be ensured for dose adjustments. The lipid panel should be monitored after the initiation of the drug. Patients should be encouraged to have regular follow-up visits.

- Clinicians should be paying special attention to any signs of active infection at every visit. In case of any serious infection, including reactivation of herpes zoster, the drug should be discontinued.

- For patients who have a history of deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism, baricitinib should be used cautiously. Patients should be educated on signs and symptoms of the development of blood clots and advised to seek immediate medical attention accordingly.

- Clinicians should use baricitinib with caution in patients with a history of diverticulitis and should have a lower threshold to rule out gastrointestinal perforation in cases of abdominal pain and advise patients to seek emergent help in that case.

- Clinicians should avoid baricitinib in pregnant patients and educate patients on effective contraception before starting the drug, and in case of pregnancy, patients should contact their providers immediately.

- Patients should be educated on the potential side effects of the development of skin cancers and lymphoma.

In summary, baricitinib is a relatively new addition to the disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs, the JAK inhibitors family, with promising results. For effective outcomes, it needs the collaborative efforts of an interprofessional team, including patients, nursing staff, pharmacists, and specialists. Nursing staff in primary care and specialist office can monitor the patient's compliance to the drug and screen for any possible side effects in collaboration with the coordinating clinicians. Pharmacists can ensure adequate drug dosing considering patient's comorbidities and provide feedback regarding its drug interactions. Other specialists like infectious disease specialists, hematologists, gastroenterologists' consults can be obtained if the patient develops any potential adverse effects. Any signs and symptoms of toxicity should be taken seriously to improve the outcome and decrease morbidity.