# Introduction

A somatic mutation describes any alteration at the cellular level in somatic tissues occurring after fertilization. These mutations do not involve the germline and consequently do not pass on to offspring. Somatic mutations are a normal part of aging and occur throughout an organism’s life cycle either spontaneously as a result of errors in DNA repair mechanisms or a direct response to stress. Mutations occurring early in development can cause mosaicism within the gene line, impacting organism development. The impacts of mosaicism on overall health due to mutations depend on the specific gene the mutation affects.

Environmental stressors and errors that occur during cellular replication increase the risk for somatic mutations to occur.

Somatic mutations have received the most study in human carcinogenesis. Various mutations in oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, and DNA repair mechanisms can select for increased growth advantage and tumor survival.

# Cellular

Cellular stressors generate free radicals causing damage to DNA. The resulting DNA damage creates mutations that are normally repaired by DNA mismatch repair systems. If the stressors induce mutations within DNA mismatch repair or replication systems, this can lead to irreversible genome breaks and damage and loss of the original genome template.

The rate of somatic mutations is often faster than the mismatch repair system allowing the mutated cells to continue proliferating.

Somatic mutations early on in cell development can lead to a variation in the typical phenotypic presentation of a respective cell line. Mutations arising in early neurocognitive development can cause mosaicism of prodigy cell lines contributing towards brain development. Large-scale mosaicism in neurocognitive tissues can cause intellectual disability and epilepsy.

# Mechanism

There is a general lack of knowledge on the exact mechanism of somatic mutations outside of the setting of carcinogenesis.

Subsequent cell divisions increase the number of mutated cells, which accumulate and decrease cell function, leading to possible cell death. Exposure to mutagens such as radiation, chemicals, and any process producing free radicals within the cellular environment increases the incidence of cancer as a result of mutations.

# Clinical Significance

The accumulation of somatic mutations appears to be a component of cellular aging, various disease processes, and cancer. Oxidative damage resulting from normal cellular processes contributes towards aging and cancer in mammalian species with higher metabolic rates compared to humans with a lower rate of metabolism.

Somatic mutations occurring in cells that generate a growth advantage within the tissue or prohibit cell death are the mutations most at risk for carcinogenesis. Mutations in tumor suppressor genes or proto-oncogenes result in uncontrolled cell division, ultimately leading to a massive accumulation of these mutated cells in the form of a tumor. The rates at which somatic mutations occur in cancerous tissues are studied via sequencing and used to identify patterns in a tumor’s growth state.

The clinical significance of somatic mutations is vast. Some of the more recognized pathologies include McCune Albright Syndrome, Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria, Sturge Weber, and variations of Lissencephaly.

McCune-Albright Syndrome (MAS) results from somatic mutations in the GNAS1 gene, causing a gain of function mutation in G protein receptors affecting the skin, bone, and endocrine tissues. The continuous activation of G protein receptors in these tissues leads to excess cell proliferation, predisposing individuals with this mutation to precocious puberty, polyostotic fibrous dysplasia of the bone leading to weak bones and recurrent fractures, and café au lait pigmentation that does not cross the midline.

Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a consequence of a somatic mutation in the PIGA gene resulting in the absence of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchored proteins CD55 and CD59 on the red blood cell membrane. These anchor proteins protect red blood cells from the complement. The absence of these proteins on the red blood cell membrane allows for intravascular hemolysis to occur anytime the body initiates the complement cascade in response to cell stress. The somatic mutation commonly causes a frameshift mutation shortening mRNA resulting in the absence of formation of GPI surface protein.

Sturge Weber syndrome is characterized by somatic mutation occurring in the GNAQ gene causes a neurocutaneous disorder characterized by disruptions in vascular development.

Somatic mutations in the lissencephaly-1 gene cause a loss of function in neurons affecting proper migration of neurons to respective positions within the cortex, producing subcortical band heterotopia in the brain.