# Continuing Education Activity

The diagnosis of traumatic diaphragm injuries (TDI) can be difficult but is critical, as a delayed diagnosis can carry significant sequelae. TDIs can occur with both penetrating and blunt trauma and are often occult. Patients may vary in their presentation based on the extent and location of injury (right versus left hemidiaphragm), the presence and extent of abdominal viscera displacement, and the presence of other injuries. For this reason, the mechanism of injury (MOI) plays a crucial role in establishing a high index of suspicion for diaphragmatic injuries. The first report of diaphragm herniation was described in 1541, but it wasn't until a few centuries later, in 1853, that Bowditch diagnosed the first antemortem diaphragmatic injury secondary to trauma. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of traumatic diaphragm injuries and highlights the role of the trauma team, radiologists, and subspecialties in evaluating and managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the anatomy and physiology of the diaphragm.
- Describe the clinical presentation, signs, and symptoms of traumatic diaphragm injuries and summarize the diagnostic approach of a patient with suspected diaphragm injury/rupture.
- Understand the treatment and management options available for traumatic diaphragmatic injuries and the limitations to each.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination amongst interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients with traumatic diaphragm injuries.

# Introduction

The diagnosis of traumatic diaphragm injuries (TDI) can be difficult but is critical, as a delayed diagnosis can carry significant sequelae. TDIs can occur with both penetrating and blunt trauma and are often occult. Patients may vary in their presentation based on the extent and location of injury (right versus left hemidiaphragm), the presence and extent of abdominal viscera displacement, and the presence of other injuries. For this reason, the mechanism of injury (MOI) plays a crucial role in establishing a high index of suspicion for diaphragmatic injuries. The first report of diaphragm herniation was described in 1541, but it wasn't until a few centuries later, in 1853, that Bowditch diagnosed the first antemortem diaphragmatic injury secondary to trauma. The first successful traumatic diaphragm injury repair was completed in 1888.

The embryologic development of the diaphragm originates from the septum transversum during the 4th week of gestation. Additional tissue contribution is supplied by the esophageal mesentery, pleuroperitoneal membranes, and chest wall muscle. After development, the diaphragm is conformed into a domelike muscle with a tendinous central septum. It attaches to the sternum, sixth through twelfth ribs, the last thoracic vertebra, and the first three lumbar vertebrae. Its most important function is in respiration, but it also provides a floor for the thoracic cavity and a partition between the abdomen and thorax. It provides additional power with expulsive maneuvers such as defecation and vomiting by contributing to the changes in intra-thoracic and intra-abdominal pressure gradients. The diaphragm is innervated by the phrenic nerve, which originates from the third through fifth cervical roots. The nerve transverses the thorax in the posterolateral mediastinum and branches at the level of the diaphragm. There is a small contribution to the sensory component of the diaphragm along the periphery, which arises anterolaterally from the intercostal innervation.

A traumatic diaphragm injury's overall incidence is exceedingly low, but prompt diagnosis is essential, as a missed injury is associated with significant morbidity and mortality (30 to 60%).

Appropriate management of TDIs is highly dependent on the type of diaphragm injury (blunt versus penetrating), hemodynamic stability, the timing of diagnosis, and the presence of contamination. Blunt injuries tend to be larger and require more in-depth repair, whereas penetrating injuries are usually reapproximated primarily with little difficulty. If patients are hemodynamically unstable, TDI repair may need to wait until a later time when the patient has been fully resuscitated. An acute versus delayed diagnosis dictates the surgical approach, which can vary from an open to minimally invasive abdominal versus thoracic approach. Diaphragm repairs include primary suture repair, prosthetic mesh placement, and in worse cases, diaphragm reconstruction. The type of repair is also partially dependent on whether the diagnosis is acute or delayed. Occasionally, in extreme cases, reconstruction may be required in a staged approach with the use of myocutaneous and rotational muscle flaps to redevelop thoracoabdominal integrity.

# Etiology

The etiology of traumatic diaphragm injuries occurs via blunt and penetrating injuries. Blunt mechanisms include motor vehicle accidents, falls from a significant height, or pedestrian strikes. Penetrating injuries can include gunshot wounds, stab wounds, or any foreign object which transverses the diaphragm disrupting the thoracoabdominal partition.

When at rest, the diaphragm is a concave tendinous structure. This downward projection towards the abdominal cavity at rest causes compression on the abdominal contents, which results in an outward projection of the abdominal wall. The chest wall is lowered, and the vertical diameter of the chest decreases. The presence of recoil brings the thorax back to its original position in exhalation. The diaphragm contracts and loses shape to a taut central tendon which becomes flat. This helps to expel air out of the lungs. With the exchange of air, the displacement of the diaphragm varies between one and two inches.

In blunt trauma, an abrupt increase in the pleuroperitoneal gradient causes an increase in kinetic energy transfer to the diaphragm, which results in the disruption. Petrone and colleagues

In penetrating trauma, the injury follows the tract of the foreign body and is typically small, with over 80% being smaller than 2 cm.

# Epidemiology

Traumatic diaphragm injuries are relatively uncommon, ranging in the literature from 0.46% to 15%.

TDIs are further divided by their mechanism of injury, blunt versus penetrating. The incidence of TDI secondary to blunt traumas is 1 to 7%. TDI secondary to penetrating injury is approximately 15%.

# History and Physical

Given the elusive nature of traumatic diaphragm injuries, a high index of suspicion is imperative during the initial workup. It is important in developing an appropriate level of suspicion to obtain the appropriate adjunctive studies where a TDI may be present.

In situations where the MOI involves a fall, the fall height and how the patient was found are important in providing clues to the degree and trajectory of energy at the time of impact.

Scharff and Naunheim

For those patients who present in a delayed fashion, their diaphragmatic injury often includes herniation of abdominal viscera. Symptoms here depend on the size of the diaphragmatic defect, which tends to increase over time. The physical findings can vary based on the anatomical point of obstruction and the severity of the herniation. Incarcerated viscera may present with partial obstructing symptoms, whereas strangulated viscera presents with a more grave clinical picture, leading to ischemia and impending perforation with septic shock.

A history of prior trauma may elude to the potential for a delayed traumatic diaphragmatic hernia. Patients often have non-specific symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and pain. This may be mistaken for peptic ulcer disease or cholecystitis in the herniated viscera without incarceration, especially if the presentation is chronic.

# Evaluation

The definitive diagnosis of traumatic diaphragm injury is one of both inclusion and exclusion. There are no specific laboratory finding which directly diagnoses this entity. Basic chemistries, hepatic panel, and pancreatic enzymes can help to rule out injuries to the liver or pancreas. Unfortunately, these numbers are not directly helpful nor reliable in acute trauma patients.

In a stable patient without an indication for emergent operative intervention, imaging studies are obtained secondary to the physical exam. Typically, a chest x-ray is the initial preferred study.

Although chest x-ray is the most common initial test in the workup for traumatic diaphragmatic hernias, computerized tomography (CT) is the gold standard.

Direct signs include diaphragmatic discontinuity, intrathoracic visceral herniation, collar sign, dependent viscera sign, diaphragm thickening, and dangling sign. Diaphragm discontinuity is the loss of diaphragm integrity on imaging in the presence of surrounding muscle thickening (Fig 2). This sign is highly sensitive but not very specific (86% and 68%, respectively), and it can be falsely positive when intra-abdominal or retroperitoneal hematomas are present. An intrathoracic visceral herniation is the most sensitive and specific of all direct signs. However, it only encompasses a very small subset of patients as most patients do not present with frank organ herniation. Collar sign is defined as a waist-like constriction of the herniated viscera at the site of injury. This produces an appearance of severe compression (Fig 3).

According to Bocchini et al., indirect signs associated with TDIs include elevated hemidiaphragm, high ISS (injury severity score) and AIS (abbreviated injury severity) scores, associated injuries, and peri-diaphragmatic bleeding. An elevated hemidiaphragm may be appreciated without the presence of a TDI, especially when intra-abdominal bleeding is present. It may also be a normal variant in some patients where congenital diaphragmatic anomalies exist. Associated injuries such as rib fractures, hemothorax, pneumothorax, pulmonary contusions, atelectasis, and pleural effusions should allude to the possibility of a TDI, but depending on the severity of additional injuries, this may not be the case. Injuries such as internal bleeding, traumatic brain injury, or pelvic fractures tend to take precedence, as these patients are typically unstable. When this is the case, the potential for a diaphragm rupture becomes an afterthought. Contrast extravasation at the level of the diaphragm should always suggest further evaluation into a traumatic diaphragm injury. These signs, both direct and indirect, are traditional teaching in the radiographic diagnosis of traumatic diaphragm injury.

Although ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may help diagnose diaphragm injuries, they are often not clinically feasible in the poly-traumatized patient.

Invasive approaches to evaluate for diaphragm injury include diagnostic peritoneal lavage, laparoscopy, laparotomy, thoracotomy, and video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS).

# Treatment / Management

Surgical management of traumatic diaphragm injuries varies based on patient presentation, mechanism of injury, associated injuries, and the need for immediate surgical intervention. Early management of the trauma patient consists of a concise and rapid assessment to identify and address life-threatening injuries. Those patients presenting in hemorrhagic shock or with systolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg are considered unstable and should receive immediate resuscitation as per Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) guidelines. Adjunctive procedures such as intubation or chest tube placement should be performed as indicated during the primary and secondary surveys. In an unstable patient, the chest x-ray is typically still performed but at the discretion of the trauma surgeon. As previously mentioned, signs of diaphragmatic injury may or may not exist on initial chest x-ray, but moreover, are often either missed or overlooked due to the severity of associated injuries or lack of supporting symptomology.

Amid instability, regardless of mechanism, patients should proceed immediately to the operating room, where an exploratory surgery is indicated to combat life-threatening injuries.

In the hemodynamically stable patient, surgical intervention is more obscure. The mechanism of injury plays a major role in the decision to perform surgery. According to McDonald et al.

Penetrating injuries are more commonly reported in the literature and usually present with minimal to no clinical signs, strengthening the argument to assess these wounds with laparoscopy as a standard approach. According to the Western Trauma Association, the controversy as to whether high-resolution MDCT is sufficient to detect diaphragm injuries has not been resolved. They support the findings in the literature, which suggest a 40% incidence of missed injury in the left thoracoabdominal region with penetrating thoracoabdominal wounds. They recommend diagnostic laparoscopy in these patients as the standard modality to further assess for TDI. This is further supported as a practice management guideline by the Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma.

The approach, be it open, laparoscopic, or thoracoscopic, demands a thorough examination of the diaphragm. In laparotomy, this necessitates takedown of the falciform ligament and potentially the associated liver attachments to palpate and visualize the posterior right side of the diaphragm. Regardless of the approach, once a TDI has been identified, the principles of repair remain the same. If herniated viscera exist, they must be reduced and carefully inspected to rule out hollow organ perforation or clinically significant ischemia.

Delayed diagnoses in missed TDIs follow the same concepts as the immediate repair, with a few exceptions. First, these patients have a progressive clinical course owing to pain, intermittent obstruction, strangulation, and in some cases, perforation. Addressing the potential contamination that accompanies these hernias is the same: debridement, irrigation, contamination control, and wide drainage. Second, the diaphragm tends to regress laterally over time. A missed injury is subject to an inability to reapproximate the tissue, primarily when repaired at a later date. These require non-absorbable prosthetic mesh placement to bridge the defect. In a delayed fashion, Petrone et al. recommend approaching these defects via thoracotomy to avoid inadvertent injury from potential associated intra-abdominal adhesions.

# Differential Diagnosis

In the initial workup for traumatic diaphragmatic injury, the differential diagnosis is much more extensive in blunt trauma. This is due to the magnitude of associated injuries that produce nonspecific signs seen on initial imaging, such as pneumothorax, pulmonary contusion, atelectasis, and hemothorax. Findings suggestive of diaphragm injury may suggest a phrenic nerve paralysis or injury.

# Prognosis

It has been generally accepted in the literature that the prognosis of a traumatic diaphragm injury by itself is good. However, it is the missed injury that later leads to herniation of abdominal viscera and increases morbidity and mortality, making the initial diagnosis so important.

The overall mortality rate of these injuries ranges anywhere from 4% to 38%.

There is little support in the literature to show how these patients do with diaphragmatic repair on their index hospitalization, probably because blunt rupture is less common than penetrating and has worse outcomes. Cardoso et al.

# Complications

Petrone et al. suggests that TDI complications can be subdivided into morbidity as a direct result of the diaphragm repair and secondary to the trauma. Complications associated with the repair include iatrogenic phrenic nerve paralysis and suture dehiscence. Both complications can lead to the need for additional invasive procedures and potentially long-term complications whose details are beyond the scope of this paper. Morbidity associated with traumatic injury varies depending on the presence of associated injuries but could include empyema, subphrenic abscess, and resultant ventilator-dependent respiratory failure. When these patients present in a delayed fashion due to a missed injury, the timeframe to presentation has varied in the literature from a few weeks to years. Complications in this setting such as atelectasis, respiratory failure, pneumonia, bowel obstruction, strangulation, and perforation have all been reported.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Because these types of injuries have an array of mechanisms, it is difficult to provide patient education to prevent. Perhaps, the focus in avoiding these types of injuries should be on overall injury prevention in the most common TDI presentations. For penetrating wounds, this would include education and prevention on knife and gun violence. For blunt TDIs, this would including decreasing the risk of internal injury in the use of motor vehicles by utilizing restraints properly, following traffic regulations, and participating in defensive driving courses.

There is certainly literature supporting the approach of non-operative management in a hemodynamically stable patient with thoracoabdominal trauma. When this is the case, patients should be educated on the risks of missed or undiagnosed injury as well as signs or symptoms that would suggest a need for immediate evaluation. In these patients, where TDI was not definitively ruled out, close follow-up is important. Repeat imaging is suggested at a 6 to 12-month interval to rule out or identify a missed TDI.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The approach to any trauma patient is multi-faceted, which requires interprofessional collaboration amongst physicians, nurses, ancillary staff, and sub-specialty providers. On a larger scale, the specialty of Traumatology is a collaborative effort amongst the experts of the field to develop and provide guidelines that are accepted as the standards in the treatment of diagnoses as they relate to trauma. Whether blunt or penetrating, Traumatic diaphragm injuries require the same standardized approach in the initial assessment and work up. The challenge to these patients is a missed injury lending to the necessity for repair months to years later, which increases morbidity and mortality. To minimize the risk of a missed injury, it requires astute awareness in part by the trauma surgeon in understanding or reconstructing the mechanism of injury to anticipate potential injuries. For this to occur, the appropriate and detailed handoff from EMS providers is essential.

Because it has been shown that the initial evaluation is crucial to favorable outcomes, a point of controversy is an agreed-upon standard approach to assess for reliable diagnostic signs on MDCT. Although it has been shown that MDCT has improved the identification of these injuries, the sensitivity and specificity are still highly variable, and the sample size is small. Further, the radiologist's ability to correctly identify imaging signs suggestive of TDI is reviewer-dependent.

Because the incidence of traumatic diaphragmatic injury is low, an abundance of large randomized control trials lacks in the contribution to gold standards for workup, diagnostic imaging, and management strategies. In a combined effort of centers across the nation, The American College of Surgeons National Trauma Data Bank has contributed to the largest study known to date establishing injury patterns associated with traumatic diaphragm injuries.