PEX and PEG are typically diagnosed during a comprehensive eye exam. The presence of flaky deposits on the lens and iris is a hallmark of PEX, while an increase in IOP is a characteristic of PEG. Other tests that may be performed include visual field testing, optic nerve imaging, and gonioscopy. Patients are often asymptomatic but may present with peripheral visual field loss from secondary glaucoma or PEG. The diagnosis is made clinically via characteristic slit-lamp biomicroscopy and gonioscopic findings:

**Slit Lamp Examination**

The characteristic finding in PEX is the visualization of white, flaky, dandruff-like PEX material along the pupillary margin and anterior lens capsule (See image of PEX deposits on anterior structures). The anterior lens capsule shows a central disc and peripheral ring of PEX material with a clear intermediate zone maintained by pupillary abrasion. The whitish double concentric ring that is seen on the anterior portion of the lens is probably due to the movement of the iris over the lens. The central disc may be absent in up to 20% of cases, and the peripheral zone may not be completely visualized without the aid of pharmacological dilation.

A thorough, systematic examination may reveal additional signs. The corneal endothelium may show deposition of PEX material that may be erroneously interpreted as keratic precipitates or inflammatory debris. Fine scattered pigment deposits are also present, which may form a vertical line known as a Krukenberg spindle, similar to what may be seen in pigment dispersion syndrome.

The aqueous humor may demonstrate PEX particles and mild flare from an impaired blood-aqueous barrier. The iris may demonstrate poor mydriasis secondary to atrophy of the dilator muscle and loss of elasticity due to PEX material accumulation within the iris stroma.

There may be phacodonesis or lens subluxation/dislocation secondary to zonular weakness. The fragility is thought to be due to the deposition of extracellular material on the zonules and ciliary processes and/or histological fiber alteration.

**Gonioscopy**

Gonioscopy is fundamental and should be performed in all patients with PEX during slit-lamp examination. PEX deposits may be visualized over angle structures. Patchy hyperpigmentation over the trabecular meshwork and Schwalbe line can be observed.****