Failure of relaxation of the cricopharyngeus muscle during swallowing (cricopharyngeal achalasia) can lead to both dysphagia and a pathologic outpouching of the pharynx called Zenker's diverticulum. Since the cricopharyngeus does not relax in the usual fashion, pressure from the constrictor muscles and the bolus builds up in the pharynx causing an outpouching of the pharynx that fills with food. There may be a mass in the neck that changes size and is associated with gurgling sounds as it fills and empties. Cricopharyngeal achalasia may occur as a primary process or secondary to injury to the nerve supply or muscle from benign or malignant processes.  Since the cricopharyngeus is innervated by the pharyngeal plexus and the recurrent laryngeal nerve, a thorough workup including complete head, neck, and chest exams are indicated. If possible malignancy is suspected, esophagoscopy, laryngoscopy, and bronchoscopy are required. MRI or CT of the neck and chest may also be necessary since the vagus and recurrent laryngeal nerves pass through both the neck and chest.

A recent review of cricopharyngeal achalasia etiologies included idiopathic (28%), cerebrovascular accident (28%), neurologic disease (17%), head and neck radiation treatment (11%), Zenker's diverticulum (10%), and myositis (5%). The most commonly employed treatments were cricopharyngeus muscle botulinum toxin injection (40%), endoscopic cricopharyngeal myotomy (30%), dilation (25%), and open cricopharyngeal myotomy (15%). The authors concluded that there is a need for prospective studies to compare the outcomes of the existing treatments because the existing studies are limited by small sample sizes, heterogeneity of etiologies, and treatments of cricopharyngeal achalasia, as well as short-duration follow-up. This limited assessment of the superiority of one treatment over another.

Several endoscopic and surgical treatments have been developed to treat cricopharyngeal achalasia and Zenker's diverticulum. In one study of recurrent Zenker's diverticula, 56 patients met inclusion criteria. Primary surgery was open in 30.3% and endoscopic in 69.6%. Revision surgery was performed via an open surgical approach in 37.5% of cases and with an endoscopic approach in 62.5% of cases. The revision technique was based on diverticulum size, age of patients, comorbidities, and preferences of patients and surgeons. There were no major complications and few minor ones. The authors concluded that Zenker's diverticulum symptoms can recur regardless of the primary treatment modality. Both endoscopic and open approaches can safely treat recurrent Zenker's diverticula.