Empyema of the gallbladder is a serious disorder that requires prompt diagnosis and treatment. The infection can quickly become systemic and cause multiple organ failure. The condition is best managed by an interprofessional team.

Most patients require aggressive hydration, IV antibiotics, and surgery. There is a growing body of evidence indicating that the surgeon should remove the gallbladder within 48 to 72 hours after optimal hydration of the patient. Because the disorder is associated with serious complications during surgery, close monitoring is necessary. Besides the surgeon, the radiologist may be required to drain any residual collections. The patient may be monitored in the ICU, where the nurse is responsible for monitoring the patient closely for any respiratory distress and renal dysfunction. These patients are also prone to wound infections, deep venous thrombosis (DVT), and pneumonia- hence vigilance is necessary. The pharmacist should follow the culture results and make the necessary antibiotic changes once the drug sensitivity results are available.

The pharmacist should also manage the medications and ensure that polypharmacy does not occur, which can exacerbate the already compromised patient. Most patients with empyema of the gallbladder require several days of admission in the hospital, and nurses should ensure that DVT and pressure ulcer prophylaxis are started. The only way to improve outcomes is through open communication between the team members.

**Outcomes**

When the condition is diagnosed and treated early, the prognosis is excellent. However, in patients who are immunocompromised, old, or those with diabetes, empyema of the gallbladder can be unpredictable and cause severe sepsis. Further, the rate of conversion of a laparoscopic procedure into an open procedure is also higher in gallbladder empyema.