**Normal Eyes**

Adaptive optics is still confined to research. Examination of large cohorts of healthy eyes is essential to establish normative databases. This will help spot any deviation from normal and clinch diseases at early stages. The outer photoreceptor segment is visualized as the cone mosaic. Few studies have looked at the cone packing density and the spacing of cones in the foveal cone mosaic. Standardizing this normative data is essential before it's implemented for clinical use.

**Cone and Rod Photoreceptors**

Imaging cones by adaptive optics was easier due to their wave-guiding properties. They are visible as an imperfect hexagonal mosaic. The most significant biomarkers employed in various studies include cone density and spacing.

Changes in the reflectance of cone outer segment tips (COST), termed dysflective cones indicate altered function when detected by adaptive optics.

**Retinal Pigment Epithelium (RPE)**

The challenge in imaging RPE by adaptive optics was due to the embedding of the photoreceptor outer segment into RPE. This was overcome by imaging RPE at areas of photoreceptor loss and areas of subretinal fluid.

**Ganglion Cells**

Imaging ganglion cells is difficult due to their transparent nature and dense three-dimensional arrangements. Rossi et al. generated a two-dimensional image of the retinal ganglion cells using multi-offset AO-SLO. Adaptive optics could also distinguish between the subtypes of ganglion cells, parasol, and midget types, based on their imaging characteristics.

**Lamina cribrosa**

The visualization of lamina cribrosa, along with quantifying parameters like pore size, shape, and density, has been made possible by adaptive optics with good repeatability. Quantification and standardization of these parameters and correlation with predisposing genes may help screen and detect susceptible individuals at a very early stage.

**Retinal Vasculature**

AO enables precise visualization and quantification of the retinal microvasculature by various parameters like wall thickness (WT), lumen diameter (LD), wall-to-lumen ratio, and cross-sectional area of the vessel wall.

AO enables high-resolution imaging of microaneurysms, retinal microvasculature, and cone photoreceptors which are the primary areas of interest in diabetic retinopathy.

Experimental studies have shown variable alterations in cone density, especially in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus.

**Retinitis Pigmentosa**

AO enabled in vivo visualization of cones and showed that cone photoreceptor density was reduced even in the early stages of the disease with the intact ellipsoid zone in optical coherence tomography. It also helps monitor patients receiving experimental therapeutic interventions like ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF), where a decelerated photoreceptor loss was documented.

**Stargardt's Disease**

A study by Song et al. demonstrated that cone photoreceptor loss precedes lipofuscin deposition in patients with macular atrophy phenotype in patients with ABCA4 gene mutation. An increase in photoreceptor spacing was documented in patients with advanced forms of the disease.

**Other Dystrophies**

A significant reduction in cone photoreceptors has also been documented in other retinal dystrophies like best macular dystrophy,

The study conducted by Agarwal et al. showed that photoreceptor density might serve as an early structural biomarker of inflammation. They also showed that cone photoreceptor loss was more in areas of inactive disease than in overactive lesions and areas of ellipsoid zone disruption. AO may have the potential to assess disease activities in these patients.