Viruses belonging to the family Arenaviridae are associated with rodent-borne diseases. These viruses are divided into two groups, New World and Old World. Each virus is affiliated with rodents that can be found across Africa, America, Asia, and Europe. Infection occurs via contact with rodent urine or droppings and can also occur via aerosol transmission when rodent excrement is stirred up, causing viral particles to get into the air. Some viruses can also cause human-to-human and nosocomial infections. Lassa virus, an arenavirus, has caused outbreaks in West Africa with case fatality rates as high as 50%.

Bunyaviruses are transmitted via arthropods and rodents and can cause mild to severe illness. These viruses can cause Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, hantavirus infections, and Rift Valley fever. Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever is an important disease entity to be aware of as it is the most widespread tick-borne illness in humans.

Filoviruses are the culprits implicated in Ebola virus disease and Marburg hemorrhagic fever and have been detected in bats in Africa. Once humans are infected, there is a risk of person-to-person spread, especially in those caring for infected patients. There have been several Ebola outbreaks in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with case fatality rates as high as 80% to 90%.

Flaviviruses can cause a range of different diseases and can be transmitted via arthropods. Dengue virus, a flavivirus, is transmitted by Aedes aegypti or Aedes albopictus mosquitoes. Clinically, this virus can cause disease, which can be classified into three categories: dengue without warning signs, dengue with warning signs, and severe dengue. This disease is endemic in over 100 countries and can be found in Africa, the Americas, Asia, Australia, Europe, and the Pacific Islands.