**Internal Jugular Central Venous Line**

Placement of an internal jugular central venous line is performed to gain vascular access, enabling both venous monitoring and administration of medications and fluid resuscitation. The procedure begins by placing the patient in slight Trendelenburg and locating the internal jugular vein within the apex of the triangular interval between the clavicular and sternal heads of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. It may help to have the patient turn the head to the contralateral side to better visualize these anatomical landmarks. If the patient is conscious, begin by applying a local anesthetic. Next, insert the needle at a 45-degree angle posteriorly while applying negative pressure. The needle will pass through the carotid sheath, and the internal jugular vein will produce blood within the syringe. An ultrasound can help assist with visualization and cannulation and ensure the proper placement of the guide needle into the vein. While keeping the guide needle in place, begin threading the guidewire. Once in place, remove the needle, introduce the dilator, and then the catheter. The catheter should now be within the superior vena cava.

It is essential to understand the relationships of the structures within the carotid sheath to perform an internal central venous line insertion properly.

**Carotid Body Tumor**

Carotid body tumors are typically slow-growing, painless masses found most commonly in the fourth and fifth decades.

**Lemierre Syndrome**

Lemierre Syndrome, a suppurative jugular thrombophlebitis, is a serious sequela of odontogenic or oropharyngeal infection. Infection typically spreads from the lateral pharyngeal space to the carotid sheath, where it can seed the internal jugular vein, precipitate septicemia, generate septic emboli, and erode the carotid artery. It is typically due to Fusobacterium or Bacteroides species. While it is uncommon in the antibiotic era, patients with poor dental hygiene and limited access to the healthcare system are still at risk.