Per the American College of Gastroenterology, the identification of critically ill patients who can benefit from parenteral nutrition should be made using a validated scoring system such as Nutrition Risk Screening 2002 (NRS-2002) or Nutrition Risk in Critically ill (NUTRIC) score.

Per Maudar 2017, several variables require monitoring while on TPN.

- Intake and output 12-hour charts

- Urine sugar monitoring every 8 hours

- Serum electrolytes: daily sodium, potassium, bicarbonate, calcium, and chloride values

- Serum creatinine and blood urea daily values

- Serum protein levels twice daily

- Liver function tests twice daily

The American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (ASPEN) guidelines also offer monitoring guidelines.

- Patients who recently received TPN should be monitored daily until stable. They require frequent monitoring if metabolic abnormalities are detected or the patient has a risk of refeeding syndrome. Refeeding syndrome can occur in severely malnourished and cachectic individuals when feeding is reintroduced and can lead to severe electrolyte instabilities. Refeeding syndrome can correlate with hypophosphatemia, respiratory distress, rhabdomyolysis, and acute kidney injury. Prevention of refeeding syndrome is critical and achievable with a slower initial infusion of TPN than expected.

- Unstable and critically ill patients should be monitored daily until stable.

- Stable hospital patients with no formulation changes for one week should be monitored every 2 to 7 days.

- Stable hospital, home, or long-term care setting, patients with no formulation changes for one week should be monitored every 1 to 4 weeks if clinically stable.