Treatment of cryoglobulinemic vasculitis can require combined inputs from different specialties like hepatologists, rheumatologists, and hematologists, depending on the underlying disease present and the severity of the illness.

**Immunosuppressive Therapy**

In patients with life-threatening or severe manifestations such as mesenteric vasculitis, pulmonary hemorrhage, and rapidly progressing glomerulonephritis, treatment with plasmapheresis and high dose corticosteroids is the first-line therapy. Immunosuppression with rituximab or cyclophosphamide in combination with plasmapheresis and high-dose corticosteroids reduces the risk of relapse. Antiviral therapy for hepatitis C virus is not considered first-line in life-threatening manifestations as the immune process can become independent of viral antigen triggering. Milder manifestations, including skin rash/ulcers, glomerulonephritis, and peripheral neuropathy all respond well to corticosteroids and rituximab with resolution in the symptoms within 6 months of starting rituximab.

**Antiviral therapy:**

In patients with cryoglobulinemic vasculitis associated with hepatitis C infection who have milder manifestation, simultaneous treatment of immunosuppressive therapy, as documented above with antiviral therapy (for hepatitis C viral infection), has been shown to be effective and is the cornerstone of management. Antiviral therapy involving a combination of ribavirin with direct-acting agents like sofosbuvir has shown to be effective.

**Other Therapeutic Considerations**

Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis associated with B-cell dyscrasias and lymphoproliferative diseases can be treated with the disease-specific chemotherapy and occasionally requires immunosuppression. Cyclophosphamide, dexamethasone, and thalidomide can treat cutaneous symptoms (with no renal involvement).

In patients with cryoglobulinemic vasculitis and hepatitis B infection, treatment with rituximab alone without antiviral therapy can lead to severe reactivation of hepatitis B. It is recommended that antiviral therapy be started before or concomitantly with immunosuppressive therapy (especially rituximab) in these patients.

Other infections causing mixed CryoVas can be treated with specific antimicrobial therapy for sustained remission, immunosuppression is to be used only in refractory cases.

IV immunoglobulin treatment is contraindicated in CryoVas as it can cause immune complex precipitation leading to multi-organ failure.

TNF-alpha inhibitors are not to be used in CryoVas as they have shown to cause early relapses and occasional worsening of neuropathy and skin ulcers.