An extensive interprofessional team approach consisting of family physicians, emergency physicians, ENT surgeons, ophthalmologists, radiologists, neurologists, stroke physicians, and maxillofacial surgeons are required to facilitate timely, accurate evaluation and treatment of facial nerve palsies. Paralysis of the facial nerve can present to a variety of healthcare professionals. Therefore it is the responsibility of staff within the primary care setting and also within the emergency department setting to be familiar with the assessment and treatment of this potentially debilitating condition. Following the decision by the initial clinician reviewing the patient (be this a physician and triage nurse) as to whether the palsy is UMN or LMN in nature, then the appropriate next step is further investigations and referral to relevant specialties. Similarly, nursing staff, particularly with experience working on wards caring for patients with head and neck pathologies, should be able to recognize the symptoms and signs of a developing facial palsy. Should a patient develop a facial palsy (particularly in the context of the postoperative period in for example otological surgery or those admitted with a necrotizing otitis externa), then rapid communication to the physician in charge of the patient's care in addition to the rest of the interprofessional team will enhance outcomes.

If the event the treating clinicians chooses pharmaceutical therapy, it would be prudent to enlist the expertise of a pharmacist to verify all dosing, perform medication reconciliation, and counsel the patient in tandem with nursing on proper administration and what side effects may present.

Finally, in the management of patients with facial nerve palsies, an important role is that of both the physiotherapists and speech and language therapists. This intervention is primarily from a rehabilitation perspective, providing patients with facial exercises and therapy to help ultimately restore function in the long term.

A well balanced interprofessional team that provides an integrated and fully holistic approach in patients with facial nerve palsies is essential in achieving superior outcomes. [Level 5]