Adverse effects of acetaminophen administered orally or rectally may include the following:

- Skin rash, hypersensitivity reactions

- Nephrotoxicity (elevations in BUN, creatinine)

- Hematological: anemia, leukopenia, neutropenia, pancytopenia

- Metabolic and electrolyte

- 
              
- Decreased serum bicarbonate
              
              
- Decreased concentrations of sodium and calcium
              
              
- Hyperammonemia
              
              
- Hyperchloremia
              
              
- Hyperuricemia
              
              
- Increased serum glucose
              
              
- Increased bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase

Additional adverse effects of acetaminophen administered intravenously include nausea, vomiting, constipation, pruritus, and abdominal pain.

Rare but serious adverse effects include hypersensitivity, anaphylactic reactions, and serious and even fatal skin reactions. These include toxic epidermal necrolysis, acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome.

**FDA Boxed Warnings**

**Hepatotoxicity**

Acetaminophen use has been linked to liver failure and sometimes has led to liver transplants or death. The hepatotoxicity occurring with acetaminophen use typically correlates with high doses of acetaminophen that exceed the recommended maximum dose.

**Dosing Errors**

There is also an FDA boxed warning to avoid dosing errors, particularly when administering acetaminophen to pediatric patients, as well as making sure that the total daily dose of acetaminophen does not exceed the recommended maximum when taking into account all medications that contain acetaminophen.

Although these effects, warnings, and associations have been documented, acetaminophen remains a safe and effective medication when used correctly. The current manufacturer dose recommendation is limited to between 3 and 3.25 grams in 24 hours, depending on the formulation. However, toxicity is rare at less than 150 mg/kg for an adult or 200 mg/kg for a child.