Early diagnosis of acute scrub typhus infection is important for appropriate patient management as it is paramount in guidance for appropriate therapy, and its timely prevention of complications. In areas where scrub typhus is endemic, rapid, sensitive, and affordable diagnostics tools are usually unavailable hence clinicians have to begin empirical treatment based on suspicion. This may often lead to misdiagnosis and, as a result, patient mismanagement.

Diagnosis of scrub typhus via serological methods is the mainstay. A significant IgM antibody titer appears by the end of the first week in primary scrub typhus infection, whereas IgG antibodies usually take around two weeks to appear at significant levels. In cases of reinfection, IgG titers can be detected as early as the sixth day of infection, and the levels of IgM antibody titers in such cases may be variable.

**Weil–Felix Testing:**This is the oldest test still in use today and is neither sensitive nor a specific diagnostic test for scrub typhus. This test relies on the use of cross-reacting proteus OXK strain for the serodiagnosis, but it provides little help in timely diagnosis as it has low sensitivity.

**The Indirect Immunofluorescent Antibody (IFA):**This test is considered the gold standard for the diagnosis of scrub typhus. The test is based on the principle of fluorescence-labeled anti-human immunoglobulin, and it detects antibodies in the serum of the infected patient. The test is positive when the fluorescence-labeled anti-human immunoglobulin binds to the immobilized bacterial antigen that has been placed on a slide. This method has several limitations as it requires repeat testing to demonstrate the difference of a fourfold increase in antibody titers while in the acute and subsequently in the convalescent phase of serum samples. Thus it is a retrospective diagnosis and is of little importance to guide initial management in settings of acute infection. If prior studies have not been performed in the population of the locality for baseline seroprevalence levels, a single high antibody titer cannot be considered diagnostic.

**Indirect Immunoperoxidase (IIP):**This test came into use to overcome the above shortcoming after modifying the IFA methods. Diagnosis can be made without a fluorescent microscope, as this method uses peroxidase-labeled antibodies instead of fluorescein. IIP methods have shown results that are equivalent to IFA. However, the sensitivity of this test is influenced by the various strains (as in IFA). Although there is no use of a fluorescent microscope, the need for technical expertise remains the same.

**Enzyme-linked Immunoabsorbent Assays (ELISA):**Currently, it is the preferred method of choice for serological diagnosis in acute scrub typhus infection as the resources for conducting IFA are not routinely available in common laboratories, and since there is the low sensitivity of Weil–Felix testing. It uses a recombinant p56-kDa type-specific antigen ofO. tsutsugamushi strains that combine with IgM antibodies produced against the strains of Karp, Kato, Gilliam, and TA716 in acute infections for its detection. IgM ELISA is a sensitive test to indicate a recent infection with O. tsutsugamushi.

**Immunochromatographic Tests (ICT):**This is a rapid diagnostic point-of-care test. The rapid diagnostic tests used for scrub typhus use the same basic principles as employed in other serologic tests. Since it uses the same recombinant 56-kDa TSA of only the common subgroups (Karp, Kato, and Gilliam) it results in a wide range of sensitivities and specificities. ICTs in the detection of IgM have sensitivities that range from 74% to 90% and specificities from 86% to 99%.

**Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) Techniques:**They have a major advantage as they can detect the disease before antibodies have become detectable by serological methods and thus allows the infection to be diagnosed earlier. There are concerns that direct detection of the organism can be affected by antibiotics. However, cultures of eschar tissues have yielded positive results even up to 7 days after the use of antibiotics.

**Bacterial Culture:**It is a long and tedious process as O. tsutsugamushi is an obligate intracellular pathogen. It also requires biosafety level 3 containment and requires significant technical expertise. Samples are taken from the buffy coat of whole blood samples, and skin biopsies from experimental mammals. However, due to these tedious processes, culture can hardly be used as a diagnostic tool in a clinical setting. Hence, this endeavor remains only for research purposes in reference laboratories.

**Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Evaluation:**For patients with signs of central nervous system involvement, a CSF evaluation may be helpful. Lymphocytic pleocytosis can be observed in scrub meningitis. CSF findings can mimic tuberculous meningitis (CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis with increased proteins) and viral meningoencephalitis.

**Chest Radiographs:**For patients with respiratory symptoms, a chest radiograph may be obtained. Pleural effusions may be seen scrub typhus along with pneumonia as para-pneumonic effusions. Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) characterized by bilateral heterogeneous diffuse infiltrates is a relatively uncommon but severe complication of scrub typhus.

Therefore, in summary, the diagnosis of scrub typhus is highly dependent on maintaining a higher degree of clinical suspicion and judicious use of limited diagnostic tests, especially in the areas of high endemicity.