SGLT2 inhibitors are administered in oral formulations. The dose varies according to the indications. Renal function should be assessed before initiating dapagliflozin. Patients in a state of volume depletion should have this corrected before starting therapy. Current advice is to withhold SGLT2 inhibitors before surgery, prolonged fasting, or critical medical illness (when patients are at increased risk for developing ketoacidosis).

- Canagliflozin is available in 100 mg and 300 mg tablets. Canagliflozin is administered before the first meal of the day.

- Dapagliflozin is available in 5 mg and 10 mg tablets.

- Empagliflozin is available in 10 mg and 25 mg tablets. Empagliflozin is taken once daily in the morning.

- Ertugliflozin is available in 5 mg and 15 mg tablets. Ertugliflozin is administered once daily in the morning.

- SGLT2 inhibitors are also available as FDC: canagliflozin and metformin, canagliflozin and metformin extended-release, dapagliflozin, and metformin extended-release, dapagliflozin and saxagliptin, empagliflozin and linagliptin, empagliflozin and metformin, empagliflozin and metformin ER, ertugliflozin and metformin, ertugliflozin and sitagliptin.

**Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus:**According to American Diabetic Association guidelines (2022), initial therapy is metformin plus comprehensive lifestyle modifications. Based on the additional risk factors such as ASCVD, heart failure, and CKD, SGLT2 inhibitors can be selected. The maximum recommended dose, according to ADA, is given below.

- **Canagliflozin:**The initial dose is 100 mg once daily and may be increased to 300 mg daily. (Not recommended if eGFR< 30 mL/min/1.73 m² to improve glycemic control )

- **Dapagliflozin:**Initial dose is 5 mg once daily; increase to 10 mg once daily to achieve the targeted glycemic goal (Not recommended if eGFR< 45 mL/min/1.73 m² to improve glycemic control )

- **Empagliflozin:**The initial dose is 10 mg once daily; the dose may be increased to 25 mg daily to achieve the targeted glycemic goal. (Not recommended if eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m² to improve glycemic control )

- **Ertugliflozin:**The initial dose is 5 mg once daily, which is increased to 15 mg daily to achieve the glycemic goal. (Not recommended if eGFR<45 mL/min/1.73 m² to improve glycemic control.)

**HFrEF (Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction):**According to AHA/ACC/HFSA(2022) guidelines, guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) for heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) includes sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors. In patients with chronic symptomatic HFrEF, SGLT2 inhibitors are suggested to decrease hospitalization related to heart failure and cardiovascular mortality, irrespective of type 2 diabetes. The following agents are preferred.

- Dapagliflozin 10 mg once daily

- Empagliflozin 10 mg once daily

**HFpEF (Heart Failure with preserved ejection fraction):**According to the 2023 ACC Expert Consensus, SGLT2 inhibitors are indicated in all HFpEF patients. The recommended agents, according to the guidelines, are given below.

- Dapagliflozin 10 mg once daily.

- Empagliflozin 10 mg once daily.

**Chronic Kidney Disease:**According to a joint consensus from KDIGO and ADA (2022), SGLT2 inhibitors with established kidney benefits are suggested for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, CKD, and eGFR >20 mL/min/1.73 m². Once initiated, the SGLT2 inhibitors can be continued at lower levels of eGFR. A reversible decline in the eGFR with the beginning of SGLT2 treatment can occur and is normally not an indication to discontinue therapy. Using an SGLT2 inhibitor in patients with urinary albumin >200 mg/g creatinine is advised to reduce CKD progression and cardiovascular events.

- Canagliflozin 100 mg once daily

- Dapagliflozin 10 mg once daily

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**Dose adjustment of SGLT2 inhibitors are not required in mild or moderate hepatic impairment. In severe hepatic impairment, canagliflozin and ertugliflozin have not been studied; consequently not recommended. Empagliflozin is usually well tolerated in patients with mild, moderate, or severe hepatic impairment.

However, patients with cirrhosis are at increased risk of infection, which further increases the risk of genitourinary infections due to SGLT2 inhibitors. Fluid overload is common in patients with cirrhosis; patients have a relative depletion of effective circulatory volume and can rapidly develop acute kidney injury (AKI) secondary to changes in the fluid status (volume depletion) induced by SGLT2 inhibitors. Risk-benefit evaluation is necessary before use in patients with cirrhosis.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**According to consensus guideline by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) & Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO), SGLT2 inhibitors with established kidney or cardiovascular benefit is suggested for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, CKD, and eGFR >20 mL/min/1.73 m². Once initiated, the SGLT2 inhibitors can be continued at lower levels of eGFR. Individual patient factors should be considered before starting the therapy in case of discrepancy. For patients with diabetic kidney disease, using an SGLT2 inhibitor in patients with urinary albumin >200 mg/g creatinine is advised to reduce CKD progression and cardiovascular events.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**SGLT2 inhibitors are contraindicated in pregnancy due to evidence of reproductive toxicity in animal studies. The risk is especially higher during the second and third trimesters.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**As discussed above, SGLT2 inhibitors have high plasma protein binding; they are unlikely to be secreted into breast milk in clinically significant amounts. However, the use of SGLT2 inhibitors is not recommended during breastfeeding due to the potential risk to the infant's developing kidney.

**Geriatric Considerations:**All SGLT2 inhibitors may increase the incidence of adverse reactions related to decreased intravascular volume and hypotension. According to a recent SOLD study (SGLT2 inhibitors in Older Diabetic patients), SGLT2 inhibitors are safe and effective for older patients.