Before starting the procedure, the infant must be restrained to minimize movement. The umbilical cord and the surrounding skin are cleaned with an antiseptic solution. The cord is better cleaned with an assistant grasping the cord by the cord clamp or forceps and pulling the cord vertically out of the field. The area is then draped, and an umbilical tie is placed around the cord, tight enough to minimize blood loss but loose enough to allow catheters to be passed easily through the vessels. The cord is then cut horizontally 1 cm to 1.5 cm from the skin. The umbilical arteries are identified by their thick walls with a smaller lumen. The cord stump is grasped, and traction applied. The lumen of the artery is probed gently by introducing the closed tips of the iris forceps and then is dilated by allowing the forceps to spring apart, maintaining in this position for about 30 seconds. The catheter is then grasped with the curved iris forceps, or between the thumb and forefinger, and inserted into the lumen of the dilated artery.

If there is any resistance to the advancement of the catheter, gentle, steady pressure must be applied. Repeated probing or excessive pressure can result in perforation of the vessel. If unsuccessful, catheterization of the other artery must be attempted. After advancing to the appropriate distance, the catheter is secured using purse-string sutures around the base of the cord, and the tie removed. Radiologic confirmation of the catheter tip must be obtained to confirm its location between the T6-T9 vertebra. The catheter can be retracted if needed, but it should never be advanced once it is secured due to the risk of introducing infection. Infusion of a heparinized solution must be started as soon as the catheter tip is verified to be in an appropriate position.