**Indication for Hospitalization and ICU**

The serial measurement of PEFR is a practical and reliable predictor of severity and the need for hospitalization. Stein and Cole found that a significant improvement in PEFR 2 hours after treatment predicted the need for hospitalization, even though initial PEFR on presentation did not (improvement noted from a median of 250 L per minute to 330 L per minute). Rodrigo and Rodrigo demonstrated a similar pattern with treatment response in FEV1, although it may not be the most practical approach at the bedside.

A favorable response to initial treatment of status asthmaticus should be a visible improvement in symptoms that sustains 30 minutes or beyond the last bronchodilator dose and a PEFR greater than 70% predicted.

On the other hand, patients with evidence of continuing clinical decline or less than 10% improvement in PEFR or less than 40% of predicted, should be considered for admission to the intensive care unit. Anyone with worsening evidence of respiratory failure, alteration of mental status, arrhythmia, cardiac or respiratory arrest, or complications like pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum naturally requires ICU admission along with aggressive resuscitation measures if consistent with their goals of care.

FEV1 or PEFR between 40% to 70% of predicted after initial treatment in the emergency room is considered as "inadequate response." The duration of management in the hospital does play a role in these subsets of patients. Kelsen and colleagues showed a 50% relapse rate in patients treated for 2 hours or less in a facility as opposed to 4% in those treated and observed for an additional 2 to 4 hours. Therefore, the consensus varies between 4 to 6 hours of treatment in a facility in this group of patients before deciding on admission versus discharge. A poor psychosocial makeup or a hostile home environment with obvious exposure to triggers may tilt the decision in favor of hospitalization.

**Pharmacological Management**

**Beta Agonists**

Short-acting inhaled beta-agonists are the drug of the first choice in acute asthma.

An area that needs clarity is the appropriate mode of delivering these inhaled medications in a ventilated patient. So far, consensus prevails over a higher dosage required to achieve physiologic benefits compared to non-intubated patients. However, there is an ongoing debate about using MDI versus nebulizers, the appropriate mode of ventilation, the exact site of the connection of the delivery device on the ventilator circuit, among others. The optimal delivery device has been a point of polarizing opinion. Mcintyre and colleagues demonstrated that only 2.9% of a radioactive aerosol was deposited in the lungs when delivered by a small volume nebulizer. Therefore, they advocated the use of MDI via an adapter attached to the inspiratory limb of the ventilator circuit. However, their findings were refuted by a subsequent study by Manthous and colleagues demonstrating a poor effect on inspiratory flow-resistive pressure by MDI as opposed to nebulized albuterol.

Subcutaneous epinephrine or terbutaline, used in the past, has fallen out of favor due to their toxicity profile, as has direct endotracheal instillation of epinephrine due to lack of demonstrated efficacy and evidence-based studies.

Intravenous beta-agonists are not routinely recommended, although there are reports of center-specific use in younger patients with status asthmaticus, nonresponsive to inhaled therapy demonstrating persistent severe hyperinflation of airways.

There have been more recent concerns, with several studies showing a correlation between asthma mortality and the use of inhaled beta-agonists. Suissa and colleagues demonstrated that the risk of asthma mortality increases drastically with the use of 1.4 canisters per month or more of inhaled beta-agonists.

The Executive Committee of the American Academy of Allergy and Immunology published a position statement on the use of inhaled beta-agonists in asthma.

**Conclusions**

- More than one canister per month use of beta-agonists is a marker for severe asthma.

- Heavy or increased use of beta-agonists warrants additional therapy, such as the use of corticosteroids.

- Long-acting beta-agonists may make asthma worse, but the available data do not allow for a definitive conclusion regarding this controversy.

- Patients currently using beta-agonists should slowly withdraw nonessential doses and use them only for rescue purposes.

However significant the concerns are regarding their long-term use, the use of short-acting inhaled beta-agonists should not be withheld or underdosed during acute attacks. They remain the drug of the first choice under those circumstances.

**Corticosteroids**

Most available data support a distinct benefit of corticosteroids in status asthmaticus in an emergency setting.

At a physiologic level, steroids reduce airway inflammation and mucus production and potentiate beta-agonist activity in smooth muscles and reduce beta-agonists tachyphylaxis in patients with severe asthma.

**Anticholinergics**

Anticholinergics have a variable response in acute exacerbation with a somewhat underwhelming bronchodilatory role. However, they can be useful in patients with bronchospasm induced by beta-blockade or severe underlying obstructive disease with FEV1 less than 25% of predicted.

Bryant and Rogers demonstrated that 0.25 mg of ipratropium bromide with 5 mg of albuterol by nebulizer resulted in greater improvement in FEV1 than albuterol alone. The response time was also much faster than corticosteroids, with a detectable change in FEV1 within 19 minutes. Nebulized glycopyrrolate can also be an alternative, although it is not much used in the United States. Available data and practice still recommend anticholinergics as second-line agents in status asthmaticus patients with inadequate response to beta-agonists or steroids. A 0.5-mg dose of Ipratropium by nebulization in conjunction with albuterol is the consensus choice.

**Magnesium Sulfate**

Magnesium inhibits calcium-mediated smooth muscle constriction, decreases acetylcholine release in the neuromuscular junction, and affects respiratory muscle force generation.

Intravenous magnesium sulfate has therefore been a useful adjunct in patients with acute status asthmaticus refractory to beta-agonists.

**Heliox and Oxygen**

A true shunt in acute asthma averages only 1.5% of pulmonary blood flow. Therefore, oxygen supplementation need in status asthmaticus is an infrequent and low dose. Refractory hypoxemia in status asthmaticus should trigger a search for complications like pneumonia, atelectasis, or barotrauma. Heliox is a mixture of 70:30 or 60:40 helium: oxygen decreases airway resistance and turbulence and reduces work of breathing and inspiratory muscle fatigue. There is a demonstrated reduction in pulsus paradoxus and enhancement in peak flow. However, its routine use is hindered by the prohibitive cost, infrequent indication, and need for recalibration of gas blenders and flow meters when used with mechanical ventilation.

**Antibiotics**

Graham et al. conducted a randomized double-blinded trial and demonstrated no difference in improvement in symptom score, spirometry, or length of hospitalization with routine use of antibiotics in status asthmaticus. That does not mean that patients with clinical signs of infection should not be treated with antimicrobials, or due diligence should not be pursued in obtaining respiratory culture specimens early on.

**Mechanical Ventilation and Sedation**

The decision to intubate a patient presenting with status asthmaticus is a clinical one and does not unequivocally require a blood gas assessment.

**Immediate indications for intubation include:**

- Acute cardiopulmonary arrest

- Severe obtundation or coma

- Frank evidence of respiratory fatigue with gasping or inability to speak at all

If a patient continues to deteriorate despite initial pharmacologic treatment, a bedside assessment around the time window of response needs to be made.

**Clinical findings that tilt a decision in favor include:**

- Increasing lethargy

- Increasing use of accessory muscles

- Change in posture or speech

- Decreasing rate and depth of respiration

In patients who are not significantly encephalopathic and have no excessive secretions, noninvasive ventilation with CPAP or BIPAP can be a useful modality to support ventilation and avoid the need for anesthesia and sedation, as well as the risk of nosocomial infection with endotracheal intubation. It is increasingly being used in the first 24 hours, at pressure support titrated to reduce respiratory rate below 25 per minute and generate tidal volume above 7 ml/kg body weight. Beyond that, there might be an increased risk of aspiration, facial pressure necrosis, and suboptimal ventilation to reconsider invasive mechanical ventilation.

Once a decision to intubate is made, the choice of sedation agent is of paramount importance.

**Ketamine**

Ketamine has sedative, analgesic, anesthetic, and bronchodilatory properties and has been increasingly recommended for emergency intubation in status asthmaticus along with succinylcholine. The usual dose is 1 to 2 mg/kg given intravenously at a rate of 0.5 mg/kg per minute to provide 10 to 15 minutes of general anesthesia without significant respiratory depression (as opposed to bolus doses).

**Potential risks**to consider before deciding in favor of ketamine include:

- Ability to cause hypertension and tachycardia with sympathetic stimulation. Thus it is to be avoided in patients with uncontrolled hypertension, preeclampsia, or raised intracranial pressure.

- Lowering of seizure threshold

- Increase in laryngeal secretion

- Metabolism through the liver, thus causing some accumulation with the continuous infusion in liver failure.

**Propofol**

Propofol is an equally preferred initial agent due to its rapid onset of action and east titratability, ability to achieve deep sedation without paralytic drugs, and mild bronchodilatory effects. However, prolonged propofol administration in this subset of patients raises the risk of increased carbon dioxide (CO2) production, as it is constituted in a fat-based diluent.

Thus for ongoing sedation needs, lorazepam is preferred with caution to minimize sedation to a level to maintain ventilator synchrony and allow response to stimulation.

**Paralytics**

For patients who continue to remain desynchronized with the ventilator despite sedation and who have a risk of generating auto-PEEP or barotrauma, paralytic drugs may need to be considered. Atracurium is the agent of choice because of the lower risk of myopathy, although it can cause bronchoconstriction due to histamine release. Vecuronium is an alternative in such circumstances.