The 2 major acute complications of hyphemas are acute intraocular hypertension and re-bleeding.

Sickle cell disease deserves special attention in relation to hyphemas. As noted above, the clearance of a hyphema requires passage of the RBCs through the trabecular meshwork and the Canal of Schlemm. The anterior chamber, however, is relatively hypoxic, which induces sickling of RBCs in those at risk. As sickling worsens, the RBCs are unable to pass through the Canal of Schlemm, producing a rise in intraocular pressure.

Any patient with intraocular pressure greater than 21 mm Hg should be treated similarly to non-traumatic acute glaucoma. An ophthalmologist should be consulted for management recommendations as there is no well-defined treatment strategy. A number of medications can be used to suppress aqueous inflow. These include topical beta-blockers, most commonly timolol, and topical alpha-2 agonists such as apraclonidine and brimonidine.

Re-bleeding can occur two to five days later and can increase the risk of permanent visual loss. Re-bleeding is seen in about 30% of cases. In patients at higher risk (sickle cell, bleeding dyscrasias), the use of an antifibrinolytic such as epsilon-aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid is no longer encouraged. Trials failed to demonstrate a decrease in rates of re-bleeding and time for hyphema resolution.

Corneal blood staining is an uncommon complication that typically occurs in patients that have prolonged total hyphema. One case series (n=289 patients) found that 2.1% of the hyphemas developed corneal blood staining. This only occurred in patients with a total hyphema.