In patients where diaphragmatic injuries are immediately diagnosed, an open laparotomy can facilitate reduction of any visceral herniation and repair of the defect. For patients who are hemodynamically stable and without other indications, laparoscopy is a reasonable alternative for diaphragm repair in a skilled surgeon's hand. The patient should be placed in the supine position, and the chest should also be prepared, and draped should the incision need to be extended. A nasogastric or orogastric tube, if not placed already, should be placed to decompress the stomach. The spleen, stomach, splenic flexure of the colon, and the left lobe of the liver should be adequately retracted inferomedially to facilitate complete visualization of the diaphragm.

Delayed diagnosis of diaphragmatic rupture, usually after visceral herniation through the diaphragm, should be treated with video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) or a thoracotomy if warranted due to retraction of the diaphragm and the extensive adhesions that may have built up over the years. A thoracic approach allows for the evaluation of any herniated contents, lysis of any pleural adhesions, and subsequent reduction. If the surgery can be done on an elective basis, the patient should receive bowel preparation prior to the procedure due to the high risk of bowel injury during adhesiolysis.

The defect, once properly identified, should be debrided of all non-viable tissue. It is then primarily repaired with simple, non-absorbable sutures, such as nylon, either interrupted or in a continuous fashion. A defect too large to be closed primarily should be bridged with a prosthetic mesh and secured with interrupted monofilament sutures. A defect significantly contaminated by enteric contents should be temporized with a biologic mesh until it can be definitively repaired with a synthetic mesh on a later date. On occasions, a combined laparoscopy or laparotomy may be required due to extensive adhesions, when reduction of contents proved too difficult through a thoracic approach alone.

Breakdown of the repair, paralysis of the diaphragm secondary to injury to the phrenic nerve, and poor respiratory efforts are all potential complications of a surgical repair. Proper pulmonary toilet supplemented by adequate analgesia should be encouraged to prevent atelectasis. The surgeon should be vigilant regarding any potential breakdown, as delayed diagnosis can frequently lead to post-operative empyema formation, diaphragmatic abscesses, and eventual sepsis and organ failure.