Examination suggestive of globe perforation or intraocular (and sometimes intraorbital) foreign body (IOFB) usually requires immediate surgical exploration and repair by an ophthalmologist (or orbital surgeon).

In addition to the globe and orbital trauma, head trauma, including injury to the cranial nerve nucleus or fascicles (or both), subarachnoid space, cavernous sinus, and orbital apex, can cause immediate or delayed-onset strabismus.

Forced duction tests can further elucidate true restriction from entrapment or pseudo-restriction from surrounding edema. Forced ductions are beneficial when the patient can not participate in the subjective exam. Eye movement may stimulate the oculocardiac reflex, an arc whose afferent limb begins with stretch receptors via the ciliary ganglion and ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve. The efferent limb is mediated by the motor nucleus of the vagus nerve, causing bradycardia, pain, and nausea. The clinical history and exam are essential in management because not every orbital fracture warrants immediate, if any, repair. Oftentimes, waiting for the swelling to subside and watching for improvement in the patient's diplopia and ocular deviation, enophthalmos, and EOM motility may improve outcomes. The ideal watch and wait interval allows for the resolution of edema and avoids excessive scarring. The length of this period of observation varies among oculoplastic surgeons, but two weeks is often considered a good benchmark.

Positively forced ductions and the presence of an oculocardiac reflex are signs of muscle entrapment and warrant immediate surgical exploration and repair. While computed tomography (CT) imaging is both helpful and used in concert with the clinical presentation and operative planning, EOM entrapment remains a clinical diagnosis. Without immediate repair, the entrapped muscle(s) is(are) at risk of atrophy or fibrosis from decreased arterial supply and can cause strabismus. The incidence of traumatic strabismus due to an EOM or cranial nerve (CN) palsy in orbital blow-out fractures is 17.5% in adults and about 10% in pediatric patients.

The repair of direct EOM injury depends on the severity and extent of the injury. For example, muscle contusion or hemorrhage may be observed, while lacerated or disinserted EOMs may be repaired as early as possible to limit scarring.

Clinical signs suggestive of EOM entrapment (muscle involved):

- Dilated pupil (inferior oblique--damage to pupillomotor preganglionic parasympathetic nerves)

- Oculocardiac reflex with EOM versions or ductions (medial or inferior rectus)

- Positively forced ductions (can occur with any EOM)

- Strabismus in primary or cardinal gazes (can occur with any EOM)

- Increased intraocular pressure (IOP) in upgaze compared to IOP in primary gaze (inferior rectus entrapment)

Patient symptoms suggestive of EOM entrapment or involvement:

- Diplopia and gaze disturbance

- Nausea, vomiting, pain, lightheadedness, increased vagal tone, especially in the direct muscle's primary action

- Younger age

- Asymptomatic*

*Of note, clinical exam findings could be absent, as is the case in white-eyed blowout fractures.

Certain history should elicit high suspicion for EOM involvement, including:

- Blunt head or facial trauma (motor vehicle accidents, firearm assault, physical assault, sports-related injury, falls)

- Penetrating injury to the globe, eyelid, or orbit (sharp, linear objects, hook objects)