Anatomy relevant to lung biopsy has been discussed in this section.

**Bronchopulmonary Segment:**These are****independent units of the lung supplied by a (tertiary) segmental bronchus, a tertiary branch of the pulmonary artery, and a branch of the bronchial artery. There are ten bronchopulmonary segments in the right and 8 in the left lung, respectively. A bronchopulmonary accessory segment may be present in a certain percentage of populations.

The right lung has oblique and horizontal fissures dividing it into three lobes with ten segments.

- **Right Upper Lobe**
- Apical segment 
- Posterior segment 
- Anterior segment

- **Right Middle Lobe**
- Lateral segment 
- Medial segment

- **Right Lower Lobe**
- Superior segment 
- Medial segment 
- Anterior segment 
- Lateral segment 
- Posterior segment

The left lung has the oblique fissure dividing it into two lobes.

- **Left Upper Lobe**
- Apicoposterioir segment 
- Anterior segment 
- Superior lingular segment 
- Inferior lingular segment

- **Left Lower Lobe**
- Superior segment
- Anteromedial segment 
- Lateral segment 
- Posterior segment

**Lymphatic Drainage of the Lungs:**As a general rule, lymphatic drainage from the entire lung drains into the right lymphatic duct except for the left upper lobe that drains into the thoracic duct via the left subclavian vein. An extensive, subpleural network of superficial lymphatics drains into the bronchopulmonary nodes. The deep lymphatic plexus lies along the bronchial tree, and pulmonary vessels first drain into the pulmonary nodes, followed by the bronchopulmonary nodes. These then drain into the tracheobronchial lymph nodes and finally into the thoracic duct.

- **Lymph Node Stations and Zones:**Lymph node locations are mapped into 14 stations and seven zones according to their relation to various surgical landmarks like the trachea, bronchi, pleura, great vessels.

**Supraclavicular Zone**

- Station 1

**Upper Zone (Superior Mediastinal Nodes)**

- Station 2 (upper paratracheal)

- Station 3 (prevascular, retrotracheal)

- Station 4 (lower paratracheal)

**Aortic Nodes**

- Station 5 (subaortic)

- Station 6 (para-aortic)

**Inferior Mediastinal**

- Station 7 (subcarinal)

- Station 8 (para-esophageal)

- Station 9 (pulmonary ligament)

**N1 nodes**

- station 10 (hilar)

- station 11 (interlobar)

- station 12 (lobar)

- station 13 (segmental)

- station 14 (subsegmental)

**Chest wall:**The thoracic wall consists of the rib cage that forms the bony skeleton wall and the skin, the underlying muscles, and fascia. From superficial to deep, the chest wall contains the following layers:

- Skin

- Superficial fascia

- Deep fascia

- Serratus anterior

- Ribs and intercostal muscles

- Endothoracic fascia