Needle decompression is done by placing a large-bore catheter through the chest wall into the pleural space and allowing for the release of pleural air. Identification of landmarks is done via palpation and visualization with the goal to place the needle just above the rib to avoid the larger blood vessels of the chest wall. Many cases document an audible whoosh of air leaving the catheter that was placed properly, but this may not occur with every placement. Instead, improvement of vital signs is often seen as a sign of successful placement. The location of the chest to place the needle is one that has been heavily researched in recent years. Classic teaching states a large bore catheter should be placed in the second intercostal space in the mid-clavicular line. This teaching has been hotly contested due to the failure rates that occur with this approach. Recently, researchers have been advocating for a similar approach to tube thoracostomy placement with catheter placement in the fourth and fifth intercostal space in the midaxillary line. This approach is being advocated over the traditional approach because less soft tissue is present in this area, allowing for deeper penetration of catheters into the pleural space which decreases the failure rate compared to the traditional approach. The primary drawback identified in this approach is a reported increased risk of occlusion of the catheter via kinking by the patient's body in the supine position. This phenomenon has been demonstrated multiple times in the military transport setting. Scrutiny is required to identify this possible complication, especially in prolonged transportation.

The procedure for dressing a sucking chest wound aims to prevent any further communication of air with the pleural space and is achieved with placement of an occlusive dressing with the goal of allowing for a one-way valve over the wound. The result should be a device that allows air to leave the pleural space without allowing for backflow of air with inspiration. Classically, an occlusive dressing is applied and adhered to the chest on three sides with the dependent portion open to allow for blood and air to escape the wound. Commercial devices work similarly but are designed to be adherent and allow for drainage and are simply applied over the wound. In the military setting, they have elected to eliminate the three-sided dressing altogether and instead recommend a complete four-sided occlusive dressing with needle decompression if tension physiology were to develop.