**Medical Management**

Patients with Chiari malformation and who have no symptoms can be managed medically. Headaches and neck pain can be treated with muscle relaxants, NSAIDs, and temporary use of a cervical collar. However, studies show that while a headache and nausea may improve, there will be no improvement in gait with medical management in many symptomatic patients. Close to 90% of patients with Chiari type I may remain asymptomatic even if they have syringomyelia.

**Surgical Management**

The main treatment for Chiari malformation is surgical with the goal of re-establishing the CSF flow across the craniovertebral junction and relieving pressure on the cerebellum and hindbrain by decompressing the posterior fossa.

Surgery is recommended for persistently symptomatic patients and confirmed tonsillar herniation. In the setting of asymptomatic tonsillar herniation, with or without syrinx, observation is recommended unless symptoms develop.

Better surgical results are seen when surgery is performed within 2 years of symptoms onset.

**Surgical Techniques**

The standard surgical technique for Chiari I is a posterior fossa decompression.

More recently, minimally invasive techniques have been described similar to those used in the spine. These allow for smaller incisions, less soft tissue damage, less dural manipulation, shorter hospital stays, faster recovery, and fewer complications.

Initial surgical correction for Chiari II is the correction of the myelomeningocele, generally in the first 48 hours. This can also be done in utero through a hysterotomy.

Chiari III follows a similar course to Chiari II. The occipital/high cervical encephalocele is corrected first, with resection of herniated contents, as these are typically non-viable, followed by dural closure and a cranioplasty.

**Contraindications to Surgery**

Suboccipital decompression is contraindicated when the tonsillar herniation is due to a pathology other than Chiari malformation. Some examples of this are intracranial hypotension or mass effect in the posterior fossa due to a mass.