To understand the mechanism of action, a bit of information on the anatomy of the CGRP receptors may prove useful. The CGRP receptor is a heteromeric receptor complex composed of three subunits:

- **CLR (calcitonin receptor-like receptor)**is a type B, G protein-coupled receptor.

- **RAMP1 (receptor activity modifying protein 1):**This is a member of the single transmembrane RAMP family and is necessary for the proper functioning of CLR. RAMP presents CLR to the plasma membrane as a mature glycoprotein.

- **RCP (receptor component protein)**is important in intracellular G protein signaling.

**Erenumab**is a human immunoglobulin G2 (IgG2) monoclonal antibody produced from Chinese hamster ovary cells. Erenumab acts by potently and competitively inhibiting the binding of CGRP to its receptor.

**Eptinezumab**is a humanized immunoglobulin G1 produced inPichia pastoris yeast cells by recombinant DNA technology. Eptinezumab potently and selectively binds to the α and β-forms of the human CGRP ligand and prevents the activation of the CGRP receptor. It has a rapid onset of action and prolonged clinical activity. This action may be due to the rapid binding and inactivation of CGRP and slow dissociation and from the peptide.

**Galcanezumab**is a humanized IgG4 monoclonal antibody produced in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells by recombinant DNA technology. Galcanezumab binds to human CGRP with high affinity and prevents CGRP-induced receptor activation. Galcanezumab also inhibits capsaicin-induced vasodilation, which is a CGRP induced, concentration-dependent, long-lasting relaxation of human coronary arteries.

**Fremanezumab**is a fully-humanized IgG2 produced by recombinant DNA technology in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. Fremanezumab selectively targets and binds to both the α and β isoforms of CGRP and prevents CGRP-induced receptor activation.

These monoclonal antibodies act rapidly and prevent the binding of CGRP. This receptor blockade is long-term, which leads to a reliable method of migraine prophylaxis using only a few doses of the drug per month. These drugs are degraded into small peptides and amino acids by enzymatic proteolysis before excretion, as with other monoclonal antibodies.

**CGRP receptor antagonists ("gepants")**are the first class of migraine-specific medication that does not have vasoconstrictive action, shows similar efficacy, has fewer adverse effects and has a possibly longer period of activity than triptans.