Digital clubbing is present in almost all cases and is the most common finding in PHO. It may be the only manifestation in mild or early cases. A physical exam is pertinent to the diagnosis of clubbing is detected on physical examination, and the bulbous deformity of the fingertips is distinctive. The nail becomes progressively convex, and there is soft tissue deposition at the base of the nail, which results in the distinctive bulbous or "drumstick" appearance of the fingertips and sometimes the tips of the toes. The skin at the base of the nail becomes shiny and thin, and the normal creases in the fingertips disappear. On palpation, because of the increased edema and soft tissue, the rocking of the nail bed may be appreciated.

Objectively, clubbing can be diagnosed using the Lovibond profile sign, which differentiates clubbing from pseudo-clubbing. Lovibond sign is positive for clubbing if there is an increase in the angle between the proximal nail fold and the nail as it leaves the nail bed to greater than 180 degrees. An increased Lovibond angle results in Schamroth sign, the obliteration of the diamond-shaped window formed by opposing dorsal surfaces of two-terminal phalanges. The accuracy of Schamroth's sign is unclear. A phalangeal depth ratio may also be used and is diagnostic when the distal phalangeal depth to interphalangeal depth ratio is greater than 1.

Skin involvement comprises of dermal and glandular hypertrophy. Dermal hypertrophy results in coarsening of facial features and furrowing of the skin on the face and scalp (cutis verticis gyrata).

Periostosis may be asymptomatic or may be discovered due to tenderness on palpation of the affected area. Joint effusions may be detected in larger joints, especially in the knees and wrists. Effusions of smaller joints may be harder to appreciate due to surrounding soft tissue swelling.