**Congenital Generalized Lipodystrophy**

Congenital generalized lipodystrophy, sometimes referred to as Berardinelli-Seip syndrome, is an uncommon lipodystrophy variant with significant and sometimes near-total fat loss.  It has autosomal recessive inheritance and patients present with findings at birth or in early infancy. Mutations in four genes coding for the proteins AGPAT2, seipin, caveolin-1, and cavin-1 have been implicated in the different subtypes of congenital generalized lipodystrophy.

**Familial Partial Lipodystrophy**

Familial partial lipodystrophy is most often an autosomal dominant condition with fat loss primarily involving the extremities, more commonly lower than upper.To date, seven variants of familial partial lipodystrophy have been described. Multiple genetic defects have been reported which can serve to explain the heterogeneity in clinical findings. The best-characterized variant, familial partial lipodystrophy type 2 or Dunnigan’s lipodystrophy, results from defects in the gene encoding lamins A and C.

**Acquired Generalized Lipodystrophy**

Acquired generalized lipodystrophy is an extremely rare condition of widespread subcutaneous fat loss. The etiology is poorly understood, but these patients may also have associated autoimmune connective tissue disease.

**Acquired Partial Lipodystrophy**

Acquired partial lipodystrophy, or Barraquer-Simons syndrome, is characterized by gradual loss of fat from the upper body and truncal region during childhood.Though no mechanism for the development of acquired partial lipodystrophy has been confirmed, some studies have linked complement induced adipocyte lysis to patients with serum positive for nephritic factor.

Over the past few decades, highly active anti-retroviral therapy induced lipodystrophy has become the most common form of acquired partial lipodystrophy. It is associated with the use of anti-viral agents including the protease inhibitors or nucleoside analogs used to treat human immunodeficiency virus. Although the mechanism is still unclear, it is known that these medications can damage adipocytes.

**Lipodystrophy Associated with Insulin Treatment**

Lipodystrophy associated with subcutaneous insulin injections may present as either lipohypertrophy (LH) or lipoatrophy (LA). Lipoatrophy presents as a large, often deep, retracted scar on the skin and likely has an immunological basis.  LH is a thickened ‘rubbery’ tissue swelling that can be picked up by a directed, accurate physical examination.