The mechanism of salivary gland secretion involves primarily cholinergic signaling by the parasympathetic nerves and signaling by neuropeptides like substance P, but also adrenergic signaling by sympathetic nerves. Parasympathetic stimulation will activate acetylcholine receptors to activate protein kinase C (PKC), releasing diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP3) which stimulate increased intracellular calcium levels. The rise in calcium mediates the increased volume of saliva and amylase output. Substance P will activate the neurokinin-1 (NK-1) receptor to similarly stimulate PKC to increase the formation of IP3 and DAG, which subsequently increase amylase output and volume flow. Sympathetic stimulation will increase alpha receptor stimulation by norepinephrine which causes smooth muscle contraction and increases volume flow and amylase output. Norepinephrine will also act on beta receptors and activate the cyclic adenosine monophosphate cascade, increasing protein kinase A (PKA) activity, amylase output, and transient saliva volume flow.

There are two main stages to the secretion of saliva. First, once stimulated, acinar cells secrete primary saliva which is isotonic and contains amylase, mucus, and extracellular fluid. This isotonic form of saliva is made by secreting sodium chloride. In the second stage, the primary saliva gets modified as it passes down the ductal tree. The sodium gets actively reabsorbed, potassium is actively secreted, chloride is passively absorbed, and bicarbonate secreted. Of note, the ductal epithelium has poor water permeability. The final saliva product will be hypotonic.