The Romberg test is a simple bedside test that should be performed on all patients presenting with imbalance, dizziness, and unprovoked falls. A positive Romberg test denotes sensory ataxia as the cause of postural imbalance. Sustaining balance while standing in an upright position depends on the sensory and motor pathways of the brainstem. The sensory pathway involves proprioception and the body's awareness of position and motion in space. Detecting a proprioceptive deficit with a positive Romberg test indicates further workup into myelopathies that may result in dorsal column deficits. Permanent dysfunction and disability may be remediable and treatable in some circumstances with early detection.

A thorough history and detailed physical examination are essential, as well as using focused laboratory testing as indicated. For example, the clinician may choose to rule out tertiary syphilis using diagnostic studies such as serologic markers and CSF enzyme immunoassay (CSF-EIA).

Modified versions of the Romberg test provide a wide range of clinical applications for balance assessment. Some of these variations include:

- **Sharpened Romberg Test**(**SRT**) - used in assessing ataxia in patients recovering the severity of decompression sickness, such as in divers.
- This test procedure differs from the traditional Romberg Test in the positioning of the feet. Instead of standing with feet shoulder-width apart, the sharpened Romberg test dictates that the feet of the patient align in a strict tandem heel-to-toe position.

- **Single-legged Stance Test (SLST)**- is mainly used to assess postural stability and control in the elderly and those with Parkinson's disease.
- Static balance test serves as a balanced assessment of Parkinson's disease. The process entails assessing how long the patient can maintain a single-leg stance with eyes open. The test ends after 60 seconds, and each leg is tested three times.

- **Sitting-rising Test****(SRT)**- is an easily administered test focused on the assessment of the elderly population as well as stroke victims as a tool to predict mortality risk.
- The evaluator instructs the patient to try to sit, rise, and then stand to a position using the minimum amount of support needed. This test is on a point scale, with measures for strength, balance, and integration aspects, with 10 points being the maximum.

- **Get-Up and Go Test**- assessment of frailty and predictor of a geriatric patient's ability to go outside alone safely.

These variations of the Romberg test mentioned above are utilized depending on the discretion of the evaluator or physician and patient presentation. Not one test is deemed superior to the others, but slight variations in each test may provide a more specific method of detecting a postural imbalance that caters to a particular patient profile.