**Epidural Hematoma**

The meningeal vessels closely adhere to the internal aspect of the boney vault of the skull. As a result, injury to the boney vault of the skull can result in the rupture of the artery. Injury to the lateral aspect of the skull, via trauma to the pterion, may result in rupture of the vessel. Most commonly (85%), this type of injury to the middle meningeal artery will result in an epidural hematoma.

**Arteriovenous Fistula**

Arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs) are another clinical complication of the middle meningeal artery. Anatomically, the middle meningeal artery runs along with paired veins, and a traumatic tear in the skull wall may result in a traumatic AVF.

**Aneurysm**

Uncommonly, aneurysms of the middle meningeal artery may be seen. Both true aneurysms and pseudoaneurysms may be observed in the middle meningeal artery, occurring under different conditions. Pseudoaneurysms are most commonly associated with trauma to the skull and are responsible for the lucid interval before a delayed bleed.

**Migraine**

The middle meningeal artery also plays a role in the onset of migraine headaches. The dura mater that the middle meningeal artery burrows into is a pain-sensitive structure. Dilation of the middle meningeal artery, which is associated with substance P and neurokinin A, results in headaches. Even though dilation of the middle meningeal artery has been shown to cause pain consistent with migraines, it has been difficult to observe middle meningeal artery dilation during the event of a spontaneous migraine.

**Chronic Subdural Hematoma**

Middle meningeal artery embolization is being proposed as a minimally invasive treatment option for the management of chronic subdural hematomas, especially the recurrent ones.