# Continuing Education Activity

Acquired digital fibrokeratoma (ADFK) is a rare, benign, fibrous tumor. It usually occurs in adults as a solitary lesion on fingers and toes. Since ADFK shares clinical and histologic features with other cutaneous conditions, careful examination is necessary for proper diagnosis and management. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of ADFK and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the typical patient history associated with acquired digital fibrokeratoma.
- Explain the treatment modalities of acquired digital fibrokeratoma.
- Review the differential diagnosis for acquired digital fibrokeratoma.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the care of patients with acquired digital fibrokeratoma.

# Introduction

Acquired digital fibrokeratoma (ADFK) is a relatively rare, benign, fibrous tumor.

# Etiology

The etiology of acquired digital fibrokeratoma remains unclear. It has been proposed to be associated with trauma or chronic irritation, especially in the acral areas.

# Epidemiology

Acquired digital fibrokeratoma is a rarely reported tumor. The actual incidence is still unknown. Most publications related to this condition only concern individual case reports. Usually, the authors stressed the lesions’ unusual size, location, or association with other conditions. A few case series exist. The most significant case series published so far included 50 patients.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of acquired digital fibrokeratoma is unknown. Histologically, the tumor is composed of denser fibers than normal skin and contains more fibroblasts and coarser elastic fibers. Therefore, the presumption is that ADFK results from the neoformation of collagen by fibroblasts.S. aureus enterotoxin B was shown to increase fibroblasts migration.

# Histopathology

Excisional biopsy should be the gold standard for acquired digital fibrokeratoma diagnosis. The histopathological examination typically reveals a very hyperkeratotic and acanthotic epidermis with thick collagen bundles oriented along the vertical axis in the dermis. The dermal core of an ADFK presents one of three histological variants which were characterized by Kint et al.

# History and Physical

In most cases, acquired digital fibrokeratoma presents as an asymptomatic protuberance that does not show spontaneous regression.

# Evaluation

The dermoscopic features of acquired digital fibrokeratoma have been rarely investigated and may differ among ADFK cases. Rubegni et al. reported a central homogeneous pale-yellow core fringed by a hyperkeratotic white scaly collarette. These features may reflect the epidermal acanthosis, hyperkeratosis, and the presence of dense collagen fibers. More peripherally, a whitish-yellow area with dotted vessels was evident, while globular vessels externally encircled the whole tumor.

# Treatment / Management

There are reports of diverse therapeutic options, including cryotherapy, shave excision, curettage, and cauterization. However, surgical excision is the mainstay of effective treatment. The tumor should be excised from its basal attachment to prevent recurrences.

# Differential Diagnosis

It is important to know about the various causes of cutaneous lesions mimicking acquired digital fibrokeratoma so that treatment can commence promptly. The differential diagnosis of ADFK includes supernumerary digit, verrucae vulgaris, cutaneous horn, neurofibroma, and pyogenic granuloma.

Supernumerary digit, usually found at the base of the fifth finger is one of the most common hereditary limb malformations. Histologically, rudimentary polydactyly differs from ADFK by the presence of nerve bundles and neuroid elements.

Verrucae vulgaris, also known as common warts, is the most frequently occurring neoplasm of the hand and fingers and is caused by human papillomavirus types 1, 2, 4, and 29.

A cutaneous horn is a clinical diagnosis referring to an exophytic and hyperkeratotic growth that contains a column of keratin. Histological examination may show a premalignant or malignant underlying process. Cutaneous neurofibromas are benign tumors that may share a clinical resemblance with ADFK and presents as a soft, polypoid, dome-shaped tumor.

Pyogenic granuloma is a common vascular tumor that usually occurs in areas of minor trauma.

# Prognosis

Acquired digital fibrokeratoma is a benign tumor with no risk of malignant transformation. Surgical excision is curative with a low risk of pain, bleeding, and infection. Excellent functional recovery with a satisfying cosmetic result is the expectation after complete surgical treatment. Usually, there is no recurrence.

# Complications

No reports exist of severe complications. However, a rare variant of acquired digital fibrokeratoma, known as periungual fibrokeratoma may cause nail plate deformity and affect the function of the digit.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

There are no preventative measures that can be taken as the etiology is not clear. Patient education should include post-operative instructions to reduce the risk of infection.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The majority of skin lesions first present to primary care providers, including nurse practitioners. However, the number of cutaneous lesions is vast, and the primary care provider cannot know all of them. Thus, it is important to work in collaboration with a dermatologist when faced with an unknown skin lesion. The other important fact is that clinicians should not presume that all skin lesions are benign; missing a malignancy can prove to be devastating for the patient.

Acquired digital fibrokeratoma is most commonly diagnosed based on history and physical examination. Clinicians need to be familiar with unusual manifestations and other skin conditions that may simulate ADFK. Microscopic assessment is often required to provide histological diagnosis and variants. Management of ADFK is possible with a complete surgical excision performed by a dermatologist or a plastic surgeon. The postoperative period involves nurses for incision care and pharmacists for appropriate pain management that could significantly affect the patient's quality of life. If either the pharmacist or the nurse detects any failure in treatment or follow-up, they should report this to the treating clinician. Despite acquired digital fibrokeratoma being a benign lesion, the principles of interprofessional team dynamics are important, as they will always lead to better patient outcomes. [Level 5]