**Origins of Cognitive Behavior Therapy**

The idea for developing this form of psychotherapy took root when Aaron Beck began to notice that his patients with depression often verbalized thoughts that were lacking in validity and noted characteristic “cognitive distortions” in their thinking. His empirical observations led him to start viewing depression not so much as a mood disorder but as a cognitive disorder. Based on his clinical observations and empirical findings, Beck outlined a new cognitive theory of depression. He published Cognitive Therapy for Depression (Beck, Rush, Shaw, and Emery, 1979) after having published a study that evaluated and demonstrated the efficacy of cognitive therapy. The combination of a detailed treatment protocol manual with outcome research was an innovation in psychotherapy practice that had only previously been attempted by behavior therapists in treating discrete behavioral problems. By accomplishing the same feat with a more complex set of clinical interventions that included cognitive, emotional, and behavioral components, Beck pioneered a model for what psychologists many years later defined as an “empirically validated psychological treatment.”

Other clinicians and researchers became interested and began developing CBT treatment protocols and evaluating their efficacy. Specific treatment protocols were developed for some psychiatric disorders. As behavioral strategies were incorporated, the term cognitive therapy changed to cognitive behavior therapy. Today CBT is the most extensively researched of all psychotherapies with several evidence-based treatment protocols.

**Cognitive Model**

CBT is based on a straightforward, common-sense model of the relationships among cognition, emotion, and behavior.

Three aspects of cognition are emphasized:

- Automatic thoughts

- Cognitive distortions

- Underlying beliefs or schemas

**Automatic Thoughts**

An individual’s immediate, unpremeditated interpretations of events are referred to as automatic thoughts. Automatic thoughts shape both the individual’s emotions and their actions in response to events. For example, a friend may cross you in the hallway and not say hello to you. If you were to have an automatic thought of “he hates me,” or “I have done something to anger him,” it is likely to impact your mood and cause you to feel upset and also to behave in an avoidant manner when you see him next. On the other hand, if you had the automatic thought, “he is in a hurry,” you would not be too concerned, and you would not be avoidant when you were to see him next.

CBT is based on the observation that dysfunctional automatic thoughts that are exaggerated, distorted, mistaken, or unrealistic in other ways, play a significant role in psychopathology.

**Cognitive Distortions**

Errors in logic are quite prevalent in patients with psychological disorders. They lead individuals to erroneous conclusions. Below are some cognitive distortions that are commonly seen in individuals with psychopathology:

- Dichotomous thinking: Things are seen regarding two mutually exclusive categories with no shades of gray in between.

- Overgeneralization: Taking isolated cases and using them to make wide generalizations.

- Selective abstraction: Focusing exclusively on certain, usually negative or upsetting, aspects of something while ignoring the rest.

- Disqualifying the positive: Positive experiences that conflict with the individual’s negative views are discounted.

- Mind reading: Assuming the thoughts and intentions of others.

- Fortune telling: Predicting how things will turn out before they happen.

- Minimization: Positive characteristics or experiences are treated as real but insignificant.

- Catastrophizing: Focusing on the worst possible outcome, however unlikely, or thinking that a situation is unbearable or impossible when it is just uncomfortable.

- Emotional reasoning: Making decisions and arguments based on how you feel rather than objective reality.

- “Should” statements: Concentrating on what you think “should” or “ought to be” rather than the actual situation you are faced with or having rigid rules which you always apply no matter the circumstances.

- Personalization, blame, or attribution: Assuming you are completely or directly responsible for a negative outcome. When applied to others consistently, the blame is the distortion.

**Underlying Beliefs**

Underlying beliefs shape the perception and interpretation of events. Belief systems or schemas take shape as we go through life experiences. They are defined as templates or rules for information processing that underlie the most superficial layer of automatic thoughts. Beliefs are understood at two levels in CBT:

Core Beliefs

- The central ideas about self and the world

- The most fundamental level of belief

- They are global, rigid, and overgeneralized

Examples of dysfunctional core beliefs:

- “I am unlovable”

- “I am inadequate”

- “The world is a hostile and dangerous place”

Intermediate Beliefs

- Consist of assumptions, attitudes, and rules

- Influenced in their development by the core beliefs

Examples of dysfunctional intermediate beliefs:

- “To be accepted, I should always please others.”

- “I should be excellent at everything I do to be considered adequate.”

- “It is best to have as little as possible to do with people.”