Stapedectomy may be performed under local or general anesthesia. The surgeon should be in communication with the anesthesiologist regarding the use of a nerve monitor, thus discouraging the use of any long-acting paralytics should general anesthesia be chosen. When thinking of which local anesthetic to use for the canal skin incision, many choose to use lidocaine or bupivacaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine. There have been postulations that the use of diluted epinephrine alone may be the route of choice for fear of migration of the amide anesthetics to the facial nerve, resulting in the inability to monitor facial nerve function. The latter, however, has not been fully supported by the literature as of yet.

Positioning the patient to achieve a comfortable procedural field for the surgeon is of utmost importance. The head of the operating table should be turned 180 degrees after proper anesthesia has been achieved, and the patient should be as close to the operating surgeon as possibly permitted by the table. In patients with short necks or large chests, placing the table in a very slight Trendelenburg position may be helpful. If a dorsal venous graft of the hand is planned, the arm opposite the ear being operated on should be positioned on an arm board. Patient comfort should be maintained with arm pads, knee elevation, and lumbar support as necessary.

Preparation of the field is carried out with alcohol or povidone-iodine (Betadine) solution, and the patient is draped for a transcanal procedure. The microscope being used is also draped before the case begins. The ear canal is suctioned of any remaining preparation, and cerumen is removed as necessary.