When a physical examination does not determine the origin of the tearing clearly, different tests can help assess the watery eye.

**Secretory test.**These tests help evaluate the increased tear production in reflex tearing or primary hypersecretion cases.

- Schirmer test. A Whatman filter paper (35 mm x 5 mm) strip is placed between the middle and lateral third of the lower lid, and the patient is instructed to keep the eyes open, blinking normally, for five minutes. The distance that is wetted in five minutes is recorded.

- 
              
- The Schirmer I test is performed without a topical anesthetic to assess basal and reflex tear production. 
              
              
- The Schirmer II test is performed with a topical anesthetic to assess basal tear production. 
              
              
- The Schirmer III test is used to measure reflex secretion. In this test, a topical anesthetic is not applied to the ocular surface. A cotton applicator is then applied to the nasal mucosa and used to stimulate the trigeminal nerve. Some literature sources list this as the Schirmer II test, while the Schirmer I and II are listed as IA and IB.

- Fluorescein tear break-up time (FTBUT). This test assesses the tear film's stability, as an unstable tear film can trigger reflex tearing.

**Excretory test**. These tests are used to report the lacrimal system patency and drainage function.

- Fluorescein dye disappearance test (FDDT): This physiologic test consists of staining the tear film using a fluorescein strip or instilling a drop of 2% fluorescein in the lower fornix. Observations of the residual fluorescence of the tear meniscus are made at 5 minutes, and the thickness of the tear meniscus is measured and graded on a scale that can be used to quantify the thickness subjectively. The scale range is 0 to 4+, with 0 representing no fluorescein dye remaining and +4 representing all the fluorescein dye remaining. A thin or no fluorescein remaining indicates a positive test and probable normal drainage outflow. This test is most valuable when both sides are compared simultaneously, which results in an asymmetric tear meniscus.

- Jones dye test 1 (JDT1): In this physiologic test, a drop of fluorescein 2% is instilled in the lower conjunctiva. The patient is asked to blow each nostril separately in a tissue. Alternatively, a swab is inserted into the nose after 2 and 5 minutes. If the tissue or swab is not stained with fluorescein, the test is considered negative and likely to have an impaired drainage system. If fluorescein is obtained, the test is positive and may suggest there is no anatomic or functional blockage.

- Jones dye test 2 (JDT2): This non-physiological test is performed in patients with negative JDT1. A small syringe is used to inject 1 mL of normal saline gently through a lacrimal cannula situated at the punctum. The test is positive if the fluid from the nose is deeply stained with fluorescein. A positive test indicates an incomplete obstruction in the nasolacrimal duct. In this situation, the patent lacrimal puncta and canaliculi enable the lacrimal sac to be filled with fluorescein, which flows down to the incomplete obstructed nasolacrimal duct. When the canaliculus is open but not functioning, the fluid obtained from the nose is clear (negative test) because the fluorescein has not reached the lacrimal sac. Failure to get fluid out of the nose indicates a complete obstruction in the lacrimal drainage system.

- Lacrimal probing test: After topical anesthesia of the conjunctival sac, the lid is distracted laterally and kept under tension. At the same time, a Bowman probe is inserted gently vertically through the punctum and then horizontally through the canaliculus until a hard (lacrimal bone) or soft stop (tissue) is felt by the examiner. Bone is contacted when the probe passes through the lacrimal sac, which indicates a patent lacrimal system up to the lacrimal sac. Alternatively, when the probe's progress is impeded by soft tissue, stenosis or obstruction of the canalicular system is present. When there is a stop, the probe is clamped at the punctum. Then the distance to the clamp is measured to determine the length to the site of obstruction or stenosis. A calibrated Bowman probe may help to localize the site of obstruction more easily and accurately.

- Lacrimal syringing test (LST): After topical anesthesia of the conjunctival sac, the lid is distracted laterally and kept under tension. At the same time, a lacrimal cannula on a saline-filled 5-mL syringe is inserted gently vertically through the punctum and then horizontally through the canaliculus until a hard or soft stop. The plunger is then gently pushed down to flush the nasolacrimal duct with saline, and the degree and localization of reflux are recorded. The duct is anatomically patent if the saline flows into the nose or throat. Reflux via the same or contralateral punctum suggests stenosis or obstruction. While regurgitation through the opposite punctum means a block of the common canaliculus or more distal structures, reflux through the same punctum indicates obstruction of the ipsilateral canaliculus, and syringing must be repeated through the opposite canaliculus. Distension of the lacrimal sac suggests a nasolacrimal duct obstruction.

- Optical coherence tomography (OCT), which uses the principle of low coherence interferometry, is gaining popularity in obtaining images from the punctum and canaliculus due to its noninvasive nature. However, its use is limited due to the lack of guidelines about standard terminologies, measurements, and image capture techniques. New modalities such as dynamic OCT and OCT dacryocystography will play an essential role in the future as they provide more extensive information about the anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology of punctal and canalicular disorders.

- Dacryoendoscopy: A dacryoendoscope is inserted through the lower or upper punctum. This leads to great detailed direct visualization of the proximal lacrimal drainage system (punctum and canaliculus).

- Nasal endoscopy: A rhinoscope is used to examine the nasal space to assess anatomic variations and to rule out nasal pathologies such as inflammation, polyps, and tumors.

- Dacryoscintigragphy (DSG): A 10-mL drop of technetium-99m radiotracer is instilled into the conjunctiva's lower fornix, and images are taken every minute for 45 minutes with a gamma camera. DSG is a noninvasive helpful technique to assess the functional patency of the lacrimal drainage system.

- Conventional dacryocystography (CDCG): This technique requires the injection of contrast media (lipoidal, iohexol, iopamidol) in the superior or inferior canaliculus to obtain posterior and lateral radiographs. CDCG provides more extended information about the anatomy of the lacrimal drainage system, which helps localize the site of obstruction. Currently, its use is limited to atypical cases. Disadvantages include the use of ionizing radiation and contrast media, lack of information about the surrounding bony structures, inability to assess the tear flow dynamics, and a limited view of the proximal lacrimal system.

- Digitally subtracted dacryocystography (DS-DCG): This technique leads to bone-free images of the lacrimal drainage system after injecting contrast media (iohexol, iopamidol, sinograffin) in the superior or inferior canaliculus. DS-DCG is indicated in complex lacrimal disorders. Disadvantages include the use of ionizing radiation and contrast media, lack of information about the surrounding bony structures, inability to assess the tear flow dynamics, and a limited view of the proximal lacrimal system.

- Computed tomographic dacryocystography (CT-DCG): This technique involves obtaining axial and coronal (1-2 mm thickness) computed tomographic images after using contrast media. The contrast media (iohexol, iopamidol) could be injected in the inferior or superior canaliculus or applied topically every minute for five minutes or three times at 0, 5, and 10 minutes. The main advantage is the information about the surrounding bony structures, which is relevant in assessing nasolacrimal obstructions in cases of maxillofacial trauma, congenital craniofacial deformities, previous surgery, lacrimal drainage tumors, and associated sinus disease. CT-DCG is the technique of choice when the bony anatomy is vital for pre-operative planning. Limitations include higher ionizing radiation exposure than DCG, contrast use, poor visualization of the common canaliculus, and inability to assess the dynamic tear flow. Currently, a reduction in ionizing radiation exposure could be attained using cone-beam CT-DCG with similar good images of the lacrimal drainage system.

- Magnetic resonance dacryocystography (MR-DCG): It uses fast sequence techniques and fat suppression to obtain good-quality images of the lacrimal drainage system. Gadolinium contrast is used by cannulation or topical instillation (one drop every minute for five minutes or one drop every three minutes for 15 to 20 minutes). Alternatively, normal saline or normal saline mixed with 0.5% lidocaine and a balanced salt solution can be used.