**Stillbirths and Abortion**

Stillbirths and preterm labor leading to abortion is the serious complication NTDs.

**Polyhydramnios**

It is typically associated with anencephaly because there is no mechanism for the swallowing reflex so that amniotic fluid remains accumulated in the amniotic sac. This condition is obvious; patients with neural tube disorders have a learning disability as there has been the arrest of the development of neural tissue. According to the conducted study, it is estimated that around 27% of pregnancies with anencephaly developed polyhydramnios few requiring amniodrainage in the third trimester.

**Arnold-Chiari Malformation**

It is defined as the downward displacement (herniation) of part of the cerebellum into the foramen magnum because of the tethering of the spinal cord in the vertebral column due to its abnormal development (spina bifida).

**Hydrocephalus**

Brain malformation has a direct impact on the development of hydrocephalus. Encephalocele is associated with the communicating type of hydrocephalus.

**Meningitis**

Continuous leakage of cerebrospinal fluid paves the easy access to meninges for normal naso-oropharynx such as streptococci, enterococci. Children with NTDs are susceptible to meningitis.

**Cognitive disability:**Normal CSF pressure, osmolarity, and constituents of CSF are required for the proper development of the brain, mainly the cerebral cortex. Patients with NTDs have less cortical development even with the normal head size due to the free flow of CSF down through spina bifida. Neural cell proliferation and migration are deranged by abnormal CSF physiology.

**Spinal fistula:**Spinal fistula formation and a continuous discharge of CSF is common in some cases.

**Complications due to fetal surgery:**Preterm delivery, obstetric complications, pulmonary edema percutaneous fetoscopic vs. open repair: preterm birth and placental rupture are more common in percutaneous fetoscopic surgery, whereas the rate of uterine dehiscence is more in open surgery.