The treatment of choice for patients with a giant cell tumor of bone involving the appendicular skeleton is surgery. The type of surgery depends on the size and area of the tumor and whether there has been a pathological fracture. The surgical options include intralesional curettage (with or without bone cement), en bloc resection, or marginal excision.

The goal of treatment is to minimize the morbidity and to maximize the functionality of the affected bone; this was traditionally done by intralesional curettage with the packing of the cavity with corticocancellous bone. Newer methods such as cementation using bone cement (PMMA) is encouraging as it helps with reconstruction and reduces local recurrence. The thinking is that by creating an exothermic reaction resulting in local hyperthermia, inducing necrosis of the remaining GCTB tissue.

Recurrence rates are as high as 50%. Local adjuvants such as aqueous zinc chloride, PMMA, phenol, argon beam coagulation, or cryotherapy have been utilized to reduce these rates.

Sacral tumors tend to be more difficult because of their location. The surgery usually has high morbidity primarily because of the proximity of the sacral nerves. Treatment requires a balance of surgery, radiation therapy, and denosumab, and there is also limited evidence of the effective use of arterial embolization.

Spinal tumors also tend to be very difficult to treat, as the goal is complete resection. The best treatment model has not yet been established. Treatment currently is patient-specific, trying to maximize the effectiveness of the surgery without having unacceptable morbidity.

Pulmonary metastases generally are not as aggressive as other solid tumors. However, with reports of fatal cases, surgical resection is the primary treatment. Other options include denosumab therapy, monitoring with chest computed tomography (CT), or whole-lung radiation therapy.

**Denosumab**– is a monoclonal antibody that works by binding to RANKL, stopping it from activating its receptor, RANK. This action results in inhibiting the function and recruitment of osteoclast-like cells. Denosumab is primarily for patients in the following clinical situations: (1) when expecting significant morbidity from initial surgery, (2) locally recurrence, (3) poor surgical candidate, or (4) high-risk locations. Early reports from a phase II study suggest a recurrence rate of 15% for patients with significant expected morbidity from the initial surgery.