To understand what pre-procedure evaluations are needed, one must understand what a cardiac catheterization procedure entails and what complications can arise from the procedure itself as well as a patient with an acute coronary syndrome. The procedure itself entails gaining vascular access and cannulation of the coronary arterial tree. Large doses of anticoagulant medications as well as antiplatelet medications will be administered, significantly increasing the bleeding risk of the procedure. Additionally, iodinated contrast is used for imaging in angiographic procedures, most of which are consider nephrotoxic. Other patients can present with a large anterior myocardial infarction or right ventricular infarction that can often present in cardiogenic shock or advanced atrioventricular heart block. A thorough peri-procedural evaluation is vital before sending a patient for cardiac catheterization.

**Vitals**

- The first step for all patients presenting with ACS is to assess for hemodynamic instability. There should be continuous monitoring of the heart rate, along with blood pressure readings every 3 to 5 minutes. Pulse oximetry should be performed on arrival and continuously monitored. The temperature should be taken to assess for fever or other signs of systemic infection. The respiratory rate should undergo continuous monitoring in cases of respiratory distress.

**12 Lead Electrocardiogram (ECG)**

- Generally performed in the emergency room when a patient first presents with acute coronary syndrome. Typical ECG findings for ACS vary based on subtype and presentation. Unstable angina and NSTEMI can present with a normal ECG or with ECG concerning for ischemia, such as ST depressions, T wave inversion, or sustained or nonsustained arrhythmias (premature ventricular complexes, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, sustained ventricular tachycardia, etc.) STEMI will present most commonly as J point elevation.

**Continuous Telemetry**

- Every patient with ACS should have continuous monitoring with telemetry, most commonly portable cardiac resuscitation devices with defibrillation pads placed before presenting to the cardiac catheterization laboratory.

**Labs**

- **Complete Blood Count**(CBC) - Due to the use of high-dose anticoagulant and antiplatelet medications, a complete blood count is needed to assess baseline hemoglobin and platelet levels to help quantify the bleeding risk.

- **Basic Metabolic Profile**(BMP) - A baseline blood urea nitrogen and creatinine level are necessary to evaluate for post-procedure contrast nephropathy as well as the ability to use other cardiac medications that are renally cleared due to the use of nephrotoxic agents during the procedure, specifically iodinated contrast

- **Partial Thromboplastin Time**(PTT) - To assess baseline anticoagulation levels and for appropriate dosing and monitor of medications during the procedure

- **Prothrombin Time**(PT) and**International Normalized Ratio**(INR) - To determine baseline anticoagulation levels and for proper dosing, monitoring of medications during the procedure

- **Troponin**- To assess the baseline degree of cardiac damage and allows for quantification of the timing of the initial event.

- **CKMB**- Sometimes used to help assess for acute or subacute stent thrombosis in a patient that has recently undergone PCI

- **Brain Natriuretic Peptide**(BNP) - Generally not needed. However, it can help assess and establish a baseline for treatment and prognosis in patients with congestive heart failure in the setting of acute myocardial infarction.

**Imaging**

- **Chest X-ray**(CXR) - Generally not needed but can assist in assessing for acute pulmonary edema and evidence for cardiogenic shock

- **CT Chest with contrast**- Generally not required unless there is a concern for possible aortic dissection, pulmonary embolism, or other causes of acute chest pain

- **CT Brain without contrast**- Generally not needed unless there is a concern for possible acute ischemic or hemorrhagic CVA