Depression is a very common disorder encountered by the nurse practitioner, primary care provider, psychiatrist, and mental health worker, coordinating as an interprofessional healthcare team. The disorder has extremely high morbidity including the risk of suicide. All healthcare workers should be knowledgeable about this disorder and refer the patient to a psychiatrist if there is a risk of self-harm.

Education plays an important role in the successful treatment of major depressive disorder. This would include the education of the family and the patient. Lack of accurate information and misperceptions of the illness as a personal weakness or failings leads to painful stigmatization and avoidance of the diagnosis by many of those affected. Patients should know the rationale behind the choice of treatment, potential adverse effects, and expected results.

The involvement of the pharmacist in the treatment plan can enhance medication compliance and referral for psychotherapy. The pharmacist can also check that dosing is appropriate, that there are no significant interactions, and counsel on adverse effects. Engaging family members can be a critical component of a treatment plan. Family members are helpful informants, can ensure medication compliance, be a big source of social support and can encourage patients to change behaviors that perpetuate depression (e.g., inactivity).

Patients with moderate to severe depression should also be seen by a social worker or case management nurse to ensure that they have a support system and finances for treatment. If there is a concern, the person managing the case should present the issues to the interprofessional team so that a plan can be developed to get the patient the care they need.  Overall, depression is managed by an interprofessional team dedicated to the management of mental health disorders. Open communication between all the members of the interprofessional team is the key to lowering the morbidity of the disorder. [Leve 5]

**Outcomes**

The outcomes for patients with depression are guarded. There is no cure and the condition has frequent relapses and remissions, leading to a poor quality of life.