Breast cancer is the most clinically relevant pathology of the mammary gland. Among females, it represents the most common malignancy, as well as the leading cause of cancer death. In males, it is a rare entity, representing 1% of cancer diagnoses and less than 0.1% cancer-related deaths. Risk factors for female breast cancer include advanced age, positive family history, early menarche, late menopause, nulliparity, oral contraceptive use, obesity, and full-term pregnancy after the age of 30. In addition, around 5 to 10% of breast cancer cases are considered to be hereditary, with most cases linked to germline BRCA1/2 mutations. On the other hand, risk factors for male breast cancer include obesity, positive family history, Klinefelter syndrome, gynecomastia, orchitis, testicular injury, cryptorchidism, alcoholism, liver disease, radiation exposure, and germline BRCA1/2 mutations. The most common histological type of breast cancer is invasive ductal carcinoma, which represents about 80% of all breast cancers. Other less common histological types include lobular, tubular, medullary, mucinous, neuroendocrine, papillary, metaplastic, and inflammatory carcinoma.

Regarding molecular subtypes, the most prevalent ones vary with age. For example, in young women with breast cancer (40 years of age or less), the triple-negative subtype has been found to be the most common. However, as age increases, luminal-A and luminal-B tumors become the predominant subtypes.

Other than breast cancer, the mammary glands can also be affected by some benign pathologies. These include fibroadenoma, papillomatosis, fibrocystic disease, lactating adenoma, gynecomastia, phyllodes tumor, mammary duct ectasia, mastitis, and mastalgia. Of these, the phyllodes tumor stands out because of its potential for malignancy.