Vernix caseosa is composed of 80.5% (water), 10.3% (lipids) and 9.1% (proteins).

However, since the fetal skin epidermal layer (stratum corneum, corneocytes) is still in its immature form (nonlamellar, no intracorneal desmosomes, and highly hydrated), which is desquamated within the vernix and mixed with sebaceous gland's sebum. Hence, the gross caseous morphology, while having approximately 80% water.

**Water**

The corneocytes in-utero engulf most of the vernix water, which helps in the epidermal development and the efficient connection with the local sebaceous glands. In elaboration, the immature corneocytes are devoid of nuclei, having networks of keratin microfilaments and a thick, nonlamellar layer of amorphous lipids, which indicates a way in which water contributes to the process of cornification (maturation) and the sebaceous glands forming an epidermal hydrophobic barrier in physiological assistance.

**Lipids**

The lipids are produced by stratum corneum and the sebaceous glands.

Stratum corneum (ceramides):

- Cholesterol esters

- Wax esters, etc.

Sebaceous glands (sebum):

- Cholesterol

- Triglycerides

- Free fatty acids

- Phospholipids, etc

The non-polar lipids (e.g., triglycerides) are predominating, with carbon chains up to 32 atoms. Although the vernix lipids resemble the adult stratum corneum, it has a decreased level of stratification order, in comparison.

Additionally, three different groups of lipid mediators are present within the vernix:

- Eicosanoids and related oxylipin analogs

- Endocannabinoids

- Sphingolipids

Demonstrating gestational phase, gender-specific, and maternal lifestyle-related differences, such as:

- Gestational phases: as the gestation progresses, there is a noted increase in the ceramide to sphingomyelin ratio, endocannabinoids-anandamide, and 2-arachidonoylglycerol.

- Gender-specific: an increase in sebaceous glands' proportions of wax esters and triacylglycerols with long hydrocarbon-chains in female fetuses.

- Maternal lifestyle: an anthroposophical maternal lifestyle (is an integrative lifestyle with philosophical basis, aiming to balance body, mind, and spirituality with a tendency to restrict the use of modern therapies, such as antibiotics or vaccines) shows an increase in the levels of linoleic acid oxidation products 9(10)-epoxy-12Z-octadecenoic and 12(13)-epoxy-9Z-octadecenoic acid (EpOMEs) and 12,13-dihydroxy-9Z-octadecenoic acid (DiHOME).

**Proteins**

- Cathelicidins

- Defensins

- Cystatin A

- UGRP-1

- Calgranulin A, B and C, etc.

The resultant of many conducted studies is the presence of 41 proteins, of which 25 are novel (e.g., cystatin A); moreover, 39% of identified proteins are components of the fetal innate immunity, and 29% have direct antimicrobial properties.