Scimitar syndrome is primarily an imaging diagnosis and gives a characteristic abnormal chest X-ray that shows the shadow of the descending pulmonary vein along the right cardiac border, a hypoplastic lung, as well as dextroposition of the heart. There can be mediastinal shifting in association with atelectasis or pulmonary agenesis.

Echocardiography is a better imaging study to start work-up; it helps to delineate the scimitar vein and any systemic arterial supply to the right lung. Also, identified associated cardiac defects can present in patients with severe symptoms.  Fetal echocardiography aid with the prenatal diagnosis by visualization of an obstructed pulmonary venous pathway, confluence behind the right atrium and a vertical vein. The flow velocity pattern that the scimitar vein has is monophasic and extends throughout the cardiac cycle with no reverse flow during atrial contraction different from the normal pulmonary venous flow usually biphasic or triphasic and with reversal of flow during atrial contraction.

Three-dimensional computed tomography (CT) and cardiac-gated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are the best diagnostic modalities, providing an excellent delineation of the anatomy of the abnormal pulmonary vein, its course, connection, and drainage. They can particularly aid with the detection of a horseshoe lung. Cine MRI and 3-D contrast-enhanced MR angiography allow the quantification of the pulmonary venous blood flow and help with the determination of the pulmonary to systemic flow ratio. These imaging modalities will also give a complete anatomical and functional diagnosis preventing the further need for more invasive techniques.

Cardiac catheterization and angiography are the most useful diagnostic studies to confirm the diagnosis of scimitar syndrome but not always necessary. They provide the pulmonary vascular resistance, the degree of the left-to-right shunt, clarification of the exact anatomy with the precise course of the anomalous vein, degree of pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary arterial anatomy, associated cardiac defects and can demonstrate additional systemic arterial collaterals from the thoracoabdominal aorta to the lung.