Intraventricular meningiomas are usually WHO grade I slow-growing lesions. With the growing use of brain MRI, most of these tumors are found incidentally and followed in an outpatient manner. Surgery can prove difficult due to the deep location of these lesions, sometimes, with high morbidity and mortality.

Small asymptomatic lesions <3cm are closely followed with brain MRI every six months for 1-2 years, and then once per year.

For large asymptomatic lesions >3cm in young good surgical candidates, gross total resection is recommended as it is curative in most cases. Surgery also provides and confirms the diagnosis. Neuronavigation can be used to plan and verify the exact trajectory of the surgery. Sometimes, complete resection can prove difficult due to vascular control being deep to the tumor, and pre-operative endovascular embolization should be attempted. If vascular control is not easily achieved, partial resection followed by adjuvant radiosurgery is a safe alternative. A needle biopsy is performed in poor surgical candidates if the diagnosis is unclear, followed by radiosurgery. If the diagnosis is clear, radiosurgery alone is sufficient.

For symptomatic lesions due to obstructive hydrocephalus or adjacent parenchymal edema, gross total resection is recommended. An external ventricular drain is usually not needed as the approach will drain the ventricles. For patients who are acutely deteriorating, an external ventricular drain is placed until the surgery is performed.

Surgical approaches are based on which ventricle the tumor is located, laterality, and the size.

Lateral ventricle:

Temporal horn of the lateral ventricle

- Transsylvian approach

- Transtemporal approach (through the posterior part of the middle temporal gyrus). Early visualization of the anterior choroidal artery. May cause visual field defects, and in the dominant hemisphere may cause aphasia.

- Occipitotemporal sulcus approach. The occipitotemporal sulcus can be opened with a subtemporal craniotomy to allow access to the posterior temporal horn.

Atrium

- Posterior interhemispheric transcingular approach (through dissection of the precuneus or cingulate gyrus).

- Interhemispheric transcallosal approach.

- Intraparietal sulcus approach. The intraparietal sulcus is opened with dissection of the parietal white matter toward the ventricle. It can produce visual field defects, apraxia, and acalculia.

- Transtemporal approach at the posterior part of the middle temporal gyrus. Early visualization of the anterior choroidal artery with devascularization of the tumor. The choroid plexus is followed until the tumor is reached and debulked.

Occipital horn of the lateral ventricle

- Posterior interhemispheric transcingular approach.

- Anterior and posterior transcortical and transcallosal approaches. Care is taken to enter into the correct ventricle when using the transcallosal approach.

Third ventricle:

- Anterior or posterior transcortical and transcallosal (interhemispheric) approach.

- Infratentorial supracerebellar approach. For tumors in the posterior area of the third ventricle.

Fourth ventricle:

- Telovelar approach

- Transvermian midline approach

- Transcerebellar paramedian approach