A common concern of patients is how effectively the healthcare provider treats their pain. The healthcare team, e.g., physicians, nurses, pharmacists, etc., must work together to assess and treat the patient's pain appropriately and avoid addiction. The prescriber should always initiate therapy on the lowest dose possible, and then the dose and frequency should be gradually increased to achieve the desired effect, efficacy, and tolerability. The prescriber should ensure that the patient clearly understands the need for regular monitoring and for the need to frequently assess the benefits and risks of treatment. The patient should be aware of complications such as constipation, fatigue, nausea, and the risk of respiratory depression.

The patient should ensure that only one healthcare provider prescribes and monitors the opioid analgesic therapy. Further, patients should understand that all healthcare providers are aware of any current opioid analgesics to avoid polypharmacy and medication interaction with other prescriptions. This can help reduce the chance of medication-induced CNS depression or respiratory depression. The healthcare team must be aware of federal and state opioid analgesic prescribing and dispensing regulations. Due to the inherent risks of opioid analgesic abuse, any treatment or opioid analgesic prescription of greater than a few days duration should include a treatment agreement or written informed consent.

The agreement should also require the patient to have only a single physician or appropriately licensed healthcare provider prescribe their opioid analgesic prescriptions and consent to random urine drug screens. The patient should receive counsel to contact the healthcare team for problems and make in-person appointments for refills. The agreement should discuss monitoring, need for follow-up visits, storage, and disposal of opioid analgesics not used. The agreement should list possible reasons for the discontinuance of opioid analgesic therapy.

Chronic pain is a significant condition affecting millions of people and is an important public health concern with considerable morbidity and mortality and associated with opioid drug diversion and misuse. Thus chronic pain is best managed with an interprofessional approach. Managing chronic pain requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including a primary care physician, nursing team, pharmacist, and pain medicine specialists. Without proper management, the patient's quality of life can have a deleterious impact. The evaluation and treatment of such patients are paramount, but health professionals must work as a team to avoid drug diversion and misuse.

Chronic pain correlates with several severe complications, including severe depression and suicide attempts, and ideation. The lifetime prevalence for chronic pain patients attempting suicide attempts was shown to be between 5% and 14%; suicidal ideation was approximately 20%.

- The first step is to evaluate a patient with acute pain by the primary care provider to prevent the progression of chronic pain.

- Conservative management of chronic pain should commence when symptoms are mild or moderate, including physical therapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and pharmacological management.

- A pharmacist or other expert knowledgeable in the medications frequently utilized to treat chronic pain should evaluate the medication regimen to include medication reconciliation to preclude any drug-drug interactions and alert the healthcare team regarding any concerns.

- The patient should regularly follow up with a primary care provider and pain specialists to assess and effectively treat the patient's pain.

- Clinicians must address comorbid psychiatric disorders. This action may require the involvement of a psychiatrist, depending on the severity of the patient's symptoms.

- If symptoms worsen on follow-up or if there is a concerning escalation of pharmacological therapy such as with opioids, a referral to a pain medicine specialist merits consideration.

- If the patient has exhausted various pharmacological and nonpharmacological treatment options, interventional procedures can be considered.

- If the patient expresses concern for suicidal ideation or plan at any time, an emergent psychiatric team should evaluate the patient immediately.

- Patients who have developed opioid dependence secondary to pharmacological therapy should be offered treatment, possibly referral for addiction treatment or detoxification if indicated. The patient should be placed on a medication weaning schedule or possibly medications to treat opioid dependence.

- Based on CDC recommendations, patients on high-dose opioid medications or patients with risk factors for opioid overdose (e.g., obesity, sleep apnea, concurrent benzodiazepine use, etc.) should receive naloxone at home for the emergent treatment of an unintentional overdose.

The interprofessional team should openly discuss and communicate clearly about the management of each patient so that the patient receives optimal care delivery. This area is where nurses and pharmacists can play a crucial role by verifying patient adherence to the treatment plan and monitoring progress (or lack thereof) with the present treatment plan. Nurses and pharmacists can help monitor for adverse medication side effects and concerns regarding diversion or misuse of opioids and communicate any areas of concern to the treating clinicians. Effective, open interprofessional communication and accurate documentation of findings for access by all team members are crucial in managing chronic pain and minimizing the adverse effects of chronic pain in the patient. [Level 2]

**Interprofessional Team Case Study**

**CC:**Syncope and Confusion

**HPI:**A 70-year-old confused female arrives in the trauma after she was found passed on the bathroom floor near the toilet. The husband reports a history of morbid obesity, diabetes mellitus, kidney disease, and chronic right hip pain, for which she has been scheduled for prosthetic hip surgery replacement that has been delayed to get her weight under control. She has been prescribed a combination of hydrocodone and acetaminophen to allow control of the pain enough for ambulation and daily pool exercises. Lately, the pain has been getting worse, and the husband mentions that occasionally she takes more medicine than prescribed.

**PE:**Vital signs T 98.7 degrees oF, BP 100/70, HR 110, RR 14, and O2 Saturation 92%.

A physical exam reveals a somnolent female that arouses to a painful stimulus. The heart, lung, and extremity exam is normal. There are no focal neurologic deficits.

**Workup**

Laboratory studies, including a CBC, chemistry, and urinalysis, are normal except for a moderate elevation of the blood urea nitrogen and creatinine. A chest x-ray and pelvic film are negative for fracture. The ECG was normal. The drug screen is positive for opioids and cannabinoids.

The patient is given naloxone and becomes awake and conversant. She admits that she was sitting on the toilet urinating; the last thing she remembers is feeling faint. She indicates that she has difficulty sleeping and walking due to chronic hip pain, and she experiences severe pain with exercise in their home pool. She denies suicidal ideation. She admits to taking an extra pain pill and "smoking a joint" prior to the episode.

Checking E-FORCE reveals she has been on a three times a day dose of her oxycodone and acetaminophen for the last six weeks prescribed by her orthopedic surgeon.

**Treatment**

The patient is admitted to the hospital, and orthopedic surgery, pain management, pharmacy, physical therapy, and dietician are consulted. Subsequent workup by the interprofessional team concludes the incident was caused by an accidental overdose of her opioid medication combined with her comorbid conditions.

The family and husband were informed that due to age, diabetes mellitus, and kidney disease, the opioid analgesic that she is taking was cleared less efficiently. With the doubling of her dose, she developed an acute toxic encephalopathy. The family and patient have a limited understanding of the potential side effects of opioids in treating pain and a poor understanding of exercise and dieting for weight control.The interprofessional team recommends that the family continue opioids at the prescribed dose without any additional doses, rare NSAIDs for breakthrough pain, monitored physical therapy and exercise, a planned diet, temporary placement of a TENS unit, pain monitored by a pain specialist, and surgical intervention as soon as possible.

At discharge, a written treatment and management plan is presented to the family and patient for discussion and consent. The goals include relief of pain, increased exercise and weight loss, and surgical intervention as soon as possible.

The patient is scheduled for outpatient pain management, physical therapy, and weight management. Before discharge, the pharmacist counsels the family and patient regarding the safe use, dosage regulation, side effects, and proper disposal of opioid medication. An emergency naloxone kit is prescribed, and the family is educated on its use.

**Follow-up**

Three months after discharge, the patient successfully lost 40 pounds (18 kg) and was cleared for surgery. Following hip replacement, the patient's pain has dramatically diminished, and she has gradually tapered off her pain medications. She continues to maintain regular exercise and dieting until she is noticeably improved. She reports that she feels better, enjoys life, and is encouraged by her progress.