# Introduction

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) acts as the principal inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system (CNS). Although researchers discovered GABA in biological tissues in 1910, its neurological role in mammals remained unknown until the late 1950s.

# Fundamentals

GABA is the principal inhibitory neurotransmitter in the CNS and is opposed by the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate.

# Issues of Concern

A disruption in the balance between inhibition and excitation, or the glutamate-GABA equilibrium, results in pathologies due to injury (e.g., strokes, Huntington’s disease), overexcitation (e.g., epilepsy, spastic disorders), or excessive inhibition (e.g., hypersomnia, benzodiazepine overdose).

Because GABA-agonists such as benzodiazepines depress CNS function, pharmacological management should consider any negative synergistic interactions with ethanol and opioid medications that can result in respiratory insufficiency and excessive somnolence/sedation.

Although benzodiazepines have indications for anxiety disorder, epilepsy, and alcohol withdrawal, they are also common drugs of abuse due to their euphoric effects or unintentional development of tolerance and dependence.

# Cellular Level

When an action potential reaches the synaptic terminal of an inhibitory (GABAnergic) interneuron, the action potential induces a change in membrane potential such that voltage-dependent calcium channels (VDCCs) open. Open VDCCs cause an influx of calcium ions into the axon terminal. The increased calcium concentration in the axon terminal after VDCC opening stimulates the movement of GABA-containing synaptic vesicles to approach the distal axon terminal and exocytose, releasing GABA into the synaptic cleft.

While in the synaptic cleft, GABA binds to the alpha and beta subunits on GABA receptors, usually found on the postsynaptic neuron (GABA-A receptors) or other presynaptic axon terminals (GABA-B receptors).

# Molecular Level

GABA is produced from glutamate, itself a derivative of alpha-ketoglutarate.

**Glutamate-GABA-glutamine cycle.**The glutamate-GABA-glutamine cycle is the multicellular process by which glutamate, glutamine, and GABA get processed.

# Function

GABA usually causes inhibition of action potentials by hyperpolarizing postsynaptic neurons and reducing the release of neurotransmitters from presynaptic neurons. The resulting inhibition decreases the activity of the affected cell, which manifests in effects ranging from decreased motor stimulation in motor neurons to decreased cortical activity in regions including the amygdala.

**GABA as an excitatory neurotransmitter in the developing CNS.**In immature neurons found in the embryonic CNS, GABA is excitatory and depolarizes these cells because of an elevated intracellular chloride ion concentration.

# Mechanism

There are two receptors for GABA: GABA-A and GABA-B.

**GABA-A receptors.**Historically, GABA-A was differentiated from GABA-B because baclofen binds to GABA-A, but bicuculline did not bind to GABA-A and vice-versa. GABA-A is a heteropentameric transmembrane ligand-gated chloride ion channel that is present in nearly all CNS neurons. Although there are many isoforms of GABA-A, most GABA-A receptors contain either alpha and beta subunits, or alpha, beta, and gamma subunits. The different combinations of alpha, beta, and gamma subunits in different GABA-A receptors influence what GABA agonistic or antagonistic drug will bind to them. Generally, due to the influx of chloride into the mature postsynaptic neuron, GABA-A activation causes hyperpolarization to decrease the likelihood of an action potential.

**GABA-B receptors.**GABA-B is a G-protein-coupled receptor that inhibits the activity of adenylate cyclase and voltage-gated calcium channels at axon terminals, resulting in modulation of intracellular activity and neurotransmitter release, respectively. GABA-B receptors are present as autoreceptors that inhibit GABA release or heteroreceptors that reduce the release of glutamate, norepinephrine, serotonin, or dopamine. Presynaptic GABA-B receptors also are coupled with G-protein-coupled inwardly-rectifying potassium (GIRK) channels to stimulate potassium uptake and cause hyperpolarization, limiting glutamate release.

# Testing

**Neuroimaging.**Neuroimaging studies used alone are not often used clinically to discern pathologic GABA signaling due to high overlap with other, more numerous neurotransmitters, and high required technical expertise in obtaining and interpreting neuroimaging studies.

**Cerebrospinal GABA.**Increased cerebrospinal GABA levels may be indicative of a disorder in GABA metabolism, such as a deficiency in either GABA-T or SSADH, the enzymes that are involved in GABA degradation.

**Plasma GABA.**Plasma GABA testing may be used to support the diagnosis of mood disorders and alcohol use disorder as a specific test.

# Pathophysiology

**Alcohol use.**Alcohol, or more specifically, ethanol, is a CNS depressant that works by potentiating the GABA-A receptor, inhibiting glutamate-binding NMDA receptors, and inhibiting VDCCs.

**Fetal alcohol syndrome.**The pathophysiology in fetal alcohol syndrome is mediated by ethanol binding to the GABA-A and NMDA receptors in the developing CNS.

**Anxiety disorders.**Anxiety disorders such as panic disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder are associated with decreased levels of GABA.

**Depression.**Although depression is primarily associated with alterations in dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin, GABA signaling deficits also play a role in depression.

**Epileptic disorders and tremors.**Epileptic seizures are thought to be paroxysmal hypersynchronous electrical discharges due to overexcitation of neurons in the brain.

**Huntington's disease.**The protein involved in Huntington disease, Huntingtin, inhibits the transcription and transport of GABA-A receptors and KCC2, causes neuroinflammation that weakens the inhibitory response and disruption of astrocytic glutamate transporters.

**Diseases involving excessive GABA.**Excessive GABA release can also be pathologic and manifests as idiopathic hypersomnia (IH), a condition that manifests as daytime sleepiness with excessive, unrefreshing sleep.

# Clinical Significance

**Acamprosate.**Acamprosate is a GABA-B modulator that increases the release of GABA from presynaptic neurons, inhibits VDCCs, and decreases NMDA activation; acamprosate can be used for patients with alcohol use disorder to maintain abstinence.

**Baclofen.**Baclofen is a hydrophilic GABA-B agonist that is thought to hyperpolarize anterior horn motor neurons in the spinal cord, resulting in decreased hyperreflexia and clonus.

**Barbiturates and benzodiazepines.**Barbiturates such as phenobarbital are GABA-A agonists currently in use for epilepsy and general anesthesia. For anxiolysis, they have been largely replaced by benzodiazepines, which have much lower overdose toxicity than barbiturates.

**Gabapentin and pregabalin.**Gabapentin and pregabalin are antiepileptic derivatives of GABA that does not interact with GABA receptors, but rather VDCCs containing the alpha-2-delta-1 subunit that leads to reduced neurotransmitter release and attenuation of neuronal excitation.

**Flumazenil.**Flumazenil is a competitive inhibitor of GABA-A receptors that can be used to treat severe benzodiazepine overdose. Its use is contraindicated if the overdose is unknown or mixed, there is tolerance to benzodiazepine or an underlying seizure disorder, or there is a risk of the prolonged QRS interval. Supportive care is otherwise indicated for benzodiazepine overdose.

**Propofol and other anesthetics.**Propofol is a GABA-A agonist favored over benzodiazepines in sedation and almost all surgical anesthesia for their pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles. Compared to benzodiazepines, propofol has a rapid psychomotor recovery. Other GABA-A agonists such as volatile anesthetics (isoflurane, nitric oxide) and etomidate are also used for anesthesia or sedation.

**Valproate.**Valproate is an antiepileptic drug thought to either increase pre-synaptic GABA levels by inhibiting GABA-T activity or enhancing the synthesis and release of GABA as well as modulating NMDA receptors. It is widely used to treat generalized and partial seizures in both adults and children.