The equipment required for the evaluation, examination, and diagnosis of presbyopia includes standard ophthalmic instruments normally used in a routine clinical setting. Generally, visual acuity is first assessed during the ophthalmologic examination, which is defined as the degree to which the visual system resolves fine details.

Visual acuity is an invaluable ophthalmological assessment tool and should be measured for far and near vision.

Systemic and ocular health evaluations are necessary clinical procedures that should be performed before any refractive procedure. The slit-lamp biomicroscope is an essential ophthalmic instrument when evaluating and examining ocular health status. The slit lamp tends to be used with accessory instruments such as a Volk lens, goniolens, and Goldmann tonometer, giving the practitioner a good idea of the ocular health status.

After completing the systemic and ocular health evaluation, clinical instruments such as a phoropter, trial lens box, retinoscope, and auto-refractor can be used to determine the refractive status of the eye.

**Selecting Frames**

The frame selection is an important aspect of ophthalmic dispensing corrective glasses since the frames can be face and prescription specific. When dispensing ophthalmic frames, the lens power, shape of the face, type of lens, pantoscopic tilt, wrap angle, weight, and height of the frame are important factors to address for the best visual performance, optimum fit, and adequate aesthetics.