In one large study of excised eyelid lesions, 59% were epidermal in origin, 1.5% were malignant, and 6% were premalignant (e.g., actinic keratosis or Bowen's disease). Of the malignant lesions, the majority (95%) were basal cell carcinoma, a minority (5%) squamous cell, and none were sebaceous cell carcinoma.

In another large study of eyelid tumors, 85.7% were benign, 1.1% premalignant, and 13.1% malignant lesions. Of the malignant lesions, 60% originated from epidermal cells and 34.6% from adnexal cells. 56.5% of malignant tumors were basal cell carcinomas, 34.6% were sebaceous carcinoma, 3.8% were squamous cell carcinomas, and 1.7% were lymphoma or plasmacytoma.

**Actinic Keratosis**

From 1990 to 1994, data from the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey showed that 14% of all dermatology visits were for AK.

Prevalence rates vary by country and range from 23% in the South Wales Skin Cancer Study to 60% in patients from Australia.

Risk factors for AK include male gender, significant cumulative sun exposure, older age, baldness, a personal history of melanoma or squamous cell carcinoma, and Fitzpatrick skin types I and II.

**Basal Cell Carcinoma**

In the United States and Western countries, basal cell carcinoma is the most common malignancy of the eyelid. A recent study of the American Academy of Ophthalmology's IRIS registry showed BCC prevalence at 0.088%. Using data from the English Cancer Registries, Saleh et al. reported that the incidence of BCC in England was 0.0045%.

As indicated above, there are regional variations, though basal cell carcinoma remains among the top two eyelid malignancies in all studied countries. For example, in India, BCC is the second most common eyelid malignancy (24%) after sebaceous carcinoma (53%).

**Squamous Cell Carcinoma & Keratoacanthoma**

In the United States and Western countries, squamous cell carcinoma is the second most common malignancy of the eyelid after basal cell carcinoma, representing <5% of all eyelid malignancies. A recent study of the American Academy of Ophthalmology's IRIS registry showed prevalence at 0.011%. However, it is still 40 times less common than basal cell carcinoma. It typically occurs in patients over the age of 50, though it can present at any age.

In other countries, squamous cell carcinoma remains among the top three eyelid malignancies, though prevalence varies from region to region. For example, in India, SCC is the third most common eyelid malignancy (18%) after sebaceous carcinoma (53%) and basal cell carcinoma (24%).

In addition, SCC occurs commonly after organ transplantation, with a reported incidence of 30% for lung transplants and 26% for heart transplant patients over five years. The prevalence of SCC amongst this group is related to post-transplantation systemic immunosuppression, which decreases the ability of the immune system to identify and destroy cancerous cells.

**Sebaceous Carcinoma**

A meta-analysis of 1,333 patients demonstrated the mean age of patients diagnosed with SC is 65.2 years old, with 60.2% female predominance.

**Melanoma**

Based on the National Cancer Database, a review of patients with head and neck melanoma from 2004 to 2015 reported that approximately 2% of cases affected the eyelids, with a higher prevalence in females (48%) than males (28.4%).

**Merkel Cell Carcinoma (MCC)**

Eyelid-specific MCC rates are not well delineated. However, approximately 1500 cases of MCC are diagnosed each year.

Patients diagnosed at a younger age are typically immunosuppressed in the setting of HIV/AIDS or organ transplantation.

**Lentigo Maligna**

Lentigo maligna (LM) exists on the spectrum of melanoma. When invasive, this entity is referred to as lentigo maligna melanoma (LMM).

The chief concern for this lesion is the transformation from LM to LMM, which can occur in 5% to 50% of cases.

Surgical excision is the primary treatment for these lesions, but for patients who are poor surgical candidates, topical agents (imiquimod cream, azelaic acid, 5-fluorouracil), cryotherapy, and radiotherapy are alternative treatment modalities.

There is a paucity of data regarding LM and LMM in the periocular region. For this reason, patients should be managed using a multidisciplinary approach consisting of oculoplastic surgeons, dermatologists, and primary care physicians.