Endogenous endophthalmitis (EE) has a multifactorial etiology, and causative agents vary from region to region. The causative agents can be fungal or bacterial, with fungal organisms dominating the majority of cases.Candida albicans account for many cases being the most common yeast, and among the molds, Aspergillus flavus is the commonest.

Klebsiella pneumonia, a gram-negative rod bacterium, is another causative agent reported to cause EE. Klebsiella has been reported in patients with liver abscess, diabetes mellitus, infective endocarditis, and after a routine colonoscopy.Clostridium septicum.Citrobacter koseri.

In fungal EE, mold infections are more common after chemotherapy and in patients undergoing liver and cardiac transplants, hematological malignancy, or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Aspergillus pneumonia has been blamed for causing EE in a small subset of patients.

The most common systemic risk factors for EE are diabetes mellitus, immunosuppression, patients on long term corticosteroids, history of recent hospitalization, ventilator-associated pneumonia, urinary tract infection, malignancy like lymphoma and leukemia, colon adenocarcinoma, dental infection, scleral perforation, vertebral osteomyelitis, liver abscess, asplenia, hypogammaglobulinemia, cardiac or renal transplant, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, chronic alcoholism, intravenous catheters and drug abuse (Bacillus cereus).  Mishra et al. reported a case of EE secondary to multifocal staphylococcal brain abscess associated with septic foci.

Neonatal EE is an alarming entity in children with bacterial infections, candida infection, malnourishment, retinopathy of prematurity, low birth weight, septicemia. The most common bacteria reported are streptococci,  S. agalactiae, Pseudomonas, and Klebsiella. Azar et al., in their retrospective analysis, reported 3 cases of pediatric EE out of 26 cases. A small number of EE cases are also reported secondary to occult systemic infections, which are culture negative.