The treatment of patients with hypomagnesemia is based on a patient’s kidney function, the severity of their symptoms, and hemodynamic stability. If a patient is hemodynamically unstable in an acute hospital setting, 1 to 2 grams of magnesium sulfate can be given in about 15 minutes. For symptomatic, severe hypomagnesemia in a stable patient, 1 to 2 grams of magnesium sulfate can be given over one hour. Non-emergent repletion of the adult patient is generally 4 to 8 grams of magnesium sulfate given slowly over 12 to 24 hours. In pediatric patients, the dose is 25 to 50 mg/kg (with a maximum of 2 grams).

For an asymptomatic patient who is not hospitalized and can tolerate medications by mouth, sustained-release oral replacement should be tried first.

Asymptomatic patients can benefit from oral sustained-release magnesium preparations (magnesium chloride containing 64-71.5 mg or magnesium L-lactate containing 84 mg elemental magnesium).

After repletion, serum electrolyte levels must be rechecked (whether in an inpatient or outpatient setting) to ensure effective treatment. Although serum magnesium levels rise quickly with treatment, intracellular magnesium takes longer to replete. Thus, patients with normal renal function should try to continue magnesium repletion for two days after the level normalizes.

Use caution in repleting magnesium in patients with abnormal kidney function (defined as creatinine clearance less than 30 mL/min/1.73 m2). These patients are at risk of hypermagnesemia. Studies recommend reducing the magnesium dose by 50% and closely monitoring magnesium levels in these patients.

Selected food sources should also be kept in mind while giving supplements to patients with adequate intake.

**Table 2. Foods sources of magnesium**

The underlying cause of persistent hypomagnesemia should be addressed and treated. For example, if a patient is consistently having low levels of the electrolyte due to renal losses, they may benefit from amiloride, a potassium- and magnesium-sparing diuretic.

In patients with concurrent hypocalcemia, calcium should be replaced before initiating magnesium replacement. This is to avoid increased urinary excretion of calcium caused by sulfate from magnesium sulfate, making complex with ionized calcium.

Potassium-sparing diuretics (amiloride or triamterene) should be considered in patients with diuretic-induced hypomagnesemia (when diuretic therapy cannot be discontinued) or chronic renal magnesium wasting.