Dust mite allergy develops in childhood or adolescence, with the majority of symptoms manifesting before age 20. The dust mite's gut contains peptidase 1, which is one of the potent digestive enzymes that persist in their fecal matter and is the major inducer of the allergy. Peptidase 1 exhibits cysteine protease activity. The variants of the allergen include Der p 1 of the European house dust mite, Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, Der f 1 of the American house dust mite Dermatophagoides farinae, Eur m 1 of the Mayne's house dust mite Euroglyphus maynei.

These allergens are found in the fecal matter of the mites. Their fecal particles are around 20 pellets per day, surrounded by a peritrophic membrane, are about the size of a pollen grain (10-35 mcg diameter), thus can be easily inhaled. The mite's exoskeleton can also contribute to allergic reactions. These allergens on inhalation cause a sensitization reaction, through epithelial leakage into the respiratory system by cleavage of the tight junctions in between the epithelial cells. This leads to increased epithelial permeability, allowing the movement of house dust mite allergens to dendritic antigen-presenting cells.

The house dust mites do not burrow under the skin and are not parasitic. Dust mites are microscopic bugs about 0.4 millimeters in length, and invisible to the naked eye. They are known to feed on the desquamated dead skin cells of humans and pets. They prefer a warm and moist environment of 70 degrees F and 70 percent humidity. Therefore, bedding, linens, carpeting, furniture linens that trap the moisture and provide the most favorable environment for the dust mites to flourish. House dust mites belong to the family Pyroglyphidae, primarily consisting of Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, Dermatophagoides farinae, and Euroglyphus maynei.

These species constitute 80 to 90 percent of the house dust mites. The most important house dust mite is Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus. In drier areas, D. farinae is commonly found. In tropical and subtropical areas, the storage mite, that is, glycyphagid mite Blomia tropicalis (storage mite), which coexists with D. pteronyssinus, is a major source of allergen. Gylcyphagus and Lepidoglyphus may be found in rural homes.