The tuning fork will be perceived as being louder when placed at the external auditory meatus.

- Rinne Positive: The patient is positive on that side (the ossicular chain is doing what it should be doing, acting as an amplifier). If the bone conduction through the mastoid process is heard louder than through the air, the patient is Rinne negative. This is always abnormal.

- If the patient has negative or abnormal Rinne negative, air vibrations are not being transmitted across the external auditory canal, the tympanic membrane, the ossicular chain, or the oval window.

Causes in the external auditory canal:

- Wax in the external canal

- Otitis externa or outer ear canal infection

- Foreign body in the ear canal

Causes due to the drum:

- Perforation of the drum due to trauma or infection

Causes in the middle ear:

- Infection (acute otitis media) in the middle ear

- Serous otitis media (glue ear) can result from repeated episodes of acute otitis media.

Causes at the oval window:

- Otosclerosis results in the failure to transmit sound from the stapes through the oval window due to abnormal bone growth.

**False Negative Rinne test**

A patient with profound sensorineural deafness may have a false negative Rinne. With complete loss of innervation to that ear, the patient will not hear anything from the tuning fork on the mastoid or near the canal. The sound transmits through their skull to the ear on the other side, and they may not be able to identify in which ear they hear the sound.

It seems that bone conduction is better than air conduction, but the ear is nonfunctional.

The way to determine the difference between a true and a false Rinne negative test is to perform the Weber test.

For example, if the left ear is completely dead, the sound waves travel to the good right ear on testing the bone conduction on the left. But the sounds are not heard when the tuning fork is held next to the external auditory meatus on the side being tested (left). In this case, the patient will state that bone conduction is louder than air conduction, giving a falsely negative Rinne test.