The management of hypovolemia is anchored in the chronicity and severity of the patient's presentation. Acute hypovolemic states could quickly lead to shock and will require urgent fluid resuscitation and vasopressor support. Chronic hypovolemic states allow for the development of compensatory mechanisms that permit a more gradual restoration of intravascular volume. Regardless, hypovolemia requires prompt attention and treatment to prevent permanent organ damage and death. Intravenous fluid resuscitation remains the most common intervention for patients in the acute setting. Much discussion has been held on the subject of specific intravenous fluids for resuscitation. Several meta-analyses suggest that colloid solutions may increase mortality. At this time, crystalloid solutions remain the standard of care for fluid resuscitation. In the CRISTAL (Colloids Versus Crystalloids for the Resuscitation in critically ill people) metanalysis the use of colloids compared with crystalloids was associated with similar mortality in patients with hypovolemic shock.

After selecting the appropriate intravenous fluid for replenishment a therapeutic goal must be selected. Several measures can be used to assess volume status and guide therapy. In critically ill patients being taken care of in the intensive care unit, more invasive procedures can be used to monitor more closely the response to therapy, some of these are:

- Insertion of a urinary catheter to measure urine output

- Insertion of an arterial line to measure arterial blood pressure and variations in systolic blood pressure

Once resuscitation targets have been met for hypovolemia, fluids administration should be stopped as excessive fluid resuscitation could lead to fluid accumulating beyond the intravascular space resulting in fluid overload and severe cardiac and pulmonary consequences.