Pulmonary hypertension irrespective of the cause occurs due to restricted blood flow in a pulmonary artery. The major pathology in Group 1 and Group 4 is obstruction of pulmonary vessels. Some diseases such as sarcoidosis, schistosomiasis, and HIV infection directly affect pulmonary vessels.

Group 1 PH (Pulmonary artery hypertension): This group includes diseases that alter the pulmonary vasculature structurally. The bone morphogenetic protein receptor 2 gene (BMRP2 gene) belongs to the TGF-b family. It normally controls the proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells. Mutation in BMRP2 gene can result in hypertrophy of smooth muscle along with dysfunction of the endothelium. This causes a decrease in the inner diameter of the lumen of the pulmonary artery that leads to an increase in pulmonary vascular resistance and an increase in right ventricular afterload resulting in high PA pressures.

Group 2 PH (Pulmonary venous hypertension or postcapillary pulmonary hypertension): The left heart disease causes backpressure and increases the hydrostatic pressure in the pulmonary veins which eventually results in increased pressure in pulmonary arteries.

Group 3 PH: Advanced chronic lung conditions lead to lung tissue destruction and a decrease in the capillary area. The common mechanisms that lead to pulmonary hypertension in this group are hypoxic vasoconstriction and vascular remodeling of the pulmonary vasculature.

Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is a compensatory mechanism that occurs to preserve the ventilation-perfusion matching by limiting the blood flow to hypoxic alveoli. The primary mechanism for vasoconstriction is through mitochondrial signaling and inhibition of potassium channels and pulmonary vascular smooth muscle membrane depolarization, thereby increasing calcium entry in muscle cells. Vascular remodeling also occurs which affects the pulmonary arterioles. These changes occur due to increased expression of endothelin 1, platelet-derived growth factors, vascular endothelial growth factor, and angiotensin 2 and a reduction in nitric oxide synthase.

In Group 4 PH, thromboembolic occlusion or narrowing of pulmonary arteries, proximal and distal both can lead to an increase in backpressure in the pulmonary circulation. This eventually leads to vascular remodeling due to shear stress. The combination of vessel occlusion and vasculopathy increase the resistance and pressure within the pulmonary circulation.

Group 5 PH is multifactorial.