Patients with pancreatic panniculitis may present in the outpatient setting or at the hospital. Thus, clinicians, including nurse practitioners and physician assistants, must recognize its clinical presentation and have an appropriate differential diagnosis. Next, it is essential to investigate the etiology of pancreatic panniculitis by obtaining appropriate labs, imaging, and in certain circumstances, skin biopsy.

An interprofessional approach is necessary to obtain the correct diagnosis and determine the underlying etiology. Dermatology can be helpful when the skin lesions are nonspecific, and the patient is not presenting with signs of acute pancreatitis or malignancy. Proper imaging, such as CT abdomen/pelvis, must be obtained, with radiologists interpreting primary or metastatic disease findings and/or pancreatitis. As biopsy can also differentiate pancreatic panniculitis from the other forms of panniculitis, communication with pathology is crucial for the appropriate interpretation of histologic findings. Nursing needs to be aware of the patient's condition and should alert other team members if they notice any deterioration or other change in the patient's condition.

As the incidence and prevalence of acute pancreatitis have increased in the United States and other countries, and as pancreatic panniculitis may precede the presentation of typical signs of pancreatitis, it is important to recognize this dermatological finding. Both in the outpatient and inpatient settings, case management and social work are important to consider for alcohol counseling and cessation, as there remains an increased association between alcohol-associated pancreatitis with pancreatic panniculitis.

Behavioral intervention and counseling can also benefit patients, and primary care clinicians must consider these strategies in patient treatment plans. The disease's staging is necessary when a potential cancer diagnosis is made. Hematology/oncology can aid in evaluating and formulating a therapeutic strategy. Addressing goals of care early, including palliative approaches in advanced disease, can significantly improve quality of life.****