Severe complications can occur from misadministration of the radiotracer or misinterpretation of the study, and caution and knowledge should be obtained regarding false positives and false negatives.

**False Negative**

False-negative examinations may occur when the chemotactic function of the leukocytes has been altered, e.g., improper cell labeling. Chronicity of infection (>2 weeks duration) has been found to reduce the sensitivity of the WBC scan, presumably due to reduced numbers of leukocytes infiltrating the more chronic lesions. Whether antibiotic therapy decreases the sensitivity of any of the scans described above is controversial. Several reports have suggested this concept not to be true, and data suggests a high sensitivity and NPV even in cases of concurrent antibiotic usage.

**False Positive**

Virtually any process resulting in a white cell response (inflammation) can cause uptake of labeled cells, uptake of FDG, gallium-67, or monoclonal antibodies even in the absence of infection. Some reported cases of false-positive scans are:

- Vascular grafts

- Gastrointestinal bleeding

- Infected sputum, particularly with a tracheostomy.

- Accessory spleen(s)

- Non-infected fractures

- Drainage tubes, tracheostomy sites

- Infarction - cerebral, myocardial, and bowel

- Recent hematomas

- Rarely, tumors and bony metastases

- Diffuse pulmonary activity may be seen on the 4 to 6-hour image but usually disappears in 24 hours on a WBC scan.

- Infectious and non-infectious processes (e.g., ARDS) may cause inflammatory changes in the lungs, and differentiation may be difficult. In addition, a focal pattern of uptake is more likely to be associated with infection.

- Charcot (neuropathic) joint. Anecdotal evidence suggests that comparison with early (2 to 4 hours) and 24 imaging may be helpful to differentiate neuropathic osseous changes from osteomyelitis when using a WBC scan. The former will be more diffuse and more pronounced on the early images compared to the delayed images. In addition, comparison with supplemental bone marrow imaging may be useful since there is evidence of a mildly inflammatory component in neuropathic joints. Nowadays, hybrid imaging with SPECT-CT and PET-CT can frequently resolve this issue. Bone marrow imaging is performed when hybrid imaging is unavailable or when equivocal findings persist.

- Quality assurance - pulmonary clumps or prolonged pulmonary residence may indicate poor labeling technique of leucocytes.

- Allergic reactions and the development of human antimouse antibodies have been reported with Tc99m besilesomab.