The mainstay of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) treatment is SSRIs and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) with exposure and response prevention (ERP).

Historically the tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) clomipramine was used as the first line for OCD due to its strong predilection for serotonin. However, given the side effect profile, SSRIs have gained favor.

ERP involves exposing the patient to their fears and having the patient resist the urge to perform a compulsion.

OCD is most commonly treated with SSRIs, and at much higher doses than used to treat anxiety or depression. FDA-approved SSRIs include fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, and sertraline.

Two primary neurotransmitters thought to contribute to OCD are serotonin and glutamate. The serotonin hypothesis arose after OCD symptoms abated with the use of serotonergic antidepressants.

Glutamate has been gaining support as more data comes to light. The use of d-cycloserine (DCS), a partial NMDA receptor agonist (a glutamate receptor), has gathered attention as research has shown DCS to enhance extinction learning in animal studies. This information could potentially be useful in augmenting CBT.

Antipsychotics have been entertained as adjunct therapy. Aripiprazole, haloperidol (finding based on only one trial), and risperidone were significantly superior to placebo. In contrast, olanzapine, paliperidone, and quetiapine could not differentiate from placebo as measured by mean Y-BOCS total improvement.

There have been instances of refractory cases having treatment with ablative lesion neurosurgery; however, there are no controlled trials. Deep brain stimulation has also been considered for severe cases of refractory OCD. Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) has not proven successful in treating the disorder.

In 1989 fluvoxamine was shown to be an effective treatment for OCD. Since the 1980s, there have been over 20 studies conducted to support the efficacy of SSRIs for the treatment of OCD.  Thus far, they have found that fluvoxamine is not superior to other SSRIs as monotherapy.

The following are appropriate drugs and doses typically used to treat OCD: fluoxetine 80 mg, escitalopram 40 mg, fluvoxamine 300 mg, and paroxetine 100 mg. Citalopram is no longer a recommended agent, given the risk of QTc prolongation in higher doses. Those treated with an SSRI for OCD will need a longer trial of 8 to 12 weeks on the medication as they typically take longer to respond than those receiving treatment for depression for a reason still unknown.

Clomipramine was approved for OCD in the late 80s but is no longer the first line to treat OCD, given its complicated side effect profile and the potential to elicit arrhythmias, seizures, and anticholinergic side effects to name a few. Treatment with SSRIs can be augmented with the use of the NMDA receptor antagonist memantine. In a double-blinded controlled study in Iran, memantine was beneficial; after eight weeks of treatment, there was a 100% response with 89% remission. Other medications that have been tried for OCD modulation via the NMDA receptors include topiramate, lamotrigine, ketamine, and riluzole, but so far, data has been inconclusive.

Other medications being explored as augmentation therapy include ondansetron, tramadol, and amphetamines; however, no conclusive evidence can be drawn at this time.

Deep brain stimulation is still a novel treatment, and due to the high costs and invasive nature of the procedure is not yet in routine use. Over the past 20 years, only 200 to 300 patients with OCD have received treatment with DBS. In an Amsterdam study published in October 2019, they found that DBS aimed at the ventral anterior limb of the internal capsule makes those with OCD more open to environmental change and can engage in more activities than their compulsions. In that study, they stated that DBS is similar in theory to cognitive flexibility.

CBT aims at altering malicious and harmful thoughts. In addition to CBT and ERP, the patient can employ mindfulness techniques such as meditation and relaxation. In a 2012 study that focused on Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy, they found that two-thirds of their patients experienced a decrease in OCD symptoms over the course of 8 weeks. Unlike ERP, MBCT does not involve exposing patients to their fear intentionally. Still, when a stressful event arises, the patient is encouraged to take time and examine their thoughts and feelings during the unpleasant time. MBCT targets the thoughts less, but more the attitude toward the obsession.