**Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome**

Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) is a potentially fatal complication of controlled ovarian stimulation. The reported incidence of OHSS varies based on diagnostic criteria but is estimated to range between 1 to 5% for moderate/severe cases.

OHSS develops from the exogenous administration of gonadotropins followed by the administration of hCG. In this process, many follicles recruited and developed in a single cycle result in excessive production of various growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and subsequent neovascularization. The combined excessive follicular growth and fluid and vascular development result in significant fluid shifts to the third compartment, resulting in ascites, edema, pleural effusion, renal injury, pericardial effusion, and thromboembolism. Patients at particular risk of OHSS include those with a diagnosis of PCOS, multi-follicular development, large number of oocytes retrieved (>24), and elevated estradiol levels (>3500 pg/mL).

For patients diagnosed with moderate to severe OHSS, treatment involves supportive care with fluid resuscitation, therapeutic paracentesis, and prophylactic anticoagulation. Patients at risk for OHSS must not have a fresh transfer and freeze all embryos until their ovarian stimulation has subsided. The final maturation trigger should be changed from HCG to a GnRH agonist if possible. In addition, cabergoline can be given daily for eight days after retrieval or after trigger to protect the patient from OHSS further. Then, one to two months later, they can safely proceed with a frozen embryo transfer when the ovarian stimulation has resolved.

**Antenatal and Neonatal Complications**

The most common complication of ART is the risk of multifetal pregnancies. In 2009, 41.1% of infants conceived via ART were of multifetal pregnancies (compared to 3.5% of infants in the general population).

Multifetal gestation pregnancies have both maternal and fetal consequences. Pregnancies have a higher likelihood of being complicated by various antenatal conditions, including hyperemesis gravidarum, gestational diabetes, and hypertensive diseases of pregnancy.

IVF providers limit multifetal gestation pregnancies through several avenues, including low-dose stimulation regimens, close hormone and follicle monitoring during stimulated cycles, and limiting the number of embryos transferred per cycle.

Beyond multifetal gestation, singleton IVF pregnancies are also possibly associated with various increased risks compared to naturally conceived pregnancies. These risks include perinatal mortality, preterm delivery, low birth weight, cesarean section, placenta previa, placental abruption, and preeclampsia. These possible risks should also be discussed when counseling patients, but with caution, as the quality of data is limited by the existing study designs. Standardized tracking of outcomes of ART pregnancies to include these outcomes would improve the quality of evidence for or against these potential risks of IVF-conceived pregnancies.