Undifferentiated connective tissue disease is considered one of the systemic autoimmune diseases. Patients diagnosed with this disease can present with a wide variety of signs and symptoms since this disease may involve any connective tissue in our body.

The first problem that arises when assessing the patients with undifferentiated connective tissue disease is whether this condition will progress to a defined connective tissue disease and when this progression will be most likely to happen. Although this condition is relatively stable over a long period and usually requires only mild therapeutic intervention, many patients may show an impaired quality of life both mentally and physically.

Complications are dependent upon what system is affected or injured. For example, when the pulmonary system sustains a long-term injury and inflammation, interstitial lung disease or even lung fibrosis can occur. Additionally, if the heart was affected, an enlargement can occur, resulting in cardiomegaly. Aside from lung and heart involvement, there is an up to 40% chance of progressing into a defined connective tissue disease.

Severe organ involvements (such as neurological or renal manifestations) or even life-threatening conditions are sometimes reported. Besides, severe interstitial lung involvement can also occur. In addition, around 88% of the patients with idiopathic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia may meet the diagnostic criteria for undifferentiated connective tissue disease.

Regarding the evolution of a stable undifferentiated connective tissue disease, it is rare for this condition to progress into a defined disease, such as systematic lupus erythematosus, which only occurs in 10% of patients, especially if the condition remains stable for more than three years. The presence of photosensitivity, Raynaud's phenomenon, or sicca symptoms is associated with a lower chance of the disease progression into SLE.

Some patients may not fulfill the diagnostic criteria for SLE and will be diagnosed with a latent form of lupus. Moreover, pregnant females with undifferentiated connective tissue disease deserve careful clinical observation since they are more liable to have disease exacerbation or even evolution. The majority of patients with undifferentiated connective tissue disease at the onset of the pregnancy period will remain undifferentiated, while about 25% of them will evolve into a defined connective tissue disease by the end of pregnancy. In addition, up to 45% of pregnancies ended as preterm deliveries.