# Continuing Education Activity

Urethral strictures cause obstructive urinary symptoms, which can be severe and affect the quality of life. They can be caused by many etiologies and can vary in severity. To avoid significant effects on life activities, urethral strictures should be diagnosed and investigated to offer the best treatment option. This activity describes the etiology, evaluation, and management of urethral strictures and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in providing care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology and pathophysiology of urethral strictures.
- Review the appropriate history, physical, and evaluation of urethral strictures.
- Outline the management and current treatment options for urethral strictures.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care for patients with urethral strictures.

# Introduction

A urethral stricture is a narrowing of the urethra, causing obstructive symptoms. They usually result from injury to the urethral mucosa and tissues around it. It can develop anywhere along the length of the male urethra and can be due to many etiologies.

The male urethra extends from the external urethral meatus at the tip of the glans penis to the bladder neck proximally. It is contained within the corpus spongiosum, which lies in a groove below the two corpora cavernosa. The inside of the urethra is lined with stratified squamous epithelium. The urethra is divided into anterior (from the external urethral meatus to the distal membranous urethra) and posterior (from the distal membranous urethra to bladder neck) parts. However, the World Health Organization conference in 2002 recommended that this nomenclature should be discarded. According to the new nomenclature, the urethra is broken up into seven segments; the urethral meatus, followed by fossa navicularis, penile, bulbar, membranous, and prostatic urethra, and finally, the bladder neck.

# Etiology

The etiology of urethral strictures is divided into four major groups; idiopathic, iatrogenic, inflammatory, and traumatic, with the idiopathic and iatrogenic being the most common at 33% each. Following them are the traumatic causes comprising 19% and finally inflammatory, causing 15% of them.

With regards to idiopathic causes, there are clinical features that point towards the possibility of them being caused by unrecognized repetitive minor perineal traumas, eventually leading to the stricture.

Iatrogenic causes are divided into five causes. Trans-urethral resections (TUR) comprise 41% of them.

Inflammatory strictures can be the result of post-infectious inflammation leading to narrowing of the lumen and weakening of the epithelium, most commonly from recurrent gonococcal urethritis. These causes are becoming less common in the developed world due to public education, but some are still common in developing countries.Escherichia coli.

Post-traumatic anterior urethral strictures most commonly affect the bulbar urethra and are frequently due to straddle injuries compressing the bulbar urethra against the symphysis pubis. This pattern of injury is rarely associated with a pelvic fracture. Penile urethral strictures due to trauma are rare but can happen following a penile fracture.

# Epidemiology

Urethral strictures are common, with its prevalence in the US being around 200/100,000 in younger men and more than 600/100,000 in men older than 65. The estimated annual incidence rate in The US is 0.9%.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology is an injury to the urethral epithelium attributed to any of the specific etiologies causing a leak of urine to the corpus spongiosum or by direct trauma to the corpus spongiosum. Either of which initiates inflammation and fibrous changes of the corpus spongiosum. This form of fibrous tissue causes contraction compressing the urethral lumen.

# History and Physical

Most patients present with progressive obstructive voiding symptoms, mostly occurring as a weak stream. However, the severity of the symptoms can vary widely among patients. Especially in patients with slowly progressive or a discrete stricture. These can present with the absence of such symptoms. Usually, in this case, the patient will have detrusor hypertrophy compensating. Other obstructive symptoms can be hesitancy, intermittency, and dribbling.

Following the initial history taking, additional questioning should be focused on uncovering the underlying etiology. History of interventions, previous infections, and trauma should be sought as well. Finally, appropriate past medical history and comorbidities should be elucidated.

Although that physical examination is usually unrewarding, performing a detailed one is still important. During the physical examination, the clinician should palpate the urethra feeling for any palpable fibrous tissue and look for any skin changes like pale patches pointing towards LS. On some occasions, these patches can be confined only to be surrounding the urethral meatus. Also, identify any scars indicating previous surgery. Examination of the prostate is very important, looking for benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), prostatic cancer, or prostatitis.

# Evaluation

Blood tests do not have a role in diagnosing urethral strictures. However, many lower urinary tract flow studies provide a detailed assessment of the urethra.

Uroflowmetry is the preferred initial investigation. It provides a good assessment of the urethral flow. Also, the interpretation of triphasic uroflowmetry provides data to distinguish patterns of healthy individuals, benign prostatic obstruction, and urethral strictures. A maximum flow (Qmax) of less than 15 mL per second raises the suspicion of lower urinary tract stricture. It is also of importance to study the curve shape to differentiate the cause. Urethral strictures typically produce a plateau at the level of Qmax. Ideally, uroflowmetry studies should be of more than 150mL in volume to yield reliable results.

Urethroscopy or cystoscopy is a relatively easy and fast investigation to diagnose urethral stricture, and it can be done under local anesthesia (flexible cystoscopy). It helps to determine the location of the stricture. However, it can be of limited use when it is unable to pass through the stricture to assess the length or the state of the urethra proximal to it. In this case, using a smaller caliber ureteroscope can sometimes help pass beyond the stricture and provide more information. Again, another limitation is its inability to provide information about the surrounding fibrosis. So, although it is of limited diagnostic value, it can provide a quick diagnosis in case of clinical doubt.

Urethrography is the next investigation if the clinical picture and uroflowmetry suggest stricture to confirm the diagnosis. A retrograde urethrography (RUG) can visualize the entire urethra up to the bladder if the patient is relaxed. Frequently, especially when the stricture is significant and insufficient distention of the proximal urethra happens, RUG will not provide sufficient information about the proximal urethra and extent of the stricture. In such cases, a voiding cystourethrography (VCUG) will provide valuable additional information. This is by either asking the patient to void after the bladder is filled with contrast from the RUG or by introducing the contrast through a suprapubic catheter. The combination of RUG and VCUG yields a good image of the entire urethra. It provides information about the location, number, length, and severity of strictures. They are usually the most definitive diagnostic tools. However, these studies have limitations when interpreting the images. This relates to the position of the stricture and the state of the proximal urethra, as these techniques provide a 2D image of a 3D structure.

Ultrasonography (US) is mainly used to assess the bladder and upper urinary tract. It can show a thickened urinary bladder wall. Residual post-voiding urine can be seen on ultrasound as well, which may guide the clinician as to how significant the urethra is obstructed.****

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan use in diagnosing simple urethral strictures is debatable. However, it can provide excellent images when cancer is suspected to be the cause of the stricture, showing the location and extent of the tumor into surrounding tissues.

# Treatment / Management

When there are no complications, the treatment’s goal would be symptom relief only. The choice should be based on symptom severity and patient preference. If the symptoms are not troublesome, treatment should not be offered. However, if the patient presents with a complication like recurrent infections or acute retention, treatment would reduce the incidence of complications.

Generally speaking, urethral stricture treatment can be divided into transurethral (dilation, internal urethrotomy) and open surgical (stricture resection and anastomosis, urethroplasty, and perineal urethrostomy). It should also be noted that with any of the treatment options, recurrence tends to happen. Especially with long strictures and previously treated ones.

Urethral dilation using sounds and boogies has been the standard and initial treatment modality for a long time. Inserting urethral dilators and sequentially increasing the size leads to stretch and disruption of the stricture. When compared to direct vision internal urethrotomy, there was no demonstrable difference between them with regards to outcomes.

Direct vision internal urethrotomy (DVIU) is performed by incising a transurethral incision to release the stricture and leave it to heal by secondary intention, increasing the caliber size of the urethra. It is the first-line treatment of choice for short (<1.5 cm) bulbar strictures with no previous intervention as its highest success rates are with such strictures.

Both of the above-mentioned procedures should be followed by prophylactic antibiotics.

Anastomotic urethroplasty is a more commonly used name for stricture resection and end-to-end anastomosis. It is most appropriate when the stricture is short (<2 cm) and is in the bulbar urethra, which is usually the result of a traumatic straddle-type injury.

Substitution urethroplasty or graft urethroplasty is a procedure where the urethra is mobilized in the area of stricture, dissected from the corpora cavernosa, and opened along the urethra for the entire length of the stricture.

Substitution urethroplasty should be used for bulbar strictures that are too long for anastomotic urethroplasty or any penile urethra stricture.

Perineal urethrostomy (Boutonnière) is a procedure with palliative intent preserved for patients who have had multiple stricture operations and do not wish to undergo additional surgeries and patients with multiple comorbidities who cannot tolerate a urethroplasty. The bulbar urethra is sutured to the perineal skin with the preservation of sphincter function and continence. Most of the patients who undergo this procedure express high satisfaction with the results.

# Differential Diagnosis

As urethral strictures usually present with progressive obstructive symptoms, many other diseases can present similarly. Some of which are:

- Prostate enlargement, either benign or cancerous. BPH is the commonest cause of weak stream

- Prostatitis, in this case, would be associated with burning, frequency, urgency, blood in urine, perineal deep pain (especially when sitting), and cloudy urine with a high prostate-specific antigen (PSA)

- Underactive bladder, bladder stones, sensory underactivity

- Central and peripheral neuropathies

- Drug-related

# Prognosis

As seen from the pathophysiology of urethral strictures, once a stricture is established, it follows a closed circle pattern of increasing fibrosis and worsening stricture. If definitive treatment is not offered, stricture severity will increase gradually, eventually causing complications. However, especially when non-operative management is offered, strictures have high recurrence rates. Surgical management is the treatment option with the best outcomes, with success rates of more than 85%.

# Complications

If left untreated, urethral strictures can cause some fo the following complications:

- Recurrent UTI

- Acute urinary retention

- Bladder diverticulum

- Urethrocutaneous fistula

- Bilateral vesicoureteric reflux

- Unilateral vesicoureteric reflux

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Reducing the incidence of urethral strictures would be based on trying to minimize the incidence of causative etiologies.

- Avoiding pelvic, perineal, and penile trauma.

- Educating the patients about the best and safest way to self-catheterize. Advice should include the liberal use of lubricating gel and using the smallest size catheter possible for short periods of time. Also, the least traumatic technique of catheter insertion should be taught and mastered by patients who self-catheterize.

- The practice of safe sex is of paramount importance, as gonorrhea was the most causative organism leading to strictures. The effectiveness of this intervention has already been demonstrated in the developed countries where numbers of urethral strictures secondary to gonorrheal urethritis have dropped significantly.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Teamwork is of utmost importance in the prevention, detection, and treatment of urethral strictures. Public education helps reduce the incidence of strictures by educating the public on the causative etiologies and how to prevent them. General practitioners and emergency clinicians should be aware of risk factors and presentation of patients with urethral strictures, providing early intervention when needed. They should also counsel any patient who presents with pelvic, perineal, or penile trauma on how to recognize early signs of urethral strictures and encourage them to seek expert help without delay. When a diagnosis of urethral stricture is made, a team of clinicians, including experienced surgeons, nurses, and social workers, should all work together to provide the most effective and timely advice and treatment. Ideally, in a large-volume center, a specialized interprofessional team should be assembled to care for patients with urethral stricture, as they require expert surgical opinion and treatment and continuous care post-op for a long time.