The pathophysiology of smooth muscle is incredibly diverse, and the limited scope of this article will not be able to cover it in detail. A brief description of how different organ systems may be affected by smooth muscle pathologies is listed below. Much of the material covered is also applicable to other diseases not mentioned in this article. As a clinician, it is more important to be able to recognize when smooth muscle may play a role in the disease process.

The gastrointestinal tract is mostly dependent on smooth muscle for motility. Any damage to the smooth muscle of the intestines may have a devastating effect on the body. The term for this loss of motility is gastroparesis. Many conditions can impact gastric motility, including nerve dysfunction, collagen disease, muscular dystrophies, amyloidosis, thyroid disease, diabetes mellitus, Chagas disease, neuropathy, and so on. A spectrum of disease can occur in these patients; they may present asymptomatic, or they may present in crisis with functional gastric obstruction.

In the renal system, vascular smooth muscle is present in the kidneys, throughout the ureters, and in the bladder. At the level of the kidneys, vascular smooth muscle dysfunction is associated with chronic kidney disease and can lead to end-stage renal disease.

In the genital system, smooth muscle is often a focus regarding its role in childbirth. Smooth muscle lines the uterus, which creates the contractile force during childbirth. Many pharmaceuticals exist specifically to help enhance smooth muscle contraction at the time of birth. While this may not represent an actual pathology, it is crucial to recognize that physicians can use a knowledge of smooth muscle physiology to prevent pathologies from occurring. In males, fertility is also a function of the contractions of smooth muscle in the epididymis and vas deferens. Without the contractile nature of smooth muscle, spermatozoa would never be able to assist in fertilization; this becomes important because of the apparent lack of information on the possible pathologic effects of smooth muscle and infertility. For example, many medications that are frequently used by males impact smooth muscle contractility and, therefore, may also affect fertility. Examples include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitors, nitrates, adrenergic receptor antagonists and agonists, psychotropic drugs, anticholinergic drugs, calcium antagonists, and ace inhibitors.

Perhaps the most well know the pathophysiology of smooth muscle occurs in the cardiovascular and respiratory systems. Within the cardiovascular system, smooth muscle helps to regulate blood flow by controlling the diameter of the vessel. As previously discussed, vascular pathologies of smooth muscle can have devasting effects on the body and lead to significant pathology. Atherosclerosis, once thought to be only a function of hemodynamics and vessel structure, has more recently been linked to smooth muscle development.