**Hirschprung's Disease:**

Hirschsprung’s Disease or aganglionosis of the sigmoid colon is a disease that affects the contractile function of the caudal sigmoid colon. In this disease, neural crest cells fail to migrate properly to the distal colon. This failure of migration leads to disruption of the enteric nervous system and thus motility and function of the sigmoid colon. This anomaly is seen classically in newborns when they are unable to pass their first stool (meconium). This disease appears in nearly 5% of children born with Down syndrome, and research shows that mutations in both germline and somatic cells contribute to the pathogenesis.

**Diverticulitis:**

Diverticulitis is a common disease of the sigmoid colon in which small diverticula or outpouchings of weakened bowel wall become inflamed. These outpouchings are false diverticula only containing the mucosa and submucosal layers. Diverticula form in the areas where blood vessels penetrate the bowel wall to supply the mucosa. These areas of bowel wall weakness can become inflamed and lead to abscess development, fistulas, or perforations leading to intense pain localized to the lower left abdominal quadrant due to peritoneal irritation. This condition's pathogenesis is multifactorial and is influenced by genetics, diet, activity levels, and fiber intake.

**Volvulus:**

Sigmoid volvulus is a disease that develops when the colon twists around its mesocolon; this occurs in the region of the sigmoid colon due to the morphological "S" shape of the colon and the high amounts of pressure that can form as the stool is compacted and prepared for excretion. When this occurs, the blood vessels that reside within the mesentery can become occluded and lead to ischemia of the bowel. Also, the twisting of the bowel creates a distal obstruction inhibiting the movement of stool into the rectum. This typically will present in people with redundant bowel, as well as those that are sedentary and prone to constipation. The physical exam will show a distended, and tympanic abdomen, and imaging will reveal large amounts of distended bowel, often referred to as the “coffee bean sign”.

**Colon Cancer:**

Neoplasms can arise within the sigmoid colon and typically will present with changes in bowel habits such as decreased stool caliber and hematochezia. Colon cancers tend to metastasize to the liver through portal drainage and, eventually, the lungs via the inferior vena cava.