Botulism classically begins with cranial nerve palsies (“bulbar symptoms”) that progress to the symmetrical descending weakness of the trunk, extremities, and smooth muscle, with eventual flaccid paralysis. Patients usually have no sensory deficits except for blurred vision, although paresthesias are occasionally seen. Typical early symptoms include diplopia (visual disturbances), dysphagia (difficulty swallowing), dysphonia (voice change), and dysarthria (slurred speech), reflecting the high susceptibility of cranial nerve efferent presynaptic terminals to the activity of BoNT. Involvement of the diaphragm precipitates respiratory failure, often requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation. Palsies of autonomic smooth muscle cause constipation and urinary retention. Food-borne botulism will often present with a prodrome of abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting beginning 12 to 72 hours after ingestion of the preformed toxin.

The presentation and severity of infant botulism are variable, due to different inoculum sizes, host susceptibilities, and time to presentation. Early symptoms frequently involve constipation, weakness, feeding difficulties, weak cry, and drooling. A ‘floppy baby’ exhibiting global hypotonia implies the need for immediate intubation and mechanical ventilation.

Wound botulism should be suspected in patients who present with bulbar symptoms and cellulitis secondary to subcutaneous administration of illicit drugs. The incubation time for wound botulism is 5 to 15 days from the time of spore introduction. Wound botulism is the only variant presenting with fever and signs of infection.