A PVR is a valuable diagnostic tool for evaluating patients with various urological symptoms such as urgency, frequency, incomplete emptying, weak urinary stream, suprapubic pain or pressure, and bladder overactivity, incontinence, hesitancy, or stranguria. It can also be used when there is a concern for an underlying neurological disease or injury, bladder dysfunction, mechanical voiding obstruction, infection, or possible urinary retention.

The PVR is often best used in conjunction with a 24-hour voiding diary and an AUA Symptom score. Together, these non-invasive tools can provide the clinician with a reasonably clear understanding of urinary symptoms, bladder function, and emptying. Formal urodynamic testing can provide additional information, but this is costly, time-consuming, and often unnecessary with the optimal use of these non-invasive diagnostic tools.

Symptoms of urinary retention and PVR can be indirect. Common symptoms of acute urinary retention are lower abdominal pain and inability to pass urine; in young children or elderly patients with dementia, who can provide only a limited history, agitation may be the only sign of bladder overdistension.

Determination of the PVR can identify those patients with incontinence who have overflow due to urinary retention. It can also track the progress and treatment effectiveness of therapy for benign prostatic hyperplasia and other urinary disorders. Additionally, patients with cauda equina syndrome may present with low back pain, saddle anesthesia, bilateral sciatica, motor weakness of the lower extremities, paraplegia, or incontinence; determination of the PVR may be of use.