M. furfur ubiquitously colonizes adults and even infants by age 3 to 6 months, and it does not have a predilection for any particular age or sex.

SD affects 1 to 3% of the general population, and this rate would be even higher with the inclusion of milder cases of dandruff. Immunocompromised patients have the highest incidence of up to 33%. SD has a seasonal pattern as it occurs more commonly in the winter months. There is a slight male predominance and a bimodal incidence peaking in adolescence and again after age 50. It has an association with various diseases, including depression, HIV, Parkinson disease, and spinal injuries.

In PV, adults age 20 to 50 are most commonly affected when sebaceous gland activity is at its peak. Incidence is higher in the summer months and tropical areas, as prevalence approaches 40% in these regions. PV may also represent up to 3% of dermatology visits in temperate areas.

Malassezia folliculitis also more commonly occurs in hot and humid environments. It correlates with immunosuppression and often occurs concomitantly with acne and other Malassezia conditions, including SD and PV. This condition may comprise 1% to 1.5% of outpatient dermatology visits in China.

Recently, studies have evaluated the effectiveness of culture-independent-based methods (e.g., molecular techniques such as PCR) as a modality to assess Malassezia population epidemiology as opposed to conventional culture-based methods. Both techniques have advantages and drawbacks. Whereas culture-based methods offer the ability to discern specific virulence factors, molecular procedures allow rapid, accurate identification and quantification of Malassezia spp. The latter has helped isolate M. furfur in deep-seated infections in immunocompromised patients and preterm infants in the neonatal intensive care unit who received lipid-laden nutrition via catheters. The use of these techniques in the future appears promising, but they are not currently available for clinical use.