Therapeutic monitoring for heparin includes activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) and activated clotting time (ACT). Both of these are aspects of clotting time, which are prolonged by therapeutic heparin doses. Activated partial thromboplastin time is performed at baseline and every 6 hours until 2 or more therapeutic values are obtained, then aPTT can be assessed every 24 hours. Dose titrations are made based on the results of the aPTT. Hospitals have dosing nomograms specific to their target aPTT, which may vary depending upon the laboratory reagent used for their test. Therapeutic aPTT is considered therapeutic at 1.5 to 2 times control, which also varies from facility to facility based on controls.

ACT is less sensitive than aPTT. ACT will only detect abnormalities when there is a 95% abnormality rate in the factors, whereas aPTT can detect when there is a 70% abnormality. ACT may also be affected when platelets are abnormal, which can result from the administration of heparin. ACT is a point of care test, which makes testing at the bedside more convenient with a quick turnaround. For these reasons, ACT is generally limited to use in cardiopulmonary bypass, ECMO (extracorporeal membrane oxygenation), or PCI (percutaneous coronary intervention). ACT monitoring during bypass is to ensure that the blood is thin enough to prevent clotting of the heart and lung machine. Most practitioners will aim for a goal ACT greater than 400 during CPB (cardiopulmonary bypass).

Another form of monitoring includes anti-factor Xa activity levels. A level is considered therapeutic at 0.3 to 0.7 international units/milliliter. This monitoring is often reserved for use in patients where aPTT monitoring is unreliable, but some institutions have protocol-driven titrations based on anti-factor Xa levels.

Monitoring for adverse effects includes hemoglobin, hematocrit, platelet count (every 2 to 3 days while on therapy), and vital signs. If hemoglobin, hematocrit, or blood pressures drop, the possibility of hemorrhage should be investigated. If the platelet count falls below 100000/mm3, then the risk and benefit of continuing heparin should be evaluated, and an alternative anticoagulant is the recommended course. A HIT 4-T score should be calculated when HIT is suspected.