Bevacizumab administration is via intravenous (IV) infusion. Bevacizumab comes in 100 mg and 400 mg solutions in 4 mL and 16 mL, respectively.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No information about dose adjustment is provided in the manufacturer's labeling. Based on the literature review, no dose adjustment is likely needed in hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No dose adjustment is suggested for renal impairment. However, nephrotoxicity manifested by proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome has been reported in the literature. Bevacizumab administration should be temporarily withheld if 24-hour urine protein levels are >2 g, and it should be resumed when levels are <2 g. Treatment discontinuation is recommended in nephrotic syndrome.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Dysregulation of VEGF due to bevacizumab therapy is associated with preeclampsia. Case reports suggest that preeclampsia resolved on discontinuation of bevacizumab.

Women of childbearing age should be informed regarding the potential adverse effects of intravitreal bevacizumab on fetal health and should be encouraged to use proper contraceptive methods during treatment. Intravitreal bevacizumab should be avoided, particularly during the first trimester, as susceptibility to teratogens is maximum during organogenesis (3 to 8 weeks postconception).

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Bevacizumab has a high molecular weight, and the concentration in milk is likely to be low. However, VEGF is believed to assist in the maturation of the infant's gastrointestinal tract; hence use of VEGF inhibitors during breastfeeding is not advised. In addition, there is a lack of clinical data; hence it is recommended that breastfeeding should be stopped during intravenous bevacizumab treatment and for six months after the last dose due to the possibility of serious drug adverse reactions in breastfed infants. Similarly, intravitreal bevacizumab has the longest half-life of the VEGF inhibitors used in eye disorders, and an alternate intravitreal agent(Aflibercept, ranibizumab) may be preferred.