The main indication of an organ transplant is an irreversible failure. The reason for organ failure can be an organ disease or secondary to systemic disease. Various bridge therapy is used till the organ transplantation is achieved to maintain that organ function.

**Kidney Transplant**

In kidney transplantation, a person becomes a candidate of organ recipient when there is an irreversible decrease in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) < 20 ml/min/1.73 m^2.

The various causes of kidney failure are as follows:

Glomerular disease

Glomerulonephritis, glomerulosclerosis, IgA nephropathy, hemolytic uremic syndrome, membranous nephropathy

Polycystic disease

Adult and pediatric polycystic disease

Renal vascular disease

Polyarteritis, renal artery thrombosis, malignant hypertension

Tubulointerstitial disease

Analgesic nephropathy, chemotherapy-induced nephritis, gout, radiation nephritis, obstructive uropathy, urolithiasis, and nephrolithiasis

Congenital disease

Hypoplasia, aplasia, dysplasia, obstructive uropathy, cystinosis

Neoplasms

Renal cell carcinoma, Wilms tumor, Lymphoma, Myeloma

Graft failure

Acute, subacute, and chronic

Diabetes

Uncontrolled juvenile or adult diabetes

Hypertension

Hypertensive nephrosclerosis

Inflammatory disease

Rheumatoid arthritis, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, Wegner’s granulomatosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Goodpasture’s syndrome

Living donor kidney transplant (LDKT): In the case of a living donor transplant, the recipient can be in the early stages of ESRD and not started on dialysis. LDKT has shown better graft survival and function.

**Pancreas Transplant**

The causes of pancreatic failure are diabetes mellites type I and II, chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, biliary duct cancer, and graft failure.

It can be performed alone, simultaneous pancreatic and kidney (SKP) transplantation, or pancreas after kidney (PAK) transplantation.

**Liver Transplant**

The various causes of liver failure:

Liver

Cirrhosis

Non-cholestasis

Alcoholic, post necrotic (type A, B, C, D) cryptogenic





Cholestasis

Primary biliary cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, biliary atresia



Acute hepatic necrosis



Acute or chronic Hepatitis B and hepatitis C, drug-induced (acetaminophen, aspirin, herbal supplements), toxins, wild mushroom poisoning



Malignant



Hepatocellular carcinoma, cholangiocarcinoma, hepatoblastoma

Systemic

Metabolic



Wilson’s disease, hemochromatosis, tyrosinemia, hemosiderosis, alpha 1 anti-trypsin deficiency



Others



Cystic fibrosis, Budd-Chiari syndrome, hyperalimentation, graft versus host disease, trauma

MELD (model for end-stage liver disease) score determines the priority in transplant. There are a few exceptions to the standard MELD score. Those are hepatic cellular carcinoma, hepatopulmonary syndrome, Porto-pulmonary syndrome, familial amyloid polyneuropathy, cystic fibrosis, hilar cholangiocarcinoma, and acute liver failure with UNOS status 1A/1B.

For hepatocellular carcinoma, the Milan criteria are used. It includes the liver tumor with a single lesion <5 cm or 2 to 3 lesions of 1 to 3 cm.