In infants and children under 2 years of age, the diagnosis of Cooley anemia (beta TM) is suspected based on clinical features of jaundice, severe hypochromic microcytic anemia, and HSM.

**Lab findings**: CBC will show microcytic anemia with decreased Hb level of <7g/dL, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) ranges from 50 to 70 fl, and mean corpuscular Hb (MCH) level ranges from 12 to 20pg.

Morphological changes of RBCs like microcytosis, hypochromia, poikilocytosis, anisocytosis, and nucleated RBCs can be seen on the peripheral blood smear. Additionally, target cells, teardrop cells, and basophilic stippling (course type) can also be visualized on the peripheral blood smear. The number of erythroblasts depends on the degree of anemia and after splenectomy. Moreover, either Hb electrophoresis or high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is warranted for definitive diagnosis. It analyzes Hb both quantitatively and qualitatively. Beta-thalassemia major demonstrates a complete absence of beta-globin chain (beta0/beta0), therefore the HbF is 92% to 95%, HbA2 is 5% to 8%, and HbA 0%.

Elevated HbA2 is also caused by hyperthyroidism, vitamin B12 and folic acid deficiency, and anti-retroviral therapy (ATT). Apart from that, prenatal screening and genetic counseling are additional valuable tools in the detection and prevention of beta-thalassemia and other autosomal recessive diseases.

**Radiographic features:**Due to active bone marrow hyperplasia, wide medullary spaces, and trabeculae mimic, a classic “chicken wire” pattern is seen on maxillofacial radiographs. On x-rays of long bones, osteopenia, and cortical thinning secondary to expanded bone marrow spaces can be seen, which often presents with pathological fractures. Similarly, the classic “hair on end” appearance can be seen on a cranial vault radiograph. Additionally, vertebral bodies have a ground-glass appearance. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, heart, and liver are also done to determine iron deposition in various tissues in cases of suspected iron overload.