Meclizine is a commonly prescribed drug by many healthcare professionals, including primary care providers, emergency medicine physicians, oncologists, internists, and PAs and nurse practitioners. When prescribing this medication, all healthcare providers should be aware of the most common adverse effects of the drug and the most susceptible population. The successful use of the drug also depends on the patient's adherence to and knowledge of the potential effects of the drug.

Patients should be aware of the drowsiness and fatigue that the drug can cause so they can avoid driving or operating dangerous machinery when taken. Due to the CNS depression effects of meclizine, health care providers should stress not to drink alcohol or take other drugs that can potentiate this effect. The elderly and patients with comorbidities such as asthma, glaucoma, and BPH should be aware of the anticholinergic properties of the drug to avoid further complications or be educated on what to do should they arrive.

Other providers, such as pharmacists, should work in concert with prescribers to guarantee that the patient knows proper administration, dosing, and knowledge of potential drug interactions. Clinical nurses should be aware of the adverse effects of the medication. All healthcare professionals must be cognizant of possible adverse outcomes and work together to prevent, manage, and/or treat accordingly if such an event should occur. This form of interprofessional collaboration will lead to successful outcomes when prescribing meclizine. [Level 5]