The cisterna magna is formed by the enlarging and expanding subarachnoid space located between the cerebellum and medulla oblongata. It connects directly with the fourth ventricle. The traditional midline cisterna magna puncture is potentially dangerous because the puncture needle directly faces the medulla oblongata.

In most patients, the dorsal subarachnoid space widens at C1–C2 providing a target for access. The cervical spinal cord expands inferior to C2, decreasing the ratio of the cervical spinal canal to the cervical spinal cord area, and making this region suboptimal for obtaining access. The extraspinal vertebral artery V3 segment courses through the C2 transverse foramen ascending through the C1 transverse foramen, and travels posteromedially within a groove on the superior surface of the posterior arch of C1 around the atlantooccipital junction. It then turns anterosuperiorly to enter the dura at the foramen magnum.

The V3 segment often forms a dorsal curve as it emerges from the transverse foramen of C2 before inclining ventrally again to enter the transverse foramen of C1; therefore, it overlies the lateral side of the spinal canal between the first and second cervical vertebrae, usually the anteroinferior quadrant. At C1-2, 72.2% of vertebral arteries lay anterior to the spinal canal. Of the remainder, 19.0% overlay the anterior third, 7.3% the middle third, and 0.9% the posterior third of the canal.

The posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) caudal loop extends below the foramen magnum in 14.7%, and below the posterior arch of C1 in 0.6% of patients.

Sometimes, during the development of the vertebral artery, there is the persistence of the first intersegmental artery, which causes the distal vertebral artery to enter the spinal canal between C2 and C1 rather than entering the transverse foramen of C1. This anomaly is called a C2 segmental type vertebral artery. Fenestration of the vertebral artery above and below C1 (duplicated vertebral artery), occurs when the first intersegmental artery persists in combination with the preservation of a distal vertebral artery that enters the C1 transverse foramen; however, this rarely happens.