**Indications for Treatment**

1) T-score less than or equal to -2.5 SD on the femur or lumbar spine in patients older than 70 years old

2) T-score between -1 and -2.5 with a 10-year probability of more than 3 percent hip fracture or more than 20 percent probability of osteoporosis-related major fracture on FRAX country-specific.

3) Patients with osteoporotic fractures

**Management**

1) Lifestyle changes: Recommendations based on studies aimed at preserving bone mass in men are similar to those recommended for women. They include a balanced diet with adequate protein and dairy intake, regular physical activity, and avoiding excessive alcohol consumption and smoking

2) Fall precautions: The NOF recommends assessing patients with risk factors for falls and offering appropriate modifications (e.g., home safety assessment, physical therapy, correction of vitamin D insufficiency or deficiency, caution with central nervous system depressant medications, avoidance of hypotension, and visual correction).

3) Calcium and Vitamin D supplementation: There is evidence that calcium and vitamin D given together reduce fractures in multiple studies, including a pooled analysis of 68500 patients with a male population of 14.7% from seven trials in the US and Europe.

Therefore, the NOF currently recommends a diet with adequate amounts of total calcium (at least 1000 mg/day for men 50–70 and 1200 mg/day for men 71 and older) and to add calcium supplements only if dietary intake is insufficient. It also advises on vitamin D intake (800–1000 IU/day), including supplements if necessary for individuals age 50 and older to achieve a vitamin D level of 30 ng/ml or greater.

4) FDA-approved anti-reabsorptive drugs available for the treatment of primary osteoporosis in males:

a) Bisphosphonates are synthetic analogs of inorganic pyrophosphate which are deposited in the bone matrix. They act in bone resorption sites and are the first-line treatment of osteoporosis. Alendronate, risedronate, and zoledronic acid are approved for the treatment of primary osteoporosis in post-menopausal women, men, and glucocorticoid-related osteoporosis. They have shown to reduce vertebral and non-vertebral fractures.  In a study with more than 2100 subjects (25% men) who had undergone surgery for a hip fracture, annual treatment with zoledronic acid reduced the risk of recurrent fractures when initiated within 90 days of the event, after a median follow up of 1.9 years.

Drug administration:  Alendronate and risedronate tablets must be taken on an empty stomach, with 8 oz of plain water. Patients must wait at least 30 min after taking these medications before eating, drinking, or taking any other medication. During that time they should remain upright, either sitting or standing. Zoledronic acid is given IV, over at least 15 min, once a year or every 2 years. Patients may experience flu-like symptoms after administration, which can be prevented with adequate hydration and pretreatment with acetaminophen.

Drug safety: Side effects are class-related and include gastrointestinal problems, such as gastritis and esophagitis. All bisphosphonates are contraindicated in patients with an estimated GFR below 30–35 ml/min. Osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) is a rare side effect, more associated with high-dose IV bisphosphonate use in patients with cancer. The risk increases with duration >5 years.

b) Denosumab: it is a RANK-L monoclonal antibody. By binding the RANK-L with high affinity, it prevents the ligand from activating its receptor, the receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B (RANK), on the surfaces of osteoclasts, inhibiting bone reabsorption.  It was approved by use in men with osteoporosis after the study ADAMO which revealed an increase in BMD of the lumbar spine, femur, and distal radius

Another significant multicenter study that included patients undergoing treatment for non-metastatic prostate cancer on anti-androgenic drugs resulted in a significant increase in BMD of the lumbar spine (8.0%), femoral neck (4.9%) and distal third of the radius (6.9%) during the 3-year follow up. Moreover, it also showed a 45% reduction in the risk of any new fractures and a decrease in the incidence of new vertebral fractures.

It is FDA approved for the treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women, in men at high risk of fracture with primary osteoporosis, to treat bone loss in women with breast cancer on an aromatase inhibitor, and male with prostate cancer on androgen deprivation therapy who are at high risk of fracture.

Drug administration: It has to be administered by a health professional, 60 mg every 6 months subcutaneously.

Drug safety: It may cause hypocalcemia, which has to be corrected before starting denosumab. It can increase the risk of serious skin infections (cellulitis) and skin rash. As bisphosphonates, it has also been rarely associated with the development of ONJ, although much more common when used in patients with cancer at higher doses. It has also been rarely associated with the development of atypical femur fractures. If chosen to be discontinued, another agent should be promptly initiated since a rapid bone loss has shown to happen upon discontinuation.

5) FDA-approved anabolic drugs available for the treatment of primary osteoporosis in males:

a) Teriparatide (recombinant human PTH 1-34) is a synthetic polypeptide with a similar sequence of the amino acids 1-34 of the amino-terminal region of the endogenous human PTH (PTH 1-84), which is the biological action sequence. It binds with similar affinity to the G protein-coupled receptor because it is identical to the biologically active fraction of PTH 1-84.

It is approved by the FDA for the treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women and men at high risk for fracture. It is also approved for treatment in men and women and glucocorticoid-related osteoporosis if high risk for fracture.

Drug administration: it is administered by 20 μg daily subcutaneous injection and treatment should not exceed 18 to 24 months. When treatment is discontinued bone loss can be rapid and either bisphosphonates or denosumab should be considered to maintain BMD.

Drug safety: possible side effects are leg cramps, nausea, and dizziness. It has shown a dose-dependent increase in the incidence of osteosarcoma in rats (on much higher doses per kg than used for humans.) Therefore, patients with an increased risk of osteosarcomas, such as patients with Paget’s disease of bone (PDB), history of prior radiation therapy of the skeleton, bone metastases, history of primary bone malignant tumor, or hypercalcemia should not receive teriparatide if require treatment for osteoporosis. Patients with PDB and osteoporosis would benefit from zoledronic acid for both conditions.

6) Hormonal therapy: Testosterone is the main therapy in hypogonadal patients increasing bone mineral density and decreasing sarcopenia. For patients with hypogonadism with high risk for fracture or with contraindications for testosterone replacement, it is recommended to add nonhormonal pharmacologic therapy. The indications for adding nonhormonal therapy are: patients on high-dose glucocorticoids, frequent falls, history of a recent fragility fracture, particularly with a BMD T-score below -2.5 at any skeletal site, T-scores below -3.5 or even below -3.0 if they have other risk factors for fracture, T-score <-2.5 (or fragility fracture) even after receiving adequate testosterone therapy for two years.

7) Possible future drugs for osteoporosis in males:

a) Abaloparatide (PTHrP 1-34) is a synthetic analog of PTH related peptide (PTHrP) with 76 percent homology that binds more selectively than teriparatide to the PTH type 1 receptor (PTH1R). It binds selectively to the RG conformation of that receptor what confers a more transient response, favoring bone formation avoiding more prolonged activation and its undesired effects (eg, bone resorption, hypercalcemia). It has been available in the United States since 2017 and has proven to be efficacious in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis, reducing the risk of new vertebral and nonvertebral fractures over 18 months. Further research is needed to understand the risks and benefits and its efficacy versus other therapies. A phase 3 trial is ongoing to evaluate its effect on osteoporosis in males.

c) Romosozumab: a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds and inhibits sclerostin. Sclerostin is secreted by osteocytes and regulates bone formation. Its inhibition by romosozumab has shown a dual effect of bone formation and decreased bone resorption. A phase III trial (FRAME) has shown a significant increase in BMD at the lumbar spine, hip, and a significant reduction of vertebral and nonvertebral fractures following 12 months of therapy in postmenopausal women. In 2018, a phase III trial with 245 male subjects also showed increased spine and hip BMD following 12 months of treatment with romosozumab, but there were safety concerns due to a low but significant increase in cardiovascular events in the medication group.

**Sequential Therapy**

When diagnosed in younger individuals, it is preferred to manage patients with sequential monotherapy, as patients will more likely need to be on long-term therapy. As the majority of the anti-osteoporotic medications can not be continued indefinitely, this management is preferred to keep patients covered for the longest period, while not increasing the risk of major side effects.

For more severe osteoporosis, one option is to follow an anabolic therapy with an antiresorptive agent. To prevent the loss of the newly formed bone, an antiresorptive agent must begin within 1 month of completing the course of anabolic therapy. It is not recommended to combine teriparatide and bisphosphonate. An RCT showed that patients on teriparatide monotherapy had a higher increase in BMD compared with those on a combination of alendronate and teriparatide. Alendronate has shown to attenuate the stimulus for bone formation promoted by teriparatide when given in combination.

**Duration of Treatment**

No anti-osteoporotic therapy should be considered indefinite. Except for bisphosphonates, all other medications produce effects that wane relatively quickly after discontinuation. In contrast, bisphosphonates retain residual effects following treatment discontinuation. Therefore, it is recommended to discontinue bisphosphonates usually after 5 years of continuous use of the oral presentations (alendronate and risedronate) and after 3 years for zoledronic acid, to reduce the risk of major side effects, such as ONJ and atypical femur fractures which become more common after 5 years of continuous use.