Because the clinical presentation of HCM is often non-specific and failure or delay in diagnosis have had significant consequences in terms of considerable morbidity and possible mortality the diagnostic workup for possible HCM is predicated on an initial screening protocol designed to have as high sensitivity as possible to optimize disease detection even if at the expense of some false positive detection.

The first step of diagnostic evaluation involves wide-ranging screening, followed by diagnostic confirmation and then finally anatomic localization of the underlying etiology of the HCM.

It is generally accepted that the diagnosis of HCM is confirmed when at least two different first-tier screening tests are unequivocally abnormally elevated.

The determination of intensity and degree of screening testing is on a case by case basis based on the degree of clinical suspicion (pretest probability) of the diagnosis of HCM. The first-level screening tests include salivary cortisol tests, which should be obtained as duplicates to evaluate the early morning and late-night levels to evaluate both absolute cortisol levels and the preservation of the normal diurnal rhythm, 24-hour urinary free cortisol estimation, and the 1mg dexamethasone suppression test. The generally accepted threshold for diagnostic fidelity of the overnight 1mg dexamethasone suppression test is serum cortisol the morning after over 1.8 mcg/dl (50 nmol/l) after confirmation that the patient actually took the dexamethasone tablet and adequately absorbed it (this can only be objectively confirmed by concurrently measure serum dexamethasone levels the morning after). Some centers use other tests for screening, such as the extended low dose dexamethasone suppression test (involves administering 2mg of dexamethasone daily for two days).

In subjects with abnormal screening tests, confirmatory tests need to be done, and included here is the need to distinguish patients with PCS/physiologic HCM. Most experts in the field agree regarding the existence of SCS, which is often clinically distinct and not as clinically striking as typical classical CS. This form of HCM is most commonly associated with adrenal etiologies rather than pituitary or EcCS though there have been cases of the latter described presenting as SCS. The controversy as regards SCS largely revolves around the exact diagnostic criteria and thresholds for the diagnosis. There are at least five clinical practice guidelines in this area.

The combined dexamethasone CRH test is generally the best dynamic test for the distinction between pathologic HCM and physiologic HCM. Its basis is the premise that patients with the latter tend to have a blunted cortisol response (and less consistently) ACTH response to CRH after dexamethasone suppression (using the standard two-day low dose dexamethasone administration protocol) compared to patients with pathological HCM. This testing is still an area of controversy, and there are lingering concerns regarding the sensitivity and specificity of the test in distinguishing pseudo-CS from true pathologic CS.

Based on clinical presentation and the results of multiple screening test results, after deciding that the patient has HCM the next diagnostic branch point is whether the HCM is ACTH dependent or independent. As ACTH secretion is pulsatile in fashion and has a well-established diurnal rhythm, this measurement needs to be done on multiple occasions over a period of time to reach a consensus. Persistently low serum ACTH levels less than 5 pg/ml are very strongly predictive of ACTH independent HCM, which should include exogenous HCM in the considered etiologic differential diagnosis. Similarly, serum ACTH level consistently greater than 20 pg/ml is typically highly suggestive of ACTH dependent  HCM, which then brings up the clinical decision branch point of distinguishing between pituitary based HCM (which is typically the cause in 70 to 85% of such cases) versus EcCS. This distinction is, however, not always easy and may involve the use of other diagnostic testing strategies detailed below.

For patients with persistent serum ACTH levels between 5 to 20 pg/ml, further dynamic testing is necessary to provide clarity. These could include the CRH stimulation test, the vasopressin (or desmopressin, DDAVP) stimulation test, and/or the metyrapone stimulation test. All these tests tend to cause post provocative increase in ACTH secretion in patients with pituitary based HCM but not in adrenal HCM nor most EcCS patients. The exact diagnostic thresholds, sensitivity, and specificity of these tests are, however, contentious, thus limiting their utility in making firm diagnostic distinctions.

Measurement of serum DHEA-S has some diagnostic utility on repeated measures as it tends to be reduced in ACTH independent HCM but increased or normal in ACTH dependent HCM.

After firmly establishing that a patient has ACTH dependent HCM, the distinction between pituitary and EcCS is the next step in the diagnosis. It is critical to be clear that imaging tests, whether they be adrenal, pituitary, general abdominal, general brain, or another related imaging testing, should only be obtained after a definitive biochemical diagnosis of HCM is made. Incidentalomas are common enough that prior imaging before making clear biochemical diagnoses can lead to unnecessary testing and possibly incorrect diagnoses with a potentially wrong treatment plan, including unnecessary surgery. Furthermore, the fact that most pituitary based HCM is the result of microadenomas makes the absence of an identified lesion on pituitary MRI a fairly common clinical scenario. Some reports have indicated up to 40 to 50% of patients with documented biochemical pituitary based ACTH dependent HCM having reportedly normal pituitary MRI studies.

The specificity and sensitivity of all these tests are not robust enough nor universal enough to avoid scenarios in which doubt as to the location of the source of ACTH excess persists, and in such settings, direct measurement of central and peripheral ACTH production may be necessary. The best-validated strategy for this is the inferior petrosal sinus sampling (IPSS). The diagnostic utility of the test is heavily dependent on performing the test in the setting of ambient continuous CRH stimulation and requires the availability of high-end imaging for fluoroscopy as well as the availability of highly skilled neuroradiologists. Attempts to obtain similar data using less invasive bilateral internal jugular venous sampling have generally not yielded robust results. Studies of the even more technically difficult cavernous sinus sampling as a method to correctly lateralize the location of tiny pituitary microadenomas causing HCM have shown that they add little if any utility to the established IPSS and are not currently common practice.

Once the biochemical diagnosis and the anatomic location are determined based on the biochemical and dynamic testing, imaging tests then take center stage. For pituitary and other brain-related causes of HCM pituitary MRI imaging is the preferred imaging modality for lesion localization. Dynamic contrast-enhanced high-resolution pituitary MRI scans may increase detection, but even the best MRI imaging systems presently available are incapable of detecting all functional pituitary microadenomas causing HCM while their high degree of sensitivity has resulted in detection of non-functional pituitary microadenomas in 10 to 20% of healthy volunteers routinely imaged.

For patients whose biochemical and dynamic testing is suggestive of EcCs, the process of anatomical localization of the responsible lesion can be particularly challenging. The optimal strategy for imaging such patients is not clearly defined, and the decision is often on a case by case basis based on a careful review of the individual’s clinical presentation. Targeted imaging using CT scans, MRI, PET imaging, and specialized nuclear medicine imaging, including Octreotide scintigraphy and Gallium-68 DOTATATE imaging, is complementary. As most EcCS lesions are found in the chest, chest based imaging may be the best place to begin in the absence of clinical clues from the history and physical examination. Most malignant etiologic lesions are relatively easy to find by these imaging modalities, but benign carcinoids are notoriously difficult to locate and may require multiple repeated imaging obtained over significant periods of time before finally being discovered.

For patients with ACTH, independent HCM imaging is generally focused on the adrenals though they have been a few rare cases described of other organ-related tumors (mainly ovarian) associated with ACTH independent cortisol overproduction associated with HCM. The best imaging study for visualizing the adrenals remains the adrenal dedicated thin slice/section CT scan with and without contrast. Such studies should include clear documentation of the tissue density (Hounsfield units -HU) or CT attenuation value both pre and post-contrast as well as details of the contrast washout properties of identified adrenal lesions. Subsequent decisions regarding diagnosis and management strategies in these patients would depend on whether bilateral or unilateral nodularity is detected, the size of the nodule(s): micronodules vs. macronodules, and the age of the patient. The absence of any obvious nodules in patients with biochemical evidence of ACTH independent HCM may require bilateral adrenal venous sampling as may the presence of multiple nodules in both adrenals or even the presence of a single nodule in older patients (over 65 years old) where the possibility of such a nodule being a non-functional adenoma rather than the cause of the HCM can be as great as 25%. Adrenal venous sampling like IPSS requires the availability of high-end fluoroscopy imaging equipment, high fidelity intravenous catheters as well as highly skilled interventional radiologists and so is not widely available. It also requires careful sample collection and labeling and continuous cosyntropin (ACTH) infusion during the sampling. HU scores of greater than 20 raise the possibility of cancerous etiology of identified adrenal lesions as does suboptimal contrast washout (less than 50% over the timed period of observation). In such settings, adrenal MRI imaging may provide additional diagnostic information. Functional imaging of adrenocortical lesions using the iodo-cholesterol scan (NP-59 I-131 Iodo-cholesterol) is hardly ever done anymore as the test is difficult to execute and has demonstrated rather limited diagnostic sensitivity or specificity. In clinical scenarios where the possibility of the adrenal lesion seen could potentially be of adreno-medullary origin (a few cases of adrenal pheochromocytomas associated with ACTH independent HCM have been reported), obtaining an I-123 MIBG scinti-scan may offer additional diagnostic information. Abdominal sonography has little utility in the evaluation of adrenal lesions involved in ACTH independent HCM but may have utility in the assessment of the rare clinical scenario of ectopic cortisol producing tumors, which are usually of abdominopelvic origin.