Technetium-99m is one of the most common radionuclides used. It is a gamma emitter that is primarily used in diagnostic imaging and has limited therapeutic utility. Its use is in imaging: the thyroid, lacrimal glands, vascular perfusion, pulmonary perfusion, bones, myocardial, etc. It is the most common radionuclide used in diagnostic investigations. Many other radionuclides are also used, including but not limited, to iodine-123, iodine-131, iron-55, selenium-75, sodium-22, strontium-89, thallium-201, xenon-133, etc.

Iodine-131 is a radioisotope that has a broad array of applications. It undergoes beta decay, and it results in mutations in the cells that it penetrates. This characteristic gives it utility in thyroid ablations (the thyroid is the only organ in the body that uses iodine), which is useful in treating various thyroid malignancies and can be used to treat refractory Graves disease. Iodine-131 results in mutations in the cells that uptake it; it is often used in large doses, as low doses can result in an increased risk of subsequent malignancies (incomplete tissue ablation). Iodine-131 is also a gamma emitter; however, due to malignancy risk, iodine-123 (a more pure gamma emitter) is used in nuclear medicine scans of the thyroid.

Cesium-137 is a radioactive isotope of cesium that undergoes beta decay and gamma emission. The isotope is chemically unstable and quite reactive; thus, it is not routinely used in diagnostic modalities. It is primarily medically used for low-dose temporary intracavity brachytherapy.

Fluorine-18 is a radioisotope of fluorine that primarily undergoes positron emission; however, it also undergoes electron capture. Fluorine-18's primary use is as a radiotracer for PET scans. Thallium has many isotopes; however, the most medically useful is thallium-201. Thallium-201 undergoes electron capture to emit X-rays and photons. This feature makes it useful in imaging studies, and it is often used in cardiac stress tests (a test used to assess myocardial perfusion). Xenon-133 is a radioisotope of xenon that undergoes Beta decay. It is an inhaled radionuclide that is used to assess pulmonary function and cerebral blood flow. Rubidium-82 is a radioisotope of rubidium that undergoes both positron and gamma emission. It is primarily administered IV to assess myocardial imaging.