The sphenopalatine ganglion is an inverted cone-shaped structure and one of the largest parasympathetic ganglia in the skull. It is also known as the pterygopalatine ganglion (PPG) since it is located in the medial wall of the pterygopalatine fossa (PPF); other names include Meckel’s ganglion and the nasal ganglion. The efferent nerves of the SPG are the greater and lesser palatine nerves, the nasopalatine nerve, the orbital and pharyngeal branches, and the posterior, superior, and inferior lateral nasal branches of the trigeminal nerve. Although input to the SPG mainly consists of preganglionic parasympathetic fibers of the greater petrosal nerve, it also receives sympathetic and somatic sensation signals.

- The three primary inputs to the SPG are:

- Sympathetic fibers: Sympathetic fibers from superior cervical ganglion travel along the internal carotid plexus to the deep petrosal nerve and eventually through the Vidian nerve to reach the SPG. The Vidian nerve arises from the junction of the deep petrosal nerve and the greater superficial petrosal nerve (a branch of the facial nerve that carries parasympathetic fibers). Sympathetic fibers pass through the PPF and supply the nasal and the pharyngeal mucosa and the lacrimal gland. Sympathetic stimulation inhibits parasympathetic tone and dries out the mucosa.

- Parasympathetic fibers: The parasympathetic afferent fibers to the SPG derive from the superior salivatory nucleus (of the facial nerve) and travel via the greater superficial petrosal nerve to the Vidian nerve to reach the SPG. Postganglionic fibers provide secretomotor fibers to the mucosa of the nose, soft palate, uvula, tonsils, the roof of the mouth, gums, upper lips, pharynx, lacrimal glands, and meningeal vessels. Parasympathetic stimulation produces watery-mucoid secretions.

- Sensory fibers: Sensory fibers arise from the maxillary nerve. The maxillary nerve passes through the foramen rotundum and reaches the SPG by traversing the PPF. The majority of the efferent fibers pass directly through the ganglion without synapsing and exit via the greater and lesser palatine nerves, although some axons do contribute to the ganglion itself. The greater palatine nerve supplies pain sensation to the bony palate and the gingival and buccal mucosa. The lesser palatine nerve supplies pain sensation to the uvula, soft palate, and tonsils.

The SPG plays a critical role in headache disorders, especially trigeminal autonomic cephalgias (TACs). The key features of TACs are unilateral headaches typically associated with an autonomic dysfunction like lacrimation and rhinorrhea, ptosis, and miosis. Cluster headaches are the most common TACs. Stimulation of the SPG causes cerebral vasodilatation and increases cerebral blood flow, which results in the release of vasoactive intestinal peptides, acetylcholine, and nitric oxide. These inflammatory substances, in turn, activate trigeminal nociceptors and cause headaches.