Nevus of Ota is usually asymptomatic though rare cases with sensory loss have also been reported. It is characterized by bluish hyperpigmentation along the ophthalmic and maxillary divisions (V1 and V2) of the trigeminal nerve. The nevus of Ota is usually unilateral or sometimes bilateral. Morphology can be macular (rarely papular or nodular), patchy brown, slate-blue or with grey-black pigmentation, and deeper lesions appearing blue. Macules are confluent, non-hairy, and flat with poorly defined margins. Pigmentation may affect extracutaneous sites like the eyes (conjunctiva, sclera, cornea, and uvea). Pigmentation may also affect the oral cavity and nasal mucosa.

A complete ophthalmic examination, including visual acuity testing, intraocular pressure measurement, slit-lamp examination of the anterior segment, and dilated fundus examination with an indirect ophthalmoscope, should be performed. Subconjunctival melanosis and episcleral pigmentation are well appreciated on slit-lamp examination. Gonioscopy should be performed to note the hyperpigmentation of trabecular meshwork. A dilated peripheral retinal examination should be performed to rule out any choroidal mass/choroidal melanoma. Stereoscopic examination of the optic nerve head should be done to document any optic nerve head cupping. An oral examination is performed to look for palate lesions.

Tanino classifies nevus of Ota into 4 types:

- Type I (mild): Type A is periocular. Type B involves the zygomatic region. Type C involves the forehead. Type D involves the only nose.

- Type II (moderate): Similar to type I but worse in severity.

- Type III (intensive): Periocular, nose, and scalp involvement.

- Type IV: Bilateral involvement.

The only difference between the nevus of Ota and the nevus of Ito is the site of involvement and distribution. Ocular complications are not seen in the nevus of Ito. The intensity of pigmentation in both of these nevi may vary with menstruation, fatigue, or weather. Pigmentation becomes more intense after puberty and remains permanent with no spontaneous regression.