Laparoscopic techniques vary between surgeons, and there is no established standardization. The steps of Roux-en-Y-gastric bypass (RYGB) include 1) gastric pouch creation, 2) creation of biliopancreatic limb, 3) jejunojejunostomy creation, and 4) creation of gastrojejunostomy.

Under general anesthesia, the patient positioning is in the supine split leg position. The lead operating surgeon stands between the legs once the patient is prepped and draped, and the monitor is positioned above the patient's head. Establishing pneumoperitoneum in severely obese patients can be a challenging task. Most commonly, the Veress needle is inserted in the right hypochondrium, and an optical trochar inserted 4 to 5 cm above the umbilicus is used to gain access. The surgeon inserts additional 12 mm ports in the left upper quadrant and right upper quadrant. A 5 mm port and Nathanson retractor secured to Martin's arm are inserted to retract the liver.

**Step 1: Gastric Pouch Creation**

Adequate exposure of the gastroesophageal junction is essential, which can be facilitated by placing the patient in reverse Trendelenburg, retracting the left lobe of the liver away using a Nathanson retractor and retracting the omentum inferiorly.

Dissection begins at the angle of His to expose the left crus of the diaphragm and gastrohepatic ligament. The pars flaccida and retrogastric attachments are divided to mobilize the stomach. The lesser sac is entered along, the lesser curvature separating neurovascular branches from the left gastric artery and vein.

MacLean et al. demonstrated that the optimal gastric pouch 20 to 30 cc in volume and primarily involves the lesser curve of the stomach. Long term follow-up has shown steady weight loss over 15 years with this technique.

**Step 2: Creation of the Biliopancreatic Limb**

The biliopancreatic limb, also known as the afferent limb, consists of the duodenum and proximal jejunum that remains in continuity with the remnant stomach proximally. The limb contains digestive enzymes from the stomach, hepatobiliary tract, and pancreas. In a standard gastric bypass, approximately 40 cm is measured starting at the ligament of Treitz and divided using a stapling device to create the biliopancreatic (BP) limb.

**Step 3: Creation of Jejunojenuostomy**

The roux limb is measured 75 to 150 cm from the jejunal division point for an average of 120 cm. The biliopancreatic limb is anastomosed to the distal segment of jejunum at this point to create side-to-side jejunojejunostomy - the JJ anastomosis.

**Step 4: Creation of Gastrojejunostomy**

The Roux limb of the jejunum can then be brought up either in an antecolic-antegastric or a retrocolic-retrogastric orientation. A side-to-side gastrojejunostomy is then created using a linear stapling device with suture closure of the defect. If the anastomosis is performed in a retrocolic pattern, it is essential to recognize the transverse mesocolon defect (Petersen’s space) that could be a potential site of internal herniation of intestinal loops. Securing the mesenteries of the biliopancreatic, roux limb, and transverse mesocolon thus obliterates this potential hernia site.

**Leak test**

Before the completion of the procedure, an upper endoscopy leak test is performed while keeping the gastrojejunostomy in view. With the patient in Trendelenburg, the gastric pouch and gastrojejunostomy are submerged in saline. An endoscope is advanced across gastrojejunostomy to assess patency and then inflated with air. The submerged anastomosis undergoes inspection for bubbling that would indicate a leak. Some surgeons prefer methylene blue dye instead of air to check for a leak.

**Post-procedure care:**

Protocols vary with regards to post-procedure care and length of stay. An overnight stay is recommended to be safe for most patients, according to one study.