During the fourth week of intra-uterine life, the laryngotracheal groove arises from the wall of the primitive pharynx. The groove elongates into the splanchnopleuric mesoderm to form the respiratory diverticulum. The distal end becomes bifid to form two lung buds. Each lung bud then undergoes the repeated process of branching and elongation such that the conducting airways develop by the 16 weeks of organogenesis. Acini development then takes place to form the gaseous exchange system during the canalicular (16 to 26 weeks) and terminal sac (26 weeks to birth) stages of lung development with continued maturation till childhood. The mechanical forces play an essential role in fetal lung development during the pseudo glandular stage of organogenesis. The spontaneous contractions of airways and fetal breathing movements regulate fluid movement in and out of the lung.

Oligohydramnios decreases the distensibility of the lungs by reducing the fluid around the potential airspaces. Severe hypoplasia is associated with a reduction in alveolar size and number with a proportional decrease in the pulmonary vasculature.

Mechanical compression may be due to intra-thoracic or extrathoracic lesions, including congenital diaphragmatic hernia, eventration of the diaphragm, ascites, pleural effusion, cystic malformations of the lung. A regular fetal breathing pattern is imperative for adequate lung maturation. Brainstem anomalies like iniencephaly, neuromuscular problems such as spinal muscular atrophy, or congenital myotonic dystrophy cause ineffective fetal breathing movements and reduction in fetal lung volume. Restrictive chest wall defects, as seen in congenital thoracic dystrophy or short rib polydactyly syndrome, cause impairment in the typical breathing pattern.

The hypoplastic lung could be a part of an abnormally formed right lung as in the Scimitar syndrome. Primary hypoplasia is still widely understudied, but many believe that the underlying cause may be secondary to abnormalities with growth factors like the fibroblast growth factor, epidermal growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor, or the transcription factors like TTF-1 (thyroid transcription factor 1), and FGFs (fibroblast growth factors) 7 and 10. These factors are responsible for normal lung development, and genetic mutation in any of these factors can result in pulmonary hypoplasia. Abnormalities in the fetal breathing activity, thoracic cavity, or amniotic fluid volume can lead to primary pulmonary hypoplasia. Alternatively, it could be related to the delayed development of the lungs or some degree of functional lung compression with no apparent structural defect.