Standing anteroposterior and lateral and Harris views are helpful. Radiographs of the ankle joint may demonstrate an apparent ball-and-socket ankle. On the lateral view, talar beaking occurs at the distal dorsal aspect of the talar head near the talonavicular joint, and this is due to abnormal biomechanical stresses at the talonavicular joint. Talar beaking is 48% sensitive and 91% specific for diagnosing a talocalcaneal coalition. The lateral radiographs reveal the C sign, which results from the bony continuity of the inferomedial border of the talus and the posteroinferior aspect of the sustentaculum tali. First described by Lateur et al., the C sign is 88% sensitive and 87% specific. On a true lateral radiograph, there is an absent middle facet sign which has a 100% sensitivity and 42% specificity. The sustentaculum tali is dysmorphic, and it appears enlarged and rounded (often referred to as the Drunken waiter sign) is 82% sensitive and 70% specific.

CT scanning of 3 to 5 mm sized slice cuts are required to rule out other associated coalitions and also for preoperative workup. CT imaging is generally upfront in evaluating osseous subtalar coalitions but elusive in cases of a non-osseous coalition. CT scan is useful to determine the location, size, and extent of the coalition. The posterior facet of the calcaneum width and the relative cross-sectional area of the talocalcaneal coalition to the area of the posterior facet of the calcaneus is calculated to determine the surgical procedure and outcome. The talocalcaneal coalitions are resectable if the size ratio is less than 50%, there is a wide posterior articular facet, and under 16 degrees of hindfoot valgus deformity measured on the coronal CT image.

Another useful classification system has been proposed based on the 3DCT reconstructions, which may help in defining the size, location, and orientation of talocalcaneal coalitions.

Mubarak et al. divided the talocalcaneal coalition into five types

- Type 1- Linear

- Type 2- Linear with posterior hook

- Type 3- Shingled

- Type 4- Complete osseous

- Type 5- Posterior

CT SPECT scan can be used to localize the precise location of the symptoms.

MRI scanning is useful to rule out fibrous or cartilaginous coalitions and to also to look for any inflammatory changes in the neighboring tendons.