The LAA is implicated in the pathogenesis of several conditions, including AF and hypertension.

It is well established that the LAA is the primary site of thrombi formation in patients with nonvalvular AF.

The 2018 LAA HOMEOSTASIS study was one of the first studies which examined the impact of epicardial and endocardial LAA occlusion techniques on neurohormonal modulation in humans. This study, consisting of 77 patients, found that after epicardial LAA closure, ANP and BNP levels decrease significantly immediately post-procedure, began to rise at 24 hours, and normalized at three months. In patients undergoing endocardial LAA device implantations, the ANP/BNP levels significantly increased post-procedure and normalized by three months. Of note, epicardial LAA devices were associated with a down-regulation of the adrenergic system and RAAS, resulting in a significant decrease in systolic blood pressure. No such effect was noted in endocardial device implantations.

LAA morphology has demonstrated a correlation with the risk of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation. Following large imaging cohorts of patients, four main LAA morphologies have been classified: chicken wing, cactus, windsock, and califlower - the former of these four being the most prevelant found in 48% of patients and the other found in 30%, 19%, and 3%, respectively

There have also been reports of tears in the LAA associated with blunt chest wall trauma from motor vehicle accidents. Despite being a rare complication, these injuries correlate with high morbidity and mortality. Approximately 10% of blunt trauma to the chest involves the LAA, and mortality estimates range between 50% to 80%.