Due to the inherent nature of the error in the human evaluation of burns even in the setting of rules, computer-based applications available for smartphones are being produced to minimize overestimating and underestimating TBSA percentages. The applications are utilizing standardized sizes of male and female models of small, average, and obese sizes. The applications are also moving towards measurements of infants. These computer applications are finding variability in the reporting of TBSA percentages by up to 60% overestimation of burn surface area down to 70% underestimation.

Intravenous fluid resuscitation guided by the Rule of Nines stands only for patients that have greater than 20% TBSA, and these patients should be transported to the nearest trauma center. Except for special areas, such as the face, genitals, and hands, that need to be seen by a specialist, transfer to major trauma centers are only necessary for greater than 20% TBSA burns. The American Burn Association (ABA) also has defined criteria of which patients should be transferred to a burn center.

Once fluid resuscitation has been initiated, it is important to identify if appropriate perfusion, hydration, and renal function are present. The resuscitation derived from the Rule of Nines and intravenous fluid formula (Parkland, Modified Brooke, among others) should be closely monitored and adjusted as these initial values are guidelines. The management of severe burns is a fluid process requiring constant monitoring and alterations. Lack of attention to details can result in higher morbidity and mortality as these patients are critically ill.