In the United States and other western cultures, the deficiency is rare with adequate diets, including B6 sources from fish, organ meats, poultry, potatoes, grains, legumes, and non-citrus fruits.

Isolated B6 deficiency is rare and usually found in association with other B vitamin deficiencies such as folic acid and B12.

Low plasma levels of active B6 are found in chronic alcohol dependence, with obese states, protein-energy malnutrition. Pregnancy, preeclampsia and eclampsia, and malabsorptive states such as celiac, inflammatory bowel disease, and bariatric surgery.

Additional at-risk groups with inadequate intake or increased metabolic requirements may become functionally deficient in B6. Included in this group are those with renal impairment, autoimmune disorders, and chronic alcohol use. Patients with chronic renal failure, especially those receiving hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis, have low plasma levels of B6. Autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, have increased catabolism of B6, resulting in higher demand for dietary supplementation of B6.

The patients with impaired renal function, patients on dialysis, and the patient who have undergone renal transplants are more at risk of Vitamin B6 deficiency. The pathophysiology behind this is low serum PLP concentrations in such patients. They exhibit similar signs and symptoms of B6 deficiency as compared to other individuals and usually respond well to oral or parenteral B6 therapy.

Of great clinical importance in toxicology is that drug antagonists to vitamin B6 occurs with the tuberculosis medicine isoniazid. Also, penicillamine and levodopa, as well as some anticonvulsant medications, may interfere with B6 metabolism.