Speech is the verbal expression of thoughts and ideas. In many cases, speech is used to communicate via a shared language. Language is an agreed-upon rule-based code we use to communicate. Parents may present with a range of concerns regarding their children when they choose to consult a speech-language pathologist (SLP). These may include but are not limited to, the child’s patterns of speech, cognitive, and social skills in contrast to their peer group. Some parents may be concerned that their child does not match up to other children their age and appears to be lagging in milestones. These may include behavioral and hearing issues also.

Multiple tests have been devised to assess oral motor disorders. One of them is the Fletcher time-by-count test of diadochokinetic syllable rate. The diadochokinetic (DDK) rate is an assessment tool used by SLPs to measure the repetitions of sounds within a set period of time. It measures how rapid one can correctly repeat a series of rapid, alternating sounds. These are called 'tokens.' Words with one, two, or three syllables are included in tokens. For e.g. 'puh', 'puh-tuh', or 'puh-tuh-kuh'. DDK rates vary between different age groups and patients with varying neurological conditions.

Normal speech depends on the functional and structural integrity of the velopharynx. This is a complex and dynamic structure that uncouples the oral and nasal cavities during sound production. Dysfunction of the velopharyngeal valve leads to hypernasality, nasal air emission, and compensatory articulation errors, all of which may impair speech intelligibility. Functional voice disorders also come under speech pathology and therapy services, in both professional and casual voice-users.

When we speak or swallow, a thin sheet of musculo-mucosal tissue called velum disunites the oropharynx and nasopharynx during speaking and swallowing. Cleft palate is a congenital deformity commonly causing velopharyngeal insufficiency (VPI), though VPI can exist independent of cleft palate also. VPI compromises speech sounds, decreases the comprehension of speech and swallowing efficacy due to improper closure of soft palate that is closed during swallowing and speaking. If the velum is not closed fully against the posterior wall of the pharynx at Passavant's ridge, this poor closure will result in nasal regurgitation and resonance disorders (hypernasality and/or hyponasality).

Speech pathologists continue to develop rehabilitative strategies under swallowing management programs also. As speech and swallowing rely on many of the same sensory and motor facilities, they are necessarily related. Oral medications may also need modification in texture so the patient can swallow them safely. Likewise, daily diet modifications may be required in patients suffering from dysphagia. As patients progress through such swallowing management programs, nasogastric tube feeding, a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy may also be suggested via speech assessment depending on the type and severity of swallowing difficulty. Swallowing difficulties are also very common in neonatal populations, and there is a distinct sub-specialty of speech pathology dedicated to neonatal feeding. Since speech assessment is a multifactorial process, it is inclusive of the individual, their family history, health, and socio-economic status enabling insight into the circumstances relevant to individual patients' needs. For example, a child who is not responsive to the parents' or the clinician’s verbal commands may be suffering from hearing impairment, or other auditory dysfunctions. Autism Spectrum Disorder and other disorders might also be underlying issues that have not been diagnosed prior, but can be elucidated through a thorough speech assessment. Clinical conditions and communication disorders are coexisting conditions in cases of cleft palate, hearing deficit, traumatic or congenital brain injury, and anomalies of the orofacial structure and difficulty in deglutition (dysphagia).

Milestones are the markers that represent a standard of normal development, and there are well-defined speech, swallowing, and language skills milestones. If a child’s speech, understanding, cognition is not age-appropriate or is not like their peer group, then further investigation is warranted. There are many potential culprits, and a formal assessment of the child's hearing ability, cognition, anatomy, and home/family environment will be investigated.