# Continuing Education Activity

Globally, pneumonia is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in children younger than the age of 5 years. Although the majority of deaths attributed to pneumonia in children are mostly in the developing world, the burden of disease is substantial, and there are significant healthcare-associated costs related to pneumonia in the developed world. This activity reviews the cause, pathophysiology, and presentation of pediatric pneumonia and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of pediatric pneumonia.
- Review the presentation of pediatric pneumonia.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for pediatric pneumonia.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and outcomes in pediatric patients with pneumonia.

# Introduction

Globally, pneumonia is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in children younger than the age of 5 years.

# Etiology

The etiology of pneumonia in the pediatric population can be classified by age-specific versus pathogen-specific organisms.Klebsiella, Escherichia coli, and
Listeria monocytogenes.Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus pyogenes, and Staphylococcus aureus can be identified in late-onset neonatal pneumonia.S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae type B is observed in this age group.S. pneumoniae is still the most commonly identified organism.S. aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa is ubiquitous.Pneumocystis jirovecii, cytomegalovirus, and fungal species if no other organism is identified.

# Epidemiology

There are an estimated 120 million cases of pneumonia annually worldwide, resulting in as many as 1.3 million deaths.

The introduction of the pneumococcal vaccine has significantly lowered the risk of pneumonia in the United States.

# Pathophysiology

Pneumonia is an invasion of the lower respiratory tract, below the larynx by pathogens either by inhalation, aspiration, respiratory epithelium invasion, or hematogenous spread.

There are four stages of lobar pneumonia. The first stage occurs within 24 hours and is characterized by alveolar edema and vascular congestion. Both bacteria and neutrophils are present.

Red hepatization is the second stage, and it has the consistency of the liver. The stage is characterized by neutrophils, red blood cells, and desquamated epithelial cells. Fibrin deposits in the alveoli are common.

The third stage of gray hepatization stage occurs 2-3 days later, and the lung appears dark brown. There is an accumulation of hemosiderin and hemolysis of red cells.

The fourth stage is the resolution stage, where the cellula infiltrates is resorbed, and the pulmonary architecture is restored. If the healing is not ideal, then it may lead to parapneumonic effusions and pleural adhesions.

In bronchopneumonia, there is often patch consolidation of one or more lobes. The neutrophilic infiltrate is chiefly around the center of the bronchi.

# History and Physical

In many cases, complaints associated with pneumonia are nonspecific, including cough, fever, tachypnea, and difficulty breathing.

Physical exam should include observation for signs of respiratory distress, including tachypnea, nasal flaring, lower chest in-drawing, or hypoxia on room air.

# Evaluation

Laboratory evaluation in children suspected of having pneumonia should ideally start with non-invasive, rapid bedside testing including nasopharyngeal swab assays for influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, and human metapneumovirus when available and appropriate. This can help minimize unnecessary imaging and antibiotic treatment in children with influenza or bronchiolitis. Children who present with severe disease and appear toxic should have complete blood count (CBC), electrolytes, renal/hepatic function testing, and blood cultures performed.

Sputum gram stain and culture are not productive as the samples are often contaminated by oral flora. Blood cultures can be done but are often negative. Today, serology is being used to determine the presence of mycoplasma, legionella, and chlamydia species. PCR is becoming available in most hospitals, but still, the results take 24-48 hours.

There are no clear guidelines for the routine use of chest x-ray in the pediatric population.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment should be targeted to a specific pathogen that is suspected based on information obtained from history and physical exam. Supportive and symptomatic management is key and includes supplemental oxygen for hypoxia, antipyretics for fever, and fluids for dehydration. This is especially important for non-infectious pneumonitis and viral pneumonia for which antibiotics are not indicated.

If bacterial pneumonia is suspected, treat empirically with antibiotics, keeping in mind significant history and bacterial pathogens that are common to specific age groups.

Neonates should receive ampicillin plus an aminoglycoside or third-generation cephalosporin

Atypical pneumonia is common in infants 1 to 3 months old, and this group should have additional antibiotic coverage with erythromycin or clarithromycin.

For infants and children over 3 months old, S. pneumoniae is the most common, for which the drug of choice is high-dose oral amoxicillin

In children older than 5 years old, atypical agents have a more important role, and macrolide antibiotics are usually first-line therapy.

Special attention should be given to children with chronic illnesses, as these might alter choices for antibioticsCytomegalovirus, ganciclovir and gamma globulin are the preferred agents. If methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is suspected, clindamycin or vancomycin may be given.

It is important to have a high index of suspicion for complications, especially in patients returning for repeat evaluation. For patients sent home with symptomatic or supportive management for suspected viral pneumonia, consider a secondary bacterial infection or other diagnoses upon re-evaluation.

Neonates and infants younger than 90 days old should be hospitalized for treatment, in addition to children who are immunocompromised or have other underlying chronic diseases like sickle cell anemia or cystic fibrosis.

Admission is often required for patients with respiratory distress and low oxygenation. In most cases, the presence of a parapneumonic effusion requires admission. Children with severe respiratory distress may require chest therapy, CPAP, or even mechanical ventilation. A large pleural effusion requires drainage for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. In patients with empyema, early video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) correlates with decreased mortality, hospital stay, and ionizing radiation from CT scans.

It is essential to ensure that clear discharge instructions and return precautions are given to parents or caregivers of children being discharged home in addition to close pediatrician follow-up.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Alveolar proteinosis

- Aortic stenosis

- Aseptic meningitis

- Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy

- Aspiration syndromes

- Asthma

- Atelectasis

- AV septal defect, complete

- AV septal defect, unbalanced

- Bacteremia

- Birth trauma

# Prognosis

For most children, the prognosis is good. Viral pneumonia tends to resolve without treatment. Long-term sequelae are rare. However, both staphylococcal and varicella pneumonia have guarded outcomes in children.

Children with tuberculosis are at high risk for disease progression if the condition is not treated Immunocompromized children have the worst prognosis. Each year, roughly 3 million children die from pneumonia and the majority of these children also have other comorbidities like congenital heart disease, immunosuppression, or chronic lung disease of prematurity.

# Complications

- Empyema

- Pleural effusion

- Lung abscess

- Necrotizing pneumonia

- Sepsis

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Pediatric pneumonia is often undertreated or missed, leading to high morbidity and mortality. The condition is best managed by an interprofessional team to improve outcomes. The majority of patients are managed by the pediatrician, nurse practitioner, or primary care provider.  Patient and caregiver education is vital. Parents need to be told to avoid smoking, and the importance of handwashing cannot be overstated. In addition, all clinicians looking after children should emphasize vaccination against pneumococcus and influenza.

Healthcare professionals, including physicians, nurses, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, pharmacists, ideally work together in close environments for optimum patient care. When caring for children with pneumonia, pharmacists can be of significant help with geographic resistance patterns for better treatment outcomes with selected antibiotic choices.

Caregivers should be educated about signs of respiratory difficulty and when to seek medical assistance. Only through a team approach can pneumonia in children be treated promptly with minimal morbidity.