Dopamine biosynthesis occurs following the same enzymatic sequence as norepinephrine (NE). In fact, DA is a precursor in the synthesis of NE (see Figure).

If an individual regularly consumes L-tyrosine in abundance, it readily crosses the blood-brain barrier, as does L-DOPA.

After DA release into the synaptic space, it interacts with various receptors on the pre and post-synaptic terminals, causing neuronal excitation or inhibition at the target neuron. There are two entire families of DA receptors composed of five different isoforms, each affecting different intracellular signaling pathways.

Once in the synaptic cleft, DA is transported back into the pre-synaptic neuron via DA transporters (DAT) for repackaging or can remain in the extracellular space to be taken up by glial cells or metabolized by the cellular membrane. DA may be metabolized extraneuronally by catechol-o-methyltransferase (COMT) to 3-methoxytyramine (3-MT), while monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B) will rapidly metabolize 3-MT to homovanillic acid (HVA).

Given this complex sequence, the modulation of dopamine can occur at various levels, such as the entire neuron, its projections, or the neuronal circuitry across the nervous system. Also, during the synthesis of DA (transcriptional, translational, and post-translational regulation), synaptosomal packaging (regulation of VMAT, transport of vesicle to synapse), DA release (neuronal depolarization, calcium signaling, vesicle fusion), and via reuptake and metabolism through regulation of the respective enzymes and their spatial localization relative to their substrate.

As indicated earlier, the systemic action of DA is subject to mediation by various receptors (D1, D2, D3, D4, and D5) and the alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors. These G-coupled receptors generally group as either D1 or D2, primarily based on their traditional biochemical functions showing that dopamine can modulate adenylyl cyclase activity.

Activation of the D1 receptors on smooth muscle, the proximal renal tubule, and cortical collecting duct increase diuresis.

While the blood-brain barrier specifically restricts the transport of DA from the systemic circulation to the central nervous system, further research has led to the discovery of its central role in reward-seeking behavior, wherein its transmission becomes markedly increased. Current DA research includes epigenetic changes and their involvement in a variety of psychiatric conditions, including substance abuse and addiction, schizophrenia, and attention deficit disorder.

Another DA circuit, the tuberoinfundibular pathway, is mainly responsible for regulating the neuroendocrine prolactin from the anterior pituitary gland, known for its role as a lactation inducer, but also has lesser roles in water/salt homeostasis and immune response and cell-cycle regulation.