The nerves of the foot and ankle include the saphenous, superficial fibular, deep fibular, medial plantar, lateral plantar, sural, and calcaneal branches.

The saphenous nerve originates from the femoral nerve and supplies the skin of the medial ankle and foot to the distal aspect of the first metatarsal.

The superficial and deep fibular nerves originate from the common fibular nerve. The superficial fibular nerve supplies the skin of the dorsal foot and digits apart from the dorsolateral first digit, dorsomedial second digit, and lateral fifth digit. The deep fibular nerve supplies the extensor digitorum brevis muscle and the skin of the dorsolateral first digit and dorsomedial second digit.

The medial and lateral plantar nerves originate from the tibial nerve. The division occurs at the level of the ankle within the tarsal tunnel. The medial plantar nerve travels deep to the abductor hallucis muscle. It will branch into the common plantar and proper plantar digital nerves of the first through fourth digits. The medial plantar nerve and it's terminal branches innervate the flexor digitorum brevis, first lumbrical, abductor hallicus, and flexor hallicus brevis muscles. Additionally, it provides sensory innervation to the skin of the plantar surface of the first three digits, medial fourth digit, and medial foot. The lateral plantar nerve obliquely along the lateral aspect of the plantar foot between the flexor digitorum brevis and quadratus plantae. It innervates the flexor digiti minimi brevis, abductor digiti minimi, quadratus plantae, adductor hallicus, lateral three lumbricals, and plantar/dorsal interossei muscles. The lateral plantar is also responsible for sensory innervation to the skin of the lateral plantar surface of the fifth and lateral fourth digit and lateral foot.

The sural nerve originates from branches of both the common fibular nerve and the tibial nerve. It supplies the lateral hind and midfoot. The calcaneal branches originate from the tibial and sural nerves and sensory innervation to the skin of the heel.

Sciatic

- Tibial

- Medial sural cutaneous
- Medial calcaneal
- Medial plantar

- Common plantar digital nerves
- Proper plantar digital nerves


- Lateral plantar

- Deep branch
- Superficial branch

- Common plantar digital nerves
- Proper plantar digital nerves

- Common fibular (peroneal)

- Deep fibular

- Lateral terminal branch
- Medial terminal branch


- Superficial

- Medial dorsal cutaneous
- Intermediate dorsal cutaneous

- Sural

- Lateral dorsal cutaneous
- Lateral calcaneal