A seizure is a transient occurrence of abnormal excessive or synchronous neuronal activity in the brain. Seizures manifest in different ways based on the anatomic regions of hyperactive neuronal activity. For example, patients may develop focal symptoms due to abnormal activity in the temporal lobe, whereas global signs represent widespread aberrant neuronal activity. Seizures may initially manifest as focal symptoms with subsequent generalization to the remaining cortex. Furthermore, patients may or may not lose consciousness during a seizure, depending on whether or not the limbic structures and brainstem are involved.

Seizure activity in the brain can be caused by numerous anatomic abnormalities such as tumors, infection, inflammatory/autoimmune processes, vascular malformations, stroke, trauma, cortical malformations/dysplasias, gray matter heterotopias, mesial temporal sclerosis, encephaloceles or other acquired or developmental abnormalities.

Seizure management relies on the treatment of the underlying etiology and/or anti-seizure drug therapy, and, for most patients, part of the evaluation for the underlying cause requires diagnostic workup with imaging. Various diagnostic imaging modalities may be used for patients with recurrent seizures, many adding complementary information for the care of these patients. Furthermore, diagnostic imaging can provide information that localizes epileptogenic lesions in patients with refractory epilepsy that require surgical intervention, potentially obviating the need for invasive electroencephalography (EEG). As such, understanding the uses and limitations of each modality is of critical importance for the treatment of these patients.