The etiology for rhabdomyolysis can be classified into two broad categories. Traumatic or physical causes and nontraumatic or nonphysical causes.

A careful history, physical examination, and laboratory workup can help identify the cause of rhabdomyolysis. In addition, multiple cohort studies have shown different causes at different frequencies for rhabdomyolysis depending on the hospital location and community behaviors.

**Traumatic or Physical Causes**

Traumatic/physical compression rhabdomyolysis can occur in different settings. In general, rhabdomyolysis from traumatic causes has a poor prognosis when compared to nontraumatic. Subclinical elevation of creatinine phosphokinase, myoglobin in serum, and myoglobinuria following physical exertion is widespread.

- Victims of polytrauma, motor vehicle accidents, mining accidents, earthquakes, particularly those trapped, are prone to crush syndrome and may develop severe compartment syndrome.

- Prolonged immobilization due to coma, intoxication with alcohol and opiates, hip fracture, and surgeries requiring specific positions for a long duration.

- Abuse, torture, and physical restraints for a longer duration are commonly seen in children.

- Fractures of lower extremities (tibial fracture), arterial occlusion from prolonged immobilization, tourniquet, and surgical clamping.

- Fire accidents and explosions.

- High voltage electric shock, lightning can cause direct injury to the sarcoplasmic membrane, with massive calcium influx along with severe rhabdomyolysis.

- Strenuous muscular exercise, especially in untrained individuals, lifting heavy weights and performing under scorching hot and humid conditions, status epilepticus, delirium tremors, phencyclidine overdose, tetanus, and rarely sepsis.

**Nontraumatic or Nonphysical Causes**

Nontraumatic causes of rhabdomyolysis can be from a mismatch between oxygen supply and demand, electrolyte changes, and metabolic abnormalities.

- Medications-alcohol, colchicine, carbon monoxide, statins, daptomycin, cocaine, corticosteroids, amphetamines, ecstasy, electrolytes, zidovudine, fibrates, diuretics, antimalarials, anticholinergics, intravenous and intramuscular illicit drug use.

- Infections-pyomyositis (MRSA), septic shock, toxic shock syndrome, Mycoplasma, Legionella, malaria, HIV, coxsackievirus, Salmonella, tularemia, ehrlichiosis, and influenza.

- Electrolyte abnormalities-hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, hyperosmolar conditions, hypo and hypercalcemia, and severe dehydration.

- Endocrine-hyper osmolar hyperglycemic state, severe diabetic acidosis with coma, myxedema.

- Myopathies - Disorders of glycogenolysis [Myophosphorylase deficiency(McArdle disease), phosphorylase kinase deficiency], disorders of glycolysis [phosphofructokinase deficiency, phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency, phosphoglycerate mutase deficiency, lactate dehydrogenase deficiency], disorders of purine metabolism [myoadenylate deaminase deficiency], disorders of lipid metabolism [carnitine deficiency, carnitine palmitoyltransferase deficiency, short and long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, lipin-1 deficiency] and Brody myopathy (calcium adenosine triphosphatase [CAT] deficiency).

- Insect bite and snake venom, hornet bite, carbon monoxide, Haff disease, and mushroom poisoning.

- Autoimmune myositis-polymyositis, dermatomyositis.

- Hemoglobinopathy-sickle cell trait.

- Dysregulated body temperature-neuroleptic malignant syndrome, malignant hyperthermia (inhaled anesthetic agents with or without succinylcholine), near drowning, hypothermia, and frostbite.

- Supplements for Physical performance-enhancing and weight-loss.

- Capillary leak syndrome and drug withdrawal-like baclofen.

The most common causes of rhabdomyolysis are trauma, immobilization, sepsis, and cardiovascular surgeries. With the increased use of lipid-lowering drugs, the incidence of rhabdomyolysis from HMG Co-A inhibitors is rising. Muscle toxicity from statins ranges from myopathy, myalgia, myositis, and rhabdomyolysis. Multiple pathophysiologic mechanisms contribute to statin-related muscle damage.  Discontinuation of statins is an effective method in the treatment of statin-induced rhabdomyolysis. Persistent elevation of CPK even after discontinuation of statins should raise concern for necrotizing autoimmune myopathy. Concomitant use of other drugs which can potentiate muscle injury should be avoided. Use of the lowest tolerable statin dose is recommended in patients with a history of drug-induced rhabdomyolysis. Patients may have one or more concomitant risk factors for the development of rhabdomyolysis. 5 to 10% of rhabdomyolysis cases may not have a definitive cause.