Assessment of ADLs is an important aspect of routine patient assessment and assists healthcare providers in assessing the patient’s status, plan, and intervene appropriately. A provider needs to address a patient’s general medical condition when determining their level of accomplishing functional capabilities that otherwise ensure independent living and personal care.

An ADL assessment helps determine whether a patient may require further rehabilitation or assistance at home or if a skilled nursing or long-term care facility would be a safer environment for the patient. Inability to ambulate may result in an increased risk of falls. It is well-reported that falls are associated with an increased mortality rate. Individuals who have experienced more than one incidence of falling and are 65 years of age and older tend to have a poor prognosis after a fall.  Such falls and subsequent hospitalization also place a burden on healthcare utilization and costs.

It is important to recognize the impact of a loss of ADL on the patient. Independent living is highly encouraged and advocated in American society, and many aging individuals fear a loss of autonomy.

Occupational therapists perform an ADL assessment to determine benefits for disability insurance and long-term care insurance policies. The cost of home care, skilled care, assisted living, and nursing homes is a concern for many families.  Not all supportive care is covered by Medicare or private insurance, thus leading to financial concerns for patients and significant others.  The high cost of care may lead to decisions that preclude patients from receiving the care required to support ADL's.

Access to care can also be an issue. Often lower socioeconomic groups or disadvantaged persons have difficulty accessing quality care for seniors.  Access can be difficult due to transportation, distance, and availability.