**Electroencephalogram (EEG)**

EEG is usually requested to assess the brain's electrical activity and correlate the findings to physiological and disease states. Although it is mostly used to rule in or rule out seizures, it can also be useful in diagnosing encephalopathy, as well as nonepileptic spells. A standard EEG usually lasts for 30 mins to an hour; however, depending on the patient's clinical status, as well as the findings of the initial EEG if done, the total duration of the EEG may be longer. In the inpatient setting, with patients having extended alteration in sensorium, a longer EEG, usually accompanied by video monitoring, is requested. It is useful to assess various encephalopathic states and use advanced software to review the prolonged studies appropriately and in a timely manner.

The EEG background activity varies with age. In individuals older than eight years old, the usual background activity in relaxed wakefulness consists of alpha waves ranging from 8.5 to 12Hz, with a posterior dominant rhythm that reacts to eye-opening and closure.

The video recording, along with the EEG recording, allows the reviewer to access and review any clinical events and their associated waveforms in a time-locked fashion to determine if they are associated.****The typical EEG duration for encephalopathic patients is longer than routine EEG evaluation on an outpatient basis. Encephalopathic patients are usually seen in acute hospital settings and typically require a longer duration EEG of at least 24 to 48 hours to assess and understand the condition completely. This also helps in monitoring their progress and assessing for non-convulsive status epilepticus.