Chronic interstitial nephritis in agricultural communities is one of the causes of chronic kidney disease of unknown etiology, which is generally more frequently seen in certain agricultural communities, as described above. Regarding the underlying pathophysiology of CINAC, two triggers have been proposed: toxic exposure in agricultural communities and heat stress with repeated episodes of dehydration causing recurrent acute kidney injury leading to CKD.

It is plausible that heat stress is an important contributor to the perpetuation of CINAC but is unlikely to be the sole driving force because CINAC is absent in very hot areas such as Cuba, Myanmar, and Northern Sri Lanka, where agrochemicals are rarely used. The identical clinical and pathologic phenotype of CINAC in different locations supports the involvement of common pathophysiological pathways. The patients treated with calcineurin inhibitors (CNI) acquire similar lesions in their proximal tubule cells. There is documented CNI effect of some herbicides and insecticides (paraquat, glyphosate, and pyrethroids). These findings strongly suggest a toxicologic etiology for the presence of CINAC.

Roncal-Jimenez et al. pointed out that recurrent dehydration may lead to renal injury by activating the polyol pathway, causing the production of endogenous fructose in kidneys that subsequently induces renal injury through metabolism by fructokinase. Fructose is nontoxic; however, fructokinase metabolizes it to generate uric aid, nephrotoxic oxidants, and inflammatory mediators. The major area where fructokinase is abundantly expressed is in the proximal tubules. Recurrent dehydration leads to repeated aldose reductase stimulation, causing fructose generation in the proximal tubules, resulting in tubular injury and inflammation. In some instances, agricultural laborers commonly use fructose-containing beverages for rehydration. A recent animal study revealed pathology suggestive of CINAC, such as elevated serum creatinine, renal inflammation, proximal tubular injury, and fibrosis after repeated exposure to heat-induced dehydration. Interestingly, this pathology was not observed in fructokinase-deficient mice. Additionally, another animal study reported that access to sufficient and clean water during the period of dehydration could protect the kidney.

One hypothesis for the damage could be the continued farmers' exposure to toxic substances without protection during the spraying at high temperatures that cause vasodilation and opening of the skin pores, causing an increment in the absorption and selective damage to the different organs, leading to reflex disorders, sensorineural hearing loss, and chronic kidney disease.

Environmental/occupational toxic exposure is more credible as the main driver of this epidemic.