Management of a patient with hyperoxaluria includes conservative, medical, and surgical measures along with the treatment of their nephrolithiasis. Isolated renal stone treatment could be conservative using fluids and alpha-blockers or surgical if the stone or stones are large, fail to pass, or the problem becomes complicated by infection. Here we focus on the prevention and treatment of patients with an established diagnosis of hyperoxaluria.

**Fluid Intake**: A greater fluid intake will increase the volume of urine and reduce the supersaturation of calcium oxalate. It is preferable to concentrate on measuring and focusing on urinary volume rather than on any particular oral intake goal. It is recommended that the oral intake should be sufficient to generate at least 2,000 ml of urine a day.

**Urinary Citrate and Alkalinization**: Potassium citrate is used to provide adequate urinary citrate levels and keep the urine pH at a favorable 6.2 to 6.8.  (Sodium citrate can be used in cases of renal failure.) Adequate urinary citrate levels (optimally at 250 to 300 mg/liter or 500 to 600 mg daily total) help prevent the aggregation of calcium oxalate crystals into stones. Potassium citrate supplements are often given along with thiazide diuretics which decrease citrate levels along with treating hypercalciuria.

**Dietary Measures**: Dietary modifications in secondary hyperoxaluria have been useful and are easily applied. Although randomized controlled trials have proven that restricting dietary calcium is detrimental, the beneficial effect of calcium supplementation in protecting against oxalate stones is less clear.

Pyridoxine (Vitamin B-6) should be supplemented as it can help patients reduce their hyperoxaluria, some significantly.

A general low-fat, low-oxalate diet is recommended.

**Other Therapies**

Orthophosphates, particularly in combination with pyridoxine, have been successfully used to treat primary and secondary hyperoxaluria.

Magnesium supplements (usually magnesium oxide or magnesium hydroxide) will reduce oxalate absorption by binding with oxalate in the intestinal tract but may promote diarrhea when used alone.

Cholestyramine is primarily used to manage bile acid malabsorption. This increases intestinal oxalate binding, thereby reducing its absorption. Cholestyramine will also bind intestinal oxalate directly and help reduce diarrhea, making it particularly useful in enteric hyperoxaluria.

Pentosan polysulfate (Elmiron), a synthetic glycosaminoglycan, can reduce calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis primarily through the inhibition of crystal aggregation. It also appears to help lower intestinal oxalate transport and reduce urinary oxalate excretion.

Oxalobacter formigenes, although involved in the pathogenesis of hyperoxaluria when deficient, confers only limited benefit when given as an oral supplement, but research is ongoing to help restore it effectively to the GI tract in hyperoxaluric patients.Oxalobacter therapy were able to re-establish intestinal colonies in primary hyperoxaluria patients, but they all failed to demonstrate any significant reduction in plasma or urinary oxalate compared to placebo. Oxalobacter therapy for enteric or secondary hyperoxaluria.

**Summary of Treatments for Secondary Hyperoxaluria**

- Low fat, low oxalate diet. Avoid excessive meat intake, spinach, cranberries, kale, rhubarb, and collard greens, as these have the highest oxalate content.

- Limit excess Vitamin C and Vitamin D.

- Pyridoxine (Vitamin B-6) supplementation.

- Normal/high calcium diet to increase intestinal oxalate binding.

- Calcium citrate supplements (or iron as an alternative) with higher oxalate meals (usually lunch and dinner). May use Calcium/Magnesium Citrate if calcium alone is too constipating. (The optimal calcium:magnesium ratio is 2:1.)

- Potassium citrate supplementation to optimize urinary pH and 24-hour urine citrate levels. Liquid preparations are preferred in patients with bowel problems or chronic diarrhea. Low potassium, liquid citrate supplements are commercially available.

- Urinary volume optimization: 2,000 ml per day minimum is recommended, but some patients may need over 2,500 ml, 3,000 ml, or more of urine production daily to control their urinary oxalate concentrations. This may mean waking up in the middle of the night to drink more water.

- Cholestyramine will help with bile malabsorption, increase intestinal oxalate binding and reduce diarrhea.

- Pentosan polysulfate (Elmiron) can help lower urinary oxalate excretion, but its main benefit is reducing calcium oxalate crystal aggregation.

- Anti-diarrheal therapy should be used if there is chronic diarrhea.

- Orthophosphate and/or magnesium supplementation. Do not use orthophosphates in patients with significant renal failure.

- Recheck 24-hour urine testing every 3 months until optimal results are obtained, then yearly.

- In cases of severe hyperoxaluria and all children with hyperoxaluria, consider screening for primary and/or enteric hyperoxaluria as appropriate.

- Optimize all other urinary chemical components (calcium, citrate, uric acid, volume) that may promote stone formation.

**Enteric hyperoxaluria**patients are also advised to consume a low-fat diet along with calcium and citrate supplements together with a restriction of oxalate-rich foods.

Higher dietary salt causes increased urinary sodium levels that exacerbate hypercalciuria and cause an increased propensity to form calcium oxalate stones. Limiting the amount of sodium intake has proven to help prevent recurrences of renal stones.

**Treatments for Primary Hyperoxaluria**

Dietary measures do not play a major role in primary hyperoxaluria as the excess oxalate in this condition is endogenous. Early, aggressive treatment is necessary to prevent loss of renal function so utilization of all of the above measures is reasonable, including high dose pyridoxine, orthophosphate and/or magnesium supplementation, increased urinary volume, pentosan polysulfate (Elmiron), Lumasiran, and intensive dialysis. Liver-kidney transplants are a last-resort therapy when all other measures are insufficient.

**Lumasiran and Nedosiran:**In November 2020, the FDA approved the use of lumasiran for type 1 primary hyperoxaluria. It is the first available, effective therapy for primary hyperoxaluria short of combined liver/kidney transplantation. Lumasiran arose from a new type of therapy called small interfering RNA (siRNA) that targets specific enzymes. In this case, the targeted enzyme is the mRNA for the hepatic hydroxamic oxidase 1 gene, which encodes glycolate oxidase. Blocking glycolate oxidase, which is chemically upstream from AGT where the genetic defect that causes primary hyperoxaluria is located, effectively lowers oxalate production in these individuals. Studies in both adults and children have shown dramatic results with an average 65% reduction in oxalate production and 52% of patients returning to normal oxalate levels which were maintained for at least 6 months.

Like lumasiran, nedosiran is also an RNA interference therapy but it's designed to target hepatic lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) which converts glyoxalate to oxalate. Experimentally, it has demonstrated dramatically lower plasma and urinary oxalate levels in type 1 primary hyperoxaluria.  While not yet FDA approved, a compassionate use exception was made in the case of a 17-year-old primary hyperoxaluria type 1 patient (originally diagnosed at age 5) who was already on aggressive, daily dialysis awaiting a combined liver-kidney transplant. The nedosiran treatment was well tolerated and effective in decreasing her serum oxalate level by about 75% despite significantly decreasing her dialysis treatments from daily to the standard three times a week. This result has been sustained for 6 months. This success may allow the patient to avoid a liver transplant although she will still need a new kidney. Nedosiran appears to be the first effective, oxalate-lowering therapy for primary hyperoxaluria type 1 patients who have ESRD.

**Pyridoxine Supplementation:**The role of the defective AGT enzyme was previously described in the pathophysiology of primary hyperoxaluria type 1. This enzyme requires pyridoxal phosphate as a cofactor. Patients with a deficiency of this enzyme could be supplemented with 5-20 mg/kg pyridoxine to boost the AGT enzyme activity. This results in a dose of 150 to 500 mg of pyridoxine daily. Some patients can achieve normal urinary oxalate levels with pyridoxine therapy alone.

**Dialysis:**The role of dialysis is controversial. Serum oxalate levels of 30 to 45 μmol/L lead to tissue deposition, and the aim of dialysis is to keep the oxalate level below that to prevent supersaturation. In patients with ESRD due to primary hyperoxaluria, dialysis cannot remove oxalate as quickly as it accumulates in the blood. In these cases, a special intensive dialysis regimen has to be put into place, which has more sessions per week as compared to the standard dialysis therapy, along with combining both hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis to achieve maximum oxalate clearance.

**Transplant**: The procedures to choose from are 1) an isolated liver transplant, 2) an isolated renal transplant or 3) a combined liver-renal transplant. The final decision is made after due consideration of various factors. Patients with ESRD or a GFR approaching end-stage levels may require renal transplants. A liver transplant is the only curative measure in patients with type 1 primary hyperoxaluria as the problem is dysfunction/defect at the level of the hepatic AGT enzyme. In patients that show a positive response to pyridoxine by increasing AGT activity, an isolated renal transplant may be considered.

Primary hyperoxaluria type 2 manifests due to the defective enzyme glyoxalate/hydroxypyruvate reductase (GRHPR), which can be found in tissues other than the liver; therefore, an isolated renal transplant has been recommended for these patients.

Primary hyperoxaluria type 3 patients are not usually referred for renal transplantation as the chances of them developing ESRD are extremely low.

There is minimal data on renal transplantation in patients with secondary hyperoxaluria.

**Experimental Treatments**

Future therapies for controlling hyperoxaluria being investigated include the following:

- Probiotic supplementation

- Vitamin E and other anti-oxidant supplementation

- L-cysteine has shown activity in animal models in lowering urinary oxalate and calcium levels. No data yet on any therapeutic effect in humans.

- Recombinant gene therapy to replace defective hepatic enzymes

- Stiripentol, a drug approved by the FDA in 2018 for use in epilepsy and Dravet syndrome, has demonstrated the ability to reduce hepatic oxalate synthesis at the cellular level in vitro. It inhibits the lactate dehydrogenase-5 isoenzyme which converts hepatic glyoxylate to oxalate. Stiripentol has been shown to be effective in reducing urinary oxalate but so far only in rats.

- Lyophilized Oxalobacter formigenes

- Reintroduction of intestinal Oxalobacter formigenes. "Oxabact" is a freeze-dried preparation of Oxalobacter formigenes which is undergoing testing for hyperoxaluria.

- Oxalate digesting enzyme preparations (Oxazyme, Nephure, Reloxaliase). Reloxaliase is specifically being evaluated for patients with enteric hyperoxaluria.

- Intestinal oxalate transport (SLC) blockers (SLC26A3 is the major transporter in transcellular oxalate absorption, and S1C26A6 is thought to be involved in transcellular intestinal secretion)

- Hepatocyte cell transplantation

- Organic marine hydrocolloid (reduced urinary oxalate by 20% in one limited study in patients with severe enteric hyperoxaluria)

- RNA interference therapy (similar to Lumasiran) utilizing lipid nanoparticles and N-acetyl galactosamine delivery systems

- RNA interference therapy targeting hepatic LDH (would make the treatment more useful for other types of hyperoxaluria; similar to Nedosiran.)

- RNA interference therapy targeting non-hepatic enzymes or intestinal oxalate transport mechanisms.

- Use of gene-editing technology (Crispr) to correct specific enzyme pathways for primary hyperoxaluria. This offers the potential for a single, curative treatment.

**Experimental Plant-Based Therapies:**In early animal studies, banana stem juice appeared promising as a possible therapy for hyperoxaluria.Crataeva nurvala). It has been shown to significantly reduce urinary oxalate in animals and also minimize renal tubular damage.Bombax eiba, Hibiscus sabdariffa, Aierva lanaa, Bryophyllum pinnatum, Costus igneius, and Ipomoea eriocarpa, among others. Unfortunately, none of these plant-based remedies has been tested in hyperoxaluric humans to date.