While the number of melanocytes in the oral epithelium is the same in all humans, there is a broad range of physiologic variation in oral gingival mucosa pigmentation. Thus, the variation in pigmentation is attributed to the activity of melanocytes in the basal cell layer of the oral epithelium. Therefore, it is the increased production melanin that is responsible for increased pigmentation. Oral gingiva pigmentation is more commonly seen in individuals with darker skin, regardless of their race or ethnicity, suggesting that genetic factors associated with melanogenesis are responsible for this physiologic pigmentation.

Microscopic examination of melanocytes in the basal cell layer demonstrates increased melanin production, similar to the microscopic changes seen in pathologic pigmentation. However, it is essential to differentiate between pathologic and physiologic oral gingiva pigmentation. Diseases that are often confused with physiologic oral pigmentation include Addison disease, neurofibromatosis, oral mucosal melanoma, and drug-induced gingiva pigmentation.

Physiologic gingiva pigmentation affects males and females equally. The most common presentation is asymptomatic, solitary or multiple, well-defined dark macules in a symmetric distribution. Pigmentation gradually appears in the first two decades of life but often goes unnoticed. The intensity and amount of physiologic gingival pigmentation increase with age, which is attributable to the cumulative effects of inflammation and minor injury associated with aging.

The presence of stippling characterizes the healthy gingiva in adults, often described as having an orange peel-like appearance. It is absent in infants and begins to appear at around age five years old. Stippling of gingiva is due to the rete pegs(prominences of the epithelial tissue) and depressions of the connective tissue.