The decision to perform amniocentesis and to convey the results to the couple requires communication between geneticists and fetal medicine experts operating as an interdisciplinary and interprofessional team. Geneticists must counsel the patient to know the possibility of the fetus being affected by a genetic disease. The genetic counselors should educate themselves and verify the availability of the required laboratory testing facilities prior to suggesting a prenatal diagnostic test to the patient. The operator should be aware of the type of samples required to be collected, the type of procedure to be performed, knowledge of the sample collection instrument, sample storage and handling instructions, and prescribed ways to transport the samples.

Following the counseling session, the patient is referred for the procedure. While performing the procedure, coordination amongst the team is required. Once the needle is inside the amniotic cavity, the assistant should carefully and promptly withdraw the amniotic fluid so that the procedure is performed in the minimal time possible and with minimal risk of needle displacement. Following the test, the implications of the report should be conveyed to the patient and her family by the geneticists. Consultation with the pediatrician and disability center counselors can be arranged for the patient if required. Meetings with the diagnosed disability social support group and families dealing with a similar disability in a family member help the patient make a proper decision.