Managing adverse reactions associated with any drug administration requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including a nurse, laboratory technologists, pharmacists, and several clinicians involved in patient care. Studies have shown that interprofessional communication in the healthcare environment significantly improves patient outcomes and healthcare cost burden regarding repeat imaging, labs, and advanced testing.

The most common adverse effect of mesna administration, particularly oral, is bad taste. Unfortunately, this can affect patient compliance with medication. In addition, if patients do not adhere to the regimen, it may lead to urinary tract irritation and hemorrhagic cystitis associated with ifosfamide and cyclophosphamide. To avoid this, healthcare providers at every level must effectively communicate the importance of taking this drug and discuss strategies to help make it more palatable. Examples of such measures include administering the medication with a strong-tasting liquid such as grape juice or crushing up the oral drug and mixing it into more palatable foods such as apple sauce.

However, beyond the taste of mesna, there are additional adverse effects that one cannot afford to miss. Without proper management and monitoring, these can lead to more dire consequences, such as hypersensitivity reactions. As mesna is not a drug that is commonly associated with these serious adverse effects, healthcare providers are prone to take these reactions for granted or not consider mesna as the culprit. As soon as the patient presents with any adverse reaction to the nursing staff, they must promptly notify a physician.

Once notified, it is also imperative that clinicians communicate with urologists for hemorrhagic cystitis and immunologist for hypersensitivity reactions. Anaphylaxis requires coordination between emergency department physicians and critical care physicians. In overdose, consultation with a medical toxicologist is crucial. Pharmacists should verify the dosing and schedule of mesna and ifosfamide. Numerous case series have been associated with the adverse effects of mesna usage.