The underlying physiology of pregnancy and the changes that occur are often a core aspect in promoting some of these disease processes of the heart. Speculations are that women may undergo these physiological changes as early as 5 weeks into their pregnancy.

- Cardiac output: Estimates for increases in a cardiac output range from 20 to 50%. These findings are seen within the first 5 weeks of gestation and increase until the late gestational age; this is usually accounted for by an increased stroke volume of about 25% in the first trimester. This considerable increase in cardiac output is one reason why pregnant women with pre-existing heart conditions can experience such dramatic effects, especially later on in pregnancy. Those with diseases such as cardiomyopathy may not adequately compensate for this stress and may develop complications such as pulmonary edema or fluid overloaded states.

- Heart rate: Along with an increase in stroke volume, there is an increase in heart rate of approximately 15 to 30% in the first trimester of pregnancy, which also contributes to an increase in cardiac output.

- Systemic vascular resistance: Systemic vascular resistance decreases during pregnancy. Estimates are that this change may be as much as 30%. Some hormonal changes include decreased responsiveness of maternal vasculature to angiotensin II and norepinephrine.

- Blood pressure: Blood pressure slightly decreases early in pregnancy. Overall, more commonly, diastolic blood pressure decreases predominate over-systolic blood pressure early in pregnancy. Usually, this value normalizes or even increases by the end of pregnancy.

A combination of the above physiological and hormonal changes are hypothesized as contributing to certain decompensated states of pregnancy, such as cardiomyopathy, congenital heart diseases, and valvular disease.

It is, however, without a doubt that specific structural changes occur to the maternal heart, and such changes can cause dysfunction in some of these pre-existing diseases. Because of the increase in the volume of pregnancy, a common effect is an enlargement of both atria and both ventricles by the end of pregnancy.

Regarding pre-existing valvular disorders such as mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation, aortic stenosis, and others, the chamber and valvular enlargement along with a potential volume overloaded state can contribute to morbidity and mortality. All of these conditions can contribute to the fluid overloaded state and place patients at risk for respiratory compromise and poorly perfused states.