Testing for thrombophilia conditions in patients diagnosed with the first episode of DVT/PE is being discouraged according to the American Society of Hematology (ASH) guidelines as it is expensive with no clinically meaningful benefit.

Testing for factor V Leiden is indicated for individuals with venous thromboembolism, especially if:

- VTE occurs at a young age, generally speaking, less than 50 yrs of age

- Atypical sites of clotting like visceral vein thromboses like an ovarian vein, portal vein, or renal vein thrombosis

- Unexplained arterial thrombosis

- Significant family history of thrombophilia

- In a hospitalized patient developing VTE despite being on prophylactic anticoagulation with no other definite explanation for VTE

- Unexplained recurrent deep venous thrombosis/PE

Testing usually is not performed in individuals with a first episode, especially if it is provoked or if it occurs in people who are older than 50 years of age.

Factor V Leiden can be diagnosed by mutation analysis (genetic testing) or using a functional coagulation test for APC resistance.

- Genetic testing is indicated for those with a family history of factor V Leiden. It is also preferred for members of a thrombophilic family, patients with antiphospholipid syndrome, or those who need to be on an anticoagulant. Individuals with a positive functional assay for APC resistance should have genetic testing to confirm a diagnosis.

- Mutation testing: Polymerase chain reaction methods can detect factor V Leiden mutation. The DNA from individuals without the mutation would be 'cut' by a restriction enzyme. In contrast, it will not cut DNA in patients with factor V Leiden mutation resulting in a different banding pattern on a DNA gel.

- Functional APC resistance assays: These tests cost less than genetic testing, but in rare cases, they can give a misleading, falsely normal result, especially in individuals on therapy with direct thrombin inhibitors or factor Xa inhibitors, as well as in the presence of a lupus anticoagulant.