Malaria is a complex disease with a spectrum of clinical effects that not only differ between children and adults but can range from practically none in patients with asymptomatic parasitemia, to uncomplicated malaria, through to severe and possibly lethal malaria.P. falciparum is 12 days, with most patients presenting in the first or second month after exposure in endemic areas.

**UncomplicatedP. falciparum Malaria **

Malaria can be separated into two disease presentations: uncomplicated and severe. P. ovale or P. vivax. P. falciparum infections, although only a small percentage, approximately 1% to 2% of infections, lead to severe malaria.

**SevereP. falciparum Malaria**

The patient presenting with at least one of the clinical or laboratory features listed below, with asexual P. falciparum parasitemia (either detected in the peripheral blood smear or confirmed with rapid diagnostic test) and no other confirmed cause of his symptoms, classifies as suffering from severe malaria. P. falciparum is responsible for the majority of the cases of severe malaria, it is also, albeit rarely, observed with P. vivax and P. knowlesi infections.

A shortened list of danger signs is used for rapid clinical assessment, which includes prostration, respiratory distress (acidotic breathing), and impaired consciousness.**.******A comprehensive list of diagnostic criteria for falciparum malaria is shown in Table 1 - Diagnostic criteria for severeP. falciparum malaria.

**Physical Examination**

Physical examination is usually unremarkable, especially of patients with uncomplicated malaria. They frequently present with irregular and erratic fever, reaching up to 41°C, sometimes accompanied by agitation or confusion.P. falciparum malaria.

**Children**

Children are more likely to present with non-specific and gastrointestinal symptoms such as fever, lethargy, malaise, nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, and somnolence.

**Pregnant Women**

The clinical features of infection in pregnancy vary from asymptomatic to severe, depending on the degree of (incomplete) immunity that a woman had acquired by the time she got pregnant. In semi-immune pregnant women, only a few infections result in fever or other symptoms.P. falciparum infections are proven to be associated with complications such as maternal anemia, low birth weight, miscarriage, stillbirths, and congenital malaria.