**Iron Deficiency:**Dietary iron deficiency affects more than 1.6 billion people globally. It is more prevalent in developing parts of the world, but it still affects 10 percent of toddlers, young girls, and women of childbearing age in the US and Canada. Iron deficiency develops in stages.

- **Early depletion of iron stores:**at this early stage, body iron stores start to shrink without functionally affecting the body in areas that require iron. Although diagnostic indicators like serum ferritin level drop, iron transport molecules, such as transferrin, increase and the total iron-binding capacity (TIBC) goes up.

- **Early functional iron deficiency:**at this stage, iron availability has decreased sufficiently to affect body compartments where iron is necessary for proper function, e.g., erythropoiesis. Though clinical anemia may not have yet developed, iron significantly decreases, and this is detectable by measuring transferrin levels and its saturation. There is more transferrin and less iron in the blood and a lower percentage of transferrin saturation with a deficiency. Besides, there are high levels of free erythrocyte protoporphyrins in circulation.

- **Iron Deficiency Anemia:**It is the most common nutritional deficiency worldwide. Clinically it causes symptoms such as weakness, lethargy. Hemoglobin levels decline, and red blood cells develop a smaller shape and form, becoming microcytic and hypochromic. Because iron is critical for multiple cell functions, iron deficiency can result in deficits affecting various systems and causing functional problems, including impaired hematopoiesis, gastrointestinal disturbances, impaired cognition, diminished immune function, altered exercise endurance or work performance, and impaired body temperature regulation. In infants and children, learning difficulties and neurocognitive and psychomotor problems can result from iron deficiency when necessary for growth and development, and the deficiency goes untreated.

**Iron Toxicity:**Iron toxicity is less likely to occur with dietary sources of iron intake due to the body's ability to control iron absorption. However, iron toxicity could be an issue when a person consumes excessive iron supplements. Adverse effects may include the following:

- Acute toxicity cause GI symptoms like vomiting and diarrhea. Further, it could produce cardiovascular, CNS, kidney, or liver toxicity specifically owing to the cellular damage by free iron radicals.

- High dose supplement usually causes GI side effects such as constipation, nausea or vomiting.

- Certain hematological disorders or repeated blood transfusions can cause secondary iron overload.