Paraneoplastic syndromes are a rare group of heterogeneous disorders that are triggered by an altered immune system response to a neoplasm. The symptoms may involve any organ system ranging from cutaneous manifestations to involvement of the neuromuscular or musculoskeletal systems. As seen in this patient, the paraneoplastic syndrome can be the initial presentation of the malignancy and can lead to delayed diagnosis and treatment. It is of great significance to understand the various paraneoplastic syndromes associated with a neoplasm. Few examples of common paraneoplastic syndromes are hypercalcemia of malignancy associated with breast cancer, SIADH associated with small cell carcinoma of the lung. Hyperlipasemia syndrome is a rare paraneoplastic syndrome associated with acinar cell carcinomas. Few cases have been reported of pancreatic panniculitis and polyarthralgia caused by hyperlipasemia.

Acinar cell carcinomas fall into the category of malignant epithelial neoplasms with an incidence of about 1% to 2% of the pancreatic neoplasms. The usual presentation of these tumors is solid, but they can also present either as cystic lesions or mixed with both solid and cystic components. They can present at any age but are often seen in older patients (sixth decade) and predominant in males than in females. Most patients present with vague symptoms such as abdominal pain, weight loss, fatigue or nausea. They are characterized by the production of zymogen granules containing pancreatic exocrine enzymes, in the tumor cells. A consequence of this is a rare paraneoplastic syndrome called hyperlipasemia or lipase hypersecretion syndrome. Serum lipase levels in such cases are usually above 10,000 U/dl and can result in multiple subcutaneous fat nodules and necrosis, termed as pancreatic panniculitis and polyarthralgia due to effusions and sclerotic lesions in the bones. This syndrome can be the initial manifestation of the neoplasm and is associated with poor prognosis. Histologically, these neoplasms are characterized by malignant cells with acinar cell differentiation, which stain positive for immunohistochemical stains such as trypsin, chymotrypsin, elastase, or lipase. Zymogen granules can be noted on the ultrastructure examination. KRAS, SMAD4, the mutations commonly associated with ductal adenocarcinomas are not seen in acinar cell carcinomas. Compared to patients with ductal adenocarcinoma, the overall prognosis for patients with acinar cell carcinoma is better. However, the presence of paraneoplastic syndrome association can worsen the prognosis and affect the quality of life as seen in this case.

Hyperlipasemia syndrome is associated with poor prognosis of the acinar cell carcinoma, and the management modalities vary. Surgical resection is often the curative option for cases with local early-stage acinar cell carcinomas. However, often these acinar cell carcinomas are diagnosed in advanced or metastatic stages, and such cases often require adjuvant chemotherapy. Given the presence of APC gene/beta-catenin pathway genetic alterations, as seen in colorectal carcinomas, acinar cell carcinomas are often treated with 5-FU/leucovorin. Other chemotherapeutic agents that can be used include irinotecan,  doxorubicin, erlotinib, gemcitabine, cisplatin, docetaxel, capecitabine, oxaliplatin, sunitinib, and sirolimus. Lowery et al. published a study in 2011 that highlighted the use of combination therapy, to use gemcitabine or 5-FU-based combination chemotherapy along with platinum analogs such as irinotecan in patients with advanced studies validated to have improved chemosensitivity.