Complications include consequences from the progression of the deformity where inadequate treatment is obtained and consequences from treatment failure.

**Clubfoot:**The most commonly reported complication is deformity relapse, primarily due to non-compliance.

Complications with surgical management include under-correction, dorsal bunion, residual cavus, in-toeing gait, and pes planus, among others.

**Planovalgus:**Complications are associated with long-term conditions such as persistent pain or arthritis. Postoperative complications may include surgical site infection, hardware failure, malunion, or non-union.

**Cavovarus:**A delay in the diagnosis may lead to a rigid deformity. Complications include ankle instability, stress fractures of the 4 and 5 metatarsals, peroneal tendon pathology, and plantar fasciitis. Chronic ankle instability may lead to arthritis.

**Congenital vertical talus:**If left untreated, CVT will cause a fixed “rocker-bottom” deformity and, if diagnosed much later than two years of age, may require triple arthrodesis.

**Congenital oblique talus: Complications are rare if**COT is a physiologic, anatomic variant. In more severe cases or if COT is associated with neurological conditions, COT may lead to fixed foot deformity and difficulty with walking.

**Metatarsus adductus:**Conservative treatment provides minimal to no complications. However, surgical intervention has a history of high complication rates, including stress risers, osseous bridging between the metatarsals, loss of purchase of the distal cortex, inability to hold correction, and unequal bone removal when surgery is performed on all metatarsals.

**Skew foot:**Skefoot deformity may lead to problems with walking and foot development if left untreated.