The most common routes of administration for phenylephrine include oral, topical, intravenous, intranasal, ophthalmic, and rectal. Less commonly, phenylephrine has been administered in the epidural space, as an adjunct to peripheral nerve blockade, in the intracavernous space, intramuscularly, and subcutaneously.

Additionally, phenylephrine dosing can be via weight-based or non-weight based infusion with typical dose ranges of 0.1 to 1.5 mcg/kg per minute.

Ophthalmic solutions of phenylephrine have a wide range of concentrations and additives depending on the desired effect.  Concentrations utilized by medical professionals generally come in doses of 1%, 2.5%, or 10%. The 1% formulations are often administered in combination with cyclopentolate 0.2% for dilated fundus and cycloplegic exams in newborns of less than three months. The 2.5% formulations are the most commonly used for dilated fundus exams in adults, children over three months, and as an aid in diagnosing conditions such as episcleritis. The 10% formulation is less commonly used (due to fear of systemic absorption) in dilated exams and to provide exposure during surgeries.

Over-the-counter (OTC) preparations of phenylephrine combination drops may come in concentrations as low as 0.12% and are marketed as a treatment of "red-eye" or uncomplicated conjunctivitis. Phenylephrine is available as an FDA-approved, over-the-counter decongestant in oral concentrations of up to 10 mg, nasal solutions typically ranging between 0.125% to  1% and are found as an additive in various OTC topical hemorrhoid creams.