Before starting, the procedural team should gather all necessary equipment (coronary orbital atherectomy system, guide catheter, IV pole, normal saline, and fluoroscopy imaging equipment), set up the OAS pump to an IV pole with the saline level sensor connected, and a stiff coronary guidewire prepped for insertion.

With all equipment assembled and personal in place, the atherectomy procedure can be initiated. Start with obtaining arterial vascular access using a 6 Fr sheath or larger using the provider's preferred approach. Access the lesion with a guide catheter, and use angiography, IVUS, or OCT to localize and evaluate the target lesion. Once located, cross the lesion with the coronary guidewire. Prepare the lubricant, connect the OAD to the OAS, and prime the pump. Before inserting the OAD into the vessel, perform testing to ensure appropriate crown advancement via advancer knob and crown rotation using the on/off button. Verify the flow of saline with crown rotation. Ensure the brake lever is open, and advance the OAD drive shaft over the guidewire. Using fluoroscopy, advance the crown to approximately 10 mm proximal to the target lesion. Verify the OAD distal tip is beyond the lesion. Press down on the brake lever to engage the brake and press the on/off button to activate crown rotation at low speed (80,000 rpm), which can be verified via the LED light on the OAD.

Advance the crown to begin atherectomy via the advancer knob no faster than 1 mm per second. Once the crown is orbiting, maintaining continuous movement is important as remaining in one location can cause damage to the coronary vessel. Under fluoroscopy, ensure the crown and crown advancer knob move in a 1 to 1 fashion. Perform a series of intermittent treatment intervals back and forth across the lesion, followed subsequently by a rest period with the crown on the proximal side of the lesion.

Each rest period should be of equal length or greater than the treatment time. A maximum recommended treatment interval is 30 seconds (the OAS pump will emit a beep after 25 seconds of treatment time). If the desired result is not observed at low speed, consider high speed (120,000 rpm) if no tortuosity is identified and vessel size is adequate.

Due to wear that can result in the equipment, the maximum treatment time per OAD is 5 minutes. The OAD does not keep track of treatment time; thus, this should be timed by a team member during each procedure. Lastly, a replacement bag of saline and lubricant should be readily available if needed during complex procedures. Following the completion of OA to the target lesion, lock the control, and then the OAD can be safely removed from the vessel. Evaluate the lesion with a balloon for complete expansion. If balloon under-expansion is noted, further runs of OA may be needed for particular lesion segments. Alternatively, intravascular imaging can be used to assess the treatment of the target lesion before stent placement.