**Dosage and Form**

Fludrocortisone is available in tablet form, and it can be taken orally with or without a meal. It is usually administered in its acetate form.

For primary adrenal cortical insufficiency usual dose is 0.1 mg per day, and it can be increased up to 0.2 mg per day. However, if hypertension develops, the dosage should be reduced to 0.05 mg per day. Dosing should be gradually tapered down to discontinue therapy.

For the salt-losing type of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, the dose is 0.1 mg/day.

When used off-label for orthostatic hypotension, the dose is normally from 0.1 to 0.2 mg orally once daily. Dosing should start at 0.1 mg by mouth each day, then increase the dose by 0.1 mg per day each week until the appearance of trace pedal edema. The maximum dose is 1 mg per day, although doses in excess of 0.5 mg daily are rarely more effective. Dosing should be with food or milk. Discontinuation of therapy requires gradual dose tapering.

**Metabolism**

The drug is metabolized by the liver. So, if there is any hepatic impairment, the dose should be adjusted accordingly.

**Drug Interactions**

- Administration with proton pump inhibitors and anemia have shown to decrease its absorption.

- Concurrent use of amphotericin B, diuretics, digoxin with fludrocortisone may cause severe hypokalemia.

- Using NSAIDs can cause peptic ulcer disease.

- It can decrease or increase the efficacy of warfarin.

- It can cause hyperglycemia, so dosages of diabetes drugs (metformin, glipizide, glimepiride, pioglitazone, linagliptin, insulin) must be adjusted.

- Administration of phenobarbital, Phenytoin, Rifampin can lower blood fludrocortisone levels.

- Taking estrogen or male testosterone analog can increase the risk of swelling.

- Fludrocortisone can impair the function of vaccines. Therefore, vaccines should not be given while patients are using fludrocortisone.

**Pregnancy Category**

Fludrocortisone is a Category C pregnancy drug.