Phagocytes, for the purpose of forming reactive oxygen radicals, use nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase system. A deficiency in the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase complex causes a functional defect leading to insufficiency in phagocytes killing pathogenic microorganisms. This system is comprised of 6 different proteins, however, a functional loss or inactivation in any of these proteins may cause the disease. Gp91phox gene mutation is observed in 65% to 70% of the cases and this gene defect is associated with the X-linked CGD.

The main problem in X-linked hyper IgM syndrome is in CSR (class-switch recombination). CSR is the transformation of the immunoglobulin mu chain into other immunoglobulin chain isotypes with different properties. Costimulatory signals on the T-cell surface serve an important function in CSR. Activated CD4 (+) follicular helper T cells express CD40 ligand and secrete various cytokines to recognize the antigen. Cytokines secreted by activated CD4+ T cells bind on the cognate receptors expressed on B-cells and direct the CSR to specific immunoglobulin isotypes. CD40L binds on CD40 expressed by B-cells.

Sixty percent of the XLP cases occur as a result of a mutation in the gene coding the SLAM-related (signaling lymphocyte activation molecule) protein.

WASp is synthesized in the cytoplasm of hematopoietic cells and critical in the actin remodeling of the cytoskeleton. Immunological synapses cannot occur between T-cells and antigen-presenting cells such as dendritic cells.

The defect in cytokine receptor subunit gamma-c gene on the X-chromosome causes the X-SCID. This receptor subunit is common in IL-2, 4,7, 9, 15, and 21.

XLA disease caused by a mutation in the BTK gene has been named the Bruton gene to honor the clinician who diagnosed the first case. Approximately half of the patients are born in families previously diagnosed with XLA and this condition refers to the fact that the other half of the patients are contracted with the disease as a result of spontaneous mutations. B-cell development defect occurring in the patients as a result of BTK mutation results in decreased B-cell count in tissue and blood and reduced differentiation in plasma cell and ultimately in decreased levels of immunoglobulin along with the decreased specific antibody responses.

IPEX occurs as a result of a mutation in the FOXP3 transcription factor. FOXP3 is crucial for the function of Treg cells also known as regulatory T lymphocyte. Treg cells have a strong immune suppressive effect and serve a function in establishing immune balance. Moreover, they are involved in transplantation tolerance as well as in the regulation of autoimmune and allergic events.