The etiology of asthma can be multifactorial. It is thought to be a combination of genetic and environmental factors. However, the primary factor underlying all types of asthma is an exaggerated hypersensitivity response. This is described as an IgE-mediated response. This response is triggered by an offending agent, whether it be an allergen or environmental agent (such as air pollutants) resulting in an increased presence of eosinophils, lymphocytes and mast cells. This causes airway inflammation and damage to the bronchial epithelium. Cytokines have also been identified as a contributing factor to the pathogenesis of asthma. Abnormal smooth muscle and contractility and smooth muscle mass are also contributing factors. Allergic asthma attacks are related to exposure to specific offending agents.

The strongest risk factor for developing asthma is a history of atopic disease. Those that have hay fever or eczema have a much higher risk of asthma.

Environmental triggers include exercise, hyperventilation, hormonal changes, and emotional upset, airborne pollutants, as well as GERD.

Environmental pollutants may affect asthma severity it might act as a trigger leading to an asthma exacerbation. The pollutant can exacerbate a pre-existing airway inflammation.

There have been several studies to support the effects of allergies and allergens in triggering asthma.

Both indoor and outdoor allergens and pollutants need to be considered these include:

- Biologic allergens (dust mites, cockroaches, animal dander, and mold)

- Environmental tobacco smoke-smoking during pregnancy and after delivery is related to a substantial risk of developing asthma

- Irritant chemicals and fumes-traffic pollution and high ozone levels

- Products from combustion devices

Occupational asthma is the most prevalent lung disease in industrialized countries and represents 15% of the new asthma cases in adults. It is defined as a variable airflow limitation or hyper-responsiveness due to a particular occupational environment. Occupational asthma may be caused by allergens or irritants in the workplace.

The hygiene hypothesis is an evolving theory that states an abnormally clean environment that limits childhood exposure to triggers and infections, which cause a "naive" immune system, increases the incidence of asthma and allergies.