**Acquired diaphragmatic hernia (ADH)**due to trauma to the diaphragm is likely to occur at areas of potential weakness along embryological fusion points.

To clarify the **penetrating trauma**and the potential for traumatic diaphragmatic injury (TDI), the anatomical landmarks of the diaphragm should be reviewed. The anatomical differences during the inspiration and expiration phases should be considered. Accordingly, the diaphragm rises during the expiration up to the fourth and fifth thoracic dermatome on the right and the left hemithorax, respectively. Also, the diaphragm descends to as low as the eighth thoracic dermatome during the deep inspiration. However, the lowest level of the lateral costophrenic angle attachment is the 12 rib. Collectively, any missile that passes through the torso from T4 through T12 can potentially penetrate the diaphragm. It should be noted that the higher rate of the left TDI with stab wounds is presumably, because of the higher prevalence of right-handed assailants.

**Blunt diaphragmatic trauma:**motor vehicle collisions are responsible for most blunt diaphragmatic ruptures in almost 90 percent of cases. Falling down and crushing injuries imply the remaining causalities of blunt diaphragmatic trauma. A significant increase in intra-abdominal pressure is required for diaphragmatic rupture in the mentioned clinical scenarios.

During the inspiration phase and with the diaphragmatic contraction, the diaphragm flattens. The flattened diaphragm increases the volume of the thoracic cavity, and accordingly, the pleuroperitoneal pressure gradient can increase from +7 to +20 cm HO in the supine position to +100 cm HO. The blunt force trauma to the torso can result in pleuroperitoneal gradients of up to 200 cm HO. The mentioned remarkable increase in pleuroperitoneal gradient surpasses the diaphragmatic tensile strength and results in diaphragmatic rupture or avulsion.

**Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia (CDH):**

To understand the pathophysiology of CDH, the embryologic development of the diaphragm should be reviewed. The diaphragm originates from four main structures, including; 1. the septum transversum, 2. the esophageal mesentery, 3. two paired (pleuroperitoneal membranes, and 4. chest wall muscular structures.

**Septum Transversum:**The development of the septum initiates in the fourth gestational week to separate pericardial and peritoneal cavities. Starting next to the cervical vertebrae, the septum transversum finally outgrows to the level of the first lumbar vertebrae (L1). Next, dorsal fusion with the**esophageal mesentery**and**pleuroperitoneal membranes**would occur.**Esophageal mesentery**similarly develops in the fourth gestational week and will eventually form the central portion and crura of the diaphragm.

The **pleuroperitoneal membranes**develop later in the fifth week of gestation, appearing initially parallel to the abdominal wall with the later medial extension. Finally, pleuroperitoneal membranes will fuse with the dorsal borders of the esophageal mesentery and septum transversum. The complete fusion will result in a discrete separation of the thoracic cavity from the abdominal cavity during the eighth gestational week. Failure of steps and incomplete fusion with adjacent structures may result in CDH.