Understanding nerve physiology is an essential step in the understanding of different types of peripheral neuropathy. The two main types of peripheral neuropathies are axonal and demyelinating neuropathies. The primary pathology in axonal neuropathy is an axonal loss, which usually starts distally in a dying back phenomenon and clinically presents with a length-dependent peripheral neuropathy. The common causes are those related to metabolic disturbances of the nerves such as diabetes, nutritional deficiencies, and organ failures. These neuropathies also affect more predominantly the smaller nerve fibers, which serve the sensory functions of pain and temperature. They are also frequently called small fiber peripheral neuropathy. The other primary type is demyelinating neuropathy, such as acute Guillain Barre syndrome and chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy. Because the pathology involves predominantly the myelin sheaths, the larger and more proximal nerves will have involvement. As a result, these neuropathies are not length-dependent and involve both proximal and distal segments of nerves, including nerve roots. Clinically, the larger fibers are involved early, resulting in early loss of joint position and vibratory sensation and early loss of deep tendon reflexes.

Neurophysiologically, with nerve conduction studies, the axonal neuropathy is characterized by loss of nerve action potential amplitude, whereas demyelinating neuropathy is characterized by an early decrease in nerve conduction velocities.

The physiology of nerve impulses generation and conduction, how it is attenuated by myelin or the lack thereof, and intraneuronal communication have major clinical implications in the body. A firm understanding of these processes assists in interpreting conduction studies, making diagnoses, and effectively treating neurological conditions.