All aviators, whether civilian or military, have to meet certain medical standards to help prevent potential incapacitation and provide for a safe flight environment. While an AME will complete medical exams for certification, pilots and aircrew may present to emergency rooms, urgent care, and outpatient clinics for acute issues. It is essential that providers are aware of the basics of flight fitness and the implications of specific diagnoses and medications. This article outlines basic guidelines for an assessment of fitness for duty, but complete information is available in the specific guides for the regulating body. Overall the guidelines set by the FAA are similar to those established by the military. However, military instructions are overall more demanding. The different military branches each have some particular differences but, in general, are similar requiring, both fitness for active duty and flight status. This article only covers a fundamental review of everything that should be included in an assessment of duty exam, but all the organizations discussed have guidelines available online to help medical examiners with an estimate of duty physicals. The instructions also contain extensive examples of what is abnormal and what may be granted a waiver. These guidelines should be used for every pilot and aircrew member.

All standards discussed above were laid out by the FAA, Navy, Army, and Air Force. The following regulations can be found as separate documents online.

ICAO Manual of Civil Aviation Medicine

FAA: Guide for Aviation Medical Examiners

Navy: Aeromedical Reference and Waiver Guide

Air Force: Waiver Guide

Army: Regulation 40-501