Development in the first few years of life is typically normal, with milestones achieved at a slightly delayed if not normal rate. Growth velocity, however, is slower, leading to short stature. Mild hypotonia in an infant may be present, and poor head control in an infant may be an initial sign. Patients do not have atypical facies, but with the onset of facial muscle weakness, a transverse or horizontal sign may be seen in later childhood. Weakness and difficulty in ambulation in typically first noted between 2 and three years of life. This manifests as toe walking, difficulty running, climbing up stairs, and frequently falling. Weakness is more pronounced in proximal than distal muscles and the lower limb more than the upper limb.

In ambulatory patients, an increased incidence of fractures is noted as a consequence of the frequent falls.

Lumbar lordosis and scoliosis with muscle contractures occur. As a result of scoliosis, pulmonary function may be impaired, which can lead to pulmonary compromise.

Contractures of the ankles, knees, hips, and elbows may be seen.

Enlargement of the calves with wasting of the thigh muscles results in pseudohypertrophy of the calves, which is a classical feature. Aside from the calves, hypertrophy of the tongue and muscles of the forearm may be seen but are less classical.

A waddling or Trendelenburg gait is common, and patients must use a wheelchair by the age of 12.

Pharyngeal weakness can result in episodes of aspiration, nasal regurgitation of liquids, and a nasal quality of voice.

Incontinence of urine and stools due to urethral and anal sphincter weakness is uncommon and, if present, is a late manifestation.

Rarely, malignant hyperthermia after anesthesia may be a presenting sign.

Symptomatic female carriers may have an early onset and progressive muscular dystrophy.

**Intellectual Disability**

Intellectual impairment is seen in all patients; however, only 20% to 30% of patients have an intelligence quotient (IQ) less than 70. The degree of impairment does not correlate with disease severity. Most patients have only a mild form of learning impairment and can function in a regular classroom. Epilepsy is more common than in the general population, and uncommonly, autism-like behavior has been described.

**DMD Associated Cardiomyopathy**

Symptoms of cardiomyopathy can develop in the early teens and are present in almost all patients in their twenties. Persistent tachycardia and heart failure, maybe presenting signs. In affected patients, dilated cardiomyopathy is characterized by extensive fibrosis of the posterobasal left the ventricular wall. As the disease progresses, fibrosis can spread to the lateral free wall of the left ventricle. With the involvement of the posterior papillary muscle, significant mitral regurgitation can occur.  Inter and intraatrial conduction abnormalities, possibly involving the AV node, can be seen. Arrhythmias, particularly supraventricular arrhythmias, are also associated with the developing cardiomyopathy.

Physical exam shows pseudohypertrophy of the calf muscle and occasionally the quadriceps muscle. Shortening of the Achilles tendon may be noted, and the patient may have hyporeflexia or areflexia. Ankle reflexes are preserved till late in the disease unless contractures develop. Knee deep tendon reflexes (DTR’s) are less brisk than the ankle and can be lost by age 6. The brachioradialis reflex is brisker than the biceps or triceps DTR’S. Typically, children are noted to use their arms to lift themselves from a seated position on the ground. This is known as Gowers sign.