To suspect and correctly identify zinc toxicity, an interprofessional team approach is crucial. An interprofessional team in managing a patient with zinc toxicity includes triage staff, nursing staff, ancillary staff, physicians, and pharmacists. It is also important to develop liaisons with a local poison control center. Zinc toxicity can cause morbidity and mortality, and improving the interprofessional team's understanding of how to promptly evaluate and treat zinc toxicity will lead to better patient outcomes.

Once zinc toxicity is identified, it is essential to define the route and initiate appropriate treatment as well as consult a toxicologist or certified poison control specialist.

Obtain zinc, copper, and ceruloplasmin levels, monitor for hemodynamic instability, consider WBI to decrease GI absorption in cases of ingestion and determine the required level of care. Thorough patient education is important to avoid future overdoses or chronic toxicity.

At this point, the evidence regarding zinc toxicity and management is primarily based on case reports of ingestions and inhalation exposures. A few epidemiologic studies have focused on long-term outcomes of zinc exposure in the setting of occupational exposures. There are no RCTs available.

This research was supported (in whole or part) by HCA Healthcare and/or an HCA healthcare affiliated entity. The views expressed in this publication represent those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official views of HCA Healthcare or any of its affiliated entities.