# Introduction

Syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by the spirochete bacterium Treponema pallidum. There are different stages of syphilis: primary, secondary, and tertiary, which are defined by clinical manifestations of the disease. Those who are infected but are asymptomatic have latent syphilis. Without adequate treatment, neurological and cardiovascular anomalies may develop, and infection in pregnancy can lead to congenital syphilis. Thus, detecting syphilis promptly is crucial in preventing the progression and fatal consequences of the disease. Traditionally, rapid plasma reagin (RPR) and venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) tests are the non-treponemal serologic tests used to screen for active syphilis infection and monitor response to treatment. Due to their lack of specificity, positive results are confirmed by tests that are treponemal-specific, such as fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA) test, T. pallidum enzyme-immunoassay (TP-EIA) test, T. pallidum particle agglutination (TPPA) test, and the automated chemiluminescent immunoassay (CLIA) test.

# Etiology and Epidemiology

Syphilis is a prevalent, sexually transmitted infection worldwide. It is caused by Treponema pallidum, a motile spirochete bacterium, with humans as its only natural host.

# Pathophysiology

T. pallidum enters the body through areas that have undergone “microtrauma,” most commonly mucous membranes. As such, sexual intercourse remains the most common route of transmission, including oral sex and oral-anal intercourse. The disease is most likely to spread while individuals have primary and secondary syphilitic lesions.

Syphilis is classified by its clinical manifestations into primary, secondary, latent, and tertiary syphilis.

Primary syphilis is associated with the highest probability of transmission and is characterized by a single painless chancre, although multiple lesions may present in a minority of patients.

Secondary syphilis is defined by a maculopapular rash on the palms and soles bilaterally. Patients may also have bacteremia with fevers and fatigue. If secondary syphilis goes untreated, individuals improve within three to six weeks. Secondary syphilis recurs in approximately 25% of infected patients within 1 year.

Patients then progress to latent syphilis, in which they are asymptomatic but have positive serology. Latent syphilis is further classified into early latent and late latent syphilis. According to WHO, patients with early latent syphilis have been infected for less than two years, and patients with late latent syphilis have been infected for over two years.

Approximately 35% of patients with late latent syphilis will progress to tertiary syphilis, which is characterized by chronic end-organ damage several years after inoculation. This includes neurosyphilis, gummatous syphilis, and cardiovascular syphilis. In those with neurosyphilis, T. pallidum has traveled to the brain and spinal cord 5 to 20 years after primary syphilis. The dorsal columns are primarily affected. In tabes dorsalis or spinal cord syndrome, individuals exhibit ataxia, loss of vibration and proprioception, urinary and fecal incontinence, and absent limb reflexes. They may also show psychiatric disease and dementia. Gummatous syphilis manifests as granulomatous lesions of the bone or skin 3 to 12 years after primary syphilis. Cardiovascular syphilis is characterized by aortitis of the proximal aorta approximately 15 to 30 years after primary syphilis.

Approximately one-third of infants born to infected mothers are diagnosed with congenital syphilis. Syphilis can be transmitted to the fetus by a transplacental transmission during pregnancy if the mother is infected. This is more likely to occur within the first two years of the mother becoming infected. Spontaneous abortions and stillbirths occur in one-third of syphilitic pregnancies. Children with congenital syphilis commonly exhibit hepatosplenomegaly, abnormal dental development, nasal chondritis (“snuffles”), deafness, and craniofacial abnormalities.

# Diagnostic Tests

Serological testing is currently the primary method of diagnosing syphilis. The two types of serological tests are non-treponemal (non-specific) and treponemal (specific). Non-treponemal tests include RPR, VDRL, and toluidine red unheated serum test (TRUST). RPR and VDRL are most commonly used. Treponemal tests include TPPA, CLIA, and TP-EIA. Syphilis can also be diagnosed using dark ground microscopy of samples of genital lesions in those with primary and secondary syphilis.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends using non-treponemal reagin tests as the first-line for screening for syphilis infection. The two main non-treponemal tests used are RPR and VDRL.

# Testing Procedures

RPR card tests are non-treponemal flocculation assays that work by detecting reagin antibodies in plasma and serum. RPR antigen mixture is prepared with cholesterol, nonspecific cardiolipin, and lecithin. A 0.05 mL drop of serum is placed on a circle within a testing card for each assay. The serum is spread throughout the circle. One drop of prepared antigen suspension is then added to each specimen. The testing cards are rotated in a humidified chamber at 100 rpm for 8 minutes. The cards are then rotated by hand and read under a light source macroscopically. If IgM or IgG antibodies to lipoidal antigens are present, agglutination is visualized on the card.

# Interfering Factors

False-negative results in non-treponemal testing can be attributed to several factors. The primary cause of false-negative results is testing during the early stages of primary infection.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

There are only two classes of RPR interpretation: reactive or nonreactive. Occasionally, it is necessary to repeat testing or report an “indeterminate” result, which requires further evaluation.

Syphilis is a reportable STI in the United States. The demographics, sex, ethnicity, and age of each patient are recorded. The CDC receives data on reportable STIs through the National Electronic Telecommunications System for Surveillance. Certain cases may be further investigated by the local health department, and additional risk factors such as men who have sex with men (MSM) and HIV infection may be reported. In the United States, the rate of reported cases of primary and secondary syphilis has significantly increased within the past 15 years. In 2001, there was a historic decline in reported cases with 2 cases per 100,000; however, the reported rate tripled in 2016 with 8.7 cases per 100,000.

# Clinical Significance

Because RPR is utilized as a first-line test to screen for syphilis infection, its use is significant in preventing the progression and sequelae of syphilis in its early stages. These sequelae include cardiac and neurologic conditions that may be fatal as a consequence of this disease. Additionally, the use of RPR in pregnant women is important in detecting and treating syphilis before transmission to the fetus occurs, resulting in congenital syphilis.

There is a high prevalence of coinfection with syphilis in those infected with HIV in certain populations. Additionally, syphilis infection may facilitate the transmission of HIV. Thus, using RPR to screen for syphilis, especially in the primary and secondary stages, allows for public health officials and clinical providers to protect those who are HIV negative from acquiring HIV and to also identify and help those already infected with HIV living without medical care.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

RPR testing is considered to be a relatively inexpensive and simple procedure. However, there are reports documenting a wide range of variability between laboratories. One report by Gupta et al. in 2009 found a 58.7% variation in RPR testing amongst 138 serology panels between 26 laboratories. This variability was attributed to several factors, including delayed testing, insufficient laboratory temperatures, use of different RPR card tests in various labs, and skewed interpretation of results. RPR testing requires the provision of standard resources and strict adherence to proper guidelines. This includes refrigeration to store antigens, monitoring laboratory temperatures and humidity, a light source, and sufficient electricity supply. There have been cautions regarding antigen susceptibility to sunlight, freezing, and thawing. Additionally, it is important to have properly trained personnel to interpret RPR results correctly.

Of note, automated RPR testing is also available and has been noted to be able to handle a larger sample size and requires less reader subjectivity.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

In addition to physicians, pharmacists have become more involved in screening patients for syphilis, thus allowing for more patients to receive treatment when necessary. This also prevents further transmission and complications of infection. Dried blood spot (DBS) testing is available for purchase in select pharmacies in the U.K. and the United States. Patients use a lancet on their fingertips to draw blood themselves and place the sample on a testing cassette.

Other interventions to improve the number of conducted diagnostic tests include “task shifting,” in which specific clinical tasks are transferred to healthcare providers other than physicians. For instance, nurses are responsible for conducting syphilis screening in various health clinics in the United States, the Netherlands, and Australia.