Ester LAs have two main adverse effects in children, the potential for toxicity with pseudocholinesterase (PSE) deficiency or absence and allergic reaction to the metabolite para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA). Amide LAs have multiple avenues through which they can exhibit adverse effects.

A LA with an opioid adjunct can result in both urinary retention and pruritis. Naloxone or nalbuphine can be used to treat urinary retention as an intravenous bolus dose (1 mcg/kg or 0.1 mg/kg, respectively). Pruritis can be attenuated with naloxone IV bolus of 1 to 2 mcg/kg with or without a continuous infusion of 1 to 2 mcg/kg/hour.

The risk factors that increase the potential for amide LA adverse effects and toxicity can be categorized into age, comorbidity, and amide LA-related risk factors. Low lean muscle mass and low albumin levels are seen in the extremes of age (neonates, infants, and the elderly). This causes a decrease in the protein binding of amide LA creating higher blood concentrations of free amide LA.

Comorbidities that can increase the risk of adverse effects and toxicity of amide LA include hepatic dysfunction, cardiac dysfunction, renal dysfunction, neurological dysfunction, and metabolic/mitochondrial dysfunction. Hepatic, cardiac, and renal disease contribute to decreased metabolism and clearance of amide LA. Right to left heart shunt creates increased uptake and concentration of LA. Neurologic and metabolic diseases increase the susceptibility to amide LA accumulation.

Amide LA administration itself can lead to the risk of adverse effects and toxicity. Mixing different amide LAs together can result in a cumulative dose that may not be safe. A large volume of amide LA can affect uptake and accumulation, exceeding safe dose levels. Less invasive topical LA may be considered safer, but careful consideration of dosing must be taken to avoid an overdose. Higher lipophilicity of an amide LA can also increase the risk of toxicity by increasing the potency and duration of action. Finally, direct intravascular injection of LAs can cause adverse effects and toxicity.

The use of epinephrine (1:200,000 or 1:400,000) can indicate intravascular injection by exhibiting a heart rate increase of > 10 beats per minute and systolic blood pressure increase > 15 mmHg.  Preventative techniques include incremental dose injection with aspiration for blood and prolonging the total duration of injection time.  Epinephrine should never be used in blocks that are localized with terminal blood supply (i.e., digital, penile, eye, ear).