Although renal leiomyosarcoma (LMS) is the most common primary renal sarcoma (50 to 60%),

- Retroperitoneal leiomyosarcoma, involving the kidney should be ruled out before making the diagnosis of primary renal LMS for which radiological techniques can play an important role in defining the boundaries of the lesion.

- Sarcomatoid carcinoma of the kidney, arising from renal cell carcinoma or less commonly from urothelial carcinoma, is perhaps the most important histopathologic differential diagnosis when dealing with a spindle cell renal tumor. Histological evaluation of sarcomatoid carcinoma often shows a malignant epithelial component, in contrast to the uniform fascicular architecture of leiomyosarcoma. In limited samples, where only spindle cell component is encountered, immunohistochemistry can help as the spindle cell component of sarcomatoid carcinoma is typically positive for keratin and negative for actin, while the reverse is true for leiomyosarcoma.

- Angiomyolipoma, a tumor of perivascular epithelioid cells, can mimic renal LMS histologically. The histological finding of mature adipose tissue with thick hyalinized blood vessels favors angiomyolipoma. But, if only the spindle cell component predominates with significant atypia, immunohistochemical reactivity for HMB-45 (a melanocytic marker) is seen in angiomyolipoma but is negative in LMS, which is helpful in this differential.

- Renal leiomyomas are the benign counterparts of leiomyosarcoma, and they are exceedingly rare neoplasms. Radiological techniques are not sufficient to distinguish them from leiomyosarcoma, and histological evaluation of the tumor is necessary to make the definitive diagnosis, which shows the fascicular arrangement of benign smooth muscles with no atypia, or necrosis and very rare or absent mitosis. It is important to note that many leiomyosarcomas have focal areas that resemble leiomyoma, and adequate sampling of the tumor is crucial for an accurate diagnosis.