ATRA initiation should be immediate once APL is suspected, especially if the diagnosis supports genetic or molecular data. If molecular or genetic data do not support the diagnosis, then ATRA should no longer be given. In patients with low white blood cell (WBC) count (< or = 10x10^9/L), antileukemic agents or chemotherapy may be delayed until a genetic diagnosis is confirmed. In patients with leukocytosis (>10x10^9/L), chemotherapy should start without delay, irrespective of pending diagnostic studies.

Before tretinoin prescription and eventual use, pregnancy status should be negative through a urine pregnancy test before eventual prescribing and use of tretinoin; this is due to the routine use of urine pregnancy tests, complications such as fetal malformations, and risk of fetal loss.

It is still unknown as to whether oral tretinoin appears in breast milk, but because of potentially serious adverse effects that may take place in breastfed infants, breastfeeding should be strongly discouraged.

Swift identification of RA-APL syndrome, an unpredictable but frequent complication, includes symptoms such as dyspnea, fever, weight gain, pleural and pericardial effusions, acute respiratory distress, pulmonary infiltrates on chest x-ray, edema, and multi-organ failure. After resolved, treatment may continue.

Sunscreen is a requirement for all patients on tretinoins, as there is an increased risk of photosensitivity. Encourage avoidance of exposure to sunlight or tanning beds. Patients should be encouraged to wear protective clothing and use sunscreen (recommended SPF 15 or higher according to the tretinoin drug label) when they are outdoors, even on a cloudy day.

Advise patients to avoid using skin products that may cause skin irritation and dryness, such as harsh soaps, shampoos, hair coloring chemicals, hair removers, or skin products that contain alcohol, spices, astringents, or lime.

The healthcare team, e.g., physicians, nurses, pharmacists, etc., need to work together to ensure safe and effective pharmacotherapy with tretinoin (ATRA, isotretinoin) in their patients. [Level 5]