The main goal for the treatment of spontaneous pneumothorax is to evacuate the gas from the pleural space and the prevention of recurrences. The guidelines from the American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) and the British Thoracic Society (BTS) are focused mainly on the management of pneumothorax in adults but not pediatric cases, specifically. Nevertheless, it is appropriate to initiate 100% oxygen via a non-rebreather mask and continuous cardiopulmonary monitoring for patients with spontaneous pneumothorax. Oxygen increases the rate of absorption of the gas from the pleural space up to four-fold compared to the absorption of 1% to 2% of the volume per day without oxygen. Clinically unstable patients with severe symptoms or symptoms suggestive of tension pneumothorax can be treated with emergent needle decompression as a bridge to tube thoracostomy placement.

For stable patients presenting with a small primary spontaneous pneumothorax for the first time, conservative management with supplemental oxygen and observation of at least 6 hours is recommended. If repeat chest radiograph shows evidence of a stable pneumothorax and the patient has access to adequate follow-up, then the patient can be discharged with strict return precautions for a 24-hour recheck. The British Thoracic Society suggests that certain asymptomatic patients with large primary spontaneous pneumothorax may be considered for observation without active intervention. The American College of Chest Physicians recommends aspiration for large or symptomatic primary spontaneous pneumothorax with a small-bore catheter (14F or smaller) or, if the initial aspiration fails, admission with a chest tube (16F to 22F). Larger primary spontaneous pneumothorax can be further managed with video-assisted thoracoscopy surgery (VATS) or thoracotomy to perform bullectomy, pleurectomy, and mechanical pleurodesis (i.e., dry gauze abrasion). VATS is less invasive than thoracotomy and has been shown to be an effective measure in the treatment and prevention of spontaneous pneumothorax recurrence.

Patients with recurrent primary spontaneous pneumothorax should be admitted with thoracostomy tube placement as a bridge to VATS. In patients that are unwilling to undergo VATS, are poor surgical candidates, or are being managed in an institution where VATS is not readily available, chemical pleurodesis can be performed with the introduction of irritants such as tetracyclines (i.e., doxycycline, minocycline) or talc via the thoracostomy tube. The inflammatory processes associated with chemical pleurodesis lead to the formation of pleural adhesions that effectively obliterate the pleural space.

In adults presenting with secondary spontaneous pneumothorax, both the American College of Chest Physicians and the British Thoracic Society recommend admission with supplemental oxygen and repeat chest radiograph in small secondary spontaneous pneumothorax. The organizations also recommend placement of a pleural catheter or thoracostomy tube if the secondary spontaneous pneumothorax is large, the patient is symptomatic, or the secondary spontaneous pneumothorax is bilateral. Observation alone is not recommended as there is an increased risk for mortality in secondary spontaneous pneumothorax. Referral to a thoracic specialist is recommended, but not until the patient is stabilized with a chest drain.