Atypical lobular and ductal hyperplasias are considered high-risk, pre-cursor, or pre-malignant lesions associated with either progression to advanced neoplasms or a marker for developing metachronous or synchronous breast cancer. Molecular studies have demonstrated that genomic changes occur in normal breast tissue. These changes lead to an increased proliferative capacity. A genomic change from the damaging effects of carcinogens is one of the leading theories behind the development of atypical proliferative lesions and breast cancer.

One of the leading players in initiating this genomic change is estrogen. Estrogen and its metabolites have been associated with multiple DNA-damaging effects leading to defective growth control, especially luminal progenitor cells. Women are exposed to estrogen at differing levels throughout their life, especially beginning at menarche and throughout the remainder of their lives. This life-long exposure to estrogen possibly represents a continued accumulation of genomic changes and damage, which may lead to the development of atypical proliferative breast lesions.

Molecular studies have discovered shared molecular characteristics between atypical proliferative lesions such as ADH and low-grade DCIS. This leads many to believe that ADH will continue on a spectrum to develop into low-grade DCIS. ALH, on the other hand, is not necessarily considered a pre-cursor for malignancy but a high-risk indicator. When ADH or ALH is identified in a breast biopsy, the risk of developing DCIS or invasive breast cancer increases by four to five times with a 2:1 predilection for the ipsilateral breast versus contralateral. It is unclear if a precursor lesion exists for high-grade DCIS or invasive carcinoma; however, breast cancer relative risk is increased four times when atypical hyperplasia is identified on a breast biopsy. The lifetime risk of developing breast cancer in patients with ADH or ALH on biopsy is 15% to 20%.

Molecular studies have identified important agents related to un-checked proliferation, including cyclin D1 overexpression, p16 inactivation, HOXA inactivation, and activation of telomerase. These changes can lead to inhibition of cell death and the development of malignancy. The sequence and interplay of these changes are not well understood, but further studies in their relation to each other and the development of atypical proliferative lesions and breast cancer could shed light on accurate risk stratification, prognosis, and early predictors of advanced neoplasia.