Congenital nephrotic syndrome therapy goals are to control edema, prevent and treat complications including infections and thromboses, and provide optimal nutrition for the child to help grow. Kidney transplantation is the only curative treatment in most cases.

**Albumin Infusions**

Proteinuria leads to life-threatening complications, including protein malnutrition, edema, and reduced growth.

Protein substitution by parenteral albumin infusions is required for heavy and constant proteinuria (10 to 100 g/L).  Usually (3 to 4 g/kg per day of albumin), 20% albumin solution together with a bolus of intravenous furosemide (0.5 mg/kg) using central venous catheters is given.

**Medications**

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and indomethacin are used to reduce the protein excretion in urine.

Thyroxine substitution is recommended in congenital nephrotic syndrome patients for low levels of serum thyroid-binding globulin and thyroxine. Thyroxine can be started with 6.25 to 12.5 μg/day and can be adjusted as per TSH levels.

**Anticoagulation**

Imbalance of plasma coagulation factor levels due to protein loss in urine results in a risk for thromboses. Aspirin and dipyridamole have been recommended for anticoagulation therapy.

**Nutrition**

Congenital nephrotic syndrome is treated with a high-energy (130 kcal/kg per day) and a high-protein (3 to 4 g/kg per day) diet. First, Breast milk and milk formulas are used. Excessive protein is used as a  casein-based protein. A mixture of rapeseed and sunflower oils is given as lipid supplementation. Vitamin D2 (400 IU/day), magnesium (50 mg/day) and calcium (500 to 1,000 mg/day) are given. Daily water intake is 100 to 130 mL/kg.

**Nephrectomy**

One approach is to do a unilateral nephrectomy to reduce protein loss and decrease the frequency of the albumin infusion. Another approach is to do an early bilateral nephrectomy and start peritoneal dialysis. When the baby is 7 kg of weight, bilateral nephrectomy is done, and start peritoneal dialysis.

Renal transplantation

Congenital nephrotic syndrome children are usually transplanted at 1 to 2 years of age

**Treatment Summary**

**Albumin Infusions**

20% albumin infusions parenterally  (3 to 4 g/kg per day of albumin)

**Nutrition**

Nutrition Protein supplementation (3 to 4 g/kg per day)

Lipid supplementation (rapeseed/sunflower oil)

Diet Hypercaloric  (130 kcal/kg per day) Vitamins A, D, E,  water-soluble vitamins

Calcium and magnesium supplementation

**Medications**

Thyroxin supplementation

Antiproteinuric drugs that reduce protein excretion (ACE-inhibitor, indomethacin) Anticoagulation (warfarin, aspirin, ATIII-infusion)

Parenteral antibiotics when bacterial infection suspected

**Nephrectomy and Peritoneal Dialysis**

When the baby is 7 kg of weight, bilateral nephrectomy is done, starting peritoneal dialysis.



**Renal Transplantation**



Renal transplantation with the extraperitoneal placement of the kidney graft is performed later when the child weighs more than 9 kg.