Unlike epithelial ovarian cancers, granulosa theca cell tumors can have varied presentations and may initially present to different specialists. For example, juvenile GCT may present first to pediatric care providers for evaluation of precocious puberty. In contrast, patients who present with amenorrhea and infertility due to androgen-secreting tumors or tumors associated with high serum inhibin levels may consult a reproductive endocrinologist. Women in the reproductive age group who manifest with menstrual abnormalities and women who experience postmenopausal bleeding are likely to consult a general gynecologic service provider. Finally, a presentation with an acute abdomen leads to an emergency general surgery consultation.

Given the above-stated, it is of paramount importance that all these providers have a sound knowledge of the clinical presentation of GCTs and the need for accurate surgical staging since the stage is the most important prognostic factor determining the outcome of this disease. Only then will prompt referral to a surgical/gynecologic oncologist be possible via effective inter-professional communication. Even though a preoperative diagnosis is often not possible, a detailed imaging assessment of the adnexal mass and discussion with radiologists may provide valuable clues to the probable diagnosis of GCT and thereby facilitate patient counseling regarding the extent of surgery and possibility of fertility preservation.

Close collaboration with an expert gynecologic pathologist is crucial since an intraoperative frozen section may not always yield a definitive diagnosis. Instead, if the pathologist suspects an epithelial malignancy, the surgeon should consider a comprehensive staging including pelvic and para-aortic lymph node dissection rather than the usually limited staging procedure done for granulosa thecal cell tumors.

Nurses play a crucial role in providing patients with the required information regarding their disease during the diagnosis and management process. The nurse should ensure the provision of the best standard of care possible to women with GCT. The nurse should assist the interprofessional team in reporting any untoward changes in the general condition of the woman. Effective communication and collaboration among the interprofessional team members are crucial for the provision of the best possible standard of care for women with GCT and their families. [Level 5]