A variety of treatments exist which include both medical and surgical interventions. The front-line treatment available for all three variants of PFICs is medical management with ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA). This secondary bile acid has numerous benefits, including reversal of hepatotoxicity from bile acid accumulation, increasing mitochondrial integrity, and decreasing the degree of cholestasis present. Additional agents such as cholestyramine, a bile acid-binding resin, can be used to treat pruritis associated with PFIC. Rifampicin is thought to work via FXR related mechanisms to upregulate specific detoxification enzymes. Phenobarbital has long been used in the treatment of newborn hyperbilirubinemia through its ability to induce CYP enzymes. Lastly, there are other medications such as antihistamines, steroids, anti-emetics, all of which have been utilized for symptomatic relief.

Often this disease process remains resistant to medical therapy and surgical intervention is required. Intractable pruritis is often a reason for surgery, the most common type being biliary diversion procedures, either internal or external, to prevent the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids and to reduce the accumulation of these acids to alleviate a patients pruritis. External diversions create a conduit connecting the gallbladder to the abdominal skin with the formation of a permanent stoma. In many cases, up to fifty percent of bile flow can be diverted away from the enterohepatic circulation alleviating many of the detrimental effects. In addition to the symptomatic relief that patients experience, external diversion procedures can even help to improve hepatocellular function, slowing down and even reversal of disease progression and increase the time to transplant, thus prolonging many patients' lives. Patient to patient results may vary. However, it has been demonstrated that external diversion procedures are often more beneficial early in the disease course, and if significant liver disease exists may provide little benefit. As with any procedure, complications may arise from external diversions, most commonly stoma prolapse. However, there have also been cases of cholangitis which have been observed, so the risks and benefits should be discussed with patients before proceeding with any such procedure.

Partial internal biliary drainage procedures are much newer, with less evidence to back their efficacy and safety. This procedure involves the formation of a small intestinal or appendiceal conduit between the gallbladder and colon. Though the long-term evidence behind this procedure is still limited, patients seem to demonstrate improvement in their pruritis and theoretically should have similar effects when it comes to disease progression and hepatocellular function.

Another procedure that may start getting more attention in the coming years are ileal bypass procedures. In this type of procedure, the distal 15% of the small intestine is bypassed via an anastomosis with the colon, which is the area where the majority of enterohepatic circulation of bile acids occur. Often utilized in patients who have had a previous cholecystectomy, its long-term efficacy is still unknown, and patients seem to have recurring symptoms often within the first year of this operation.

Many patients’ symptoms will eventually recur or can even be refractory to both medical management, diversion procedures, or a combination of the two. These patients or those who develop end-stage liver disease will often be referred for a liver transplant. Liver transplant thus far has been demonstrated to provide benefits in all variants of PFICS. As with any transplant, the risk of rejection remains, and in some studies, specifically in patients with PFIC2, recurrence of the disease has been noted. Nonetheless, Liver transplant is still the best treatment option for patients with PFIC and is now being considered a first-line option in many centers, even in patients without evidence of end-stage liver disease. Though no new novel therapies have been approved by the FDA, there are some currently being tested which seem to be promising. Of these, apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter (ASBT) inhibitors seem to significantly reduce intestinal uptake of bile acids and prevent the majority of enterohepatic circulation. Other agents, such as FXR agonists, have already been tested on animal models and seem promising to reduce the synthesis of bile.