# Continuing Education Activity

Renal angiomyolipomas (AMLs) are considered the most prevalent benign renal tumor. Renal AMLs are generally composed of blood vessels, smooth muscles, and adipose tissues. Although most of these tumors are found incidentally on radiological imaging, symptomatic presentations such as flank pain, gross hematuria, or severe retroperitoneal hemorrhage may also exist. Imaging plays a central role in the diagnosis and management of these tumors. This activity reviews the evaluation, treatment, complications, and prognosis of renal angiomyolipomas and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the epidemiology of renal angiomyolipoma.
- Review the evaluation of a renal angiomyolipoma.
- Summarize the treatment of a renal angiomyolipoma.
- Outline the complications associated with renal angiomyolipoma.

# Introduction

Renal angiomyolipomas (AMLs) are the most prevalent benign renal tumor.

Angiomyolipomas are sometimes mistakenly referred to as hamartomas. While both are benign, the difference is that an angiomyolipoma is a true tumor, while a hamartoma is defined as a disorganized collection of normal local tissue and cells that are usually the result of a trauma, infection, infarction, obstruction, or hemorrhage. Although first described by Grawitz, angiomyolipomas are distinct from Grawitz tumors which are malignant renal cell carcinomas and hypernephromas.

Imaging plays a central role in the diagnosis and management of renal angiomyolipomas.

The fundamental diagnostic criterion of classic angiomyolipoma is detecting a large amount of adipose tissue on radiological imaging.

The management of angiomyolipomas is generally based on the clinical manifestations, tumor size, number, growth pattern, and malignant potential.

# Etiology

Renal angiomyolipomas most often occur as "sporadic" cases (80%), which are isolated but may also be associated with certain "hereditary" conditions (20%) such as tuberous sclerosis and pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis.

Hereditary angiomyolipomas, associated with tuberous sclerosis complex or pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis, are caused by a genetic mutation in the TSC1 or TSC2 genes.

Compared to the more common sporadic type, hereditary angiomyolipomas (associated with tuberous sclerosis or lymphangioleiomyomatosis) are likely to be larger, begin at an earlier age, be multicentric and bilateral, grow more quickly, hemorrhage, develop chronic renal failure, and undergo malignant transformation.

**Tuberous sclerosis**is a rare, familial, autosomal dominant genetic disorder that causes benign tumors to develop in various body parts, usually affecting the brain, eyes, heart, lungs, and kidneys. It is also associated with adenoma sebaceum, epilepsy, and mental deficiencies.

Patients with tuberous sclerosis tend to have larger angiomyolipomas when diagnosed (32% will be >3 cm), are more likely to have bilateral and multifocal lesions, and have twice the rate of tumors that increase in size over time compared to non-tuberous sclerosis AML patients.

**Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis**is an exceedingly rare genetic disease often associated with angiomyolipomas that may sometimes be associated with tuberous sclerosis. The overall incidence is about 5 cases per one million women.

All patients newly diagnosed with lymphangioleiomyomatosis should receive renal imaging as screening for angiomyolipomas. However, due to its rarity, routine VEGF-D testing for lymphangioleiomyomatosis is not necessary or recommended for most female patients with angiomyolipomas but should be considered in younger women with multiple renal AMLs, especially if they also have pulmonary issues. (See our companion article on lymphangioleiomyomatosis.)

# Epidemiology

Renal angiomyolipomas are rare kidney tumors that account for only 0.3 to 3% of all renal neoplasms.

Renal angiomyolipomas tend to occur in females more than males, possibly due to estrogenic effects.

At least 50 to 75% of patients with tuberous sclerosis will be found to have renal angiomyolipomas.

# Pathophysiology

The exact reason for sporadic renal angiomyolipoma is not fully known.

Hereditary renal angiomyolipomas are caused by a mutation in either the TSC1 or TSC2 gene.

Deficient or defective TSC1 or TSC2 gene activity will lead to unchecked activation of the mTOR pathway resulting in the formation of angiomyolipomas.

Angiomyolipomas are generally considered benign and will only very rarely become malignant.

# Histopathology

Renal angiomyolipomas can be classified histologically as either typical (triphasic) or atypical (monophasic or epithelioid).

**Gross Pathology Descriptions**

- The mean tumor size is 6 cm, but the range varies from 0.5 to 25 cm.

- A "large" tumor would be >6 cm. (Historically, this was previously 4 cm.)

- Circumscribed, not encapsulated.

- Tumors rarely have a cystic component.

- Tumors are usually unifocal and unilateral but could be bilateral or multiple, suggesting underlying tuberous sclerosis.

- The cut surface appearance could be gray-white (smooth muscle component), red (vascular component), or yellow (adipose component); the typical golden-yellow appearance depends on the fat content.

- It may or may not invade the local perinephric fat, lymphatics, or renal sinus.

- May rarely invade the renal vein and develop a tumor thrombus similar to malignant renal tumors with possible intracardiac extensions and pulmonary embolisms.

- Epitheliod variant tends to have minimal fat and may show metastasis in a third of cases.

**Microscopic Pathology Descriptions**

- The classic triphasic renal angiomyolipoma contains thick-walled dysmorphic, disorganized hyalinized blood vessels without elastic lamina.

- The tumor also contains mature adipose tissue and myoid spindle cells.

- Epithelioid variant usually contains predominant polygonal cells with densely eosinophilic cytoplasm. Hemorrhage, necrosis, epithelioid cellular proliferation, and mitotic figures are typically common.

- In renal angiomyolipomas with epithelial cysts, the cysts are lined by cuboidal or hobnail epithelial cells.

**Biomarkers**

Renal angiomyolipomas are comprised of three cell types, all originating from pericytes.-smooth muscle actin, and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2.

Renal angiomyolipomas typically stain strongly positive for estrogen, progesterone, and androgen receptors which partly explains the increased incidence in females and the accelerated growth in patients on hormonal therapy.

Melanocytic markers for spindle cells (HMB-45 and Melan-A) can help differentiate angiomyolipomas from various sarcomas.

Malignant angiomyolipomas are extremely rare. Risk factors would include fat-invisible lesions on imaging, pure epithelioid histology, a size greater than 7 cm, and the presence of intralesional necrosis.

# History and Physical

Renal angiomyolipomas are mostly asymptomatic and typically diagnosed incidentally.

Historically, up to 15% of patients would present with a spontaneous retroperitoneal hemorrhage (also called Wunderlich syndrome). This can be severe and lead to shock in about one-third of patients.

Possible clinical signs and symptoms include flank pain, palpable abdominal mass, urinary tract infection, hematuria, anemia, severe renal insufficiency, and shock.

Renal angiomyolipomas associated with tuberous sclerosis complex or pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis tend to be more aggressive, occur at an earlier age, are likelier to be bilateral and multifocal, and are larger at initial diagnosis than the more common sporadic variety.

# Evaluation

In clinical practice, angiomyolipomas appear as either fat-rich, fat-poor, or fat-invisible masses.

CT scanning is generally used first, often for unrelated reasons, and may be sufficient. If not, an MRI will be more sensitive in identifying fat-poor angiomyolipomas.

The cornerstone for identifying renal angiomyolipoma is diagnostic imaging. A  biopsy is not generally required to diagnose an angiomyolipoma but might be needed to exclude malignancy in difficult or complex cases such as fat-invisible renal mass lesions. Several imaging modalities help diagnose this condition as described below:

**Ultrasonography:**Hyperechoic lesion associated with a posterior acoustic shadowing is the typical feature of a fat-rich angiomyolipoma.

The lesion's echogenicity directly correlates with the total fat content.

Unfortunately, about a third of renal cell carcinomas can demonstrate a similar appearance on ultrasound.

The combination of tumor size with ultrasonic image-based quantitative textural analysis improves the ability of ultrasonography to differentiate hyperechoic renal cell carcinomas from angiomyolipomas with a higher degree of accuracy.

A CT or MRI is suggested if the ultrasound shows significant growth (>2.5 mm/year) or a potentially serious change. (It is helpful to repeat the same imaging modality used to make the original diagnosis so the comparison can be more precise.) For these reasons, a baseline ultrasound is suggested for newly diagnosed angiomyolipomas if not already obtained. The combination of tumor size with ultrasound image-based quantitative textural analysis improves the ability of ultrasonography to differentiate hyperechoic renal cell carcinomas from angiomyolipomas with a higher degree of accuracy.

**Computed Tomography:**The presence of a region of interest on CT scanning that contains attenuations of –10 Hounsfield Units or less is considered a dependable and reliable sign of fatty tissue, which is easily seen in most fat-rich angiomyolipomas.

For this reason, proper placement of the region of interest (ROI) is essential to detect the fatty tissue component of suspicious renal masses. This is because the attenuation values will be higher if the ROI is placed on the muscular or vascular component than if placed on fatty tissue.

Fat-poor angiomyolipomas appear heterogeneously hyperattenuating or iso-attenuating. Fat-invisible angiomyolipomas appear homogenously hyperattenuating because there is insufficient adipose tissue to show any decreased density. In these cases, an MRI is usually the next recommended step. In selected cases, a contrast-enhanced CT scan may be indicated if there is a high suspicion of active bleeding, as it is necessary to find tortuous blood vessels prone to hemorrhage before a therapeutic embolization can be performed.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging:**There is little difference in accuracy between MRI and CT scans for detecting most renal angiomyolipoma although MRI is considered superior in fat-poor lesions.

In one study of 98 pathologically confirmed fat-poor angiomyolipomas, 23% were identifiable on MRI but not CT scan.

Fat-rich angiomyolipomas show T1-hypointensity (dark) with fat suppression and T1-hyperintensity (bright) without fat suppression. It is important to note that this T1-hyperintensity is also present in other conditions like renal cell carcinomas and hemorrhagic cysts so it is not a specific, definitive, diagnostic manifestation of angiomyolipomas.

The main difficulty is to diagnose the fat-invisible mass, which contains too little fat to manifest the hypointensity on the fat-suppressed images required for making the diagnosis.

The application of MRI artifacts had been proposed for improved evaluation of the fat content in renal tumors. One of these is the India ink artifact which makes a black line at the boundary between fat and water. Applying this type of artifact helps diagnose small tumors and fat-poor angiomyolipomas—phase versus opposed phase chemical shift MRI assists in differentiating fat-poor angiomyolipomas and renal cell carcinomas. T2-weighted images are also beneficial for diagnosing renal angiomyolipomas.

Fat-rich angiomyolipomas are usually hyperintense while fat-poor angiomyolipomas manifest as heterogeneous or homogeneously hypointense in comparison to renal tissues.

Gadolinium contrast is generally not needed for diagnosis but can help identify internal aneurysms and determine general vascularity. Overall sensitivity and specificity of MRI for diagnosing fat-poor angiomyolipomas have been reported as 83% and 90%, respectively.

**Percutaneous Biopsy:**Percutaneous renal biopsies are mainly indicated to differentiate malignant renal lesions from benign masses.

The purpose of a percutaneous renal biopsy is mainly to identify benign lesions that would not require aggressive treatment in those rare equivocal cases where imaging modalities alone are unable to make a definitive diagnosis.

**A percutaneous renal biopsy is typically only used to differentiate a renal cell carcinoma from a fat-invisible or low-fat angiomyolipoma if both MRI and CT scan images are inconclusive or indecisive.**

Although this imaging presentation is unusual for a renal cell carcinoma, both lesions may look identical.

A percutaneous renal biopsy may be necessary to differentiate between the papillary subtype of renal cell carcinoma and fat-invisible angiomyolipomas if the lesion is small (considered as less than 3 cm) and appears T2-hypointense on MRI without any evidence of fat inside the tumor.

The risk of significant bleeding following a percutaneous biopsy in fat-invisible angiomyolipomas is no greater than for other renal masses.

**Renal nuclear scanning**utilizing technetium-99m (Tc) mercaptoacetythiglycine (MAG3) renography is not generally used in the routine evaluation of angiomyolipomas and other renal masses. It evaluates relative renal function, which can be helpful before nephron-sparing surgery. It may also be useful in differentiating renal masses and pseudomasses in cases where other imaging modalities are ambiguous.

**Evaluation Summary:**

- Ultrasonography can be useful for the initial detection of a renal mass or for tracking but is not reliable enough for an initial diagnosis.

- CT scanning is generally used first in the initial evaluation of renal masses, usually for unrelated reasons, and is often sufficient for diagnosis.

- CT scans also have the advantages of wider availability, lower cost, easier access, and can be performed quickly.

- An MRI will be more sensitive in identifying fat-poor angiomyolipomas if the CT scan is inconclusive.

- For fat-invisible lesions, no imaging study will suffice, and a definitive diagnosis will require either a percutaneous biopsy or direct surgical intervention.

- If any of these means cannot determine a reliable diagnosis, the mass lesion should be treated as a renal malignancy.

# Treatment / Management

**Indications for Treatment**

Most angiomyolipoma cases are asymptomatic and usually do not require treatment, but therapeutic interventions are required in the minority of cases.

In the past, the main indications for intervention were the presence of the symptoms, suspicion of malignancy, the presence of the tumor in women of childbearing age, and a size larger than 4 cm.

Recently, the historical 4 cm size threshold has been questioned. Some recent studies do not support the 4 cm size criterion because only 30% of renal angiomyolipomas larger than 4 cm were symptomatic.

Other studies revealed that using the 4 cm criterion as a predictor of hemorrhage has lower specificity than the tumoral aneurysm size of 5 mm.

This evidence suggests that the vascularity of the angiomyolipoma and the size of any related aneurysms are ultimately more significant than the tumor size alone.

Angiomyolipomas can be especially troubling during a pregnancy given the high levels of estrogen receptors in these lesions, which causes them to enlarge, and the relatively high rate of reported hemorrhage.

The European Association of Urology and the Canadian Best Practice Report recommend that the treatment of angiomyolipomas be considered and discussed with women of reproductive age who have been found to have these lesions.

If an angiomyolipoma is found in a pregnant lady, it should be managed similarly to other renal tumors, and the treatment should be highly individualized.

Currently, the European Association of Urology and the Canadian Urological Association recommend that intervention is required in well-selected cases and should consider the following criteria:

- Symptoms from the tumor(s) such as persistent pain

- Large lesions (>6 cm, formerly >4 cm)

- Multiple lesions

- Lesions that are enlarging >2.5 mm per year (>5 mm yearly is considered high risk)

- Intralesional aneurysms >5 mm

- Poor access to emergency care or follow-up

- Poor patient compliance

- Presence of a tumor in women of childbearing age

- High-risk occupations such as commercial airline pilots

- Female patients who must continue hormonal therapy

Possible interventions include medical treatment with mTOR inhibitors, thermal ablation (radiofrequency ablation and cryotherapy), selective renal artery embolization, and surgical excision (total nephrectomy, partial nephron-sparing surgery).

**Medical Treatment:**Hereditary renal angiomyolipomas (those associated with tuberous sclerosis and/or pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis) are caused by a mutation in theTSC1 or TSC2 genes resulting in unchecked activation of the mTOR pathway. This results in cell overgrowth and the formation of angiomyolipomas.

Medications that inhibit the mTOR pathway can interrupt tumor progression and promote the reversion of the existing lesions.

Sirolimus was the first mTOR inhibitor used to treat hereditary angiomyolipomas.

Everolimus (also an mTOR inhibitor) was approved by the U.S Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treating hereditary angiomyolipomas in the setting of tuberous sclerosis complex.

The use of everolimus in sporadic angiomyolipomas is more problematic. A 2020 phase II multi-institutional prospective trial reported good efficacy in patients who were given 4 to 6 cycles of monthly everolimus therapy based on response and tolerability. Over 50% of the patients demonstrated a reduction in tumor size of 25% or more, but almost 50% developed side effects or toxicities that required modification or discontinuation of therapy.

It is important to recognize that mTOR inhibitors are not risk-free and have many reported side effects.

- Amenorrhea

- Delayed wound healing

- Dyslipidemia

- Fatigue

- Hyperglycemia

- Hypophosphatemia

- Infections

- Lymphopenia

- Microcytic anemia

- Non-infectious pneumonitis

- Proteinuria

- Stomatitis

- Thrombocytopenia

**Thermal Ablation**

Thermal ablative therapy (radiofrequency ablation, cryotherapy, etc.) has been recommended by the American Urological Association Guidelines for small renal masses (<3 cm).

Specific selection depends on patient characteristics, tumor size, and specific location, as well as local experience and expertise. Thermal ablative therapy has the advantage of being able to perform simultaneous percutaneous renal biopsies and being effective regardless of the underlying nature of the tumor. This gives them a significant advantage over selective angiographic embolization, where the diagnosis has to be clear and definitive before treatment, although embolization remains the preferred minimally invasive procedure for angiomyolipomas. The most commonly used thermal ablative modalities include cryotherapy and radiofrequency ablation.

- **Cryotherapy**has been used very successfully in small numbers of angiomyolipoma patients, but there is insufficiently reported data to recommend its routine use.
- Cryotherapy has some unique advantages, which include minimal damage to surrounding renal tissue, a well-defined area of ablation, the ability to obtain a tissue biopsy during the same procedure, percutaneous accessibility, minimally invasive technology, and the delivery of definitive treatment to the mass regardless if it is eventually determined to be a benign or malignant lesion.
- In institutions that have experience with this modality, cryotherapy may be a very reasonable option, especially where arterial embolization has failed or is not technically feasible, as well as in situations where the absolute minimal loss of renal function is desired or there is some remaining doubt about the diagnosis. This would also include patients with pre-existing renal failure or extensive bilateral disease as an alternative to surgical resection.
- If renal cryoablation of the tumor is being considered, it would be best to include it within a clinical trial if possible. No data is yet available on the possible combination of angiographic embolization together with renal cryotherapy, but it might theoretically provide superior results for larger tumors.

- **Radiofrequency ablation**of angiomyolipomas has demonstrated minimal complications with good efficacy. This minimally invasive technique is most suitable for small-sized tumors which are asymptomatic but could also target large masses.
- Radiofrequency ablation targets the vascular and solid elements of the tumor mass without damaging normal renal tissue. The efficacy of radiofrequency ablation for renal angiomyolipomas has been assessed for small angiomyolipomas in relatively small series.
- In one study, 15 small renal angiomyolipomas were treated successfully with complete disappearance of tumoral enhancement on CT scan and a low complication rate (13.3%) at a mean follow-up of 21 months.
- Another study reported a reduction in tumor size from 4.5 cm to 2.9 cm after radiofrequency ablation of a sporadic angiomyolipoma in a patient with a solitary kidney without any complications or tumor recurrence at the 12-month follow-up.
- Four large angiomyolipomas were treated by radiofrequency ablation in another study, and no complications or hemorrhagic events were reported. This study also showed, during a follow-up of 48 months, a significant decrease in the mean soft-tissue-to-total tumor ratio, but the total tumor volume did not significantly change.
- CT scan guidance is required for tumors that cannot be easily and safely targeted by ultrasonography. Superselective renal artery embolization combined with radiofrequency ablation has produced excellent success rates in a small number of studies.

**Selective Renal Artery Embolization:**In the past, the main treatment for angiomyolipoma was surgical excision because tumor malignancy could not be excluded.

Selective renal artery embolization is the preferred procedural option reserving surgery and possibly thermal ablative therapies for patients with vascular malformations, uncontrollable symptoms, embolization failures, or diagnostic uncertainty.

When the surgical option is indicated, preoperative embolization of the tumor may be considered to reduce the complications and the difficulty of the operation.

Most of these side effects are related to a post-embolization syndrome characterized by flank pain, fever, vomiting, nausea, and leucocytosis during the first three days after the procedure.

These side effects are generally managed conservatively with standard supportive care. Prescribing antipyretics, antiemetics, and analgesia prophylactically could play a major role in minimizing and controlling these symptoms.

**Surgical Excision:**Total or****partial nephrectomy is the only treatment option that totally eradicates the entire renal mass.

Parenchymal preservation is especially important in patients with hereditary angiomyolipomas because of the higher recurrence rate, faster growth rate, and multifocal disease pattern.

Nephrectomy is usually indicated when the suspicion of malignancy is high and the renal mass is particularly large or when other treatment modalities cannot be performed.

Surgical excision has the advantage of a higher cure rate and the need for fewer follow-up procedures with reduced surveillance compared with arterial embolization.

**Active Surveillance and Follow-up**

Generally, active surveillance is used to monitor the ongoing progression of known tumors and the development of new ones when the diagnostic evaluations are completed and the indications for treatment are not present.

There are currently no definitive guidelines for sporadic angiomyolipomas regarding the frequency of imaging studies or which imaging modality should be used for that reason.

An annual repeat of imaging may be appropriate for small and solitary lesions.

For hereditary angiomyolipomas, the International Tuberous Sclerosis Complex Consensus highly recommends using the MRI yearly to monitor the condition because of its higher sensitivity in detecting adipose tissue.

Ultrasound is usually sufficient for monitoring with a CT scan or MRI if significant changes are found. With long-term follow-up, it is reasonable to avoid routine CT scanning to minimize radiation exposure.

**Treatment Summary**

- Most angiomyolipomas do not need any treatment.

- The need for treatment is based on current symptoms, size (>6 cm), growth >2.5 mm/yr, intratumoral aneurysms >5 mm, high-risk situations, and potential lack of access to healthcare.

- The least invasive treatment modality should be used whenever possible, which minimizes complications and loss of renal function.

- Everolimus has shown efficacy in controlling tumor growth and promoting shrinkage in hereditary angiomyolipomas. Its use in the more common sporadic angiomyolipomas is uncertain, but early studies suggest it can be effective.

- Thermal therapies such as radiofrequency ablation and cryotherapy allow percutaneous biopsies to be performed simultaneously and will be effective for both benign and malignant lesions. They should certainly be considered for smaller tumors (<3 cm) depending on local experience, expertise, and availability.

- Selective angiographic embolization is the treatment of choice for active bleeding and prophylaxis of high-risk angiomyolipomas. However, there is a high retreatment rate of 30%, and it requires a definitive diagnosis before treatment.

- Surgery is the most definitive, curative therapy reserved for situations that cannot be better managed with less invasive modalities. Nephron-sparing techniques are recommended.

# Differential Diagnosis

It is essential to know that renal angiomyolipoma has different types ( fat-rich angiomyolipoma, fat-poor angiomyolipoma, and fat-invisible angiomyolipoma).

It is necessary to exclude the other differential diagnoses before deciding on treatment.

- Renal cell carcinoma

- Oncocytoma

- Wilms tumor

- Retroperitoneal liposarcoma

- Adrenal myelolipoma

- Tumors metastatic to the kidney

The recent high use of high-resolution imaging modalities has raised the detection of small renal masses. Many of these small renal lesions are found incidentally, are assumed to be possible renal cell carcinomas, and are managed accordingly.

Differentiating renal cell carcinomas from angiomyolipomas can sometimes be challenging in routine clinical practice.

Clinical information that favors the diagnosis of angiomyolipoma includes female gender, younger age, and asymptomatic clinical manifestations.

Retroperitoneal liposarcomas may also appear similar to larger angiomyolipomas. Since angiomyolipomas are renal parenchymal tumors, there will be an indentation or dimple where the mass originated, while a liposarcoma will tend to envelop and compress the entire kidney with no specific originating marker.

When a renal mass lesion cannot be reliably determined to be an angiomyolipoma from imaging alone but is considered suspicious for AML, a percutaneous biopsy is reasonable, especially for high-risk patients, as it will avoid the risks and potential complications of surgery.

If there are indications of malignancy (such as internal necrosis, calcifications, or local lymphadenopathy), it should be treated as a malignancy unless proven benign by percutaneous renal biopsy.

Lesions suspicious of possible malignancy (tumoral necrosis or calcifications, regional lymphadenopathy, metastasis, perinephric extension) should generally be treated surgically.

# Prognosis

Small angiomyolipomas and those without aneurysms usually have a good prognosis as the risk of spontaneous bleeding are low, at only 2%.

Another important prognostic factor is the malignant potential, as some types of angiomyolipoma have a greater tendency for this transformation.

There is a need for updated clinical guidelines to help guide physicians to optimal management in each of these rare and unusual cases. Improved treatments or even a potential cure will require ongoing translational research in genomics, immunotherapy, and other new treatment technologies.

# Complications

Renal angiomyolipoma is a rare benign neoplasm, but it may still impose significant morbidity and mortality due to the tumor's unique vascular characteristics and the possible complications associated with treatment.

The risk of bleeding associated with renal angiomyolipomas is a challenging factor in saving the patient's life while preserving renal function.

Another important complication includes the need for long-term surveillance and the potential for renal impairment over time associated with renal angiomyolipomas.

# Consultations

The management of renal angiomyolipoma and its complications requires a multidisciplinary team.

- Nephrologist

- Radiologist

- Interventional radiologist

- Oncologist

- Urologist

- Pathologist

- Clinical pathologist

- Vascular surgeon

- General surgeon

- Genetics counselor

- Primary care

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with renal angiomyolipoma should be informed about this disease's benign nature.

Health care providers also have to advise the patients about the importance of medication adherence and compliance and the need for long-term surveillance.

Any woman of childbearing age diagnosed with renal angiomyolipoma who plans to become pregnant should seek consultation to discuss the management of her condition before and during the pregnancy. Pregnancy is considered a significant risk factor for disease progression and complications as the tumor mass will likely grow and may rupture while she is carrying.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Over 90% of all angiomyolipomas never need treatment.

- A number of experts recommend an evaluation of all patients with newly diagnosed angiomyolipomas for tuberous sclerosis.

- Conversely, all patients with tuberous sclerosis should be screened for angiomyolipomas.

- All patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis should receive renal imaging for angiomyolipomas.

- Asymptomatic patients with <2 lesions smaller than 4 cm are unlikely to have tuberous sclerosis.

- Consider a biopsy if the diagnosis cannot be reliably made from CT and MRI scanning alone.

- If the diagnosis is still in doubt, treat the lesion as a malignancy.

- Ultrasound is not sufficiently detailed to make a definitive diagnosis but can track previously diagnosed lesions.

- The risk of a percutaneous biopsy is no greater for patients with low-fat or invisible-fat angiomyolipomas than for other renal tumors.

- MRI imaging is more sensitive in detecting fat than CT and is, therefore, most useful for fat-poor lesions. (No imaging will show a fat-invisible lesion.)

- If all measures have failed to confirm a diagnosis reliably, treating the lesion as malignant is recommended.

- Active bleeding is best controlled with selective angiographic embolization, but there is a 30% retreatment rate.

- Surgical intervention with minimally invasive ablative techniques should be considered when possible.

- Women of childbearing age should consider prophylactic treatment of angiomyolipomas due to the high risk of complications during pregnancy.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Managing renal angiomyolipoma requires the collaboration of the entire interprofessional healthcare team.

The role of the radiologist and interventional radiologist is crucial to confirm the diagnosis and monitor the disease progression through imaging.

All medical efforts should focus on preserving renal function while preventing disease progression and associated complications.

The nursing staff plays a crucial role in patient counseling, assisting in surgery, coordinating contacts and interventions between specialties, and answering patient questions. If medical therapy is part of the treatment plan, the pharmacist will counsel the patient on proper dosing and administration and perform medication reconciliation, contacting the ordering or prescribing clinician if any problems are noted.

All interprofessional team members must provide meticulous documentation of their activities and interventions in the patient's medical record so all team members have access to the same up-to-date, accurate information. All interprofessional team members should likewise be able to engage in open communication regarding the case with all other team members so the best therapeutic options can be implemented. This interprofessional approach will drive optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]