**Ischemic Priapism**

**The initial approach**to ischemic priapism is to treat it as a true emergency. Any priapism episode lasting four hours or longer requires early intervention to decrease the likelihood of irreversible corporal damage and future erectile dysfunction. Although treating a patient's underlying disease may reduce erectile rigidity, emergency management should focus on achieving actual detumescence. Several medications can be utilized for ischemic priapism, and oral therapies such as pseudoephedrine may be tried while awaiting equipment and supplies for more advanced interventions. Oral terbutaline has long been suggested as a priapism remedy in the past but has not shown sufficient efficacy to be recommended currently, according to both the American Urological Association (AUA) and the European Association of Urology guidelines.

**Aspiration and normal saline irrigation**are recommended as the initial medical therapy. Performing a dorsal penile block before aspiration, irrigation, and drug injection therapy is advisable to minimize patient discomfort. Aspiration is generally done using a large diameter needle, butterfly, or angiocath (19 gauge or larger) at either the 2 o'clock or 10 o'clock position on the penis near the base while milking the shaft. About 20 ml to 30 ml should be aspirated, and the color of the blood should be noted. Aspiration alone is only effective in about one-third of patients. It must be combined with other treatments, such as irrigation with normal saline or diluted sympathomimetic agents, to achieve successful, prolonged detumescence. Aspiration with normal saline irrigation has been reported to successfully achieve detumescence in 66% of cases.

**Intracavernosal drug therapy**is generally the next step in priapism treatment. Although several sympathomimetic agents are available for intracorporeal injection, phenylephrine is the most frequently utilized and recommended as the preferred first-line agent due to its efficacy and superior safety profile.

**The American Urological Association Guidelines**on priapism recommends an intracavernosal injection of 0.5 to 1 ml of a diluted phenylephrine concentration of 100 to 500 mcg/ml every 5 minutes for a total of up to 3 injections.

A lower concentration and smaller injected volumes should be utilized in children and those with severe cardiovascular disease. Other potential sympathomimetic drugs include ephedrine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. Of these, phenylephrine has relatively few cardiovascular side effects and is generally the preferred agent. All patients receiving intracorporal sympathomimetic agents should be monitored for arrhythmias and elevated blood pressure. If completed within 12 hours of priapism onset, some studies have reported a near 100% success in achieving detumescence with this therapy.

**Surgical intervention**will be required if medical therapy fails. A prolonged duration of the priapism (>15.5 hours) and the failure of 1,000 mcg of injected, diluted phenylephrine solution after aspiration and normal saline irrigation suggests the likely need for surgical intervention such as a shunt.

All have roughly similar rates of priapism resolution. Our preferred shunt is made directly through the glans with a cruciate incision into the distal end of the corpora on both sides. Blood is milked out of the corpora, and irrigation continued until the color changes to a bright red, indicating adequate oxygenation. A shunt can also be created more proximally or directly to one of the superficial penile veins, the saphenous vein, or the deep dorsal vein.

**The "Corporal Snake Maneuver"**can be tried if aspiration, irrigation, and shunting are unsuccessful. A small probe (7/8 Hegar dilator) is passed through the shunt opening in the glans into the corpora cavernosa all the way to the crura to create a clear channel for drainage.

**Penoscrotal decompression**has recently been suggested as a better alternative shunting procedure that avoids trauma to the glans and distal corpora. This avoids any increased susceptibility to potential future penile prosthesis erosion and a better cosmetic result. Known as penoscrotal decompression, the approach is the same as for a trans-scrotal penile prosthesis placement. The corpora are isolated and opened just enough to allow a pediatric Yankauer suction to enter. It can then be advanced proximally and distally to evacuate debris and corporal thrombus.

The greater the degree of intervention, the lower the chances of eventual recovery of normal erectile function. Placement of a penile prosthesis at the time of the fistula surgery has been suggested for patients who initially present with prolonged priapism of 48 to 72 hours or more, as their chances of recovery of normal erectile function is minimal.

**MRI imaging with contrast enhancement**can help determine the relative health of the cavernosal smooth muscle tissue in cases of prolonged priapism.

**Surgical intervention in priapism aims**to relieve pain and shorten the duration of corporal ischemia, which would otherwise lead to continuing pain, fibrosis, and permanent erectile dysfunction. When a patient with prolonged priapism of 48 hours or longer presents for treatment, it may be prudent to explain that even with optimal care at that point, much damage has likely occurred to the erectile tissue and corpora already, which may not be reversible. In such cases of resistant ischemic priapism and those of 48 hours duration or longer, serious consideration should be given to full corporal dilation with immediate penile prosthesis implantation.

Antithrombotic therapy has been suggested as a possible adjunct to shunting procedures for ischemic priapism. It would theoretically reduce the incidence of shunt thrombosis and recurrent priapism. A small study with 22 patients from a single institution suggested a substantial benefit in reduced priapism recurrence rates in those who had antithrombotic therapy in addition to their shunting procedures (11%) compared to those who only had the shunts (69%).

**Summary of Management of Acute Ischemic Priapism**

- Oral pseudoephedrine

- Penile local anesthetic block

- Aspiration of the corpora

- Intracorporal injections of diluted phenylephrine (100 mcg - 500 mcg/ml) every 5 minutes x 3

- Surgical cavernosal - spongiosum shunt

- Corporal dilation with or without immediate penile prosthesis placement

**Recurrent or "Stuttering" Priapism**shares many treatment goals with ischemic priapism, with acute therapy focused on achieving detumescence and chronic therapy focused on preventing recurrences. Emergency management should focus on acute therapy for erections of 3 to 4 hours or longer with the same treatments utilized as in acute ischemic priapism. Avoidance of alpha-adrenergic receptor blockers, such as phenothiazines, is recommended as well as trazodone and similar medications. Many of these patients may have sickle cell disease, which should be investigated. Many of these patients will report waking up with a prolonged erection with increasing frequency and duration until they develop an ischemic priapism emergency.****should be effective, but there are no studies or reports on their use to date, so they cannot be recommended at this time. Terbutaline is no longer recommended in the treatment of priapism.

Medications for which there is evidence of efficacy in the treatment of stuttering priapism include:

- Baclofen (start at 10 mg TID and gradually increase weekly. Maximum is 90 mg daily. Patients with spinal cord injury or "sleep-related pain erections" only.)

- Casodex (50 mg daily)

- Finasteride/dutasteride (finasteride 5 mg daily, dutasteride 10 mg daily. May slowly reduce dosage in most patients.)

- Gabapentin (300 mg - 600 mg TID)

- Hydroxyurea (sickle cell patients only. See dosage below.)

- Ketoconazole plus prednisone (200 mg TID daily plus prednisone 5 mg for two weeks followed by ketoconazole 200 mg HS for five months.)

- LHRH Agonists (Leuprolide, Goserelin, etc.)

- Phenylephrine (both oral and diluted for intracavernosal injection as needed)

- Pseudoephedrine (30 mg - 60 mg at bedtime with another 30 mg if priapism occurs)

- Sildenafil (50 mg daily)

More details on these therapies can be found in our companion StatPearls review article on "Stuttering Priapism."

**Sickle Cell Disease:**If a priapism patient has sickle cell disease, then aggressive hydration, alkalinization, oxygenation, and pain control are required in addition to the standard treatment of acute episodes of ischemic priapism. Exchange transfusions should be considered to lower the hemoglobin S for cases of acute priapism not responding to alternative therapies. Good results have been reported with automated red blood cell exchange transfusions, which can rapidly reduce the Hb S concentration to 10% or less without iron or fluid overload, but these require specialized equipment and staffing. Emergency treatment would otherwise be the same for non-sickle cell patients with acute priapism. Recurrent priapism is a significant cause of erectile dysfunction in male sickle cell patients due to permanent damage to the corpora cavernosa.

Sickle cell patients with recurrent priapism generally respond well to hydroxyurea prophylaxis and automated exchange transfusions, which should be used when possible. Related symptoms include mental acuity changes, tachycardia, higher respiratory rate, and low oxygen saturation. Some sickle cell patients with frequent recurrences can be taught self-administration of diluted phenylephrine (or a similar alpha agonist medication) injected into the corpora for erections lasting more than 2 hours.

Hydroxyurea was originally designed as an anti-cancer drug. It affects bone marrow causing an increase in fetal hemoglobin while decreasing normal adult hemoglobin production.

When hydroxyurea therapy fails to prevent recurrent priapism in sickle cell patients, another approach uses regularly scheduled transfusions. The goal is to keep the hemoglobin S concentration to less than 50%. This program of regular transfusions should be re-evaluated after 6 to 12 months. It should be abandoned if it has not successfully reduced recurrent priapism episodes. Other treatments for recurrent priapism, such as sildenafil, as listed above, can be used concurrently.

**Non-Ischemic Priapism**

Non-ischemic priapism is generally managed conservatively due to the low probability of penile damage, and thus the initial intervention should be observed with treatment utilizing topical ice packs. Although aspiration can be completed for diagnostic purposes, this procedure generally does not result in complete detumescence. Sympathomimetic intracorporal injections and surgical shunts are ineffective and not recommended in non-ischemic priapism. Supportive care with perineal compression and ice can be reasonably offered.

Many patients elect to avoid surgery due to the inherent risks of erectile dysfunction, and some patients have been reported to maintain their capacity to obtain and maintain an erection despite years of non-ischemic priapism. Spontaneous resolution is reported in up to 62% of cases in published series. Should a surgical procedure be desired, the initial recommended approach is arteriography with selective arterial embolization or direct ligation of the dysfunctional cavernous artery fistula.

**Summary of Current American Urological Association Priapism Treatment Guidelines**

**Ischemic Priapism**

- May start treatment with oral pseudoephedrine.

- Oral therapy is not recommended as the only treatment for ischemic priapism.

- Intracavernous treatment is necessary for patients with an underlying disorder like malignancy or sickle cell disease. At the same time, the primary condition should be treated.

- Aspiration is vital if there is a delay in starting medical treatment. Irrigate with normal saline and aspirate while waiting for sympathomimetics.

- For ischemic priapism, diluted phenylephrine is the recommended agent for intracavernosal injections as it has fewer adverse cardiac effects than alternative drugs.

- The phenylephrine must be diluted before use. Recommended dilution is 100 to 500 mcg/ml.

- Injections can be performed every 5 minutes for up to 3 additional injections. Others have recommended repeat injections up to 60 minutes or a maximum total dosage of 1,000 mcg of phenylephrine.

- During intracavernous injections, monitor the patient's vital signs, including EKG and blood pressure.

- If intracavernous injections fail, consider a surgical shunt. A cavernosa-spongiosum shunt through the glans is preferred as it has the fewest complications.

**Non-Ischemic Priapism**

- Aspiration is only done for diagnosis.

- Non-ischemic or high-flow priapism is relatively rare and comprises <5% of all priapism cases.

- The primary treatment is observation.

- Embolization or surgery can be done if the patient wants these treatments. Patients should be warned about failure rates and complications.

- Selective embolization using gels, clots, coils, and chemicals can be performed.

- Selective embolization is recommended over surgery when an interventional procedure is needed or requested.

- Surgery is the last choice of treatment.