**Natural History**

The natural history and course of these gliomas need to be appreciated so that the proper management is undertaken. Gliomas grow slowly but have the potential to spread into the surrounding tissues, including around the optic nerve, the chiasm, and into the adjacent brain. In most patients, with slow growth, there is stabilization of the vision. In about 40% of patients, however, continued growth may be seen.

**Management**

Treatment is managed by an interdisciplinary team of neuro-ophthalmologists, hematology-oncologists, oculoplastic surgeons, and radiation-oncologists, depending on the case. Management is tailored based upon multiple factors, including symptoms, nature of the tumor, tumor progression, vision and vision change, clinical course, NF1 status, neoplasm genetics, patient age, and patient preference. Observation is the first choice until significant visual deficits or radiographical progression is seen.

The management of gliomas is summarized a follows:

**Optic Nerve Glioma**

- If stable, simply observe clinically and radiologically

- In the presence of vision loss and severe proptosis, surgery may be considered

- If there is posterior progression of the tumor with the risk of invasion of the chiasm or surrounding tissues, surgical resection can be undertaken

**Optic Chiasm Glioma**

- If stable, observe with sequential radiological assessment

- If there is progression in patients of less than 10 years of age, consider chemotherapy.

- If there is progression in patients more than 10 years of age, combine chemotherapy and radiotherapy.

**Midbrain Glioma**

- If stable in patients for more than 10 years, consider chemotherapy and radiotherapy

- If stable in patients less than 10 years, consider chemotherapy

- If there is progression, a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy is considered.

**Observation**

In 80% of patients, there is an initial phase of visual deterioration followed by stabilization. However, stable vision does not always equate with a stable tumor, as tumor progression may be seen even in these patients. Long-term survival has shown a good prognosis when patients are followed conservatively with no intervention.

**Surgery**

Whereas surgical resection was considered the treatment of choice until recently, it is now recognized that surgery should be limited to obtaining a biopsy for diagnostic purposes, or to resect tumors when they cause excessive proptosis and pain or when they extend posteriorly, threatening involvement of the optic chiasm. It is now known that optic nerve glioma will rarely progress to the chiasm or damage the contralateral fibers.

**Radiotherapy**

Radiotherapy has continued to be controversial. Although initial studies showed no benefit on survival or vision preservation, more recently, it has been shown that stabilization of vision and more limited progression of the tumor may be achieved.

**Chemotherapy**

In most cases, chemotherapy with vincristine/carboplatin is considered first-line treatment. It has about a 70% progression-free survival (PFS) and has no increased risk of secondary malignancy or treatment-related mortality. The primary adverse event is hypersensitivity reactions to carboplatin, seen in 40% of patients. Other chemotherapy regimens include Thioguanine/procarbazine/CCNU/vincristine (TPCV) and cisplatin/etoposide, and temozolomide. These have similar PFS but have an increased risk of secondary leukemia and should, therefore, be avoided in patients with NF1.

Bevacizumab, a VEGF inhibitor, has also been shown to be effective in stopping or reversing the growth of OPG. It has been reportedly used as both monotherapy and combined therapy with vinblastine or irinotecan. Hwang et al. reported 14 cases of refractory OPG that all remained stable or regressed during treatment. However, 4 of those patients had tumor progression after discontinuation of therapy. The most common adverse events involved gastrointestinal toxicity, with most resolving with treatment cessation.

Recently, gene-targeted therapy has become increasingly common. This has increased the utility of tumor biopsy. The most common genetic aberration is a BRAF-KIAA1549 fusion. This activates the MEK/MAPK/ERK pathway causing proliferation, survival, and tumorigenesis. MEK inhibitors target this pathway and report a 69% 2-year PFS for refractory OPG.

**Subtypes of Gliomas**

**1. Gliomas confined to the optic nerve**

When these tumors, which are confined to the optic nerve, are treated conservatively or incompletely resected, recurrence or progression is seen in 17%.

**2. Gliomas that extend to the chiasm**

If there is no invasion of the adjacent third ventricle or the hypothalamus, these tumors behave like those confined to the orbital optic nerve. Left untreated, these chiasmal gliomas have a mortality of 17% over 10 years. If the tumor extends into the surrounding tissues (hypothalamus or third ventricle), then mortality rises. If the tumor is partially resected from the chiasm, there is a high rate of recurrence or progression (64%). Untreated, the visual prognosis is very good, with 80% remaining stable. It is thought that fractionated radiation may slow the growth of tumor in the chiasm without the risk of loss of vision that surgery entails. Overall, when all modalities of treatment are considered, chiasmal gliomas have a mortality of 22%, recurrence or progression of tumor 43%, and visual stabilization in 68%.

**3. Gliomas that extend to the chiasm and invade the hypothalamus**

The mortality rate in patients where the chiasmal tumor extends into the hypothalamus or third ventricle is more than 50% over 15 years. Mortality may be reduced with radiotherapy and chemotherapy, but recurrence or progression is still seen in 52% of cases.