Except for a dental emergency, a surgeon must medically optimize patients requiring the removal of unerupted or impacted teeth. The surgeon must assess each tooth separately when evaluating impacted teeth for extraction. An extraction may not be indicated in cases where pathology is not to blame for the impaction.

Patients with uncontrolled epilepsy are at an increased risk of aspiration and self-harm, including potential seizure activity during dental extraction.

Further evaluations may be necessary for patients with cardiovascular diseases (CVD) such as ischemic heart disease, dysrhythmias, infective endocarditis (IE), uncontrolled hypertension, or severe coronary artery disease before extraction.

Patients with severe renal impairment or liver disease may be challenging to manage due to the increased risk of bleeding and infection.

Immunocompromised patients, like organ transplant recipients, are at higher risk of developing systemic infections after invasive dental procedures. There is no clear evidence of the effectiveness of antibiotic prophylaxis with transplant patients. However, these patients still need thorough assessment and appropriate advice.

Patients with bleeding disorders or anticoagulant (AC) therapy are at increased risk of bleeding with a dental extraction. Studies have suggested not holding AC for invasive dental procedures as the risk of not taking AC outweighs the benefit of controlling bleeding from extraction. Local hemostatic measures following dental extractions are suggested for patients with a bleeding disorder or those receiving AC therapy. The international normalized ratio (INR) measures the patient's bleeding tendency and requires monitoring for those taking warfarin. Generally, a patient with INR below 4.0 is suitable for extractions in an outpatient surgical setting.

Patients with a history of radiation therapy are at an increased risk of developing osteoradionecrosis (ORN) after extraction. The ORN presents with an area of non-healing bone exposed to the oral cavity.

Antiresorptive agents such as bisphosphonates may be prescribed for osteoporosis, multiple myeloma, Paget disease of bone, hypercalcemia of malignancy, and many more.

Like radiation therapy, a thorough examination and necessary prophylactic treatment should be done before administering an antiresorptive agent. Avoid elective extraction or other dental surgical procedures if a patient is already on an antiresorptive agent and requires dental treatment. The surgeon must do a thorough risk assessment if extraction is inevitable. Higher risk factors for developing MRONJ include concurrent steroid use, advanced age, and use of antiresorptive agents for over five years.

Tooth proximity to vital structures is another limitation to the extraction of unerupted teeth. Proximity to the inferior alveolar nerve (IAN) is often related to impacted mandibular third molars. The Roods criteria demonstrate the radiographic prediction of IAN injury during mandibular third molar extractions.

Panoramic radiographs and CBCT can assist the surgeon in visualizing the relationship between the IAN and the mandibular third molar. With a higher risk of IAN damage, a coronectomy may be indicated as an alternative surgical technique to prevent nerve damage.

Unerupted maxillary teeth can cause oroantral communication (OAC) with proximity to antral sinuses. Radiographic images are required for a proper evaluation of impacted tooth-sinus proximity.