Initial symptom management with simple analgesics, oral or intravenous hydration, and avoidance of the upright position may often be effective. PDPH symptoms can resolve spontaneously within one to two weeks in over two-thirds of patients. In many cases, symptoms are severe and persistent and require intervention.

There is some evidence to support the use of oral or intravenous caffeine (300 mg to 500 mg in one L of intravenous fluid over one hour) for PDPH, although effects may be transient with high failure and recurrence rates.

Specific treatment of the dural leak may not be required in all cases since spontaneous resolution typically occurs within days to weeks. However, prolonged symptoms and complications have been reported when treatment is not pursued.

The idea of using blood to patch a hole in the dura was described in 1960 by Dr. James Gorley, a surgeon from Pennsylvania.  He described placing small volumes of blood outside the dura to treat PDPH, with very good results.  This later became the concept for the epidural blood patch.

Definitive treatment with an epidural blood patch is recommended when symptoms persist after conservative treatment. For post partum mothers recovering from childbirth and with a high degree of responsibility for caring for their child, a PDPH can be quite disabling.  Many physicians will treat early with an epidural blood patch in these situations.  For this procedure, 10 ml to 30 ml of autologous venous blood is injected by an anesthesiologist into the epidural space at the level of the prior procedure.  This is thought to create a "patch" over the dural puncture and decrease CSF leak, or simply increase the intracranial pressure.  Success rates are higher than 75% to 90%, especially if repeated but can rarely be complicated by back pain, meningeal irritation, radiculopathy, bulbar neuropathy, meningeal infection, hematoma or cauda equina syndrome.

A two to three-day continuous epidural saline infusion may be less effective and have fewer adverse effects than blood patch, but require an indwelling epidural catheter, bedrest, and hospitalization.  This is rarely done.

Multiple experimental treatments have been suggested, including oral or parenteral steroids, intramuscular adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), oral gabapentin, methylxanthines (through vasoconstriction and decreased central venous volume), such as IV aminophylline (5 mg/kg to 6 mg/kg over 20 min) or oral theophylline (300 mg every six to eight hours), and sumatriptan or other triptans. Several cases have reported the successful use of local injection of cyanoacrylate adhesive or fibrin glue for refractory cases.  Due to high success rates and low complication rates of the epidural blood patch, it remains the gold standard of therapy for PDPH.

Frovatriptan use for 5 days before LP seems to reduce the incidence of post-LP headaches in some studies. sumatriptan did not show benefit when used for just 1 day before the LP.