Eye development occurs in the human embryo from approximately the third week through the tenth week of gestation. Ocular tissues are of mesodermal and ectodermal origin. The retina, ciliary body, optic nerves, and iris are derived from neuroepithelium. The lens, eyelid, and corneal epithelium are formed from surface ectoderm. The sclera, blood vessels, ocular muscles, vitreous, and corneal endothelium and stroma, develop from the extracellular mesenchyme. The homeobox gene Pax6 is vital to the initiation of eye development, which begins with evagination of the optic grooves. During the fourth week of pregnancy, upon neural tube closure, the optic grooves are transformed into optic vesicles, which are outgrowings of the brain on either side of the forebrain. The optic vesicles make contact with the surface ectoderm which induces changes in the ectoderm necessary for further development. The optic vesicles develop into the optic cup, the inner layer of which forms the retinal pigment epithelium, with the retina being formed by the outer layer. The iris and ciliary body develop from the middle part of the optic cup. As the optic cup invaginates, the lens placode forms through the thickening of the ectoderm and eventually forms the lens vesicle upon separation from the ectoderm.

The choroid fissure is a space at the inferior portion of the optic vesicle that accommodates the passage of blood vessels to the eye. Wingless-related integration site (Wnt) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) are important protein regulators of neuroectoderm development during early morphogenesis. Bone morphogenic proteins (BMP) are heavily involved in the regulation of optic cup development. Regulation of ocular embryogenesis is vital to proper development; Sonic hedgehog reduces Pax6 expression, and retinoic acid (a vitamin A derivative) plays an important role in paracrine signaling.