# Continuing Education Activity

Transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy is a rare but severe cause of restrictive cardiomyopathy, caused by the accumulation of transthyretin fibrils in the myocardium. It can present with new or worsening heart failure or new conduction system disease. Due to the lack of knowledge and efficient diagnostic modalities, this disease was often missed in clinical settings. However, with the advent of contemporary cardiac imaging techniques and effective therapeutic options, early diagnosis and treatment are possible. This activity reviews the pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment of Transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the epidemiology of transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy.
. 

- Explain the common cardiac and non-cardiac findings associated with transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy.
- Describe the typical imaging findings associated with transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy.
- Outline the available treatment options for transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy.

# Introduction

Transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy (ATTR-CM) is one of the types of systemic amyloidosis in which misfolded transthyretin (TTR) protein gets deposited in the myocardium. Another pertinent etiology of cardiac amyloidosis is due to the deposition of immunoglobulin light-chain (AL) aggregates. Several other amyloidogenic proteins may get deposited in various organs and tissues but rarely involve the myocardium.

Transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR) is a systemic disease. Due to amyloid deposition in extracardiac tissues, patients often have associated extracardiac signs and symptoms. However, isolated cardiac involvement has been reported as well.

With improving bone avid radiotracer scintigraphy technology and the advent of new therapeutic options, diagnosis and treatment of ATTR-CM have become possible. As diagnostic capabilities are getting better, studies have shown a higher prevalence of ATTR-CM in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction than previously perceived.

# Etiology

Transthyretin (previously known as prealbumin) is a normal circulating protein that functions as a carrier protein for retinol (vitamin A) and thyroxine. It is primarily synthesized by the liver (>95%). Additionally, in small amounts, it is also produced in the choroid plexus and retinal epithelium.

Chromosome 18 carries the gene for TTR protein. Therefore, a mutation in the gene coding for TTR can cause structural changes in TTR, causing it to misfold. This type of ATTR is referred to as hereditary transthyretin amyloid (hATTR). In addition, it has been observed that the normal aging process can render ATTR tetramer prone to misfolding, even when the genetic sequence of the TTR is expected.

Myocardial deposition of misfolded TTR protein in both types of ATTR (hATTR and wATTR) causes a clinical phenotype of transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy (ATTR-CM). However, emerging clinical data have shown that wATTR-CM is more common than hATTR.

# Epidemiology

The prevalence data of ATTR-CM is limited and not well characterized.

wATTR-CM is the more common type of ATTR-CM. It is primarily seen in older patients and has a male predominance.

Lower prevalence of wATTR in females may partly be understood by the hypothesized cardioprotective effect of estrogen and possible underdiagnosis due to smaller heart size in females not meeting the screening threshold for ATTR-CM. Compared to wATTR, hATTR is more equally distributed among males and females. However, clinical expression is still more common in males.

TTR gene is present on chromosome 18. hATTR follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. However, disease penetrance is more complicated and less understood. The age of onset of clinical disease in hATTR-CM varies widely and depends on the type of mutation. More than 100 different TTR mutations have been identified. These mutations have varied geographical distribution. The most common mutation in the USA is Val122lle. It is seen in approximately 3 to 4% of African Americans, with 1.5 million carriers. The most common mutation in the rest of the world is Val30Met.

# Pathophysiology

Misfolded TTR protein forms insoluble fibers. In the heart, they occupy interstitial spaces in the myocardium, making it stiff and rigid. TTR deposition causes further myocardial fibrosis and eventually affects its mechanical function. Due to TTR deposition, the myocardium appears thickened and hypertrophied on cardiac imaging. Compromise in ventricular compliance initially causes diastolic dysfunction. In advanced stages, myocardial dysfunction can result in globally reduced systolic dysfunction.

Diastolic dysfunction causes an increase in left ventricular end-diastolic pressure and left atrial pressures.  Persistently increased left atrial pressures and left atrial dilatation increased the likelihood of developing atrial arrhythmias in these patients. Myocardial infiltration often affects the electrical conduction system as well.

The autonomic and peripheral nervous systems are common extra-cardiac sites for misfolded TTR protein deposition. It is seen that hATTR affects the nervous system more commonly, whereas cardiomyopathy is more commonly seen with wATTR-CM.

# Histopathology

Endomyocardial biopsy with congo red staining remains the gold standard to diagnose ATTR-CM.

With the advent of cardiac technetium pyrophosphate scan and cardiac MRI, the need for tissue diagnosis has limited clinical significance.

# History and Physical

ATTR-CM typically presents with clinical signs and symptoms of progressive congestive heart failure. In addition, they often have cardiac arrhythmia and conduction system disease, which may occur years before the development of heart failure.

hATTR can have a variable presentation. It can present as primary cardiomyopathy or primary autonomic or peripheral neuropathy. Not uncommonly, it can present mixed clinical features of both cardiomyopathy and neuropathy.

**Congestive Heart Failure**

ATTR-CM should be suspected in old patients with recurrent HF exacerbations irrespective of their ejection fraction status. Often they will have fatigue, poor exercise tolerance, shortness of breath with the New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class II to IV. In addition, it is seen that they have significant right ventricular involvement, causing peripheral congestive symptoms like elevated jugular venous pressure, lower extremity edema, hepatic congestion, and ascites. Often at advanced stages, cardiorenal syndrome ensues. Interestingly, these patients often develop intolerance to beta-blockers and angiotensin convertase enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) which they might have tolerated previously.

**Cardiac Arrhythmias**

Atrial fibrillation is the most common cardiac arrhythmia seen in ATTR-CM. It is present in 40 to 60% of patients at the time of diagnosis. Eventually, all patients develop atrial fibrillation during the disease. When present, it is usually of persistent type.

**Conduction System Disease**

Deposition of TTR amyloid in interstitial space disrupts the normal conduction system of the heart. Patients may present with varying degrees of heart block due to the involvement of atrioventricular (AV) nodal and infra AV nodal conduction. Due to associated conduction system disease, atrial fibrillation usually presents with a slow or controlled ventricular response. Patients will give a history of lightheadedness, presyncope, and unexplained falls. Elevated jugular venous distension with cannon A wave can be seen when the patient is in complete heart block due to AV dissociation. Eventually, one out of every three patients with wATTR-CM patients ends up requiring permanent pacemaker (PPM) implantation.

**Extracardiac Manifestations**

Extracardiac TTR amyloid deposition can cause nerve entrapment in close spaces. Bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) and lumbar spinal stenosis are commonly seen with the ATTR disease process.

Clinical suspicion for ATTR-CM should be heightened, especially when cardiac and extracardiac findings are seen simultaneously.

# Evaluation

**Electrocardiogram (ECG)**

Electrocardiogram (ECG) of ATTR-CM is described to have low voltage ECG patterns along with poor R wave progression across the precordial leads.

However, these ECG findings are not acceptably sensitive.

**Echocardiogram**

Myocardial infiltration of ATTR causes concentric bi-ventricular hypertrophy. A septal wall thickness of >12 mm should heighten clinical suspicion but is not diagnostic.

Strain echocardiography has emerged as a practical tool in the early detection of cardiac amyloidosis. "Apical sparing" with progressive worsening of longitudinal strain when moving to midventricular and basal segment is characteristic of cardiac amyloidosis. It gives an appearance of a "bulls-eye pattern," or sometimes referred to as "cherry on top" in the strain imaging. The apical to basal strain ratio and apical to mid-ventricular plus basal strain have shown good diagnostic accuracy.

Echocardiographic parameters can help identify patients with cardiac amyloidosis but cannot be used to differentiate between hATTR, wATTR, or AL type.

**Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging (CMR)**

Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) has considerable utility as both a screening tool and a tool to track treatment response.

It is seen that T1 signals are amplified in cardiac amyloidosis, similar to post-contrast extracellular volume fraction (ECV). CMR with parametric imaging can identify native (non-contrast) myocardial T1 signal and ECV. Parametric imaging is believed to be a more sensitive and reliable measure of amyloid burden, and therefore can be used for treatment tracking.

CMR cannot reliably differentiate between hATTR, wATTR, or AL type.

**Nuclear Imaging**

Nuclear imaging using avid bone radiotracers is the sole imaging modality available that can accurately diagnose ATTR-CM without the need for biopsy. There are majorly three types of bone avid radiotracers that are available. Most commonly used is technetium pyrophosphate (TC-PYP) (available in the USA). Other available radiotracers are Tc-DPD and Tc-HMDP (available in Europe).

During the scan, TC-PYP is injected intravenously. Once in circulation, it selectively binds to osseous tissue and ATTR fibrils.

TC-PYP scan offers few advantages over other imaging modalities. TC-PYP scan can detect ATTR deposition in the myocardium much earlier than the development of structural and conduction system changes. TC-PYP scan can diagnose ATTR-CM with 100% specificity without the need for biopsy when grade 2 or 3 update is present, and there are no monoclonal proteins on urine and serum testing.

The specificity of the TC-PYP scan to differentiate ATTR from AL does reduce when monoclonal proteins are present. 40 to 50% of patients with ATTR were found to have coexisting unrelated monoclonal gammopathy.

**Genetic Testing**

Genetic testing may be obtained once the diagnosis of ATTR-CM is confirmed (either with nuclear imaging or with cardiac biopsy). Genetic testing will help to differentiate hATTR-CM from wATTR-CM. In addition, differentiating between hATTR-CM from Wt-ATTR-CM might be needed to accommodate disease-specific treatment.

# Treatment / Management

**Supportive Treatment of Cardiac Involvement**

**Management of Heart Failure**

Dietary sodium restriction and diuretic use are essential to maintain euvolemia in ATTR-CM patients. Achieving and maintaining euvolemia is often challenging in these patients due to the small LV cavity and autonomic dysfunction. Loop diuretics with higher oral bioavailability (e.g., torsemide and bumetanide) are often preferred in combination with aldosterone receptor blockers. Beta-blockers and ACE, ARBs, or angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitors (ARNi) therapies are usually not well tolerated because of ensuing hypotension due to the reasons mentioned above. With the progression of ATTR-CM and reduction of LV cavity size, stroke volume and cardiac output reduce, resulting in a reduction in renal perfusion, causing the cardio-renal syndrome.

**Management of Arrhythmias**

ATTR-CM patients have a narrow scope of heart rate variability. Extreme tachycardia and bradycardia are poorly tolerated due to the small LV cavity, high-grade diastolic dysfunction, and low stroke volume. Similarly, atrial contraction (often called "atrial kick") is crucial in ventricular filling. Therefore rhythm control is the preferred strategy for managing atrial fibrillation. Rhythm control can be achieved by antiarrhythmics or by catheter ablation. Amiodarone is the preferred agent when using antiarrhythmics due to its better safety profile when dealing with cardiomyopathy and some clinical data demonstrating its safety in ATTR-CM.

A significant percentage of ATTR-CM patients develop conduction system disease, eventually requiring permanent pacemaker support.

**Therapies Targeting Transthyretin**

At present, three major pharmacological strategies are being studied for specifically targeting ATTR-CM.

Patisiran

Inotersen

Tafamidis

Diflusinal

Doxycycline and tauroursodeoxycholic acid (used in combination)

The first two strategies described in the table above have a few pharmacological agents approved for clinical use by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The third strategy of using doxycycline with tauroursodeoxycholic acid is still being evaluated in clinical trials.

Patisiran (Onpattro)

&

Inotersen (Tegsedi)

- Not presently FDA approved for use in ATTR-CM.

- FDA approved for hATTR polyneuropathy (with or without cardiomyopathy)

Tafamidis (Vyndamax)

&

Tafamidis meglumine (Vyndaqel)

**Tafamidis**

Tafamidis and tafamidis meglumine got FDA approval for treatment of ATTR-CM in May 2019.  Tafamidis selectively bind to the thyroxine-binding sites of TTR. It stabilized the tetrameric form and slowed dissociating into monomers, reducing amyloid formation.

Tafamidis has demonstrated a reduction in all-cause mortality and cardiovascular hospitalization in both hATTR-CM and wATTR-CM patients with heart failure of NYHA functional Classes I and II. Its treatment has been shown to reduce the decline in functional capacity (six-minute walk test) and quality of life (Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire). Functional improvement was seen in approximately 6 months, and mortality reduction took nearly two years.

Tafamidis has demonstrated a reduction in all-cause mortality and cardiovascular hospitalization in both hATTR-CM and wATTR-CM patients with heart failure of NYHA functional Classes I and II. In addition, its treatment has been shown to reduce the decline in functional capacity (six-minute walk test) and quality of life (Kansas city cardiomyopathy questionnaire). In approximately six months, functional improvement was seen, and mortality reduction took nearly two years.

FDA-approved dose for tafamidis is 61 mg orally once daily, and for tafamidis, meglumine is 80mg orally once daily.

Tafamidis is well tolerated. In the ATTR-ACT trial, 441 patients with ATTR-CM were randomly assigned tafamidis 80mg, 20mg, and placebo in a 2:1:2 ratio. Patients were followed for 30 months. The rate of adverse events was similar in the treatment and placebo groups.

**Organ Transplantation**

A liver transplant can remove mutant TTR from circulation. It has previously been used to treat hATTR but cannot be used for wATTR.

# Differential Diagnosis

Light chain amyloid (AL) cardiomyopathy

Other causes of infiltrative cardiomyopathy

- Cardiac sarcoidosis

- Cardiac hemochromatosis

- Fabry's disease

- Mucopolysaccharidoses

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

A Gene-editing approach using CRISPR-associated protein 9 is under development for treating hATTR. This approach hypothesizes that target DNA can be permanently modified. Thus, silencing mutated TTR permanently may treat hATTR.

PRX-004 is being studied to treat ATTR amyloidosis. It is hypothesized to work by removing ATTR deposits from the myocardium.

# Staging

Based on the threshold of troponin T ( >0.05 ng/ml) and Nt-proBNP (>3,000 pg/ml), Grogan et al. have described the Mayo Clinic wATTR-CM staging system.

# Prognosis

Data suggest that survival in hATTR-CM is worse when compared to wATTR-CM. Mean survival in hATTR-CM (Val122lle) is approximately 2.5 years. hATTR patients with isolated polyneuropathy with no heart involvement have a better prognosis with a mean survival of 8 to 10 years.

The median survival in wATTR is approximately 3.5 years, and it can further be risk-stratified based on the Mayo Clinic wATTR-CM staging system. Stage I: 66 months; Stage II: 42 months; Stage III: 20 months.

The U.K. National amyloidosis center studied both hATTR and wATTR cohorts and used Nt-proBNP (>3000 pg/dl) and estimated glomerular filtration rate (<45 ml/min/1.73m^2). They reported mean survival in hATTR-CM (Val122lle) of 29 months and wATTR of 49 months. Interestingly, echocardiographic findings, including left ventricular mass, wall thickness, and degree of diastolic dysfunction, were not found to be an independent predictor of survival.

Technitium pyrophosphate scan can be used for prognosticating ATTR-CM as well. A heart to the contralateral chest uptake ratio of 1.6 or greater has poorer 5-year outcomes.

# Complications

If untreated, ATTR-CM can cause progressive worsening heart failure, arrhythmias, and conduction system diseases, which can cause sudden cardiac death due to fatal arrhythmias or complete heart block. In addition, the functional capacity and the quality of life deteriorates exponentially with every heart failure exacerbation and subsequent hospitalization.

Tafamidis, which is used for the treatment of ATTR-CM, is well tolerated. However, in clinical trials, the rate of adverse events was similar in tafamidis and placebo groups.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

**What is Transthyretin Amyloid Cardiomyopathy (ATTR-CM)?**

Transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy is caused by the deposition of an abnormally folded protein called transthyretin. Transthyretin is a naturally occurring protein in the human body that helps transport the thyroid hormone in the bloodstream.

This abnormally folded transthyretin protein can get deposited in different organs and tissues in the body, including nerves, heart, kidney, and gastrointestinal tract.  Abnormal buildup of transthyretin amyloid protein in heart muscle stiffens it, eventually developing congestive heart failure.

**Are There Different Types of ATTR-CM?**

There are two types of ATTR-CM: Hereditary (hATTR-CM) and wild type (wATTR-CM).  hATTR-CM is a genetic disease caused by a genetic mutation in the transthyretin gene. wATTR-CM is an aging disease where normal transthyretin protein becomes structurally unstable and gets deposited in the heart. hATTR-CM can occur in younger age (50s to 60s), whereas wATTR usually occurs in older age (late 70s to 80s).

**What Are Some Common Clinical Symptoms of ATTR-CM?**

Patients may develop heart failure, which can present as reduced exercise capacity, shortness of breath, and swelling in the legs. Patients may have a recurrent exacerbation of shortness of breath and difficulty breathing requiring frequent emergency room and hospitalization. Atrial fibrillation is often seen. Patients often have lightheadedness, dizziness, and loss of consciousness due to slow heart rate and brief heartbeat pauses. This may be due to slow heart rate and transient pauses of the heartbeat. Patients often report intolerance (low blood pressure, postural hypotension) to traditional medications used for heart failure management, including beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers.

**Is There Any Treatment Available for ATTR-CM?**

Few new drugs and treatment strategies have emerged in recent years, and many are still under clinical review. However, in  2019, the US FDA has approved Tafamidis for clinical use in ATTR-CM. Tafamidis is an oral medication that is used in once a day formulation. Tafamidis can prevent further disease progression but unfortunately cannot reverse the disease process. Therefore early identification and treatment of ATTR-CM are advised.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

ATTR-CM is emerging as an essential clinical entity in the realm of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Real-world clinical data have demonstrated an increased prevalence of ATTR-CM than what was previously perceived. Which improving novel non-invasive imaging techniques, clinicians can now facilitate early diagnosis of ATTR-CM. With the advent of effective therapeutic options for ATTR-CM, it is now possible to improved outcomes in these patients. However, as these therapies cannot reverse the disease process and can only prevent further progression, early identification is paramount for them to be most effective.

Primary care physicians and general cardiologists should understand the disease process and pathophysiology of ATTR-CM. They should look for clinical cues of ATTR-CM and should screen patients who fit the clinical picture. Novel non-invasive cardiac imaging like cardiac MRI and bone avid scintigraphy may have an essential role in diagnosing ATTR-CM. Echocardiogram with strain imaging has also emerged as an efficient screening tool. Radiologists and cardiologists specializing in cardiac imaging should get more familiar with imaging patterns and findings of ATTR-CM.