Providers should advise patients with pinguecula to safeguard their eyes from ultraviolet light, wind, and dust.

Surgical excision is considered only for cosmetic reasons. Surgical excision of the pinguecula is possible under topical anesthesia. Following the excision, the bare sclera can be closed with a conjunctival autograft. Topical antibiotic-steroid eye drops are prescribed during the post-operative period. It is a final resort either in cases of chronic persistent irritation when the treatment, as mentioned above, has failed, and when interference with contact lens wear occurs. Excision should be followed by histological evaluation; this is to exclude malignancy when the pinguecula is atypical in either location or appearance.

Argon laser photocoagulation is an alternative to standard surgical excision for pinguecula. It is a safe method for removing a pinguecula for cosmetic purposes. It provides control of the extent and depth of removal of tissue. Thus conjunctival defects and complications are reduced. Argon laser photocoagulation involves the use of argon green laser (wavelength 514 nm). A topical anesthetic drop is instilled into the conjunctival sac before the procedure. High power laser is used for thick pinguecula, whereas low power laser is appropriate for thinner pinguecula. Usually contiguous, non-overlapping laser spots of 200 microns are used (laser duration 100 milliseconds (ms), power 300 to 360 mW, argon green laser).

Following argon laser photocoagulation, the conjunctival defects are allowed to re-epithelialize. During the post-operative period, patients should receive a topical antibiotic steroid eye drop.

There were no significant differences between surgical excision and argon laser photocoagulation in cosmetic outcomes. Surgical excision of symptomatic pinguecula with conjunctival autograft with fibrin glue may improve cosmesis. It also improved dry eye symptoms.****