To fully understand the implication of physiologic disturbance of osteoblasts in various disease states, one must have a perfunctory understanding of bone and the often-overlooked nuances of this dynamic skeletal organ.

**Overview of Osseous Components**

Bone (osseous tissue)

- Hard, dense connective tissue that gives structural support to the body

Cortical (compact) bone

- Dense, outer cortex that supports and protects, the main store of calcium, accounts for 80% of bone mass, formed of osteons.

Cancellous (trabecular) bone

- Porous, highly vascular "spongy" internal tissue with a high surface area to volume ratio. Comprised of trabeculae. 20% bone mass, almost 10x the surface area of cortical bone. Red and yellow bone marrow fills in space between pores

Periosteum

- Covers the external surface of cortical bone and is a dense fibrous sheath containing osteoprogenitor cells. An exception is over articular surfaces, where articular cartilage is found. Periosteal cells are capable of becoming osteoblasts

Endosteum

- Covers innermost cortical bone and is often only one cell thick. The endosteum lines the medullary cavity. This cell layer also contains osteoprogenitor cells that can differentiate into osteoblasts

Osteon (Haversian System)

- The fundamental anatomical and functional unit of cortical bone; cylindrically arranged and typically parallel to the long axis. Area of remodeling in cortical bone

- Consists of concentric lamellae surrounding a central Haversian canal, which permit blood vessels and nerves to travel within and supply the osteon

- Volkmann's canals are perpendicular perforating channels in lamellar bone that permit blood vessels and nerves to reach the Haversian canal from the periosteal and endosteal surface; these also interconnect the osteon canals

Interstitial lamellae

- Remnants of partially resorbed osteons from previous remodeling

Trabecula

- The main anatomical and functional unit of cancellous bone. Aligned towards mechanical load distribution. Bone marrow is contained within the porosities created by the trabeculae

Bone Marrow

- Colloquially divided into "red" bone marrow (Medulla ossium rubra): active myeloid tissue where hemopoietic stem cells produce red blood cells; and "yellow" bone marrow (Medulla ossium flava): hematopoietically inactive, mesenchymal stem cells (stroma) that accumulate lipids

- As individuals age, the red marrow becomes yellow as the fat concentration increases. Yellow marrow can revert to red under physiologic stress requiring hemopoiesis.

**Physiology of Remodeling**

Remodeling is a process orchestrated by bone multicellular units (BMUs), a term for aggregates of osteoblasts and osteoclasts that function sequentially to remodel bone. Estimates are that 1 million BMUs are active at any time. BMUs consist of a cutting cone of osteoclasts that resorb bone, and osteoblasts that subsequently fill in the resorption area. The process predominately divides into four phases: activation, resorption, reversal, and formation.

- Activation recruits osteoclasts

- Resorption osteoclasts "catabolize" or resorb bone

- In the reversal stage, osteoclasts undergo apoptosis and osteoblasts are recruited

- Osteoblasts then secrete a matrix in the Formation stage that mineralizes

**Location of Remodeling**

Eighty percent of estimated bone remodeling activity has been demonstrated on cancellous bone surfaces. Cortical bone demonstrates intracortical remodeling in addition to remodeling on the periosteal and endocortical surfaces.

**Signaling**

While not completely understood, bone and bone-forming cells exhibit many complex signaling mechanisms.

MSCs initially differentiate into osteoprogenitor cells, triggered by core-binding factor alpha-1 (CBFA1) or runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2).

Mature osteoblasts also produce receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand (RANKL), osteoprotegerin (OPG), and macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) which regulate further osteoblast differentiation into osteoclasts.

Several signaling pathways that are imperative to maintaining a balance between osteoblast and osteoclasts include WNT, BMP, PTH/PTHrP, Notch, and Hedgehog.

Furthermore, growth factors, and anabolic hormones (including fibroblast growth factor, insulin-like growth factor, interleukin-6, parathyroid hormone, estrogen, and calcitonin) exhibit anti-apoptotic effects on osteoblasts. Tumor necrosis factor, glucocorticoids, and bone morphogenic protein 2 induce apoptosis in osteoblasts.

**WNT/β-Catenin (Canonical WNT) Pathway**

The cell-membrane Frizzled receptor and co-receptor low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5) are inactive in the absence of Wnt ligands. Without Wnt, β-catenin is phosphorylated by glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3), signaling it for proteolysis by ubiquitin-dependent proteases.

The Wnt pathway is activated when Wnt binds Frizzled and LRP5. GSK-3 downregulates. Inactivation of GSK-3 increases the accumulation of intracellular β-catenin. β-catenin subsequently translocates to the nucleus and induces gene transcription that results in an increase in bone mass through a variety of different mechanisms.; this includes stem cell renewal, preosteoblast replication, osteoblastogenesis, and inhibiting osteoblast apoptosis. Other secreted inhibitors, such as Dickkopf (Dkk) and Sclerostin (SOST), also can regulate signaling through the Wnt/Frizzled/LRP5 interaction.

Sclerostin, for example, is secreted from terminally differentiated osteoblasts (osteocytes) embedded within the newly formed bone matrix. Sclerostin binds to and inhibits LRP5 from binding to frizzled receptors. This process activates the Wnt pathway and increases bone production.

**Parathyroid Hormone (PTH) & Parathyroid Hormone Related Peptide (PTHrP) Pathways**

PTH and PTHrP are distinct polypeptides that serve separate biological functions, though functioning through a common receptor -the family B G-protein-coupled-receptor parathyroid hormone-1 receptor (PTH1R). PTH targets osteoblasts and renal tubular cells while PTHrP targets chondrocytes, osteoblasts, placental cells, skin, hair follicles, brain, and teeth. Notably, PTH functions to maintain calcium and phosphate homeostasis while PTHrP is involved in the development of the placenta, fetus, and bone.

PTH stimulates both resorption and formation of bone depending on the temporality of its exposure. Continuous elevation results in resorption, while intermittent elevation leads to osteoblast formation. Both effects appear to result from the modulation of PTH1R. Resorption may result from increased RANKL synthesis and inhibiting OPG mRNA expression, while the PTH induced mechanism for bone formation has not been completely elucidated.

There have been suggestions that intermittent elevation of PTH results in the release of TGF-B from resorbing bone that, in the absence of stimulation, serves to recruit osteogenic progenitors. PTH is also an upstream regulator of Runx2. The cell cycle effect of PTH on Runx2 appears to be mediated through MAP kinase ERK1/2 phosphorylation, activation of CREB/fos with JunD, resulting in the expression of IL-11 and suppression of Dkk as well as cyclin D1 activity to increase bone formation.

PTH stimulates osteoblasts to produce angiopoietin 1, a vascular growth factor as well as WNT co-receptor LRP6 and activates WNT signaling.

Sodium-Hydrogen exchanger regulatory factor (NHERF) 1 also has been implicated in modulating PTH signaling.