**Vasomotor Symptoms**

The severity of symptoms, presence of other coexistent medical problems, other menopausal symptoms, age, and the personal choice of the patient should guide the management plan.

- **Mild hot flashes**-Behavioral measures are usually effective in mild symptoms. This includes lowering room temperature, using fans, heat-friendly clothing, dress in layers, and avoiding triggers (stress, spicy foods).

- **Moderate to severe hot flashes-**Most patients will need pharmacologic therapy apart for behavioral and lifestyle changes. This includes hormonal and nonhormonal treatments. Hormonal therapy is the treatment of choice in women with no contraindications.

**Hormonal Therapy**

Women younger than 60 years or within ten years of menopause are candidates for hormone therapy as the risk of the adverse effect is minimal in this group. Women with an intact uterus need combination therapy with both estrogen and progestin to protect against uterine cancer, while those who have undergone hysterectomy can receive estrogen only. Transdermal therapy is the treatment of choice in women with diabetes, hypertriglyceridemia, and migraine without aura, those with increased risk for venous thrombosis, gallbladder disease, and liver disease. Studies have reported a decrease in the frequency of hot flashes by 75% and the severity by 87% with either estrogen alone or with progesterone. The response is usually noted by two weeks with good symptom relief by six weeks—no difference in efficacy between oral or transdermal treatment. Progestogens are added in women with an intact uterus to protect against uterine cancer. Hormonal treatment is also indicated and safe in women with primary ovarian insufficiency or early menopause.

Typically the treatment can be safely used for up to 3 to 5 years and up to 60 years of age, after which it is discontinued. Typically they are tapered and stopped over six months to 1 year, especially in those with frequent bothersome symptoms. Symptoms may recur in 50%. In women with early menopause or primary ovarian failure, hormone therapy is recommended until the expected age of natural menopause. This is to reduce cardiovascular, osteoporosis, and fracture risk. In a small percentage who continues to have significant symptoms impacting the quality of life beyond 60 years of age, hormonal therapy can be continued at a lower dose and preferably by the transdermal route.

**Dosing, Formulation, and Route of Administration**

Estrogen preparations are available as oral tablets, transdermal patches, topical gels, emulsions, and lotions. The intravaginal creams and tablets and vaginal rings and are usually used for vulvovaginal atrophy at lower doses, but vaginal rings at higher doses are available for hormone replacement therapy (HRT).

**Nonhormonal Therapy**

This includes lifestyle changes, nonprescription therapies, and prescription medicines. Nonhormonal treatment is preferred in women above 60 years of age or if more than ten years postmenopausal. Other categories of patients are symptomatic women with a history of MI, stroke, venous thromboembolic disease, estrogen-sensitive cancers, those with increased risk of breast cancer, heart diseases, or venous thromboembolism (VTE). Black cohosh, ginseng, vitamin E, flaxseed, etc., are not shown any benefits. Some data suggest possible improvement in symptoms with activities that involve reduced stress like cognitive behavioral therapy, hypnosis, and mindfulness-based stress reduction. Yoga, acupuncture, and exercise have not shown any benefit.

Nonhormonal pharmacologic therapies that are effective include SSRIs (paroxetine, escitalopram, fluoxetine, citalopram), SNRIs (venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine), clonidine (patch), and gabapentinoids (pregabalin, gabapentin). These have been shown to decrease the severity and frequency of hot flashes. The onset of relief is noticed in 2 to 3 weeks. SSRIs and SNRIs reduce the frequency and severity of menopause-associated vasomotor symptoms by 10% to 64%. Among these, escitalopram and paroxetine ER and venlafaxine XR were the most effective.

**Genitourinary Syndrome**

**1. Hormonal therapy**- Low dose topical estrogen is the treatment of choice for moderate to severe symptoms. It increases the thickness of the epithelium, secretion, moisture, and vaginal flora. The effect wears off when use is discontinued. But it is interesting to note here that it does not improve urinary incontinence.

Conjugated equine estrogens daily (for 2 to 3 weeks followed by one week off, repeat as needed), estradiol vaginal cream 0.01% (1 gm. every two weeks or every three weeks), estradiol ring (one every three months) are used.

**2. Lubricant and moisturizers**- These can be used in milder symptoms and as first-line treatment in general, especially for women with estrogen-sensitive cancer. These are available over the counter as vaginal lubricants and moisturizers, such as globules, creams, and liquids. The active component is hyaluronic acid that improves the moistening of the extracellular matrix. Studies have shown subjective and objective improvement in symptoms, including vaginal dryness, itching, burning, and dyspareunia. The therapeutic effects are limited to the duration of treatment.

**3. Selective estrogen receptor modulator with affinity to vaginal mucosa -**Ospemifene is the first SERM approved for moderate to severe VVA symptoms in patients, not candidates for estrogen. It increases the risk of vein thromboembolism (1.45/1000 women in the ospemifene group and 1.04/1000 women in the placebo group), hence it is contraindicated in women with current or past thromboembolic disease. Ospemifene is given orally at a dose of 60 mg daily.

**4. Vaginal dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) (prasterone) -**It is a treatment option for dyspareunia. The dose is 6.5 mg (0.5% formulation) as a daily vaginal suppository.

**5. Laser therapy**- Has been used recently in the treatment of vulvovaginal atrophy. The goal is to stimulate collagen remodeling and new collagen synthesis. More studies are needed to assess the long-term efficacy and safety of these procedures before recommending them for common use.

**Sexual Dysfunction**

Sexual dysfunction is multifactorial. Treating hot flashes, vaginal dryness, and mood changes have been found to improve sexual dysfunction. Some of the symptoms, especially post-surgical menopause, are attributed to a decreased level of androgen. Low-dose vaginal estrogen and DHEA can be used in dyspareunia. Several randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials suggest that testosterone therapy improves sexual function like desire and frequency in postmenopausal women. The potential benefit and harm and the limited data on long-term use need to be discussed. Also, all safer options like relationship intervention, sex therapy sessions, optimizing treatment of depression, and treatment of another postmenopausal problem should be done before the trial of testosterone therapy. Transdermal and oral preparations are preferred in women.

Androgen should be used with caution in patients with a high risk of breast cancer, endometrial hyperplasia or cancer, cardiovascular disease, and hepatic disease. It can cause hirsutism and decreased HDL levels. Since testosterone is converted to estrogen in the body, a close watch on all potential complications of estrogen treatment can occur. It also needs monitoring of lipid levels and liver function at regular intervals.

**Sleep Disturbance**

The nature of the sleep disturbance can help guide the clinician to appropriate treatment. The specific cause needs to be identified, and appropriate treatment needs to be initiated. Insomnia related to vasomotor symptoms (VMS) should be treated with HRT. Primary insomnia shows a good response to cognitive behavioral therapy. Non-benzodiazepine hypnotics and melatonin also can be tried. Sleep disturbance associated with depression may respond to antidepressants. Women with persistent sleep complaints need to be referred to sleep specialists for comprehensive sleep management to diagnose and treat unrecognized and untreated sleep disorders.