Plunging ranula:

A ranula is a mucous cyst seen within the base of the mouth. The etiology of a ranula is often due to acquired traumatic incompetence in the structure of a surrounding salivary gland duct located within the submandibular or sublingual spaces leading to the accumulation of mucus or saliva from gland rupture secondary to hypertension. This mucus is often composed of a higher concentration of proteolytic enzymes such as matrix metalloproteins and type IV collagenase than normal saliva contributing to the locally invasive nature of a ranula.

A simple ranula is located only within the sublingual space. However, herniation of the mucous via the mylohyoid muscle boutonniere (normal discontinuity within the mylohyoid muscle that allows for communication between the sublingual and submandibular spaces) generates a specific type of ranula called a plunging ranula that involves the submandibular space. A plunging ranula often presents as a painless swelling of the lateral neck that occurs during the third decade of life, unlike a ranula which is often a bluish mass at the base of the oral cavity. Complications of a plunging ranula include disruption in the patient’s ability to speak or chew, which can eventually progress to dyspnea secondary to obstruction when the cyst involves the parapharyngeal space. Diagnostic confirmation is by the supporting clinical findings along with imaging to evaluate the underlying lesion involvement. MRI of the mass would reveal low signal with T1 and high signal with T2. While ultrasound would reveal a thin-walled hypoechoic cystic lesion that may have increased attenuation if an infection is present. Treatment includes surgical excision of the cyst and associated sublingual gland and rare cases requiring submandibular gland removal or Picibanil directed sclerotherapy with a high rate of recurrence.

Ludwig's angina:

Ludwig’s angina is necrotizing cellulitis of the base of the oral cavity that may progress quickly and involve the submaxillary and submandibular spaces. Often seen secondary to periodontal abscesses.

The mylohyoid muscle separates the sublingual and submandibular spaces, but a finite line of communication remains between these two spaces posterior to the mylohyoid muscle. Infections that originate in the teeth can spread from one space to the other via this communication or breach the mylohyoid muscle itself.

Patient present with submandibular and sublingual swelling that is exquisitely tender along with associated fevers and chills. Complications include subsequent deep neck infections, thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular vein, subphrenic abscess, carotid artery rupture, or mandibular osteomyelitis. In the worst-case scenario, this infectious entity progressively worsening tongue swelling can cause airway obstruction, which can lead to death by asphyxia.