# Continuing Education Activity

The term "bacteriostatic antibiotics" is used to describe medications whose mechanism of action stalls bacterial cellular activity without directly causing bacterial death. The mechanisms of action of these antimicrobials are broad, and they generally require patients' to have functional immune systems to function optimally. This activity outlines the indications, mechanisms, and contraindications of bacteriostatic antimicrobials in treating bacterial infections and other key factors pertinent to members of the healthcare team treating patients with bacterial infections.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of various bacteriostatic antimicrobials.
- Describe the indications for different bacteriostatic antimicrobials.
- Review the toxicity of bacteriostatic antimicrobials.
- Outline interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the use of bacteriostatic antimicrobials.

# Indications

Bacteriostatic antimicrobials, a term generally used to describe antimicrobials that function via inhibition of bacterial protein synthesis, have many indications in medicine according to their mechanisms of action. Due to merely inhibiting further growth of bacteria, bacteriostatic antimicrobials require a functioning host immune system to fully clear overgrowth. Due to this effect, however, observational studies have shown that there is a lower incidence of toxic shock and more tolerable side effect profiles.

The indications for tetracycline antimicrobials are extremely broad. As one of the oldest classes of antimicrobials, tetracyclines have demonstrated good activity against gram-positive, gram-negative, atypical, and spirochete bacteria.

The indications for macrolide antimicrobials are dependent upon the specific macrolide antimicrobial in question. There are three primary antimicrobials within this class: erythromycin, clarithromycin, and azithromycin.Neisseria spp. Clarithromycin has a similar spectrum of activity to erythromycin, with additional activity against some staph and strep species.

Clindamycin is an antimicrobial that has gained many indications. In a 1996 review of the literature concerning the drug, indications for it include the following uses: skin and soft tissue infections (including diabetic foot), osteomyelitis and septic arthritis, recurrent streptococcal pharyngitis, anaerobic lung infections, and as an alternative for intra-abdominal and pelvic infections.

Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole previously saw use as the primary outpatient antimicrobial for a wide variety of infections. However, due to the emergence of widespread resistance, it has lost its utility for empiric coverage of infection in the outpatient setting.

Additionally, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole is one of the agents of choice to prevent HIV/AIDS-associated infections, specifically pneumocystis pneumonia (P. jiroveci). Its recommendations include its use as a prophylactic agent in patients with CD4 count less than 200 cells/microliter.

Linezolid, first gaining widespread use in the 2000s, has broad activity against most gram-positive organisms.

# Mechanism of Action

Bacteriostatic antimicrobials most commonly function via the inhibition of bacterial protein synthesis pathways.

As a class, the primary mechanism of action of tetracycline antimicrobials is the reversible inhibition of the 30S bacterial ribosomal subunit.

Macrolides function via inhibition of the larger subunit of bacterial ribosomes, the 50S subunit.

Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole has been a successful antimicrobial combination formulation because each of its constituents, trimethoprim, and sulfamethoxazole, prevents effective processing of folic acid and its derivatives in bacteria.

Linezolid has a unique mechanism of action compared to other antimicrobials. It binds to the P site of the 50 S ribosome, which prevents the formation of bacterial ribosomal fMet-tRNA complex and thus preventing bacterial protein synthesis.

# Administration

Tetracycline antimicrobials are administrable either orally or intravenously.

While erythromycin administration is possible via the IV route, the most common formulation of macrolide antimicrobials is in oral dosage forms.

Clindamycin is nearly completely absorbed orally. However, it has a relatively short half-life, requiring dosing every 6 hours.

Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole has available formulations on the market in both oral and intravenous forms; however, due to its indications, it is nearly universally encountered in its oral formulation.

Linezolid has nearly 100% absorption orally and may be given orally or intravenously, depending on the clinical setting.

# Adverse Effects

Similar to their indications, the adverse effects of bacteriostatic antimicrobials are dependent upon the drug in question.

Due to their excellent bioavailability in most tissues throughout the body, tetracyclines can easily be deposited into vascularized bones and tissues; this becomes problematic in fetuses and children less than eight years old, where tetracycline antibiotics can deposit and cause a characteristic brown discoloration of bones, which is permanent throughout life. This adverse effect is not inherently toxic and is a relative contraindication. Additionally, this effect is directly dose-dependent.

Macrolide antimicrobials are significant inhibitors of CYP3A4 and have several interactions via these pathways. Specifically, they increase serum concentrations of carbamazepine, corticosteroids, cyclosporin, digoxin, theophylline, valproic acid, and warfarin.

Clindamycin commonly correlates with local hypersensitivity and skin reactions, which can be severe enough to cause toxic epidermal necrolysis or Stevens-Johnson syndrome.C. difficile colitis (up to 20 to 30%) and high rates of diarrhea without underlying infection.

Generally, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole is well-tolerated in both immunocompetent and immunocompromised patients. However, there are some drug-drug interactions with warfarin, methotrexate, phenytoin, digoxin, and oral contraceptives.

Linezolid is generally well-tolerated in the general population.

# Contraindications

The contraindications to the various bacteriostatic agents are specific to each class of drug/agent in question. Contraindications to most tetracycline antimicrobials are as follows: kidney dysfunction (except doxycycline), children less than eight, pregnant patients, and active colitis.

# Monitoring

One advantage of most bacteriostatic antimicrobials, as a class, is that they usually do not require intensive monitoring as other classes of bactericidal drugs. Tetracycline antimicrobials do not typically require monitoring of blood drug concentrations, nor do they have an easily identifiable metabolite to monitor their activity in vivo.in vivo. However, if patients are taking other agents with macrolides, corresponding concentrations of other drugs should be monitored for alterations in their activity.

# Toxicity

In general, due to the comparatively slower mechanism of action of bacteriostatic antimicrobials, the toxicity profiles of bacteriostatic agents are generally lesser than their comparable bacteriocidal analogs.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

There has been a traditional bias against bacteriostatic antimicrobials for a variety of indications, particularly in more acute settings, due to a misconception that they have clinically slower rates of activity and lose efficacy.

The use of these bacteriostatic agents requires an interprofessional team approach to patient care. The prescribing/ordering clinician will decide which antimicrobial to use; this decision should be in tandem with a board-certified infectious disease pharmacist, in conjunction with the latest antibiogram data - especially in the inpatient setting. The pharmacist should also perform a complete medication reconciliation to rule out potential drug-drug interactions. Nursing will be responsible for administering these drugs in the inpatient setting, and for outpatients, they can still counsel the patient on proper administration. Nursing can also evaluate patient adherence and should be cognizant of potential adverse reactions so they can be reported to the prescriber immediately. This interprofessional team approach will optimize the therapeutic potential for bacteriostatic antimicrobials while limiting drug resistance and adverse events. [Level 5]