The most common side effects of carbamazepine include dizziness, drowsiness, ataxia, nausea, and vomiting. Although rarer in occurrence, this comes with a black box warning for several severe dermatologic reactions. In patients of Han Chinese ancestry, studies have indicated a strong association between the HLA-B*1502 gene and Steven Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN). Studies have shown no increased risk with this gene and SJS/TEN in Iranian patients.HLB-B*4001, HLB*4601, and HLB*5801 genes were strong protective factors. Patients of Han Chinese ancestry should undergo testing for the HLA-B*1502 gene. Up to 90 % of patients on carbamazepine who have this reaction experience it within the first few months of treatment. Another important allele to consider with this medication is HLA*3101. This allele is present in Japanese, Korean, and European ancestry.

Carbamazepine has another black box warning on agranulocytosis and aplastic anemia.

Due to the mild anticholinergic activity, carbamazepine can increase the risk of delirium in the elderly population. This effect can also lead to urinary retention, increased intraocular pressure, and constipation.

Carbamazepine can exacerbate heart failure patients or even lead to cardiac dysfunction in healthy patients due to its tendency to cause homocysteinemia. Homocysteine is commonly known to increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. Patients with cardiac conduction issues have a higher risk of undergoing atrioventricular (AV) heart block. The use of this drug in patients with an abnormal ECG should be avoided to elude potential second and third-degree AV heart block.

This drug is teratogenic and is a category D drug in pregnancy. Although contraindications to carbamazepine do not include pregnancy, clinicians should only use it if the benefits outweigh the increased risk of congenital malformation. Such malformations include spina bifida, craniofacial defection, cardiovascular cutaneous malformation, hypospadias, and developmental delays. Plasma level is reduced during pregnancy, likely related to increased metabolism. Carbamazepine can cross the placenta, and this drug can also be transferred through breast milk in nursing infants, prompting the need to decide whether to discontinue nursing or discontinue the drug in the mother.