For most pediatric patients with facial soft tissue trauma, particularly isolated contusions or abrasions, it will be sufficient to provide local wound care, ice, rest, and anti-inflammatory pain control. More advanced management strategies are described below.

**Anxiolysis and Pain Control**

While distraction is often the safest and fastest method of anxiolysis and pain control in pediatric trauma patients, pharmacotherapy is often needed for procedures.

**Inhaled and Intranasal Agents**

Inhaled pharmacologic agents such as nitrous oxide can be considered, especially if there are contraindications for intranasal product use, or a brief detailed examination such as the ear, eye, or mouth is needed without sedation in a patient unwilling or unable to cooperate with the exam.

**Topical Agents**

For topical procedures, such as intravenous access or wound care, consider early use of topical local anesthetic agents and allow for adequate time for anesthesia before reassessing. Traditionally a compounded mixture of lidocaine-epinephrine-tetracaine (LET) has been favored for open wounds. Some commercial products have a package-insert prohibition against use on open wounds and are not FDA-approved for open wounds though the evidence for this prohibition is unclear. Commercial agents have been demonstrated to be safe and effective when applied directly to wounds.

**Nerve Blocks**

Nerve blocks are an under-utilized practice to provide anesthesia that relies on fewer needlepoint introductions and smaller volumes of anesthetic agents, especially for laceration repair or dental injuries.

**Antibiotics and Vaccination**

For all open wounds or dental avulsions, confirm the patient’s vaccination status. Tetanus is part of the pediatric vaccine series, so as long as general vaccinations are up to date, then the patient is protected. For well-cleaned wounds requiring closure, systemic antibiotics are not beneficial.

**Lacerations and Wounds**

**Simple Lacerations**

Once pain and anxiety are adequately managed, wounds must be cleaned before any attempt at repair. Copious, high-pressure irrigation minimizes the chance of infection.

Facial sutures should generally remain in place for 3-5 days, at which time they should be reassessed for healing and need for removal if non-absorbable.

For younger children, especially, covering the wound with a sterile dressing can reduce the tendency of the child to touch or irritate the wound directly. There is no conclusive evidence that topical ointments (either sterile petroleum gel or containing topical antibiotics) affect wound healing or infection rates. However, it is unlikely to be harmful, and it is reasonable to apply to closed wounds.

**Dog Bites**

Detailed animal bite management is discussed in the StatPearls article “Bites, Animals.” In general, dog bites to the face should be treated with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid.

**Intraoral Lacerations**

Tongue laceration management is described in the StatPearls article “Tongue Lacerations,” though some pediatric considerations bear mention.

**Wounds that Need a Specialist**

Wounds in highly cosmetic or structurally complex regions may be considered for exploration and closure by a facial or ophthalmologic specialist, either at the bedside or in the operating room. These generally include involvement of the eyelid, injuries to ductal or cartilaginous structures, suspected nerve injuries, and depending on provider comfort, may involve the vermillion border, nasolabial fold, and the ear. Facial wounds may also be closed up to 24 hours after the occurrence, so next-day specialty follow-up for closure can also be considered.

**Nose Soft Tissue Injuries**

Nasal contusions and swelling are primarily treated with the application of ice. Septal hematomas should be drained and packing applied.

**Ear Injuries**

Auricular hematomas should be drained and covered with a pressure dressing.

**Dental Injury**

Management of dental injuries, including fractures and avulsions, is discussed elsewhere.

**Burns**

Evaluation and treatment of burns are covered elsewhere in StatPearls.

**Eye Injuries**

Comprehensive approaches to eye trauma are discussed elsewhere in StatPearls.