Macroscopically, the kidney divides into two sections: the renal cortex, the outer part of the kidney, and the medulla, the inner section. Both contain different structures of the nephron, the functional unit of the kidney. It is crucial to comprehend the nephron’s structure to understand the functioning of the kidney.

The nephron is comprised of a glomerulus and a complex tubular system. The glomerulus and the first portion of the tubular system, known as the proximal convoluted tubule (PCT), are located in the renal cortex. Following the PCT, the loop of Henle, a hairpin-like structure, penetrates the medulla and returns to the cortex to connect with the distal convoluted tubule (DCT). Finally, the nephron drains into the collecting duct via connecting tubules.

There are two types of nephrons: (1) superficial nephrons with glomeruli near the cortical surface and short loops of Henle, and (2) juxtamedullary nephrons with glomeruli located near the cortico-medullary junction and long loops of Henle descending deeper into the renal medulla.

The glomerulus filters large amounts of blood, which the tubular system converts into urine through reabsorption and secretion of free water and solutes.

**The Glomerulus**

The glomerulus forms by a tuft of capillaries surrounded by an impervious capsule denominated Bowman’s capsule.

- Fenestrated endothelium of the glomerular capillaries: this layer confers size selectivity through fenestrae with diameters between 70 to 100 nm.

- Glomerular basement membrane (GBM): this is a thick structure composed of extracellular proteins, including proteoglycans, laminin, fibronectin, and type IV collagen. This layer confers charge selectivity to the filtered particles.

- Podocytes: a visceral epithelium of specialized cells that lines the GBM and forms the outermost layer of the filtration barrier.

Once blood is filtered, the ultrafiltrate resides between the visceral epithelium and Bowman’s capsule. From here, the ultrafiltrate flows into the PCT.

**The Proximal Convoluted Tubule**

Bowman’s capsule gives rise to the PCT, which lies adjacent to the glomerulus in the renal cortex. The PCT forms from a simple cuboidal epithelium that is dedicated to absorbing and transporting water, electrolytes, and other particles. These cells are characterized by a brush border of microvilli designed to increase the surface in contact with the glomerular ultrafiltrate, with abundant long, thin mitochondria lining the basal pole of the cell; and numerous vesicles involved in transcellular transport of 60 to 80% of the ultrafiltrate.

The peritubular capillaries surround the PCT. This capillary network is responsible for the blood supply of the tubules and the recovery of the reabsorbed free water, ions, and other plasma constituents like amino acids and glucose.

**The Loop of Henle**

The PCT leaves the renal cortex and turns into the thin descending limb (TDL) of the loop of Henle, penetrating the renal medulla. The tubule becomes narrower, and the cells become smaller, with few mitochondria and short microvilli often unnoticeable on light microscopy.

The tubule then turns upward towards the cortex, turning into the thick ascending limb (TAL). Here the lining cells become more prominent, with more numerous microvilli and mitochondria to engage in the active transport of sodium to dilute the urine.

**The Juxtaglomerular Apparatus and the Distal Convoluted Tubule**

The juxtaglomerular apparatus is the region regulating the glomerular filtration through the tubuloglomerular feedback.

The TAL turns into the DCT after returning to the renal cortex near its glomerulus of origin.

The DCT cells are tall cells notable for containing the largest number of mitochondria among other cells in the nephron. They have an extensive basolateral amplification enclosing multiple mitochondria, creating a palisading appearance in the basal part of the cells.

**Connecting and Collecting Tubules**

The final part of the nephron is the connecting tubules, where the last fine-tuning of the urine occurs. These tubules have two types of cells; the intercalated cells and the connecting tubule (CNT) cells. The intercalated cells appear dense on electron microscopy and do not have the basolateral amplification characteristic of the DCT cells. These cells regulate hydrogen and bicarbonate secretion. The connecting tubule cells also have basolateral amplification but possess fewer mitochondria than DCT cells.

The appearance of principal cells marks the transition into the collecting tubules and the end of the nephron. In cortical nephrons, the CNT leads to the collecting tubule, which drains to a collecting duct. The connecting tubules of juxtamedullary nephrons join and form an arcade that drains into a shared collecting duct.