# Introduction

Although the DNA helical diameter is only 2 nm, the entire DNA strand in a single cell will stretch roughly 2 meters when completely unwound.

The nucleosome structure was first described in 1974 by Roger Kornberg who, with evidence from biochemical experiments, X-ray diffraction studies, and electron microscopy images, proposed the nucleosome was comprised of repeating units of eight histone proteins and about 200 DNA base pairs.

The tight structure of chromatin brings about the problem of accessibility to the DNA by enzymes involved in DNA replication and transcription. Chromatin exists in one of two states: heterochromatin, which is condensed and allows little access by transcription enzymes, and euchromatin, which is loose to allow for interaction with transcription enzymes. The transition between these two states is determined by interactions between the DNA and histone proteins via post-translational modifications to the histone proteins like methylation and acetylation.

The ability for DNA packaging to be modified at various stages of the cell cycle is important in both DNA replication and cell division as well as transcription. Replication occurs at many origins of replication throughout the DNA strand to accelerate the replication of the entire genome, with each origin separated by approximately 100,000 base pairs.

# Molecular Level

All DNA is packaged as structures called nucleosomes which are the basic unit of chromatin.

Further DNA binding proteins, known as non-histone proteins, are a large group of heterogeneous proteins that play a role in the organization and compaction of the chromosome into higher-order structures. The H1 protein is essential in these higher-order structures.

From the solenoid size, chromatin is further packaged and condensed into chromosomes. These regions can be visualized microscopically through various stains applied to chromosomes during mitosis that are best seen during metaphase.

In addition to the need for systematic compaction of DNA for replication and cell division, it is important for the interphase cell to have its DNA organized within the nucleus. This organization helps to section the DNA into different areas of cell expression, among other functions. The nucleus consists of a nuclear double-layered membrane matrix compiled of different types of proteins that ensure nuclear stability and facilitate nuclear organization. This organization is by no means static, and a plethora of complicated mechanisms will change DNA expression temporally and geographically within the body. The nuclear lamina is under the inner membrane of the nucleus, where scaffolding proteins and matrix attachment proteins are present. Eukaryotic DNA is organized into loops, which can vary from 25 to 200 base pairs long. Within the actual genetic code of DNA, specific sequences allow for the attachment of matrix attachment regions (MARs) and scaffold attachment regions (SARs) along the nuclear lamina.

# Clinical Significance

The clinical significance of aberration in DNA organization is broad-reaching. This is highlighted by many disorders of histone methylation, including alpha thalassemia X-linked intellectual disability syndrome, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, Coffin-Lowry syndrome, and Rett Syndrome.

DNA packaging around histones is directly related to gene expression and is the foundation of the field of epigenetics. The extent to which epigenetics contributes to clinical presentations is still actively being determined, but the present body of evidence suggests that variable gene expression contributes to a range of pathologic processes involved in cancers, neurological disorders, and even consciousness, among many other disease states.

Important to the field of epigenetics is the fact that the changes associated with disease states are reversible, unlike mutations in the DNA sequence itself. With this in mind, the increased understanding of epigenetics has elucidated the potential to treat certain conditions by preventing or reversing the post-translational modifications to histone proteins. For example, methylation of a tumor suppressor gene or deacetylation of a histone protein associated with an oncogene likely contributes to carcinogenesis, so drugs that inhibit these processes have been trialed as potential cancer treatments.