In recent years, there have been efforts to sub-classify clinical phenotypes of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis based on the presence or absence of vasculitis, somewhat counterintuitive to the nomenclature itself.

Patients who are ANCA positive (reported around 40% of all patients with EGPA) tend to have a vasculitic phenotype and are more common to have myalgia, migrating polyarthralgia, weight loss, mononeuritis multiplex, and renal involvement either as crescentic or necrotizing glomerulonephritis.

Conversely, patients without ANCA positivity tend to have an eosinophilic phenotype with a higher incidence of myocarditis.

The presence of ANCA alone, however, is not the absolute correlate to vasculitis. About 47% of patients in a study by Cottin et al. had vasculitis without seropositivity for ANCA, while 29% were positive for myeloperoxidase ANCA without the presence of vasculitis.

About 41% of patients in the same series by Cottin et al.

They, therefore, suggested isolating and recognizing a subgroup with features of vasculitis to be defined here.

**Vasculitic Phenotype**

Definitive vasculitis features

- Biopsy-proven necrotizing vasculitis of any organ

- Biopsy-proven necrotizing glomerulonephritis or crescentic glomerulonephritis

- Palpable purpura

- Alveolar hemorrhage

- Coronary arteritis causing myocardial infarction

Surrogates of vasculitis

- Hematuria with red casts greater than 10%, dysmorphic RBC, and/or 2+ protein

- Leukocytoclastic capillaritis

Mononeuritis

Presence of ANCA

The rest of the patients will fall into the eosinophilic asthma phenotype. It is important to recognize that subgroup early, particularly in the presence of myocarditis with no other evidence of vasculitis. Overly depending on the presence of vasculitis to diagnose EGPA may result in missing those patients with eosinophilic asthma who may otherwise benefit from early targeted therapy.

The primary trigger in pathogenesis at the cellular level seems to be an aberrant T-helper cell pathway.

**Role of the Th2 Cell Lineage**

There have been various theories about what prompts an abnormal Th-2 type immune response in the first place. Allergies, infections, medications have all been considered. The allergy theory has not been substantiated despite a high prevalence of IgE levels, as studies show that hypersensitivity to currently tested allergens is present only in 30% of CSS cases. Rolla et al. suggested a superantigen theory in CSS, which activated the oligoclonal expansion of certain T cell subsetsAspergillus or Actinomyces. Several medications have also been reported, including sulfonamides, macrolide, and diphenylhydantoin.

The pathogenic role of T cells in the aberrant immune response of this disease has been further proven by the presence of specific clonally expanded subpopulations of T cells as well as increased frequency of related HLA alleles like HLA- DRB1 04 and HLA-DRB1 07.

There is an increased serum presence of IL-10, which mediates inhibition of Th-1 response, thus tilting the scale towards differentiation of Th2 cells. This phenomenon is particularly common in the ANCA negative phenotype of EGPA.