Drinking history is the most important component, which includes the number of drinks per day and the duration of drinking. Given the lack of a unique diagnostic test, exclusion of other causes of liver injury is mandatory.

Personal and psychosocial factors are also important because excessive drinking is related to depression and other psychological diseases.

One should ask questions about diet, caloric intake, risk factors for malnutrition, and also about the risks for various types of chronic liver disease, including chronic viral hepatitis.

Questions about the following symptoms are necessary and informative:

- Nausea and vomiting

- Fever (in alcoholic hepatitis)

- Weakness

- Yellowish discoloration of eyes

- Loss of appetite

- Abdominal discomfort

- Increased thirst

- Weight loss

- Fainting

- Confusion

- Alteration of the sleep-wake cycle

- Mood swings

**Physical Examination**

The clinical definition of alcoholic hepatitis is a syndrome of liver failure where jaundice is a characteristic feature; fever and tender hepatomegaly are often present. The typical age at presentation is between 40 and 50 yrs, and it occurs in the setting of heavy alcohol use. Patients often report a history of intake of at least 30 to 50 g alcohol/day though over 100 g/day is common. Patients may be abstinent for weeks before admission. The cardinal sign is the rapid onset of jaundice. Other signs and symptoms include fever, ascites (SAAG greater than 1.1), and proximal muscle loss. Patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis may have encephalopathy. Typically, the liver is enlarged and tender.

General physical examination typically shows jaundice, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, spider telangiectasias, Dupuytren contractures, testicular atrophy, decreased libido, parotid and lacrimal gland enlargement, white nails, Muecke's lines, asterixis and features of portal hypertension such as ascites, pedal edema, encephalopathy and caput-medusae (distended and engorged superficial abdominal veins).

Abdominal tap (paracentesis) should take place if there is a suspicion of ascites.