There is no guidelines-based treatment available for LAE. Currently, no known medical therapy is available to reverse the left atrial remodeling. The focus of care and medical treatment in patients with LAE is the identification and treatment of underlying pathologies.

**Treating valvular abnormalities:**Mitral valve stenosis/regurgitation involves medical therapy geared towards relieving symptoms, percutaneous mitral valvuloplasty, and surgical treatment. Patients might also need anticoagulation therapy should they develop arrhythmias to lower thromboembolic risks.

**Treating hypertension:**It is the most common modifiable risk factor for cardiovascular diseases. Many blood pressures lowering agents are available to aid patients in lowering blood pressure. Similarly, lifestyle modification, including consuming low salt diet, exercising regularly, limiting alcohol intake, quitting smoking are some of the measures that assist in lowering blood pressure.

**Treating left ventricular dysfunction and heart failure:**Medical therapy remains the cornerstone of these pathologies. The mainstay of medical treatment includes beta-blockers (BB) including carvedilol, metoprolol succinate, and bisoprolol, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi)/angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB), and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRA). A new class of medication angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor sacubitril/valsartan is also being recognized recently for offering mortality benefits in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction.