**Management of Acute-phase Reactions**

These systemic reactions are typically self-limiting. The mainstay of management is the supportive use of acetaminophen with or without nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Acute-phase reactions normally resolve within 48 hours. Premedication with acetaminophen is advised with recurrent doses. It is important to rule out other causes of fever, such as infection.

**Management of Upper GI Adverse Effects**

As mentioned earlier, the occurrence of these complications can be prevented by proper administration of the drug. The use of bisphosphonates, however, should be avoided in patients who have chronic esophageal conditions, such as Barret's esophagus.

**Management of Hypocalcemia**

Managing hypocalcemia in the context of bisphosphonate use involves identifying leading causes such as previous radiotherapy to the head and neck, prior thyroidectomy, and hypomagnesemia.

**Management of Ocular Complications**

Ocular complications are rare and usually not vision-threatening. However, a referral to an ophthalmologist is recommended for the management of ocular complications.

**Management of Osteonecrosis of the Jaw**

Prevention and early identification of high-risk patients are key strategies in the management of ONJ.

Once ONJ occurs, management becomes challenging.

**Management of Subtrochanteric Femoral Fractures**

Upon confirmation of the fracture, bisphosphonates should be discontinued, and calcium and vitamin D supplementation considered. Orthopedic referral shall be sought depending on the imaging findings.