Patients with symptomatic magnesium depletion can present in many ways. The major clinical manifestations include neuromuscular and cardiovascular manifestations and other electrolyte abnormalities. Specific signs and symptoms are outlined below.

Early presentation of hypomagnesemia includes nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, fatigue, and weakness.

**Neuromuscular Manifestations**

- Neuromuscular hyperexcitability (often the first clinical manifestation)

- Tremors

- Tetany, including positive Trousseau and Chvostek signs, muscle spasms, and muscle cramps. It may occur in the absence of hypocalcemia and alkalosis and is thought to be due to the lowering of the threshold for nerve stimulation.

- Choreoathetosis

- Seizures

- Vertical nystagmus

- Apathy

- Delirium

- Depression

- Agitation

- Psychosis

- Delirium

- Coma

**Cardiovascular Manifestations**

- Electrocardiogram changes, including widening of the QRS complex, peaked T waves (with mild to moderate deficiency), prolongation of the PR interval, and diminution of the T wave (with severe deficiency).

- Atrial and ventricular premature systoles

- Atrial fibrillation

- Ventricular arrhythmias, including torsades de pointes

- Cardiac ischemia

- Increased risk of digoxin toxicity by inhibiting Na-K-ATPase and depleting intracellular potassium.

**Other Electrolyte and Hormone Abnormalities**

- Hypocalcemia

- Symptoms typically occur at magnesium levels below 1 mEq/L (0.5 mmol/L or 1.2 mg/dL).
- Milder hypomagnesemia (between 1.1 and 1.3 mEq/L) lowers the plasma calcium concentration only slightly (0.2 mg/dL or 0.05 mmol/L).

- Hypoparathyroidism

- Hypokalemia (about 60% of cases)

A case report describes symptoms of cerebellar ataxia, generalized convulsions, intermittent downbeat nystagmus, and supraventricular tachycardia in a 59-year-old man with severe hypomagnesemia.