In healthcare systems across the country, there are periods when demand for healthcare services spike to levels above the baseline level of demand. These “surge” periods of demand place stress on the healthcare system, especially those areas with already scant resources. Each system can handle surge demand to different degrees based on the availability of resources and ability to maximize their effectiveness. Surge capacity is the maximum amount of resources that can potentially be available during a given period.

In periods of extreme surge, when demand outruns supply, the hospital must decide which patients should receive access to the finite supply of resources, such as ventilators or blood products. In most hospital systems, inpatient beds are one of the first resources to be consumed when demand increases.

A group of researchers at Johns Hopkins University and a panel of experts in the field of emergency medicine and disaster preparedness developed the reverse triage system to address the constraints of inpatient capacity during a disaster event.

With the previous assumptions in mind, the challenge of reverse triage is to determine which inpatients can be safely discharged. According to the expert panel, a patient is considered a candidate for early discharge if there is not a significant risk for a consequential medical event, including irreversible impairment, unexpected death, or a reduction in function within 72 hours of hospital discharge.

When evaluating patients for the likelihood of consequential medical events, it is important to remember that even normally discharged patients carry some amount of risk for adverse events after they leave the hospital. One study has estimated that adverse events occur in up to 19% of routinely discharged patients and up to 12% of discharged patients have a preventable adverse event.

In order to choose the most appropriate patients for early discharge, a standardized system of inpatient classification was developed to allow practitioners to risk stratify inpatients and determine the safest disposition. A 5-point system for inpatient risk stratification was developed, ranging from minimum risk (1) to very high risk (5), with maximum risk tolerance determined for each level. The first and lowest risk group is those patients who have less than 4% risk of consequential medical events, such as a patient with normal vital signs who could be transitioned to oral antibiotics for a simple infection or oral anticoagulants for an uncomplicated deep venous thrombosis.

Once inpatients are appropriately classified into risk categories, appropriate dispositions can be initiated. Although the goal is to create inpatient capacity, one potential limitation of the reverse triage system is that early discharged patients may return to the hospital due to a consequential medical event, worsening of the condition, or inappropriate discharge, and lead to a further surge in demand. This safety net of returning for additional evaluation and management is, however, necessary to prevent patients from having a bad outcome who have been processed under a reverse triage system. Patients should be informed to return for any worsening or failure to improve as expected. Patients that return to already strained healthcare systems pose additional challenges that must be addressed. For example, one study suggests that patients who return to the emergency department after hospital discharge require longer times in treatment and are twice as likely to be readmitted to the hospital.

Techniques to address surging healthcare demand are an ongoing area of research as hospital systems across the country are facing increased demand with a limited supply of resources. Although reverse triage has been proposed as a tool to combat a surge in a mass casualty or disaster event, several hospitals are evaluating the feasibility of using the reverse triage system to address more routine surge situations such as emergency department overcrowding.