A major advantage of the transconjunctival approach compared to the transcutaneous approach is the decreased incidence of complications, namely lid malposition, and external scarring. Nevertheless, the blepharoplasty surgeon must possess a thorough knowledge of the potential complications of the transconjunctival lower lid approach.

Early

- Corneal abrasions: may be prevented with the use of corneal shields and intentionally not to passing instruments directly over the eyes.

- Orbital hemorrhage: a rare but potentially sight-threatening complication, requiring emergent identification and intervention with lateral canthal release and/or medications (i.e., mannitol, steroids).

- Infections: should be promptly treated with topical and/or systemic antibiotics.

Intermediate

- Eyelid malposition: 

- Lower lid retraction – a common complication caused by damage to the anterior and/or middle lamella which can be initially managed conservatively with lid massage and upward taping but may require surgical revision if persistent at three months.
- Lagophthalmos – a result of zygomatic nerve injury leading to reduced orbicularis tone and subsequent exposure keratopathy; initial treatment involves aggressive lubrication, though persistence may be correctable with lateral canthal repositioning.
- Ectropion – results from vertical lid shortening of the anterior lamella, may be avoided with routine use of lateral canthopexy to support the lower lid position in cases of increasing vertical tension.

- Strabismus: most commonly due to inferior oblique muscle injury and can usually be managed conservatively.

- Corneal exposure: can be avoided with frequent eye lubrication.

- Epiphora

Late

- Changes in eyelid height and contour: caused mainly by anterior and middle lamellar changes.

- Hypertrophic scarring: may be present when performing concomitant skin pinch.

- Dermal pigmentation