Studies have compared the complication rates between surgically and percutaneously performed a tracheostomy. Oliver et al. in 2007 found that percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy was significantly quicker than surgically created tracheostomy, but there were more early complications associated with the percutaneous technique.

In general, minor complications associated with tracheostomy are (I) minor bleeding, (II) infection, (III) temporary oxygen desaturation, (IV) tube occlusion, (V) false passage, (VI) tracheocutaneous fistula, (VII) poor cosmetic scar, and (VIII) infection. The major or serious complications are (I) hemorrhage requiring transfusion or due to tracheo-innominate artery fistula, (II) trachea-oesophageal fistula, (III) subglottic stenosis, (IV) tracheal stenosis, (V) tracheomalacia, and (VI) death.

Although routinely performed, tracheostomy tube change is not without complications or potential pitfalls; thus, it is imperative to understand the procedure in addition to anticipating potential problems. Certain institutions may have established protocols or guidelines in place to facilitate an uneventful tracheostomy tube change, whereas continuous education and quality improvement projects certainly aim to improve competence and reduce complications.

The commonly encountered complication, if at all, of tracheostomy tube change is displacement or creation of a false passage.

When this rare complication occurs, it is important to follow the basic life support or advance life support algorithms, and help must be called so that experienced personnel, typically anesthetists or otolaryngologists may help to re-establish an airway. The usual practice in this instance is to reinsert the tracheostomy tube with the use of an obturator or tracheal dilator. Oral or nasal intubation may be attempted to establish a definitive airway, especially in cases of respiratory arrest.