The main keys for successful functional outcomes of tibial plateau fractures are the restoration of the axial and rotational alignment of the limb and knee stability.

**Non-Operative Management**

This would be indicated in minimally displaced fractures whether it is a split or depression pattern. These fracture patterns typically occur with low energy mechanisms where there are no associated ligamentous injuries. Also, non-ambulatory patients would be candidates for nonoperative management. Fractures appropriate for non-operative management may be placed in a hinged knee brace, immediate passive range of motion can be started and patients would be advised on non-weight bearing for 6-8 weeks followed by partial weight-bearing for further 6 weeks then full weight-bearing as tolerated. The patient should be re-evaluated weekly with plain radiographs for 3 weeks following injury, and assuming there is no further injury or displacement, may be transitioned to imaging biweekly or every three weeks. The patient should remain in the brace until radiographic healing is complete, which may take up to 12 weeks. Physical therapy may begin at this time, and patients may not regain full function until 16 to 20 weeks or longer. Return to activities requiring prolonged weight bearing and stress such as certain sports should not occur until healing is nearly complete, with the affected extremity demonstrating more than 90% of the strength of the unaffected extremity.

**Operative Management**

**Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF):**This is indicated for tibial plateau fractures with significant articular step-off, condylar widening, ligamentous instability, and for Schatzer IV, V, and VI injuries.

The approach is tailored based on the fracture pattern. A lateral approach with a straight or hockey stick anterolateral incision is commonly performed. Posteromedial incision utilizing the interval between pes anserinus and medial head of gastrocnemius has been described for medial plateau fractures and those with posteromedial extensions. Dual surgical incision medial and lateral is indicated for bicondylar fractures. With posterior approaches reserved for posterior shearing fractures.

Reduction (Direct or indirect): It focuses on restoring articular surface continuity and congruity. Any metaphyseal voids should be filled with bone grafts or cement. Bone grafts could be autogenous, allogenic, or artificial substitutes. Calcium phosphate cement has shown high compressive strengths when utilized to fill out metaphyseal defects.

Internal fixation can be achieved with a variety of constructs either screws alone or plate (locked vs non-locked) with the aim of achieving absolute stability to maintain the articular surface. Isolated screw fixation can be used for simple split fractures or depression fractures that have been elevated percutaneously. Non locked plate in a buttress mode would be ideal for simple fracture patterns in healthy bones. Whilst a fixed angle construct such as a locked plate would be more beneficial in comminuted fracture patterns and poor bone quality with the advantages of less compression of periosteum and soft tissues.

Postoperatively, a hinged knee brace is applied and advice of an early passive range of motion and non-weight bearing for 6 weeks followed by partial weight-bearing for further 6 weeks then weight-bearing as tolerated.

**External fixation with limited open/percutaneous fixation of the articular segment:**This is indicated in significantly comminuted fractures or highly contaminated open fractures. The principle is to perform articular surface reduction percutaneously or with mini incisions then, stabilize the reduction with subchondral lag screws or wires. After which an external fixator or a hybrid ring fixator is applied. It allows knee range of motion and decreases soft tissue insult. Patients are allowed weight-bearing after callus formation and the fixator stays for two to four months.  This treatment modality has been reported to be associated with a high malunion rate.

**Staged or Sequential fixation: Bridging external fixation with delayed ORIF:**may be performed as a temporizing measure when there is significant soft tissue injury, or if the patient has sustained other serious injuries that require damage control orthopedics.

**Arthroscopically assisted reduction and internal fixation:**This can provide equally satisfactory results to open reduction and internal fixation. Especially in Schatzker I to III fractures.

**Primary Total Knee Arthroplasty:**This could be an option in specific patients with specific fracture patterns.