LHON was the first disease to be associated with mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) point mutations and is, therefore, maternally inherited. Whereas both the father and the mother contribute to the nuclear portion of the zygote, the mother's ovum is virtually the sole provider of the zygote's cytoplasmic contents which contains several hundred intracytoplasmic mitochondria. “Maternal inheritance” refers to the transmission of the mitochondrial genome from a mother to all her children, with no paternal mtDNA contribution. The mitochondria generate the cellular energy necessary for normal cellular function and maintenance thus those cells in tissues particularly reliant on mitochondrial energy production, such as the central nervous system, including the optic nerve, retinal pigment epithelium, and extraocular muscles will contain more mitochondria. If a new mutation occurs in the mtDNA and the proportion of mutant mtDNA exceeds a certain tissue-specific threshold, however, the wildtype mtDNA is no longer able to compensate to sustain normal cellular function, and the disease phenotype is expressed.

In LHON mitochondrial mutations affect complex I subunit genes in the respiratory chain leading to selective degeneration of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and optic atrophy within a year of disease onset. Three common mtDNA mutations (m.11778G.A/MTND4, m.3460G.A/MT-ND1, m.14484T.C/MT-ND6) account for about 90% of clinical cases in multiple and ethnically divergent pedigrees. These mutations are absent or very rare among normal controls.

Except in rare cases of de novo occurrence of a primary LHON mutation, an mtDNA mutation will be present in all maternally related family members of patients with LHON, even though many will never become symptomatic. Hence, whereas the presence of an mtDNA mutation is necessary for phenotypic expression, it may not be sufficient. Since the amount of mutant mtDNA in the optic nerves of individuals at risk may differ, the degree of tissue heteroplasmy might help explain the variable phenotypes seen in patients whose mitochondrial genotypes measured in blood alone appear similar.

Other genetic factors may influence the phenotypic expression of LHON such as nuclear genes that regulate the expression of mitochondrial genes.

Because of the male predominance of visual loss in LHON, an X-linked vision loss susceptibility gene has been hypothesized. Recent studies have identified a high-risk haplotype at Xp21 associated with a 35-fold increase in vision loss among patients with the 11778 and 14484 mutations.

Immunologic factors have also been suggested, mainly to explain the association of LHON with multiple sclerosis. However, studies have shown the HLA-DR locus is not a major genetic determinant for the development of visual loss.

Internal and external environmental factors may also play a role. Systemic illnesses, nutritional deficiencies, trauma, medications, or toxins that stress or directly or indirectly inhibit mitochondrial metabolism have been proposed to affect the phenotypic expression of the disease.