Scimitar syndrome has a variable presentation, ranging from an asymptomatic patient with an isolated finding with a benign outcome, to a patient with signs of congestive heart failure and/or respiratory distress. There are two main presentations: infantile and childhood/adult variant; that can divide into three different groups: those associated with other clinically significant cardiac defects, and patients without significant cardiac defects that present either early in infancy or milder forms that present later in childhood/adulthood. The most common associated cardiac defects are atrial septal defect (80%), patent ductus arteriosus (75%), ventricular septal defect (30%) and pulmonary vein stenosis (20%); but you can also find tetralogy of Fallot, aortic arch hypoplasia or coarctation and hypoplastic left heart syndrome.

The infantile form usually correlates with higher comorbidities that include multiple congenital defects (accessory diaphragm, eventration or partial absence of the diaphragm; phrenic cyst; horseshoe lung; and pericardial absence), complicated with severe pulmonary hypertension causing congestive heart failure, contributing to significant mortality. These patients are generally diagnosed within the first few months of life, presenting as failure to thrive, with tachypnea and heart failure, causing a picture of a severely ill and agitated patient with a mortality rate of up to 45%. Patients present with clinical signs of right-to-left shunt if there is pulmonary hypertension, and contributing factors for this development of increased pulmonary-to-systemic flow ratio include:

- Infra diaphragmatic aorta to the lower right lung flow

- Shunts through associated cardiac defects

- Stenosis of the scimitar vein or the pulmonary veins

- Large left-to-right shunts from the scimitar vein

- Pulmonary hypoplasia that leads to increased pulmonary vascular resistance in both lungs

Patients may present with pulmonary infections (especially of the right lower lobe), bronchiectasis and interstitial pulmonary disorders.

The childhood/adult variant tends to be milder with lower mortality rates. Patients present with an incidental finding of an unexplained right heart dilation, as well as frequent pulmonary infections predominant on the right side. Due to mildly elevated pulmonary artery pressure and right-sided volume overload, up to 50% of the patients may experience right ventricular hypertrophy with right bundle branch block. Physical examination characteristically demonstrates a shift of the heart sounds and cardiac impulse to the right, associated with a systolic murmur.