Depending on the location of lymph nodes, lymphadenectomy can be carried out as either open surgery or laparoscopic surgery. In the operation of radical open inguinal lymphadenectomy for penile carcinoma, the patient is supine with legs fixed in moderate external rotation. Having as anatomical reference points the pubic symphysis and anterior superior iliac spine, a 10-cm horizontal skin incision is performed 2 cm above the inguinal crease. The femoral triangle apex is reached by dissecting the lower skin flap at Scarpa fascia level until 10 to 12 cm below the incision. The great saphenous vein (GSV) is severed and isolated between ligatures. The surgeon continues dissection of GSV and its branches at its insertion into the common femoral vein (CFV).

Surgical specimen, which includes lymphatic nodes between the sartorius and adductor longus muscles as well as fascia covering these muscles is removed close to femoral vessels and sent to the laboratory to be assessed for the presence of cancer cells. To avoid lymph drainage, all subcutaneous tissues along medial, distal, proximal, and lateral margins are sutured.

An axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) for breast cancer is performed by an incision that measures approximately 2 inches across the patient's axilla. Lymph nodes located below the lower edge of the pectoralis minor muscle (level I) as well as lymph nodes located directly under the pectoralis minor muscle (level II) are removed. A small drain may be placed to avoid post-operative complications.

Total mesorectal excision (TME) is a common surgery used in the treatment of colorectal cancer in which the patient is placed in the modified lithotomy position. The aim of this procedure is the en bloc resection of rectal cancer with a complete pararectal lymphadenectomy as contained in the mesorectum, with a rectal fascia intact. TME may be performed as an open, laparoscopic, or robotic operation with comparable oncological results.

A neck dissection is a surgery to remove cervical lymph nodes from the neck for the purpose of cancer treatment. Macfee incision, which comprises of two horizontal parallel incisions, is a commonly used incision for neck dissection. The platysma muscle is identified and raised to perform neck dissection. Neck dissection is performed depending on the extent and involvement of vital structures. Pectoralis major myocutaneous flap or temporalis flap and skin graft are used for the reconstruction.