The ankle joint is important during ambulation because it adapts to the surface on which one walks. The movements that occur at the ankle joint are plantarflexion, dorsiflexion, inversion, and eversion. The muscles of the leg divide into anterior, posterior, and lateral compartments. The leg's posterior compartment of the leg divides into the superficial posterior compartment and the deep posterior compartment. The superficial posterior compartment consists of the gastrocnemius and the soleus muscles, which are the primary muscles involved in ankle plantarflexion. The deep compartment contains the tibialis posterior, the flexor digitorum longus, and the flexor hallucis longus muscles. The flexor digitorum longus and the flexor hallucis longus have roles in ankle plantarflexion, and the tibialis posterior muscle plays a role in ankle joint inversion. The tibialis anterior muscle, found in the anterior compartment of the leg, is the primary muscle that facilitates dorsiflexion of the ankle joint. The peroneus longus and peroneus brevis muscles, found in the lateral compartment of the leg, function to facilitate eversion of the ankle joint.

**Ligament Testing**

The anterior drawer test is used to examine the integrity of the anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) and utilizes the anterior translation of the talus under the tibia. The test is performed by stabilizing the distal tibia (and fibula) with one hand while the other hand holds the calcaneus and puts the ankle in slight dorsiflexion. The calcaneus is then translated anteriorly while simultaneously translating the leg (distal tibia and fibula) posteriorly. Excessive talar anterior translation on the injured side compared to the uninjured side is indicative of a positive test.

The talar tilt test, also known as the inversion stress test, is used to test the integrity of calcaneofibular ligament. The examiner performs this test by stabilizing the distal tibia (and fibula) with one hand and inverting the ankle while it is in the neutral position. Pain elicited at the area of the ligament indicates a positive test.

The eversion stress test is used to assess for a deltoid ligament injury. It is performed by everting and abducting the heel while stabilizing the tibia (and fibula). Increased laxity or pain indicates a positive test.