Newborns require admission to a Level III neonatal intensive care unit and an interprofessional team approach to tackle the obstacles faced with caring for neonates affected by HI. Along with the ICU clinicians and nurses, the team should include specialists in a variety of fields such as dermatology, neonatology, plastic surgery, genetics, ophthalmology, otolaryngology, physical therapy, occupational therapy, nutritionist, and social work. ICU management is mainly supportive. Neonates should be placed in an isolated room in an incubator with added humidity to counter thermoregulatory issues. Neonates are at high risk of bacterial infection and sepsis. Patients require close monitoring of vitals, blood cultures if hemodynamically unstable or lethargy noted, and routine serum electrolytes with depletion.

Loss of skin barrier leads to transepidermal water loss and electrolyte imbalance. To avoid dehydration, clinicians need to monitor daily weight changes, fluid intake, and urinary output. Deep fissures may pose a risk for infection if purulent drainage is identified, then acquire would cultures. Topical antibiotics can be applied to fissures. Extensive fissuring can cause pain and discomfort. Adequate pain control should be provided with acetaminophen, NSAIDs, or narcotics. Furthermore, neonates with HI are at risk for complications related to impaired flexibility such as restrictions to the anterior chest-wall expansion that may lead to restriction of lung movement, increased risk of pneumonia, difficulty feeding, and risk for respiratory failure. Neonates that display signs of acute respiratory distress require intubation to secure a patent airway.

Other impairments in flexibility include contractures in distal extremities in the hands and feet. These require plaque removal and a liberal application of emollients to avoid ischemic digit necrosis and compartment syndrome from epithelial constrictions. Moreover, ectropion increases the risk of exposure keratitis and will require ophthalmology consult. Adequate lubrication of the eyes with hourly artificial tears or other ocular lubricants are necessary.

Eclabium caused by tension from the plaques may lead to immobile mouth and inadequate feeding. This will require a nasogastric tube for sufficient caloric intake. Neonates will also require once to twice daily bathing with only water and routine application of bland emollients, such as petroleum-based products, to promote shedding of stratum corneum. Avoid potent topical emollients due to the risk of systemic absorption. The use of self-adherent wraps or gauze to secure lines or tubing is recommended instead of tape due to the fragility of the skin. In addition to supportive therapy and the liberal use of bland emollients, the use of systemic retinoids is the standard of care in HI. Acitretin is a systemic retinoid with a short half-life and reduced side effect profile, which promotes the shedding of hyperkeratotic plates and reduces scaling.

There is enhanced mortality and survivability with early use of systemic retinoids. Early use improves digital and thoracic constrictions, thus improving breathing and functional movement, and decreases the risk of digital necrosis. In order to implement systemic retinoid therapy, a pre-therapeutic assessment is required, followed by serial labs including complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, cholesterol, triglyceride levels, and urinalysis. Acitretin is dosed between 0.5 and 1 mg/kg per day. Acitretin should be titrated to the lowest dose based on physical exam assessments and side effects. Systemic retinoids can be discontinued at 6 months of age. In case oral therapy cannot be tolerated, topical retinoids with 0.1% tazarotene cream is an effective alternative with limb contractures and ectropion management. Beyond the neonatal period, children with HI require long-term care with frequent follow-up care with physical and occupational therapy to optimize range of motion, also speech and language therapy for children that display cognitive and social dysfunction.