Healthcare providers, including pharmacists, must understand their legal and professional responsibilities regarding recalls. Pharmacists are strongly encouraged, but not required by law, to report adverse drug reactions to the FDA. With certain vaccines, however, there is a legal obligation.

Drug manufacturers often notify consumers automatically of a recall before pharmacies are notified. Notices are sent to all consumers of the recalled medication without regard to specific batches affected. Thus, pharmacists should be prepared to answer patient questions concerning recalls. By comparing the batch number of a patient’s medication to the batch numbers involved in the recall, pharmacists can identify whether their specific patient’s medication was affected. The best resource for pharmacists to obtain the most current information regarding FDA recalls, including specific batch numbers affected, is the FDA Enforcement Report Index. This resource is free online and is updated weekly.

If a patient’s medication is among the affected batches, the pharmacist should learn the reason for the recall. If the recall is due to something benign—for example, the drug container has a defect that does not impact the chemical quality of the medication—the pharmacist should inform the patient of this and counsel them to continue taking the medication as usual. If the recall justifies the patient stopping their medication, the pharmacist can help them obtain their medication from another manufacturer. If a patient’s medication was not among the affected batches, the pharmacist can reassure the patient and counsel the patient to continue taking the medication as usual. This communication is vital because it prevents patients from needlessly stopping their medication. The pharmacist can also share their decision with the patient’s primary care provider to avoid future confusion. Another resource providers can direct their patients to is the FDA Adverse Events Reporting System (FAERS). Consumers, pharmaceutical companies, and providers can all report complaints and adverse events to the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS). This FDA maintains FAERS as a free, user-friendly system for online searching by the general public. Thus, it is a useful resource for patients.

The Recall Alert System is a mechanism designed for the FDA to communicate with providers regarding recalls, but it frequently fails to do so. For 20% of Class I recalls (the most severe category of recalls), the FDA failed to utilize the Recall Alert System or MedWatch in one study. Rather than an exhaustive list of all available recall information, MedWatch is a summary of severe reactions that a provider would not anticipate based solely on current labeling. An adverse event is considered serious if it fatal, life-threatening, requires hospitalization, causes a congenital anomaly, or if medical or surgical intervention was needed to avoid permanent consequences.