The complex pathogenetic pathways in rheumatoid arthritis involve both the innate and adaptive immune system activation and involvement of several cells including T-cells, B-cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, neutrophils, fibroblasts, chondrocytes, and mast cells. The exact pathophysiological mechanisms involved in rheumatoid arthritis are still not completely understood. An interplay between genetic and environmental risk factors leads to autoimmunity and altered immune system. Molecular mimicry, epigenetic transformation, and cross-reactivity are additional possible theories. Citrullination, carbamylation, and methylation are important theories in rheumatoid arthritis that lead to the production of new antigenic epitopes and autoantibodies to citrulline and rheumatoid factor in seropositive patients.

The innate and adaptive immune systems react to these antigenic epitopes by activation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs). Upon exposure to an antigenic stimulus, cells of the innate system, including monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells, express TLRs which initiate and promote a cascade of inflammatory events. Macrophages and dendritic cells engulf and process the antigenic peptides, which is followed by migration to the peripheral lymphoid tissue where they present these antigenic epitopes to the adaptive immune system. Antigen presentation to T lymphocytes promotes T cell differentiation with resultant activation of cellular immunity and the subsequent release of proinflammatory cytokines, including the Tumor necrosis factor-alpha, transforming growth factor β, interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, IL-21, and IL-23. The T-B cell signaling pathways promote B lymphocyte activation with the production of autoantibodies to rheumatoid factor and citrulline that lead to the systemic and articular disease process.

The immune drive is further associated with the expression of adhesion molecules and the chemotaxis of neutrophils into the synovium, release of chemokines by the activated endothelial cells of synovial microvasculature that leads to inflammatory synovitis and synovial thickening. The thickened synovial tissue becomes hypoxic due to the proliferation of synovial cells and increased fluid volume in the synovium with a reduction of the capillary flow. This all together promotes angiogenesis and pannus formation.