**Cavernous Sinus Tumors**

- Tumors were the most frequent cause of CCS as previously mentioned

- Tumors may be primary or metastatic and have a wide differential, including meningiomas, schwannomas of CN III, IV, V1/V2 (the most common) or VI, haemangiomas, haemangiopericytomas, and metastatic disease (i.e., the perineural spread of tumor through neural foramina) from lung, breast or prostate.

- Tumors also may arise from either a pituitary tumor or by locally spreading, such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma with intracranial extension (more in Southeast Asia).

**Cavernous sinus vascular pathologies; vascular pathologies in the CS include carotid-cavernous fistulas (CCFs), carotid-cavernous aneurysms (CCAs), and cavernous sinus thrombosis (CST)**

- CCAs do not carry a major risk of subarachnoid hemorrhage. CCFs may arise spontaneously or from secondary causes such as trauma, CCAs, and venous thrombosis.

- CCFs can be classified as indirect, low-flow, or dural CCFs (an indirect communication between the cavernous sinus and branches of the internal or external carotid artery within the adjacent dura). They can also be classified as being direct or high-flow CCFs (a direct connection between the intracavernous carotid artery and the cavernous sinus).

- The causes of CST are aseptic or infectious. Infections can spread from a nasal furuncle (50%), sphenoidal or ethmoidal sinus, (30%) as well as dental infections (10%). Aseptic causes typically occur after surgery or trauma. The most common causative microorganism is Staphylococcus aureus, followed by milleri group streptococci which include Streptococcus constellatus, Streptococcus intermedius, and Streptococcus anginosus. Septic cavernous sinus thrombosis is a rare but serious complication of cavernous sinus infections.

**Infections**

- Bacterial infection sources are explained above. One patient with tuberculosis is also reported**.**

- Fungal infection is the second common cause of CCS in Northern India. Out of 18 fungal infections, Aspergillosis accounted for 44.4%, mucormycosis accounted for 22.2%, and other fungal infections accounted for 33.3%.

**Inflammation
**

- An inflammatory process of unknown etiology causes Tolosa-Hunt syndrome. Inflammation causes swelling, pressure and then dysfunction of the structures, particularly of the CN.

- Sarcoid or Wegener granulomatosis can also predispose to cavernous sinus syndrome.

- Herpes zoster can cause inflammation.