WPW ECG pattern is caused by abnormal electrical conduction through an accessory pathway that bypasses the normal cardiac conduction system. This accessory pathway allows cardiac electrical activity to bypass the atrioventricular node conduction delay, and arrive early at the ventricle, leading to premature ventricular depolarization. This preexcitation also bypasses the fast conducting His-Purkinje system and results in early but slowly propagated ventricular depolarization, which gives rise to the ECG pattern of a short PR interval with a “slurred” start to the QRS complex termed a delta wave. The remainder of a normal QRS obliterates this delta wave as the normal cardiac conduction catches up following AV node delay and fast conduction through the His-Purkinje system.

There are two ways in which an accessory pathway can lead to WPW syndrome. The pathway can either initiate and maintain an arrhythmia or allow conduction of an arrhythmia generated elsewhere. The first type occurs when a circuit is formed between the normal conduction system of the heart and the accessory pathway (or two or more accessory pathways), allowing for atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia (AVRT). An incorrectly timed extra electrical impulse can lead to a recurring cycle between the atria, AV node, ventricles, and the accessory pathway. Orthodromic AVRT occurs when conduction progresses from the atria with antegrade conduction through the AV node to the ventricle and retrograde conduction through the accessory pathway. This will usually result in a narrow complex QRS as the His-Purkinje system is used unless aberrant conduction is present. Antidromic AVRT is the opposite with antegrade conduction passing from the atria through the accessory pathway to the ventricle and retrograde conduction back up the AV node and is usually associated with a wide complex QRS.

The other way an accessory pathway can lead to arrhythmia is by allowing conduction of an arrhythmia that is generated elsewhere to propagate to a portion of the heart that would normally be electrically insulated from this arrhythmia. The accessory pathway is typically comprised of myocardial tissue and usually has non-decremental or non-delayed conduction allowing immediate ventricular activation. This non-decremental conduction property predisposes patients with WPW syndrome to sudden cardiac death. This occurs due to rapid ventricular rates in conditions with rapid atrial depolarization, such as atrial fibrillation (AF) or atrial flutter. These fast ventricular rates can degenerate into ventricular fibrillation (VF) and cardiac arrest.