Since the first cases of COVID-19 were reported in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China, in December 2019 and the subsequent declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic by the WHO in March 2020, this highly contagious infectious disease has spread to 223 countries with more than 643 million cases, and more than 6 million deaths reported globally. A recent epidemiological update by WHO reported that more than 200 countries worldwide had reported SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern, of which the Omicron VOC has been reported as the most dominant current circulating VOC since first being reported in November 2021. The US has experienced the highest number of SARS-CoV-2 infections and COVID-19-related deaths, followed by India and Brazil.

Persons of all ages are at risk for infection and severe disease. However, patients aged ≥60 and with underlying medical comorbidities (obesity, cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease, diabetes, chronic lung disease, smoking, cancer, solid organ or hematopoietic stem cell transplant patients) are at an increased risk of developing severe COVID-19 infection. The percentage of COVID-19 patients requiring hospitalization was six times higher in those with preexisting medical conditions than those without medical conditions (45.4% vs. 7.6%) based on an analysis by Stokes et al. of confirmed cases reported to the CDC from January 22 to May 30, 2020. Notably, the study also showed that the percentage of patients who succumbed to this viral illness was 12 times higher in those with preexisting medical conditions than in those without medical conditions (19.5% vs. 1.6%).

Data regarding the gender-based differences in COVID-19 suggests that male patients are at risk of developing severe illness and increased mortality due to COVID-19 compared to female patients.