# Introduction

Skin cancer is a fast-growing epidemic in the United States with greater than 3.5 million new cases diagnosed each year.

# Function

Skin cancer prevention comes in many forms, including mindfulness, proper clothing, and the use of sunscreen. The primary form of prevention is avoiding excessive exposure to the sun’s ultraviolet radiation. Additionally, patients should discontinue the use of tanning beds.

Other than avoiding the sun at peak hours and wearing protective clothing, using sunscreen is the single-best habit patients can develop to reduce their risk of skin cancer. Sunscreens come in various types and contain different ingredients that protect against the sun in different ways. Chemical ingredients, such as the frequently used para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) and cinnamates, absorb solar rays and change UV rays into heat energy. Ingredients like zinc oxide and titanium dioxide work as a physical barrier that deflects UV rays off of the skin. Selecting sunscreens that are labeled as broad-spectrum is important because that indicates that the patient will be protected from both UVA and UVB rays. Zinc oxide and titanium dioxide, aside from creating great barrier protection, are excellent ingredients to look for in sunscreens due to their broad-spectrum UV coverage.

Choosing the right sunscreen for your patient will depend on the patient’s skin type, any allergies the patient may have, and the age of the patient. Sunscreen should be applied 20 to 30 minutes before sun exposure and reapplied every 90 minutes after. There is no such thing as waterproof sunscreen; however, the FDA has approved 3 levels of water resistance based on a product's ability to resist an 80 minute period of water immersion. Sunscreens with a higher water resistance factor should be encouraged with reapplication of sunscreen at least every 90 minutes. This is especially true when involved in water activities. If the sunscreen has a lower water resistance factor, reapplication should be even more frequent.

# Issues of Concern

Skin cancer is more prevalent than all other types of cancer combined. It is estimated that 30,000 people will die from melanoma and nonmelanoma skin cancers in 2018.

# Clinical Significance

Many medications are known to increase photosensitivity, which can increase the risk for skin cancer. These medications include but are not limited to tetracyclines (especially doxycycline), thiazide diuretics, sulfonamides, fluoroquinolones, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, retinoids, and St. John's wort.

Increasing research is being conducted on oral agents that can prevent or treat skin cancer. Low-dose capecitabine has been researched for the secondary prevention of nonmelanoma skin cancers in solid organ transplant recipients.

# Other Issues

There is some research that suggests that antioxidants and vitamins are helpful for chemoprotection of skin cancer.

**Outcomes**

Overall, it appears that the rates of skin cancer have increased. This could be due to an aging population, more awareness or due to a shift in lifestyle. Whatever the case, there is now less argument about the use of a sunscreen 24/7 throughout the year.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Most skin cancers can be prevented, but this requires education of the public. Besides the physician, both the nurse and pharmacist can play a valuable role in this type of intervention. The public needs to know that besides the sun other risk factors for skin cancer include tanning beds and chemical exposure like arsenia. For those who prefer the outdoor lifestyle, they need to wear sun protective clothing, discontinue smoking, wear sunglasses and liberally use UV protection sunscreen. Finally, patients need to know to how to examine their skin and when to see a healthcare provider.