Essential investigation in characterizing PSS is PCR analysis of aqueous humor tap to assess viral DNA.

It is essential to perform central visual field testing (Humphrey visual field, 24-2 or 30-2) to assess a glaucomatous pattern of visual field loss, suggestive of optic nerve damage. Also, stereoscopic optic disc photography is helpful for glaucoma assessment and monitoring. The finding of progressive optic disc cupping and disc hemorrhage after an acute attack of severely elevated IOP may suggest permanent damage to the optic disc.

Iris angiography during an acute episode may demonstrate areas of segmental iris ischemia, vascular congestion, and leakage.

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) and OCT angiography (OCTA) of the optic disc provide useful information about optic nerve structure, retinal nerve fiber layer, and peripapillary vessel density. A decrease in these parameters may suggest permanent glaucomatous damage.

The images shown represent the optical coherence tomogram (OCT) image of both eyes of a male patient who was 45-year-old at the time of diagnosis of left eye Posner Schlossman syndrome. His clinical presentation was characterized by recurrent episodes of left eye anterior uveitis (iritis), elevated intraocular pressure, and open anterior chamber angle. His vision was normal in both eyes. He was normal in between attacks. This OCT was obtained nine years after presentation; Figure 1 shows significant loss of ganglion cell complex (GCC) and retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) in the left eye. There is evidence of progression to glaucomatous damage, characterized by optic nerve cupping of the left eye. The optic nerve is normal in the right eye. Figure 2 examines the change analysis over the nine-year follow-up period and reveals a rate of GCC loss of -0.97microns/year and RNFL of -1.14microns/year, both having significant P values. He has been managed with topical steroid and non-steroid (topical Nepafenac) during periods of acute inflammatory flair and maintained on topical hypotensive to manage ocular hypertension.

Furthermore, anterior segment OCT of the cornea in eyes with PSS associated with an endotheliitis depicts this as an irregular and highly reflective endothelial cell layer.