# Introduction

In current clinical practice, procalcitonin (PCT) has developed into a promising new biomarker for the early detection of systemic bacterial infections. PCT is a 116-amino acid residue first explained by Le Moullec et al. in 1984; its diagnostic significance was not recognized until 1993.

Other inflammatory biomarkers, such as C-reactive protein, lack the specificity to accurately distinguish between bacterial and non-bacterial infections.

The United States Food and Drug Administration has approved using PCT assays for initiating or discontinuing antibiotics in lower respiratory tract infections (LRTIs) and for discontinuing antibiotics in patients with sepsis.

PCT should not be used as the sole determinant for antimicrobial therapy.

# Pathophysiology

Under normal homeostasis, pre-procalcitonin undergoes initial synthesis by thyroid C cells. Later this peptide is transformed into procalcitonin via cleavage of a 25-amino acid signal sequence by endopeptidases. The end product calcitonin, the 32-amino acid hormone responsible for serum calcium regulation, is formed following conversion by the enzyme prohormone convertase.

The extra-thyroid synthesis of PCT occurs in the liver, pancreas, kidney, lung, intestine, and leukocytes; notably, the synthesis of PCT is suppressed within these tissues in the absence of bacterial infection.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

Human serum or plasma specimens can be used to determine procalcitonin (PCT). For accurate results, serum and plasma specimens should be free of fibrin, red blood cells, and other particulate matter.

The PCT specimens should be free of bubbles. Remove bubbles with an applicator stick before analysis. Use a new applicator stick for each specimen to prevent cross-contamination. To ensure consistency in results, recentrifuge specimens before testing if they contain fibrin, red blood cells, or other particulate matter.

# Diagnostic Tests

**Kinetics**

Procalcitonin (PCT) serum levels have been shown to increase 6 to 12 hours following initial bacterial infections and increase steadily in the two to four hours following the onset of sepsis.

**Chemical Assays**

In current clinical practice, several chemical assays have been developed to detect PCT serum levels at varying sensitivities, most displaying functional sensitivity around 0.06 ng/mL.

# Testing Procedures

All currently available assays for the quantification of PCT are based on immunoassay techniques.

A point-of-care test for PCT  is available using an immunochromatographic technique. A colored band appears on the test strip 30 minutes after applying 200 microliters of serum or plasma; the intensity of the band is read against a reference card. The results are reported as less than 0.5, 0.5 to 2.0, 2.0 to 10, and greater than 10 μg/L.

# Interfering Factors

Although procalcitonin (PCT) assays have shown promising results over the years, several limitations still require consideration before implementing these tests in everyday clinical practice.

The PCT assay may exhibit interference when a sample is collected from a person consuming a supplement with a high dose of biotin (also termed as vitamin B7 or B8, vitamin H, or coenzyme R).

The cost-effectiveness of PCT assays also needs to be considered, as overuse in the emergency setting leads to extraneous costs. The average price of the test is roughly $9.44, which is relatively inexpensive. However, this cost does not consider the amount that insurance charges, nor does it include sample acquisition costs.

Within the intensive care setting, Kip et al. performed a randomized controlled trial to determine the cost-effectiveness of PCT assays among septic patients. They determined that PCT assays improved mortality rates and decreased the clinical course of antibiotics. However, they found costs for patients tested with PCT assays averaged $2704 greater than patients who did not undergo PCT testing.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

Procalcitonin (PCT) has a set half-life of 20 to 24 hours which provides clinicians and researchers with a rough timeline of when levels should begin to decrease following physiological control of the systemic infection. When physiologic control is reached, PCT should decrease by approximately 50% over 24 hours.

The following clinical scenarios have utilized various PCT cut-off levels to determine the source of an infective process as well as when antibiotic therapy could be utilized or discontinued:

**Arthritis**

- PCT cut-off level: 0.1 to 0.25 ng/mL

- Role of PCT: To discriminate infective (septic) arthritis from non-infective arthritis.

- Type of Study: Observational

**Bacteremic Infections**

- PCT cut-off level: 0.25 ng/mL

- Role of PCT: To rule out bacteremic infections.

- Type of Study: Observational

**Blood Stream Infection (primary)**

- PCT cut-off level: 0.1 ng/mL

- Role of PCT: To differentiate between true infection and a contaminated sample.

- Type of Study: Observational

**Acute Bronchitis/**Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) Exacerbations****

- PCT cut-off level: 0.1 to 0.5 ng/mL

- Role of PCT: To reduce (unnecessary) antibiotic exposure in the ED and inpatient setting without adverse outcomes.

- Type of Study: Randomized controlled trial

**Infective Endocarditis**

- PCT cut-off level: 2.3 ng/mL

- Role of PCT: High diagnostic accuracy for predicting acute endocarditis.

- Type of Study: Observational

**Meningitis:**

- PCT cut-off level: 0.5 ng/mL

- Role of PCT: To differentiate viral from bacterial meningitis and reduce antibiotic exposure.

- Type of Study: Before-after

**Neutropenia**

- PCT cut-off level: 0.1 to 0.5 ng/mL

- Role of PCT: To identify systemic bacterial infections within neutropenic patients.

- Type of Study: Observational

**Pneumonia**

- PCT cut-off level: 0.1 to 0.5 ng/mL

- Role of PCT: To reduce antibiotic exposure during hospitalization without adverse outcomes.

**Postoperative Fever**

- PCT cut-off level: 0.1 to 0.5 ng/mL

- Role of PCT:  To differentiate postoperative infections from non-infectious fevers.

- Type of Study: Observational

**Postoperative Infections**

- PCT cut-off level: 0.5 to 1.0 ng/mL

- Role of PCT: To minimize antibiotic treatment in surgical intensive care settings without detrimental outcomes.

- Type of Study: Randomized controlled trial

**Severe Sepsis With or Without Shock**

- PCT cut-off level: 0.25 to 0.5 ng/mL

- Role of PCT: To limit antibiotic treatment in intensive care settings without detrimental outcomes.

- Type of Study: Randomized controlled trial

**Upper Respiratory Tract Infections**

- PCT cut-off level: 0.1 to 0.25 ng/mL

- Role of PCT: To limit antibiotic treatment in intensive care settings without detrimental outcomes.

- Type of Study: Randomized controlled trial

**Urinary Tract Infections**

- PCT cut-off level: 0.25 ng/mL

- Role of PCT: To determine the extent of renal involvement.

- Type of Study: Observational

**Ventilator-associated Pneumonia**

- PCT cut-off level: 0.1 to 0.25 ng/mL

- Role of PCT: To minimize antibiotic treatment without detrimental outcomes.

- Type of Study: Randomized controlled trial

Once the cut-off level is established, the timing and frequency of PCT measurement to assess adequate infection control should be determined.

Algorithms have been established for emergency and intensive care settings, providing clinicians with a quick method for determining when to initiate or discontinue antibiotics.

In the intensive care unit, an algorithm has been instituted to determine when antibiotic treatment should be discontinued in patients with sepsis.

# Clinical Significance

It is well-documented that early diagnosis of a bacterial infection can decrease mortality and morbidity among all patients.

Unfortunately, most first-line tests for determining infection, such as blood cultures and C-reactive protein, lack the efficiency and specificity needed to treat patients promptly. Therefore, procalcitonin (PCT) serum assays have been developed to provide healthcare providers with an earlier detection method to determine the origin of a systemic inflammatory response (e.g., bacterial versus non-bacterial). Early detection, in turn, limits the development of antibacterial resistance and patient exposure to antibiotics when they are no longer warranted.

The prognostic value of PCT has also shown clinical significance by providing clinicians with a positive correlation between disease severity and elevated PCT serum levels, especially within septic patients.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

For non-waived tests, laboratory regulations require, at the minimum, analysis of at least two levels of control materials once every 24 hours. If necessary, laboratories can assay QC samples more frequently to ensure accurate results. Quality control samples should be assayed after calibration or maintenance of an analyzer to verify the correct method performance.

The laboratory must participate in the external quality control or proficiency testing (PT) program because it is a regulatory requirement published by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) in the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) regulations. It is helpful to ensure the accuracy and reliability of the laboratory concerning other laboratories performing the same or comparable assays.

Consider all specimens, control materials, and calibrator materials as potentially infectious. Exercise the normal precautions required for handling all laboratory reagents. Disposal of all waste material should be in accordance with local guidelines. Wear gloves, a lab coat, and safety glasses when handling human blood specimens. Place all plastic tips, sample cups, and gloves that come into contact with blood in a biohazard waste container.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

As bacterial drug resistance continues to rise across the globe, it has become of utmost importance to enhance antibiotic stewardship.

PCT assays have utility in several clinical scenarios; current research suggests that PCT levels are most useful in acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) to determine when and if antibiotics should be initiated.

Overall, PCT levels provide a promising laboratory measurement for identifying bacterial infections. However, the utility of this test is limited by the clinical setting and patient population. Therefore, further research must be conducted before implementing PCT guidelines for everyday clinical practice.