Treatment for restless legs syndrome is usually not commenced in patients with sporadic or mild symptoms.

In 2014, a device for improvement in sleep was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to be used commercially for patients with RLS. The device counter stimulates the patient's legs with the help of vibrations. The approval came after two randomized studies showed improvement in sleep with the device as opposed to a placebo pad.

Patients should be advised to avoid caffeine, antidepressants, antipsychotics, dopamine-blocking anti-emetics, and centrally-acting antihistamines. Short daily dialysis in renal failure patients, iron replacement, exercise, massage, and heat can all alleviate the symptoms.

Dopamine agonists, including pramipexole, ropinirole, rotigotine, and cabergoline, have reduced symptoms, improved sleep quality and quality of life. Pramipexole and ropinirole have adverse effects, including gambling addiction and extreme weight gain.

The rotigotine transdermal patch can also be used. It is well tolerated and has a relatively low risk of clinically significant augmentation of restless legs syndrome.

In a large meta-analysis involving 3286 participants, pramipexole was shown to improve the symptoms of patients with primary moderate-to-severe restless leg syndrome and maybe better than ropinirole. In a small study, rotigotine improved periodic limb movements and restless leg syndrome symptoms in the short term among end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients.

The use of alpha2-delta calcium-channel ligand (gabapentin or pregabalin) should be considered for the initial treatment of those patients who have severe sleep disturbance, comorbid insomnia, anxiety, pain, or a previous history of an impulse control disorder (ICD).

The drugs are effective anywhere from 1-5 years, but they also have adverse effects, which reduce their compliance. Today, the first-line treatment is either an alpha2 delta calcium channel ligand or a dopamine receptor agonist. Supplemental iron is recommended for all patients who have low serum ferritin levels.

Restless leg syndrome in pregnancy usually resolves after delivery.

Exercise is of benefit to many patients, but it is often not realistic in the middle of the night.

International Restless Legs Syndrome Study Group (IRLSSG) developed a guide for the long-term pharmacologic management of RLS.

- Pregabalin - Effective for up to a year in treating RLS

- Ropinirole, pramipexole, and rotigotine - Effective for up to six months

- Gabapentin enacarbil for 1 year, levodopa for 2 years, and rotigotine for 5 years - Probably effective for durations ranging between 1 and 5 years

- Pergolide and cabergoline - Due to safety concerns, they are not being used in treating RLS

All patients with a ferritin of less than 50 ng/mL should receive the iron replacement.

In terms of nonpharmacological measures, the following should be recommended to patients:

- Sleep hygiene

- Exercise

- Hot or cold bath

- Limb massage

- Vibratory or electrical stimulation of the feet

- The elimination of caffeine before bedtime