Neoadjuvant therapy is not considered a standard of care in cholangiocarcinoma. Rarely, locally advanced or borderline resectable cases may receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy or chemoradiation therapy based on low-powered studies. Orthotopic liver transplantation has been studied in selected populations with inconclusive results. Neoadjuvant therapy should be offered in a clinical trial setting.

Surgery is the only curative treatment for selected patients. The surgical procedure differs according to the anatomical location. Distal lesions are treated with pancreaticoduodenectomy, the Whipple procedure. Intrahepatic lesions will require hepatectomy, and lymphadenectomy is rarely performed. For hilar lesions, surgical resection will vary according to the Bismuth-Corlette anatomical classification.

Type I Bismuth-Corlette can involve the extrahepatic bile ducts but not the biliary confluence and can be treated with biliary surgical resection/Whipple procedure. Type II involves an En bloc resection of the extrahepatic bile ducts, cholecystectomy, and hepatoduodenal ligament lymph node resection, with the creation of a Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy. Type III (Type a and b) involves radical resection of the extrahepatic duct, with ipsilateral hepatic lobectomy, hepatoduodenal ligament lymph node resection, and a Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy (Type III a require right hepatectomy or trisegmentectomy and Type IIIb requires a left hepatectomy). Type IV is predominately unresectable.

Postoperative therapy should be offered within 8 to 12 weeks and requires baseline laboratory and imaging before therapy initiation.

Adjuvant therapy should be offered to patients with a resected pathological specimen and a report of vascular invasion, node positivity, and positive margins, and preferably, concurrent adjuvant chemoradiation or adjuvant chemotherapy alone should be offered. There is limited clinical trial data to define the standard of care, and enrollment in a clinical trial is encouraged.

The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) consensus-based adjuvant guidelines recommend the following

**Extrahepatic Cholangiocarcinoma with Negative Margins and Negative Nodes**

Chemotherapy alone for 6 months with gemcitabine (Gem) [1000 mg/m2 weekly for 3 of every 4 weeks] or fluoropyrimidine (5-FU) [leucovorin 20 mg/m2 followed by FU 425 mg/m2 intravenous [IV] bolus days 1 through 5, every 28 days] published in the ESPAC-3 Trial which enrolled 96 patients with bile duct cancer, and the median overall survival (mOS) for the chemotherapy group was 43.1 months versus 35.2 months in the observation group, albeit not statistically significant. Alternatively, 5-FU [225 mg/m2 daily]-based adjuvant chemoradiation from other gastrointestinal malignancy extrapolation data from the rectal cancer experience.

**Extrahepatic Cholangiocarcinoma with Positive Margins, Invasive Disease, or Carcinoma in Situ at the Margin**

Four cycles of Capecitabine (Cap) [1500 mg/m(2) per day on days 1 to 14] plus Gemcitabine (Gem) [1000 mg/m(2) intravenously on days 1 and 8], every 21 days followed by 5-FU CRT [Cap 1330 mg/m2 per day divided into two daily doses and RT 45 Gy to regional lymphatics; 54 to 59.4 Gy to tumor bed] published in a single-arm SWOG-S0809 trial enrolled 54 bile duct cancer and showed a mOS of 35 months without a comparison group.

**Intrahepatic Cholangiocarcinoma with Negative Disease**

No recommendations.

**Positive Margins**

Consider re-resection, ablation, 5-FU or Gemcitabine chemotherapy, or chemoradiation therapy discussion with a multidisciplinary team.

At ASCO 2017, BILCAP study was presented as first phase 3 randomized adjuvant therapy for patients with no postsurgical complications and Eastern Cooperative Oncological Group of two or less (ECOG less than 2), 447 patients were randomized 1:1 Cap N 223[1250 mg/m2 D1-14, every 21 days, for eight cycles] or observation (Obs) N224 from 44 UK sites 2006 through 2014, it included 19% Intrahepatic, 28% hilar, 35% extrahepatic bile duct cancer and results showed an mOS for Cap 53mo when compared to Obs 36mo (HR 0.75 p0.028). Cap soon will be adopted as the new standard of care.

Surveillance by NCCN recommendations includes imaging every 6 months for 2 years if clinically indicated, then annually up to 5 years. The oncologist may monitor patients closely with liver function tests and tumor markers (CEA and CA19-9) every 3 to 4 months for 2 years, then every 6 months up to 5 years. All above-mentioned tests can be performed when clinically indicated.

No single or combined therapy in unresectable, locally advanced, and metastatic cholangiocarcinoma will achieve a cure; rather the focus is on palliative intervention and extension of survival. All patients with advanced and unresectable disease should be offered a clinical trial when feasible. Patients with good performance status (ECOG 0-1) for chemotherapy could consider first-line option Gem [1000 mg/m2] plus Cisplatin (Cis) [25 mg/m2] on days one and eight every three weeks with acceptable toxicity in low dose cis as published in ABC-02 randomized phase 2 study which included 242 metastatic bile duct cancer patients and showed a mOS of 11.7 months in the combination arm when compared to 8.3 months of Gem alone (HR, 0.70; p0.002). Other first-line, gem-based combinations are not randomized studies and have reported a mOS for GemCap 12.7 months and Gem with Oxaliplatin 14.3 months both on a selected population of patients. Alternative 5-FU-based combination plus Cis 11.5 months or Cap 11.3 months. Patients with poor performance may receive oral Cap which reported a mOS of 8.1 months when compared to the best supportive care of 4.5 months. Future clinical trials with targeted therapy, including FGFR, MEK, and other drugs tailored per the tumor molecular profile, are ongoing and preliminary reports are promising.