Linear IgA bullous dermatosis (LABD) in adults can have a varied presentation, making it difficult to distinguish from other autoimmune vesiculobullous diseases such as bullous pemphigoid (BP). Patients may present with scattered, tense bullae on a background of non-inflamed skin, while others may develop a more herpetiform appearance to their lesions with prominent erythema beneath the vesicles or bullae. The lesions typically have a widespread distribution and usually involve the trunk and extremities but can also involve the scalp, genital area, or face. Some patients may have to expand annular vesiculobullous plaques or even a presentation mimicking toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). In chronic bullous disease of childhood, the classic clinical presentation includes annular erythematous lesions with a ring of vesicles, commonly referred to as a "crown of jewels" or "string of pearls." In children, the lesions most commonly occur on the abdomen, lower back, thighs, groin area, and around the eyes and mouth. The "crown of jewels" or "string of pearls" is less commonly observed in the adult form.

Like many other autoimmune vesiculobullous disorders such as pemphigus vulgaris (PV), BP, and cicatricial pemphigoid (CP), LABD can also have mucous membrane involvement in about 50% of patients, making the examination of mucous membrane surfaces such as the oral mucosa, conjunctivae, nares, and genital areas an important component of a complete examination in patients with suspected vesiculobullous disorders. Like CP, the mucosal involvement in LABD may result in significant scarring. The most commonly involved mucosal surfaces are the oral mucosa and conjunctiva. Interestingly, drug-induced LABD, particularly drug-induced LABD secondary to vancomycin, tends to be much more severe and may mimic toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) and may even have a positive Nikolsky sign.

There have been reports of atypical variants/presentations of LABD including an eczematous form, prurigo nodularis-like form, urticarial form, morbilliform presentation, and even a seborrheic dermatitis-like presentation of LABD.

Both the adult and childhood forms of LABD can vary symptomatically from completely asymptomatic, to mild or severe pruritus or burning sensation.