The basis of proceeding with vertebral augmentation despite having limited evidence when compared to placebo in patients with osteoporotic compression fractures is the lack of generalized conclusions for various trials and expert opinion. Despite multiple studies, there is insufficient information to conclusively determine if there are specific patient subpopulations that would or would not benefit from vertebral augmentation.

If a patient's pain secondary to an osteoporotic compression fracture is unable to be weaned off from opioid analgesics because of its persistent nature or if a patient has developed significant side effects to opiate analgesics, some expert opinion suggests vertebral augmentation as a possible treatment option for osteoporotic compression fractures. Significant side effects from opioid analgesia would include constipation, respiratory depression, confusion, nausea, or urinary retention.

One study compared patient demographics for those with persistent and severe back pain considering undergoing vertebral augmentation. There were two groups in the study. Groups either underwent kyphoplasty or opted for conservative management. Patients included in the study had pain for greater than three weeks duration. Patients who responded to conservative management did not undergo vertebral augmentation. The augmentation group included patients who failed conservative management. Kyphoplasty served as an alternative therapy. The conservative management population had better pain scores at a one-year follow-up when compared to the vertebral augmentation group. The augmentation group was found to be more obese, with more severe osteoporosis, and with a T-score of less than -2.8. The augmentation group was found to be older and with greater compression of the vertebral body when compared to the conservative treatment group. Patients who opted for kyphoplasty had significantly greater risk factors compared to patients who responded to conservative therapy.

Multiple studies have been done focusing on patients suffering from multiple myeloma with metastatic pathological compression fractures. In this select group of patients, kyphoplasty has been found to significantly decrease the need for patients' requirement of walking aids post vertebral augmentation as well as the need for oral pain medication. In one study done in patients with pathological compression fractures, kyphoplasty led to a decrease in the necessity for bedrest secondary to pain, compared to conservative management.

In a separate uncontrolled study, kyphoplasty was shown to significantly decrease patients' reported pain and an improvement in their underlying physical and social functioning, as well as patient-reported vitality. Over 80% of the patients who underwent kyphoplasty reported pain relief in this study.

In an additional study of 57 patients with a pathological fracture secondary to malignancy, there was either a complete or significant resolution of pain in 84% of patients who underwent kyphoplasty or vertebroplasty. The pain scores remained significantly decreased at one year following the procedure.

Over half of the systematic reviews focused on vertebral augmentation for patients with underlying cancer; there was a significant improvement in pain scores following the procedure. The research showed similar scores for the reported need for pharmacological analgesia and inpatient disability.

Another indication for vertebral augmentation would include a vertebral angioma with no neurological symptoms and intractable pain.