The majority of patients with allergic conjunctivitis are first seen by the pharmacist, nurse practitioner, or primary care provider. The patients may be in the pharmacy searching for an over-the-counter treatment; the pharmacist should take this opportunity to educate the patient on lifestyle changes and refer the patient with serious/recurrent symptoms to an ophthalmologist.

Patients with allergic conjunctivitis need to avoid the offending antigen, which requires lifestyle changes. Some patients may need to undergo allergy tests to determine the allergen and then make the behavior changes. Often the wearing of contact lenses may not be possible. In all cases, the patients should receive education on humidifying the home, wearing sunglasses when going out, avoiding mascara and makeup, using artificial tears liberally, and applying cold compresses to the eye.

While the primary care provider and nurse practitioner may see patients with allergic conjunctivitis as outpatients, they should always be alert for patients with visual changes or severe symptoms. Empirical prescription of topical steroids by the primary care providers is not recommended as these agents can also cause cataracts; referral to an ophthalmologist is prudent.

It is always possible that allergic conjunctivitis is mistaken for a much more serious disease. As a result, the nurse and pharmacists dealing directly with the patient need to be vigilant and report to the clinical team interprofessional leader, the ophthalmologist, or optometrist if they are not improving relatively quickly. The pharmacist and nurse should similarly provide patient education and inform them that close follow-up is necessary if improvement does not occur quickly. The development of pain is always a disconcerting symptom and should require the team to report to the team leader. An interprofessional approach that involves open communication and joint education will result in the best care. If the interprofessional team works together to identify potential treatment failures before developing significant morbidity, potential poor outcomes can be avoided. [Level 5]

**Outcomes**

PAC and SAC's long-term outcomes are good, but a significant number of people are left with eye discomfort and poor ocular cosmesis. Some individuals develop recurrences leading to conjunctivochalasis-which is secondary to ongoing limbal conjunctival chemosis. Other complications that can occur in VKC and AKC include corneal opacification and ulcer formation. Some patients may develop lid involvement leading to difficulty in wearing contact lenses. Overall, allergic conjunctivitis management also leads to time off work and an increased cost of care because of frequent visits to the eye specialist and the need to buy prescription eye drops. Finally, drugs used to manage allergic symptoms may also lead to adverse reactions like cataracts.