Nerve blocks are useful for achieving anesthesia to a regional area of the body. Regional nerve blocks offer many advantages over local tissue infiltration. They are useful when local infiltration may not be possible or could result in tissue damage or distortion. Local tissue infiltration can distort the tissues, which could affect cosmetic outcomes when a wound is repaired. This is especially important for areas, such as the face, where cosmetic results are extremely important. Nerve blocks generally require less anesthetic medication to produce the desired effect when compared to local infiltration. Other indications include wound closure, dental procedures, and contraindication to general anesthesia. Nerve blocks are less useful in situations where the wound may extend over an area that is innervated by several nerves. If the injury crosses the midline, it may be beneficial to perform a nerve block on both sides of the face.

The infraorbital nerve provides sensory innervation to the lower eyelid, the side of the nose, the upper lip, upper incisor, canine, premolars, and root of the first molar. An infraorbital nerve block is very useful for procedures that involve the skin between the lower eyelid and upper lip and for dental procedures on the ipsilateral maxillary teeth.

The infraorbital nerve block is easily achieved by infiltrating an anesthetic medication in the area of the infraorbital nerve. This is done by an extraoral and intraoral approach, with the latter being the more common of the two. The intraoral approach is achieved by injecting anesthetic medication into the buccal mucosa opposite the upper second bicuspid tooth 0.5 cm from the buccal surface. The extraoral approach involves injecting medication into the tissues around the infraorbital foramen.