Myoclonic epilepsy in Infancy should first be differentiated from many non-epileptic conditions.

- **Hypnagogic jerks**are benign myoclonic jerks that usually occur on falling asleep. They are also called Hypnic jerks or sleep starts, and they resemble the jerks of myoclonic seizures. Hypnagogic jerks do not occur in waking states, and the EEG is normal.

- **Benign non-epileptic myoclonus of infancy**or benign spasm of infancy (BSI) is non-epileptic spasms occurring in the first year of life and self-resolve by two years. BSI is characterized by spasms lasting 1-2 seconds, with normal ictal and interictal EEG recordings. Ictal video EEG helps in ruling out the epileptic myoclonus of infancy and thereby helps to avoid unnecessary or over-treatment.

- **Benign neonatal sleep myoclonus (BNSM)**is a self-resolving condition featured by myoclonic lightning-like jerks occurring only during non-rapid eye movement sleep, with normal EEG findings. Myoclonic epilepsy of Infancy is typically noted to have onset after 6 months of age and generally not happens during sleep, which is an important distinctive feature.

- The jerking movements associated with myoclonic epilepsy of Infancy may be mistaken for **motor stereotypies, benign shuddering spells, myoclonus-dystonia, tic, or hyperekplexia**(excessive startle response).

The following epileptic encephalopathies should be excluded before diagnosing benign myoclonic epilepsy in infancy.

- **Dravet syndrome**or severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (SMEI) is pharmaco-refractory epilepsy in previously healthy children with the onset in the first year of life. SMEI is usually a channelopathy often caused by SCN1A mutation in three-fourths patients. The seizures are usually prolonged, refractory, febrile or non-febrile, and generalized or unilateral clonic. Temperature sensitivity and onset with febrile seizures can be seen, with normal EEG initially. As seizures progress, developmental delay with cognitive impairment and behavior disorders are possible in the long run. Neuroimaging is usually normal, and interictal EEG may be abnormal with generalized or focal slowing.

- **West syndrome (infantile spasms)**is characterized by the triad of infantile spasms, an abnormal EEG with Hypsarrhythmia, and developmental arrest.

- **Lennox Gastaut syndrome (LGS)**is featured by a triad of multiple seizures (tonic seizures in sleep, myoclonic, and or atypical absence seizures), an abnormal EEG with a slow spike-and-wave pattern, and developmental arrest. LGS presents later in childhood than infantile spasms and can be preceded by West's syndrome in 20% of cases.

- **Progressive myoclonic epilepsies (PME)**comprises a group of rare types of epilepsies that are progressive. PME includes Lafora body disease, Unverricht-Lundborg disease, mitochondrial encephalopathy with ragged-red fibers, type 3 neuronopathic Gaucher Disease, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, and sialidosis. PME typically present in late childhood or adolescence. The characteristic features of PME are multiple seizures (myoclonic or tonic-clonic), progressive neurologic deterioration including ataxia, or dementia.