The most common and classic presentation of erythema infectiosum is a mild febrile illness with rash. Beginning symptoms of infection can include fever, malaise, myalgias, diarrhea, vomiting, and headache. After initial viremia, the classic erythematous malar rash involving the cheeks with surrounding oral pallor develops. This rash does not develop early in the disease process. The rash is classically characterized as a “slapped-cheek rash” and maybe the only clinical diagnostic finding in this disease process. This facial rash can last 4 to 5 days. At the time the facial rash develops, the patient usually feels well, and the viremia has resolved. This rash is thought to be immune-mediated. Days after the facial rash develops, a maculopapular rash usually develops on the trunk and limbs. This rash is nonpruritic and usually lasts about 1 week. The rash may also have a lacy or reticular appearance as it starts to resolve. The reticular rash is often present more on the extensor surfaces. The palms of the hands and soles of the feet are typically not affected.

The course of infection can also present with arthralgias. Joint symptoms are thought to be immune-mediated, and they are more common in adults than children. Women are more affected by joint symptoms than men. The affected joints are usually symmetric. Commonly affected joints include hands, feet, wrist, knees, and feet. Patients will most often complain of joint stiffness. The affected joints show no signs of physical joint destruction from the virus. Joint involvement is usually later in the disease course as well. These joint symptoms typically resolve after about 3 weeks of symptom onset.  When joint symptoms are present, the patient is not considered infectious or contagious.

Immunocompromised individuals typically do not show manifestations of rash and joint symptoms due to the belief that these are immune-mediated, and they would not have an adequate immune response to this infection for these symptoms to develop. Patients who are immunocompromised may develop chronic parvovirus B19 infection which can lead to neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, or complete bone marrow suppression.

Key features about the rash

- The rash may be itchy in adults

- The rash is usually observed in most children but less than 50% of adults

- The patient is not infectious when the rash appears