# Definition/Introduction

The cornea is a smooth, clear structure at the front of the eye. It functions to (1) shield the eye from foreign substances and (2) help control visual focus.

The cornea is composed of 5 layers: epithelium, Bowman’s layer, stroma, Descemet’s membrane, and endothelium (Figure 1A).

The cornea of the human eye is the most densely innervated part of the body, 300 to 600 times more sensitive than skin.

**Corneal Reflex**

The cornea is the first substance irritants or foreign objects will touch when they come in contact with the eye. Contact with the cornea initiates 2 reflexes: blink reflex (corneal reflex) and tear production. The corneal blink reflex is caused by a loop between the trigeminal sensory nerves and the facial motor (VII) nerve innervation of the orbicularis oculi muscles. The reflex activates when a sensory stimulus contacts either free nerve endings or mechanoreceptors within the epithelium of the cornea. Sensory information transmits through the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve (V) to synapse within the spinal trigeminal nucleus in the brainstem (blue pathway, Figure 1B). The contacted nerve within the spinal trigeminal nucleus then projects to the facial nucleus and synapses with the facial nerve (purple pathway, Figure 1B). The facial nerve exits the facial nucleus, wraps around the abducens nucleus, and exits the skull at the stylomastoid foramen. After exiting the skull, the facial nerve travels medially over the surface of the face to activate the orbicularis oculi muscle. Contraction of this muscle causes a blink movement (i.e., eye closure; red pathway; Figure 1B).

There are 2 stages to the blink reflex, early and late. A-beta fibers activate the initial movement of the eyelid (early response) on the ipsilateral side. Other fiber types activate the late stage. The late-stage reflex stimulates facial nerves bilaterally so that both eyes blink. Input from the secondary motor system (e.g., interpositus nucleus of the cerebellum, red nucleus, and reticular activating system) can modulate this late stage reflex.

The motor output of each blink can vary in non-pathological conditions. Many factors can influence the blink response. One factor is the duration and intensity of the sensory stimulus.

The blink response causes the eyelid to close. This system works together with a secondary circuit pathway through the oculomotor nucleus to re-open the eyelid. This secondary pathway is activated by the same touch pathway used by the blink response (Trigeminal V1). To facilitate this response, V1 nerves have secondary inputs within the trigeminal spinal nucleus onto nerves that project to the oculomotor nucleus. These spinal nucleus/oculomotor neurons synapse onto oculomotor neurons that then activate the levator palpebrae. The oculomotor pathway initiates the eyelid to re-open after it closes in the blink response. It works in conjunction with the facial motor pathway.

**Tear Production**

Touching the cornea can also activate circuits that initiate tear production. This reflex circuit follows the same pathway as the blink reflex except that the parasympathetic nerves within the facial VII nerve innervates the lacrimal and meibomian “tarsal” glands instead of muscle (green circuit; Figure 1B).

Tears have several functions.

- Form smooth optical surface

- Keep cornea surface moist

- Wash away debris or irritants

- Have antibacterial properties that help to prevent infection

The corneal blink reflex is not the only reflex that can trigger tear production. Certain visual and taste reflexes can also stimulate these glands. Bright lights trigger visual reflexes. Specific chemicals that may be specifically noxious if they entered the eye (e.g., peppery, spicy, or hot foods) activate taste reflexes. Both systems contact parasympathetics that generate tear production.

# Issues of Concern

Several disorders and environmental substances can influence the corneal blink reflex by altering the anatomy of the trigeminal nerve within the cornea. Glaucoma, for example, is a disorder that induces increased pressure in the eye. As this disorder progresses, trigeminal nerves in the cornea bend. These bends correlate with progressive ocular symptomology and decreased corneal blink reflex sensitivity.

Diabetes is another disorder that impacts corneal health, resulting in peripheral neuropathy in many patients. The unmyelinated C fibers and small A-gamma nerve fibers are most commonly affected. Research has shown that as the disease progresses, there are decreases in the density of nerve plexuses, decreased nerve branching, and increases in bending of the nerve fibers.

A disorder that influences the tear production circuits is Bogorad’s syndrome, “Crocodile tears syndrome.” This syndrome is resultant from improper connections that form during nerve regeneration in patients recovering from Bell’s palsy (i.e., damage to the facial nerve, VII). During recovery, efferent fibers from the superior salivary nucleus synapse with parasympathetic fibers of the facial nerve. This causes the patient to produce tears during salivation (e.g., when smelling or eating foods).

# Clinical Significance

Dysfunction of the corneal “blink” reflex can occur from damage at any point in the pathway (i.e., central or peripheral nervous system). Peripherally damage causes ipsilateral reflex deficits while central dysfunctions have bilateral deficits.

Peripherally, damage to either the trigeminal nerve (V) or facial nerve (VII) nerve will disrupt the corneal blink circuit. Physicians diagnose damage to peripheral nerves by examining either the early and late stages of the blink reflex or secondary symptoms of the nerve damage.

When examining secondary symptoms of nerve damage, physicians perform tests for motor and sensory function. The trigeminal nerve (V1) causes a lack of sensation for the forehead. To test V1 function, have the patient close their eyes and indicate when they feel a touch to different regions of the face. Patients with V1 damage do not feel or identify touch on the affected side of the forehead.

Facial nerve damage causes ipsilateral paresis of the muscles of facial expression. This results in drooping of the mouth and flattening of the forehead and nasolabial fold on the ipsilateral side.

Central nervous system dysfunction will cause deficits in the blink reflex bilaterally. Symptoms will present as dysfunction in the late stage but not the early stage of the blink reflex. A common lesion that influences the blink response is Wallenberg syndrome (i.e., lateral medulla lesion). The spinal trigeminal nucleus is located within the lateral medulla. Disruption of this area region interrupts the blink reflex pathway and results in a lack of late-stage reflexes bilaterally with corneal stimulation on the affected side.

Damage to the reticular activating system, red nucleus, or cerebellum will also influence the corneal blink reflex.