Ocular hypotony is primarily a clinical diagnosis. In all cases of hypotony, an open wound or leak should be ruled out. Seidel test is beneficial in this regard. Other diagnostic procedures help outline ocular anatomy when evaluating a case of ocular hypotony and provide information on the etiology and presence of severe ocular hypotony.

An instance of this is the use of ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM). UBM uses an ultrasonic probe of 35 MHz or 50 MHz. The 35 MHz probes are used to evaluate the ciliary body as they can visualize deeper structures compared to the 50 MHz one. UBM helps assess the anterior chamber depth, image a shallow or flat anterior chamber, and the forward bowing of the iris seen in a situation of hypotony. The UBM can also image the ciliary body and reveal clinically missed cyclodialysis, atrophy, membrane over the ciliary body, detachment of the ciliary body, and intraocular foreign body.

The choroidal effusion present in some cases of severe ocular hypotony can be imaged with a B (brightness) mode ultrasound scan. The B scan can also show the presence of a choroidal or retinal detachment when the fundal view is not entirely clear.

A choroidal detachment in a postoperative hypotonic eye can be seen in the B scan in **figure 2**. Similarly, for the imaging and evaluation of retinal and choroidal folds, fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA), optical coherence tomography, and optical coherence tomography angiography can be utilized.

On FFA, choroidal folds appear as alternating hyper fluorescence and hypo fluorescence bands. Hyperfluorescent crests appear due to atrophy of the RPE, while the troughs are hypo fluorescent. Disc swelling associated with hypotony could demonstrate features of leakage on FFA. Spectral-domain OCT is more sensitive than fundus photographs in diagnosing hypotony maculopathy and can detect folds in the presence of normal eye examination.

Indocyanine Green Angiography (ICG) can also be used to image choroidal folds in situations of ocular hypotony and could detect folds missed by FFA.