Neonatal myasthenia gravis, like adult MG, is ultimately a clinical diagnosis. A strongly suggestive history (mother with known autoimmune MG) and physical examination may be sufficient to make the diagnosis; however, in rare cases, the clinical presentation is not classic, and the mother is asymptomatic for MG, and it is usually helpful to have positive results on one or more standard diagnostic tests.

**Antibody Testing for Anti-acetylcholine Receptor**

Antibody testing is usually highly specific for myasthenia gravis. In the appropriate clinical setting, positive antibody titers confirm the diagnosis, and further testing may only be indicated if the clinical presentation is atypical. Antibody testing only involves serum testing and, especially in the case of acetylcholine receptor antibodies, is relatively inexpensive and straightforward.

**Intramuscular Neostigmine Test**

Intramuscular neostigmine can be administered to evaluate the response of ptosis, dysphagia, and head lag. In the case of negative or equivocal results, a second dose can be administered after 4 hours. It is best if this testing is performed in a monitored setting (i.e., with cardiac telemetry) where advanced cardiorespiratory support is available in case of bradycardia or asystole, which in rare instances occurs during this testing, especially when higher doses are used. Other adverse effects are abdominal cramps, sudden diarrhea, cardiac arrhythmia, and excessive tracheobronchial secretions. Intravenous neostigmine is contraindicated before 2 years of age due to the risk of cardiac arrhythmia.

**Electromyogram/Nerve Conduction Study (EMG/NCS)**

This is a test that measures the electrical activity of a muscle or a group of muscles. In some cases, a single-fiber EMG test may be done, which is a more sensitive test. Traditional single fiber electromyography is not practical for most children, especially as it cannot be performed under sedation or general anesthesia. A variant of single-fiber electromyography, stimulated single-fiber electromyography, is much more useful in children and adolescents than traditional single-fiber electromyography.