Prevalence is commonly confused with incidence.  Incidence is the rate of new cases or events during a specified time period for a population at risk whereas prevalence is the total cases present at one specific time, both new and old cases.  Incidence occurs when the new case is diagnosed, and each new case diagnosed increases the prevalence.  Prevalence decreases when the disease is cured, or the patient dies.  The cure for a disease or death of a patient does not affect the incidence of the disease whereas it decreases the prevalence.  In the image below incidence is the new additions to the reservoir, prevalence is the total in the reservoir, and cure/death decreases the reservoir.  Stated another way, the incidence is a measure of the risk of getting the disease during a specified time period whereas prevalence is a measure of how much burden of the disease there is in the population at one specific moment in time.

A second common error with prevalence is not correctly defining the population at risk.  The total number of people living with ovarian cancer is estimated to be 0.13% of females (222,060 women living with ovarian cancer in the United States / 170,000,000 females in the United States).  If one were to make a mistake and use the total population of the United States instead of only females the prevalence would be incorrectly reported as 0.07%.  This 0.07% prevalence is not correct as only females are at risk, not all individuals.

Prevalence is also not static among different groups.  We will take two different examples, osteosarcoma and essential hypertension, and compare their prevalence stratified by age group.  Osteosarcoma tends to occur in the pediatric age group and has a second incidence peak in the elderly.  Osteosarcoma has approximately a 20% 10-year survival rate. Thus a pediatric patient diagnosed with osteosarcoma will likely no longer be alive in 10 years.  If there are few new cases in teenagers and adults, the prevalence will decrease as more individuals leave the disease group (by death or cure) than new cases are diagnosed.  Later in life, there is the second incidence peak where senior citizens start developing osteosarcoma at increasing rates.  This will add new cases to the osteosarcoma group, and thus the prevalence will increase in senior citizens corresponding to this second peak in incidence.

Essential hypertension, on the other hand, has an average life expectancy of decades after diagnosis.  As people get older, more individuals are newly diagnosed with essential hypertension (new incident cases), and thus the prevalence of essential hypertension increases with increasing age as we add the new diagnoses of essential hypertension to all of the old cases of essential hypertension still alive.