Patients often will present with complaints of acute onset of posterior knee pain, swelling, and instability.  A thorough history includes the mechanism of injury, such as trauma from falling onto a flexed knee or recent motor vehicle accident.  There may or may not be a complaint of a “pop” with PCL tears like those frequently reported with ACL tears.

A thorough knee exam should be performed, including overall limb alignment and gait assessment. The neurovascular integrity of the lower extremity distal to the injury should also be assessed. Intimal tear to the popliteal artery should be suspected in case of weak distal pulses or Ankle-Brachial Index< 0.8 with a further investigation with arteriography. Arteriography should not delay treatment in case of an evident vascular deficit

- **Inspection:**Affected knee will often present with mild to moderate joint effusion. Swelling is usually less than an ACL tear. Patients may present with antalgic gait on examination with obvious favoring of the affected knee. They may have difficulty walking up or downstairs or at an incline.  During the stance phase of the gait, external rotation recurvatum or varus thrust could be suggestive of associated PLC injury. There may be a positive sag test; The sag test is performed with the patient supine, hip flexed to 45 degrees, and knee flexed to 90 degrees.  The tibia will be noted to sag distally relative to the femur as compared to the opposite knee.

- **Palpation:**There may be an effusion on physical examination. Palpate the joint lines for tenderness which could be suggestive of meniscal tears.

- **Muscle strength testing:**Strength should be normal, but there may be a weakness with knee extension and flexion secondary to guarding.

- **Range Of Motion:**The passive range of motion may be limited 10 to 20 degrees with flexion. It may be further decreased with other concomitant injuries such as meniscal, muscular, or ligamentous etiology.

- 
**Special Testing:**

- **The posterior drawer test:**This is the most accurate test for assessing PCL integrity. It is performed with the patient in a supine position with the hip flexed to 45 degrees and knee flexed to 90 degrees. A posterior force is applied to the proximal tibia whilst the femur is stabilized. In PCL injury, the tibia will be posteriorly translated relative to the femur; therefore, reduction to the neutral position is usually needed before posterior force application. Internal rotation tightens the superficial medial collateral ligament and posterior oblique ligaments which decreases posterior tibial translation as they act as secondary restraints to posterior tibial translation. So, in isolated PCL injuries, the tibia translates >10-12 mm in neutral and 6-8 mm in internal rotation, whilst in combined ligamentous injuries the tibia translates >15 mm in neutral and >10 mm in internal rotation.

- **The quadriceps active test:**helpful for diagnosis of complete PCL tear. The patient is positioned supine with the knee flexed to 90°. The examiner stabilizes the foot and asks the patient to attempt extending the knee, this results in isometric contraction of the quadriceps. In complete PCL injury, a posteriorly translated tibia will reduce to relative to the femur.

- **Dial test or external rotation test:**This test is used to diagnose combined PCL and PLC injuries. The patient can be positioned either prone or supine. The examiner externally rotates both feet at 30°and then 90° of knee flexion, and compare both sides. Asymmetry of 10° or more is considered abnormal. Increased external rotation at 30° only is suggestive of isolated PLC injury, while increased external rotation at both 30 and 90° is suggestive of a combined PCL and PLC injury.

- **Varus/Valgus stress:**This assesses combined PCL and collateral ligament injury versus isolated collateral ligament injury. Laxity at 0° is suggestive of combined injury either MCL or LCL and PCL injury. While laxity at 30° alone is suggestive of either MCL or LCL injury.