The pathogenesis and clinical phenotype follow a dichotomy of either eosinophil-mediated damage or ANCA-induced endothelial injury.

**Eosinophils**

An initial TH2-mediated immune response provokes the margination of eosinophils. Eosinophilic presence in active disease is likely a consequence of increased synthesis, enhanced extravasation, and prolonged survival in target tissues. IL-3 and IL-5, produced by TH-2 lymphocytes, are the key regulators in the maturation and release of eosinophils, as well as their survival in blood. Serum levels of IL-5 correlate consistently with disease activity and go down with the initiation of immunosuppressive therapy.

When activated by Th-2 type cytokines, Epithelial and endothelial cells also secrete eosinophil-specific chemokines like eotaxin 3(CCL26), CCL17, and CCL22. They act on CCR4 receptors to facilitate the recruitment of eosinophils and effector Th2 cells to the end organs–thus amplifying the immune response.

Eosinophils, in turn, release the cationic proteins like eosinophil cationic protein (ECP), eosinophil peroxidases, eosinophil-derived neurotoxins, and eosinophil granule major basic protein which is directly involved in mediating tissue damage.

Eosinophils also secrete cytokines like IL- 1, IL-3, IL-5, TGF- beta, and vascular endothelial growth factor. IL-5, in turn, plays an active role in the maturation, differentiation, and survival of eosinophils.

Histological findings in EGPA are characterized by eosinophilic infiltrates in walls of small and medium-sized blood vessels and extravascular tissue spaces. In EGPA with acute pulmonary exacerbations, Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid is also rich in eosinophils, similar to acute or chronic eosinophilic pneumonia. Extravascular eosinophilic granulomas are also observed, particularly in the gastrointestinal tract.

IL- 5 is not the only mediator of eosinophilic tissue infiltration, as evidenced by the persistence of tissue  Major Basic Protein (MBP) despite therapy with mepolizumab causing complete downregulation of IL5 titers. IL-4 and IL-13 are two other potent cytokines of Th-2 profile immune response and may play an important role in tissue infiltration and degranulation of eosinophils.

Peripheral blood eosinophils in EGPA express surface markers of activation like CD69 and CD25 along with a concomitant increase in serum IL-5 and ECP.

**ANCA**

Elevated p- ANCA levels with antibodies in a perinuclear pattern are seen in approximately 40% of patients with EGPA. Rarely a cytoplasmic pattern with specificity for neutrophil proteinase 3 (c- ANCA) is seen.

The presence of ANCA correlates with an increased incidence of glomerulonephritis, mononeuritis, and biopsy-proven vasculitis. Alveolar hemorrhage is also found more often in this group of patients.

Infusion of MPO- ANCA in wild-type and Rag2 knockout mice resulted in severe necrotizing and crescentic glomerulonephritis.

However, endothelial injury in ANCA associated vasculitis is neutrophil-mediated with the generation of reactive oxygen species and proteolytic enzymes from cytoplasmic granules.