The focus in evaluation is on underlying disease processes that progressed to right ventricular hypertrophy.

**Chest Radiograph**

Chest radiographs of patients with severe TR reveal cardiomegaly due to right ventricular enlargement. A prominent cardiac silhouette is observed on the right with the pulmonary artery view, and the enlarged right ventricle fills in the retrosternal space on the lateral film. Additional findings may include right atrial enlargement, the presence of an azygos vein, an upwardly displaced diaphragm, or the presence of pleural effusions.

When the cause of the TR is pulmonary hypertension secondary to a left-sided cardiac abnormality, other radiographic findings may be seen, particularly prominent right and left pulmonary artery hilar segments.

**ECG Criteria**

Right axis deviation (axis greater than 90 to 100 degrees) is often present with right ventricular hypertrophy. There also may be associated right atrial overload and ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities in the right precordial leads (formerly called “RV strain”), reflecting subendocardial ischemia or repolarization abnormalities of the right ventricular myocardium.

The RV forces become predominant in patients with right ventricular hypertrophy (especially due to a pressure load as with pulmonic outflow obstruction or severe pulmonary hypertension), producing tall R waves in the right precordial leads (V1 and V2), and deep S waves in the left precordial leads (V5 and V6). Because of the increase in the amplitude of the R wave and decrease in the depth of the S wave, the R:S ratio in V1 greater than 1 is suggestive of right ventricular hypertrophy. Differential diagnosis of increased R:S ratio in adults includes right bundle branch block, posterior wall myocardial infarction, Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern (especially due to lateral or postero-lateral left ventricular pre-excitation), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (septal hypertrophy), early precordial transition (counterclockwise rotation), normal or positional variant.

Obtaining an R:S ratio greater than 1 from a right-sided precordial lead (V3R or V4R) may be a more reliable indicator of right ventricular hypertrophy.

Thus, reported clues to the diagnosis of right ventricular hypertrophy include the following:

- Right axis deviation (greater than 90)

- R in V1 greater than 6 mm

- R in V1 + S in V5 or V6 greater than 10.5 mm

- R/S ratio in V1 greater than 1

- S/R ratio in V6  greater than1

- Late intrinsicoid deflection in V1 (greater than 0.035 seconds)

- Incomplete right bundle branch block

- ST-T wave abnormalities ("strain") in inferior leads

- Right atrial hypertrophy/overload (“P pulmonale”)

- S greater than R in leads I, II, III, particularly in children (S1S2S3 pattern)

Patients with VSD and EKG evidence of right ventricular hypertrophy require evaluation to determine the cause (pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary stenosis, or double-chambered right ventricle).

**Echocardiogram**

Diagnostic testing is indicated whenever PH is suspected. The purpose of the diagnostic testing is to confirm that PH exists, determine its severity, and identify its cause:

- When a patient's echocardiogram is NOT suggestive of PH: Diagnostic evaluation should be guided by clinical suspicion. If the clinical suspicion for PH is low, evaluation of the patient's symptoms should be directed toward alternative diagnoses. Alternatively, if the clinical suspicion for PH remains high despite the echocardiographic findings, right heart catheterization (RHC) should be performed.

- When echocardiogram is suggestive of PH: No further testing for PH is required if there is enough left heart disease on the echocardiogram to explain the degree of estimated PH. However, additional diagnostic testing is required if there is either no evidence of left heart disease or the extent of left heart disease seems insufficient to explain the degree of estimated PH.

Echocardiography is the main diagnostic modality for evaluation of TR. The operator should examine the right ventricle using multiple acoustic windows, and the report should present an assessment based on both qualitative and quantitative parameters. It enables evaluation of the severity of TR, valve morphology, right chamber sizes and right ventricular function, estimation of pulmonary artery systolic pressure as well as an assessment of any concomitant left heart disease. Parameters that can be measured include RV and right atrial (RA) size, a measure of RV systolic function, as assessed by at least one or a combination of the following:

- Fractional area change

- DTI-derived tricuspid lateral annular systolic velocity wave

- Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion

- RV index of myocardial performance

RV systolic pressure, typically calculated using the TR jet and estimation of RA pressure based on inferior vena cava size and collapsibility, should be reported when a complete TR Doppler velocity envelope is present. When feasible, additional parameters such as RV volumes and EF using  three-dimensional echocardiography should complement the basic two-dimensional echocardiographic measurements. The new reference values according to the 2015 American Society of Echocardiography guidelines  are displayed in Tables 2A and 2B.

**Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance**

Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging may be helpful if the echocardiographic evaluation is suboptimal or inconclusive for assessment of TR severity and right ventricular size and function. CMR enables quantitative assessment of tricuspid regurgitant volume, a regurgitant fraction (the ratio of TR volume to stroke volume), right ventricular volumes, and ejection fraction as well as evaluation of associated LV and mitral disease.

**Cardiac Catheterization and Angiography**

Cardiac catheterization and contrast right ventriculography are not helpful for the diagnosis or evaluation of TR in most patients. However, RHC of measurement of pulmonary pressures and pulmonary vascular resistance is appropriate in patients with TR when clinical and noninvasive data regarding pulmonary pressures are discordant. Left heart catheterization may be helpful to assess potential causes of functional TR (left-sided valve or myocardial disease with an elevated left atrial pressure). On the other hand, a diagnosis of PH requires RHC. PH is confirmed when the mean pulmonary artery pressure is 25 mm Hg or greater at rest. Clinical studies and additional information provided by RHC are necessary to then classify the patient into an appropriate World Health Organization (WHO) PH category (groups 1 through 5).

**Right Heart Catheterization**

RHC is necessary to confirm the diagnosis of PH and accurately determine the severity of the hemodynamic derangements. RHC is also helpful in distinguishing patients who have PH due to left heart diseases, such as systolic dysfunction, diastolic dysfunction, or valvular heart disease (pulmonary venous hypertension; post-capillary PH due to left-sided heart disease) (table 1).

**Pulmonary Function Tests**

Pulmonary function tests are performed to identify and characterize underlying lung disease that may be contributing to PH.

**Overnight Oximetry**

Overnight oximetry can identify nocturnal oxyhemoglobin desaturation. It is common in patients with PH and may prompt supplemental oxygen therapy during sleep.

**Polysomnography**

Polysomnography is the gold standard diagnostic test for sleep-related breathing disorders such as obstructive sleep apnea. It should be performed when the clinical suspicion for OSA is high or the results of overnight oximetry are discordant with clinical expectation.

**Exercise Testing**

Exercise testing is usually performed using the six-minute walk test, stress echocardiography, or cardiopulmonary exercise testing. The latter can be performed with gas exchange measurements, echocardiography, and/or RHC.

**Ventilation-Perfusion Scanning**

Ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) scanning is the preferred imaging study to evaluate patients for CTEPH. A normal V/Q scan accurately excludes chronic thromboembolic disease with a sensitivity of 96% to 97% and a specificity of 90% to 95%. When the V/Q scan suggests that chronic thromboembolic disease exists, pulmonary angiography is necessary to confirm the positive V/Q scan and to define the extent of disease. V/Q scans are an important part of the diagnostic evaluation because PH due to chronic thromboembolic disease is potentially reversible with surgery.