A detailed history and meticulous examination are needed for all cases of esotropia presenting to the outpatient department. Complete history taking should include essential points like age of the patient, onset of deviation, nature of deviation – constant/intermittent, unilateral/alternating. Other critical points to be recorded are abnormal head posture, complaints of double vision, headache, asthenopia, history of closing one eye in bright sunlight. Any predisposing factors of viral illness, head trauma, and excessive near-vision work should be actively enquired. Any family history of squinting or any significant peri-natal history should also be noted down. Previous management, either optical, occlusion therapy, or surgical treatment, is also essential.

Patient evaluation should include general physical examination, build, nutritional status assessment. Gross inspection of head posture, lid fissures, intercanthal distance, interpupillary distance, any mongoloid or antimongoloid slant, epicanthal folds, associated exophthalmos, or enophthalmos should be noted. An ocular examination should consist of a detailed analysis of the anterior and posterior segments. Anterior segment examination should include lid position, ptosis or pseudoptosis, any lid fissure changes associated with eye movements, Marcus Gun Jaw winking, media opacities including cornea or lenticular changes, and pupillary reactions, which give a gross indication of optic nerve head and retinal status.

Posterior segment examination should include a dilated fundus examination to rule out any pathology like macular scarring, optic nerve hypoplasia, retinoblastoma, along with an objective assessment of macular torsion. Other necessary evaluations should include assessing visual acuity using age-appropriate methods, angle of deviation measured with Hirschberg tests, prism bar cover test for near and distance, fixation pattern assessment – alternate fixation, cross-fixation, and dominance of either eye.

Accommodation Convergence/Accommodation ratio (AC/A), fusional divergence amplitudes, binocular function, stereopsis, ocular movements, and refraction with atropine cycloplegia assessments are also essential in all cases of strabismus. These tests will help identify the type of esotropia and thus help plan further patient management. Any associated clinical features like inferior oblique overaction, dissociated vertical deviation, latent nystagmus should also be examined.