Budd-Chiari syndrome (BCS) is often categorized by disease duration and severity:

- Acute: Clinical manifestations develop rapidly over a few weeks, with intractable ascites and hepatic necrosis. Venous collaterals are not seen.

- Subacute: Has insidious onset, with patients taking up to three months to develop symptoms. Venous collaterals develop, leading to minimal ascites and hepatic necrosis.

- Chronic: Patients present with complications of cirrhosis. Venous collaterals are present.

Fulminant liver failure can occur in patients with BCS and is characterized by acute liver injury along with elevated transaminases, jaundice, elevated prothrombin time/international normalized ratio (PT/INR), and hepatic encephalopathy; the latter usually develops within eight weeks of the development of jaundice. Venous collaterals are not seen.

The majority of patients with Budd-Chiari syndrome present with the triad of abdominal pain, ascites, and hepatomegaly. Due to the non-specific nature of findings and a wide range of presentations, a high degree of suspicion is needed to diagnose this condition.

Clinical presentation:

Acute and subacute presentation: Sudden onset of ascites, abdominal pain, jaundice, hepatomegaly, renal failure, hepatic encephalopathy.

Chronic presentation (most common): Progressive ascites and absence of jaundice. Half of the patients can present with renal impairment.

Rare presentation: Tender hepatomegaly, fulminant/sub-fulminant hepatic failure, jaundice, and renal failure.

On physical examination, the following findings can be seen:

- Jaundice

- Ascites

- Hepatomegaly

- Splenomegaly

- Pedal edema

- Stasis ulcerations

BCS should be suspected when there is:

- Sudden onset of ascites and painful hepatomegaly

- Massive ascites with relatively normal liver functions

- Sinusoidal dilation in liver biopsy without heart disease

- Fulminant hepatic failure along with hepatomegaly and ascites

- Unexplained chronic liver disease

- Liver disease with a thrombogenic disorder.