Bazefoxifene is a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) used primarily in managing osteoporosis in postmenopausal women.

Osteoporosis is medically defined by a bone density T score of 2.5 standard deviations below the mean. While age represents the most significant risk factor, menopause leads to rapid bone resorption due to a remarkable decrease in estrogen levels. It remains one of the biggest contributors to debilitating physical health for women.

Bazedoxifene first gained general acceptance for osteoporosis when approved by the FDA in 2013. As part of a combination drug incorporating conjugated estrogens and bazedoxifene, this medication aims to prevent osteoporotic-induced fractures for high-risk women that may have contraindications to other conventional therapeutics.

Before late 2013, the standard clinical treatment for osteoporosis included bisphosphonates like alendronate or IV zoledronic acid, but these were administered with caution, as they are contraindicated in pregnant women and patients with chronic kidney disease.

Bazedoxifine's therapeutic benefits and efficacy were thoroughly tested through two global, randomized, double-blind, placebo- and active-controlled, phase III studies. As part of the inclusion criteria, the study encompassed 1583 healthy postmenopausal women at risk for osteoporosis who were randomly assigned to one of five groups: bazedoxifene 10 mg, 20 mg, or 40 mg a day; raloxifene 60 mg/day; placebo. The study's principal objective was reinforced by the results of the clinical trials, as it was determined that improvements in lumbar bone mineral density (BMD) scores were dose-dependent and significantly elevated from baseline. The mean percentage elevation in lumbar BMD in the 40 mg bazedoxifene group and raloxifene 60 mg group, compared with the placebo group, was 1.49% in both groups.

Other general indications for bazedoxifene include the prevention of glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis.

**FDA Approved Use**

- Prevention of osteoporosis and management of vasomotor symptoms in postmenopausal women

**Non-FDA Approved Indication**

- Anti-proliferative effects that inhibit the progression of breast cancer