Humans are the only natural host to carry N. meningitidis and do so in their nasopharynx before systemic infection. Humans so colonized may be asymptomatic carriers. Colonizing the nasopharynx puts close contacts, such as family members, college roommates, and military recruits, at an increased risk of contracting N. meningitidis and possible infection. Those involved in laboratory or medical care exposure, such as intubating an infected patient with no face shield or mask, are also at increased risk. N. meningitidis colonization of the nasopharynx via inhalation of aerosolized particles containing the bacteria. The incubation period varies and ranges from 1 to 14 days.

Once colonized, it possesses several virulence factors that aid in its invasion and infection of humans: capsule, pili, opacity proteins, meningococcal serine protease A (MspA), lipo-oligosaccharide (LOS), and human factor H-binding protein. Although N. meningitidis may or may not have a capsule, systemic infection isolates are invariably capsulated, aiding in surviving the immune response. The pili are considered a primary adhesion factor and have increased traversal of the nasopharyngeal epithelium in transgenic mice leading to increased rates of meningitis and septicemia. Opacity proteins, Opa and Opc, also facilitate adhesion to and invasion via receptors found on human epithelial cells, endothelial cells, and cells belonging to the immune system. MspA may also aid epithelial and endothelial cell binding. After N. meningitidis invades the bloodstream, it activates and produces a robust immune response. LOS is an essential component for eliciting the immune response, and via cytokine release leads to endothelial damage, capillary leakage, tissue necrosis, organ failure, and meningococcal sepsis. Human factor H-binding proteins also aid in surviving a strong immune response by binding human factor H and negatively regulating the complement pathway of the immune system. The invasion of the bloodstream is thought to be the primary route to the brain but can also cross the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone.

N. meningitidis also possesses several genetic mechanisms to invade and avoid the immune response of the host. These include phase variation (alteration in protein expression), antigenic variation (altering surface proteins), and molecular mimicry to help it survive the immune response.

Like many other diseases, the immune system plays a very important in protecting the host. Conditions that compromise the human immune system increase the risk of contracting meningococcal disease, including meningococcemia and or meningitis. These diseases include human immunodeficiency (HIV) infection, acquired immunodeficiency disease syndrome (AIDS), asplenia, and complement deficiency.