Participation in a drug trial carries an increased level of risk as compared to ordinary medical care, especially due to the potential of being exposed to the unexpected effects of a new drug. Drug trials also encompass several ethical dilemmas. These dilemmas generally stem from the fact that those who bear the burden and risk of participation in the trials are not the same as those who stand to gain from them.

Current research ethics place significant weight on the informed consent process. However, the notion of informed consent is sometimes questionable due to the difficulty in determining the adequate level of information that should be provided to the participant for the consent to be valid, especially in a new compound that has not been tested before and which may be associated with unknown risks. Either too little information is given, or in some cases, too much information is provided in a language that is too technical for the participant to comprehend.

Placebos are commonly used in drug trials. An issue of concern associated with using a placebo is the possibility of harming the participating subjects, who, instead of receiving active treatment, are receiving a placebo. If the participant is not receiving active treatment, this may expose the subjects to an aggravation of their conditions, increased levels of pain, or even the risk of death. Therefore, the use of placebos is acceptable only if it does not subject the participant to any risk of serious or irreversible harm.

Randomization is an essential component used to reduce bias in clinical trials. However, randomization between the two arms of a drug trial may raise serious ethical concerns. By participating in a randomized controlled trial, the participants may receive a treatment that eventually turns inferior. This is particularly problematic if the experimental drug is found to be worse than the standard treatment available outside of the trial or the participant is assigned to a placebo. Participants may thus be denied the best-proven standard of care available.

Publication bias occurs when only clinically or statistically significant results of drug trials are published. Unfavorable results are often not publicized or published, thus generating a false impression of the effectiveness of a medication. For instance, a pharmaceutical company sponsoring a drug trial typically has the right to review the research results prior to publication and may withhold the publication of unfavorable results. Thus, the research findings remain unavailable to the scientific community and make it difficult for healthcare providers to ascertain if a particular drug is appropriate for their patients or not.

Sponsorship bias or funding bias is another issue of concern that may arise during drug trials. Funding for a trial is often provided by a pharmaceutical company that has manufactured or sponsored the drug. This produces a conflict of interest, as the company is inherently biased towards favorable research outcomes and would help enhance the sale of its product.