Variations of the pectoralis major seem to primarily encompass the extent of attachment to the sternum and ribs, differences in the size of the sections to the abdomen, the degree of separation among the sternocostal and the clavicular segments, the fusion of the clavicular fibers with the deltoid, and in the decussation anterior to the sternum. Also seen is the absence of the sternocostal fibers, more so than the clavicular fibers.

The pectoralis minor has been seen to occasionally originate from the second rib in addition to the third to fifth ribs. The insertion of the tendon can also range towards the coracoid process to reach the greater tubercle in some cases as well.

Variations of the serratus anterior include attachments to the tenth rib and a deficiency of the attachments to the first rib. There have also been cases reporting the serratus anterior to be in union with the levator scapulae, external intercostals, or the external oblique.

The subclavius has been reported to occasionally insert into the coracoid process rather than the clavicle or even into the clavicles and the coracoid process at the same time.

Rarely it is possible to find a pectoral muscle (fifth and sixth ribs at the cost-chondral junction) between the pectoralis major muscle and the pectoralis minor muscle; this strip of muscle merges with the small pectoral muscle, with a vertical and lateral direction. It can be 14 centimeters long and only on one side of the rib cage. This rare variation does not have a name.

The sternalis muscle is a strip of anterior and lateral muscle to the sternum and lateral to the pectoralis major muscle, with a population response of 5 to 8%. It is inserted at the level of the manubriosternal junction and arises from the sternal handlebar and with myofascial continuity with the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Its insertion is quite variable and not always located on both sides of the sternal bone. It can be innervated by the lateral pectoral branches or by the intercostal nerves of the anterior branches. The sternalis muscle can be about 9 centimeters long.

The chondrocoracoideus muscle or Wood's muscle is a rare variant of the pectoral muscles.

A strip of muscle tissue known as an axillary arch in the axillary portion can merge with the pectoralis major muscle.

The subclavian muscle may be absent (agenesis) from one side of the body.