An estimated 15% of patients living with HIV in the United States (US) are unaware of their status. HIV testing needs to be incorporated into every level of the healthcare system to diagnose HIV as early as possible. It is estimated that 40% of new infections of HIV are transmitted by those who are not aware of their HIV diagnosis. Early detection reduces the complications of HIV infection and decreases the risk of transmission.

**Who to Screen**

HIV testing should be considered at every clinical visit across specialties. All healthcare providers should be aware of the screening recommendations.

- All patients between 13 and 75 years of age should be routinely screened for HIV. One-time testing is sufficient for most patients except in specific populations. Those needing more frequent testing are men who have sex with men, especially between 13 and 24 years of age; those who inject drugs; those who have sex in exchange for money or food; those who have sex with partners of unknown HIV status; and those who have partners who are known to be HIV positive, inject drugs or are bisexual.

- Patients should be screened for HIV if they present with signs and symptoms of HIV. A constellation of nonspecific symptoms, such as fever, sore throat, or rash, may present as acute retroviral syndrome 2 to 4 weeks after HIV transmission. Patients should be screened if they report possible HIV exposure, regardless of symptoms. This includes all patients requesting sexually transmitted infections testing, those with occupational needle stick or significant mucous membrane exposures, as well as suspected or known sexual or percutaneous exposures, such as patients sharing needles for substance use.

- Patients with possible exposure need repeated testing during the 4 to 6 months following exposure. These patients also should be considered for occupational or nonoccupational post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP). Guidelines for prescribed PEP can be found at https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/basics/pep.html.

- Patients who are seeking pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) also should be screened for HIV before starting therapy as well as every 3 months after beginning treatment with PrEP. PrEP treatment is currently emtricitabine/tenofovir once a day.

- If emtricitabine/tenofovir is used as PrEP in an individual who has converted to HIV, there is a risk that the virus will develop resistance, further complicating the treatment.

- Women who are pregnant need to be screened early in pregnancy.