In addition to the stomach's secretory function, the stomach also has a muscular component, as do all structures within the alimentary canal. The muscularis externa is composed of smooth muscle cells that orient in three directions: oblique layer (unique to only the stomach), a circular muscle layer, and the longitudinal layer. Together these three muscle layers are responsible for the gastric movements needed to break the food bolus into smaller components. A food bolus, which consists of partially digested food from the mouth and the esophagus, is processed by the stomach into chyme, which is a more readily absorbable substance by the small intestine. The stomach accomplishes this food processing through forceful back-and-forth churning motions by the inner oblique layer of the muscularis externa. The circular and longitudinal layers facilitate gastric emptying of chyme through the pyloric sphincter, which allows only liquids and small enough food particles to pass through. Gastric emptying may be slowed by the presence of fats and acids in the duodenum, stress, exercise, and various hormones. Chyme that is not emptied will continue to churn in the stomach until it, too, can pass through the pyloric sphincter. Slow-wave contractions of the gastric smooth muscles are generated by myenteric interstitial cells of Cajal, which serve as GI pacemakers.

There are three movements associated with gastric motility.

- **Peristaltic wave**:
- Contraction of the longitudinal layer rhythmically - Peristalsis can only occur in a forward motion with receptive relaxation of the distal intestinal region.

- **Segmentation**(i.e., mixing component):
- Rhythmic contraction of the circular muscle layer
- The myenteric plexus control sets the segmentation motor pattern as the pacemaker. Rhythmic transient depolarizations within this nervous system create a "waxing and waning" pattern of electrical amplitudes contributing to the formation of a "churning" motion. This motion is capable of slowing the speed of chyme progression through the system, thus allowing for optimal nutrient absorption.

- **Ancillary movements**:
- Stomach Relaxation: As a food bolus is transferred from the esophagus into the stomach lumen via the relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter (LES), relaxation of the stomach is needed to allow for the accumulation of ingested food. The stomach acts as a temporary container so that the digestion of its contents can take place in a uniform and controlled manner. The relaxation occurs through the parasympathetic activation of the vagus nerve, which inhibits the contraction of the gastric muscle layer.

All mechanical movements are the result of coordinated muscle contractions. The muscle layer is regulated primarily by the enteric nervous system (ENS), which is the intrinsic nervous system of the alimentary canal. The ENS can become activated by various inputs from the CNS like olfaction, sight, mechanical reception of the food bolus, or chemical mediators (PSNS/SNS). The mesh-work of neurons that makes up the ENS is found between the longitudinal and circular muscle layers. Commonly, it is referred to as the Auerbach's plexus or the myenteric plexus. The degree and rate of peristalsis are established by the myenteric interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC), as previously mentioned.

The stomach itself does not significantly contribute directly to the body's absorption of nutrients, although it absorbs some substances such as alcohol and aspirin.

**Brief Cellular Review**(refer to the "cellular" section for more information)

Hydrochloric acid (HCl), the main constituent of gastric acid, is secreted by parietal cells. The hydrogen (H) and chloride (Cl) components of HCl are secreted separately by hydrogen/potassium ATPase pumps and chloride channels in the stomach. Pepsinogen, a proenzyme for pepsin, is secreted by chief cells. Collectively, gastric acid creates an acidic environment that denatures proteins and activates the conversion of pepsinogen to pepsin.

The acidic environment of the stomach is not only useful for protein denaturing but also for protection against potentially infectious agents. All material consumed by the body must pass through the stomach, making it an important defense against microbes. Many bacteria are killed or inhibited by the stomach's acidity.

Additionally, secretory cells of the gastric glands include foveolar cells and enteroendocrine cells. Foveolar cells protect the stomach from the corrosive nature of its acidic environment by producing mucus and bicarbonate (HCO3). Enteroendocrine cells secrete various digestive hormones such as gastrin, somatostatin, and ghrelin. Gastrin release occurs in response to increased gastric distension, increased gastric pH, and the presence of amino acids in the stomach.

**Blood Supply and Lymphatics**

- **Arterial Blood Supply:**
- The celiac trunk, which is the first major branch of the aorta after the aorta traverses the diaphragm. The celiac trunk immediately divides into three predominant arteries: the common hepatic artery, the splenic artery, and the left gastric artery.
- The left gastric artery runs the lesser curvature of the stomach and eventually anastomoses with the common hepatic artery. The greater curvature of the stomach receives vascular supply from the anastomoses of the left and right gastroepiploic arteries. The left originates as a branch of the splenic artery, and the right originates from the common hepatic artery.

- **Venous Drainage:**
- The stomach predominately drains via the portal system to the liver before entering the inferior vena cava. The anastomoses drain the lesser curvature of the left and right gastric vein to the portal vein. The greater curvature is drained by the anastomoses between the left and right veins to the superior mesenteric vein, which eventually drains into the portal vein as well.

- **Lymphatic Drainage:**
- The lymphatic vessels travel with the vasculature of the stomach along the lesser and greater curvatures of the stomach. Lymph fluid drains sequentially through several lymph node systems depending on the stomach region. Half of the fundus drains to the pancreaticolienal group, while the remaining half and the cardia drain to the Superior gastric group of lymph nodes. The body of the stomach drains to the inferior gastric subpyloric group of nodes, while the pyloric region drains to the suprapyloric group of nodes. All groups drain eventually into the celiac lymph node. Once the lymph is at the celiac node, the lymph drains through the cisterna chyli to the Thoracic duct where it returns to the heart.