There are numerous therapies available for AA, including intralesional, topical, and systemic modalities. Due to the extent of involvement, intralesional administration is often impractical in AT, and treatment is initiated with topical or systemic agents. There are many more studies on the treatment of AF than studies specifically evaluating the treatment of AT. Of those that studied AT, the most efficacious treatments were found to be topical immunotherapy, phototherapy, pulsed systemic steroids, and immunosuppressive agents. There have also been successful case reports of JAK inhibitors and the combination simvastatin and ezetimibe, though clinical trials with outcomes for AT patients are lacking.

Topical steroids are an initial conservative treatment for AT. These are most often utilized in children less than 10 years old presenting with extensive disease. Therapy with a super potent topical steroid such as clobetasol 0.05% solution or foam is recommended. Children with a history of hair loss for less than one year have shown better responses than those with longer disease durations.

Topical immunotherapy can be used in extensive AA and is performed with diphenylcyclopropenone (DPCP, diphencyprone) or squaric acid dibutyl ester (SADBE). Dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB) was also used but has largely been abandoned because of mutagenicity by the Ames test.

Systemic steroids are another frequently used initial therapy to stimulate hair regrowth with good results. Monthly intramuscular triamcinolone injections have shown the most success, followed by pulsatile oral prednisone or methylprednisolone.

Immunosuppressive agents are often used second-line after a patient has failed standard therapy. These include cyclosporine, methotrexate, or azathioprine, alone or in combination with systemic steroids. Methotrexate can be used in both children and adults and is dosed weekly, usually at 15 to 25mg. Cyclosporine may be used as monotherapy in adults and is usually dosed at 3 to 5 mg/kg/day. Treatment duration should be limited to 6 to 12 months.

Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors are newer medications that are currently being studied in alopecia areata and totalis. These include tofacitinib, ruxolitinib, and baricitinib. These agents have promising therapeutic benefit due to our current understanding of the pathogenesis of AA. JAK inhibitors have proven efficacious in treating other inflammatory conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis. There are a few open-label trials for AA patients, which have shown impressive results with significant hair regrowth. However, many patients have a recurrence of hair loss after therapy discontinuation. Side effects of oral JAK inhibitors include viral reactivation, infection, transaminitis, and bone marrow suppression.

Phototherapy with psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA) and photodynamic therapy (PDT) has been used in cases of extensive AA with reported success. PUVA involves oral or topical administration of psoralen, a photosensitizing agent, followed by UVA light exposure. The adverse effects of PUVA include cutaneous malignancy, so this therapy should be utilized cautiously. PDT is a similar therapy with the application of a photosensitizer, such as 5-aminolaevulinic acid (ALA), followed by light exposure. This therapy has mixed results, and clinical trials are lacking.

There are case reports of the use of daily simvastatin in combination with ezetimibe, with reported success, though no trials have been conducted.

In addition to medical intervention, products to conceal hair loss such as wigs, hairpieces, and scalp prostheses may be used instead of or in conjunction with other treatments. Topical and systemic therapies take time to achieve results, and wigs or prostheses provide immediate coverage. These can be purchased readymade or customized for the patient. There are options made with human hair and others with synthetic fibers. Due to the extensive nature of the disease and psychological impact, many patients prefer to keep their scalp covered while undergoing medical therapy.