The crystalline lens forms very early in fetal life. The development of the eye starts on day 22 of embryogenesis. Optic vesicles form as outpouchings from the forebrain around 25 days of gestation. They enlarge and come into contact with the surface ectoderm. The cells of the surface ectoderm overlying the optic vesicles form the lens placode. The lens pit appears inferior to the lens placode, deepens by cellular multiplication, and eventually separates from the surface ectoderm forming the lens vesicle. The primary lens fibers and the embryonic nucleus form around 40 days of embryonic life.

The lens capsule is a basement membrane that develops from the lens epithelium. Secondary lens fibers form at seven weeks, and the fetal nucleus is formed at eight months. The lens proteins are sequestered from the other ocular structures histologically; the lens has a capsule, anterior epithelium made up of a single layer of cuboidal cells that elongate to form lens fibers at the equatorial region. The nucleus is the central part of the lens. As age increases, the lens consists of the embryonic nucleus (formed in the first three months of gestation), the fetal nucleus, which forms after that, the infantile nucleus, which develops from birth to puberty, and then the adult nucleus. The sequestration of lens proteins from the rest of the ocular structures and their unique antigenic properties form the basis for lens-induced inflammation when these proteins are exposed either through an intact or ruptured anterior capsule.

The exact pathogenesis is unknown. Various hypotheses about the pathogenesis of lens-induced inflammation have been proposed:

- Loss of immune privilege of the crystalline lens and sequestration of lens proteins by the lens capsule (release of lens proteins resulting in a foreign body reaction),

- Loss or alteration of immune tolerance to lens proteins, and

- Possible role of anterior chamber-associated immune deviation (ACAID).

Traditionally, the crystalline lens has been considered immunologically privileged due to avascularity, absence of nerves, and isolation from fetal circulation.

However, later it was shown that lens proteins leak into the aqueous humor in normal conditions with an intact capsule of the clear crystalline lens.

Though foreign grafts are almost always rejected, lens-induced uveitis is relatively rare, considering the very common incidence of violation of the lens capsule. Also, the lens proteins are not species-specific or organ-specific.

The immune response to lens proteins may vary in different species. The soluble lens proteins are weak antigens (alpha-crystallin and beta-crystallin) or lack antigenicity (gamma-crystallin). The difference in the immune response to lens proteins may be related to different alleles of major histocompatibility complex molecules.

It is currently agreed that lens-induced uveitis is a form of autoimmune response. Excess lens material in the anterior chamber may cause altered tolerance to lens proteins.

As discussed previously, evidence of type I hypersensitivity (anaphylactic) reaction has not been reported in lens-induced inflammation. However, types II, III (immune complexes), and IV (delayed-type, cell-mediated) hypersensitivity reactions may play a role in the pathogenesis of lens-induced uveitis.

A possible connection of the lens to the immune system may be via the zonules connecting it to the ciliary body.