To achieve a higher eradication rate following H. pylori infection, the European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology Hepatology and Nutrition (ESPGHAN) and North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition (NASPGHAN) have updated the treatment guidelines for children and adolescents. Triple therapy including PPI (1-2 mg/kg/day), amoxicillin (AMO) (50 mg/kg/day), and clarithromycin (CLA) (20 mg/kg/day) for 14 days is the treatment of choice if the strain is susceptible to CLA and metronidazole (MET). If this regimen fails, CLA can be replaced with MET (20 mg/kg/day) without further antibiotic susceptibility testing. Another treatment option is sequential therapy for 10 days (PPI with AMO for 5 days followed by PPI with MET and CLA for 5 days) in pediatric patients infected with fully susceptible strains. Sequential therapy should not be given if the strain is resistant to MET or CLA; however, this treatment regimen exposes the child to three different antibiotics. Medication doses should be calculated based on the weight of the child, and a higher dose of PPI per kg body weight is recommended to suppress acid in younger children sufficiently compared to adolescents and adults. PPIs are preferred to be given at least 15 minutes before meals. In the case of resistance to both CLA and MET or when antimicrobial susceptibility is not known, bismuth quadruple therapy consisting of bismuth salts (8 mg/kg/day), PPI, AMO (in children younger than 8 years) or tetracycline (in children older than 8 years) and MET is effective. Although there is limited evidence, the other regimen recommended, in this case, is the combination of high dose AMO triple therapy with MET.