The treatment of urolithiasis is based upon the patient's acute presentation and includes both conservative medical therapies and surgical interventions. Often when patients present, pain control is an important intervention. Oral and IV anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) are indicated as first-line treatments for pain. Opioids can be used, but are reserved for refractory pain. IV lidocaine has also been studied as an effective pain control option.

Approximately 86% of stones will pass spontaneously within 30-40 days.

- Less than or equal to 2 mm stones, 8 days for mean passage and passage rate of 87%

- 3 mm stones, 12 days for mean passage and passage rate of 76%

- Between 4-6 mm, 22 days for mean passage and passage rate of 60%

- 7 mm stone with a passage rate of 48%

- 8-9 mm stone with a passage rate of 25%

Patients with urolithiasis can present with varying degrees of illness/complications associated with the condition. Patients with small stones, physiologic bloodwork, no signs of infection, or acute obstruction can be managed using MET.

Patients presenting with large stones, or if the presentation is consistent with acute renal failure, oliguria/anuria, SIRS criteria, associated infection, or a history of the solitary kidney is present, may require urgent/emergent urologic intervention. Intractable pain or vomiting, inability to tolerate oral intake, pregnancy, or pediatric patients may require hospitalization for closer observation.

Further interventions should be discussed with urology emergently, and an appropriate plan of care should be made according to the patient's risk factors, medical history, acute presentation, and urologist's comfort and preference. There are various methods of acute urologic interventions, including extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL), flexible ureteroscopy (URS), and percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL).

Flexible URS is the most common method used and involves an endoscopic approach passed through the lower urinary tract system into the ureters and calyces. This technique allows for the visualization of the urinary tract and the retrieval of an obstructing stone.

ESWL is a technique in which an x-ray is used to target stone location, and shockwaves from an energy source are used to fragment the stone into smaller pieces that can be passed into the urine. This technique may require follow-up ureteral stent placement to facilitate fragment passage. This technique typically requires IV sedation or general anesthesia but can be performed on an outpatient basis. Cystine stones may be resistant to treatment.

PCNL is often reserved for patients that fail or have contraindications to URS or ESWL. This method is preferred for stones greater than 20 mm in size, staghorn calculi, and stones in patients with a history of chronic kidney disease. Large stones located in the kidney and proximal ureter are often treated using this technique. General or spinal anesthesia is used, and a small puncture wound is placed in the flank skin overlying the stone, followed by a ureteroscope to retrieve the stone. Contraindications to PCNL include current pregnancy, bleeding disorders, and active urinary tract infections.

Acute renal obstruction with signs of urinary tract infection is a urologic emergency. This will require emergent decompression to prevent permanent renal damage and worsening of infection. The two options currently present for this are indwelling ureteral catheter and placement of a nephrostomy tube.

In patients who have calcium urolithiasis, medications such as thiazide diuretics, citrate salts (potassium citrate), and lifestyle modifications are beneficial in long-term management.

Outpatient management can be assisted by testing to determine the etiology of urolithiasis which includes testing focused on abnormalities in the serum (serum calcium, phosphorus, oxalate, sulfate, magnesium, citrate, cysteine, ammonium, vitamin D levels, lactate dehydrogenase, and parathyroid hormone) and the urine (urine electrolytes, pH, uric acid, creatinine, and calcium). These tests allow for further stone analysis to improve further management.