The significant symptoms of postmenopausal syndrome are vasomotor (hot flashes), vaginal and urinary (termed as GSM-genitourinary syndrome of menopause), insomnia, and mood. Hot flashes are a sudden sensation of heat centered on the upper chest and face that rapidly becomes generalized and lasts two to four minutes with associated perspiration. Palpitations, chills, shivering, and a feeling of anxiety may be present. This frequency of symptoms ranges from one to several times per day. It is also reported most commonly at night. The average duration of hot flashes is about 5.2 years but can also persist as long as 20 years.

Clinical manifestations of GSM are usually mild. The symptoms are vaginal dryness, burning, itching, dyspareunia, loss of libido, and lower urinary tract symptoms (urinary frequency, urgency, and nocturia, urgency, and urge incontinence (28%) recurrent urinary tract infections, stress incontinence). Signs of GSM include decreased moisture, lack of vaginal rugae, vaginal pallor, and decreased pubic hair, loss of elasticity, and narrowing of introitus. They may also have uterine prolapse, cystocele, and rectocele.

Irregular menstrual cycles, hot flashes, and night sweats are predominant during the perimenopausal state. After menopause, genitourinary symptoms like vulvovaginal atrophy and dryness predominate. Most of the symptoms have been difficult to establish a true relationship with menopause and response to treatment with estrogen, but vasomotor and genitourinary symptoms show a good response to hormone replacement therapy. Postmenopausal women also have symptoms of sexual dysfunction, including decreased libido, reduced frequency of sexual thoughts, and fantasies.

Sleep disturbance is prevalent in almost 50% of patients by menopause. There is increased sleep-onset insomnia and an increased prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).