Considering the suspicious genitourinary fistulas, the first critical point to address is the patient's history. Symptom development following a recent surgery should be explicitly evaluated. Standard questions, including cancer radiation, obstructed labor, similar to the discussed patient, and trauma, should be raised. Specific symptom characteristics, including the leakage volume and or vaginal fluid color and smell, should be noted. The critical notion is to differentiate the urogenital fistula-related symptoms from other possible causalities of urinary incontinence. Accordingly, patients with urogenital fistula admit changing heavy pads more frequently. Physical examination should be started with a split speculum examination.

During the early post-traumatic phase, proceeding with physical examination under anesthesia and application of dye test would be reasonable. Moreover, complex fistulas involving ureters are possible. To perform dye tests, several sterile fluid options, including sterile infant formula or indigo carmine, exist. The urethra would be compressed with the application of a gauze sponge while the bladder is being filled with colored fluid. In the absence of leakage over the placed tampon or cotton swabs, the next step is to ask the patient to cough. (to induce Valsalva maneuver). The color of the staining would discriminate the source of potential fistula. That said, if the tip of the tampon is blue-stained, a vesicovaginal fistula is suspected. However, clear fluid wetness is compatible with the presence of a uretrovaginal fistula.

Considering the imaging studies, cystoscopy is performed to evaluate several aspects, including the residual injury in the bladder and the number and characteristics of intravesical fistula orifices. Retrograde pyelography is performed to address the ureteral integrity. The major drawback with intravenous pyelography (IVP) is the potential for missing the ureteral leakage immediately adjacent to the trigone. Pelvic MRI is more sensitive than IVP or CT in diagnosing vesicouterine fistula. MRI has higher soft-tissue contrast compare to CT-Cystogram. Specific further steps, including MRI or double-balloon urethral catheter under fluoroscopic guidance, may be helpful for the diagnosis of a complex urethral fistula or urethral diverticulum. Specific institutional-based protocols, including combined cystoscopy and vaginoscopy present to evaluate the suspicious or established vesicovaginal fistulas.

The diagnosis is traditionally established utilizing clinical evaluation and dye testing. In addition to the methylene blue dye test described above, a "double-dye" test is also generally performed. This is accomplished by having the patient take oral phenazopyridine just before coming into the office.

Transvaginal ultrasonography may clearly visualize the exact size, site, and course of the fistula. Transvaginal sonographic evaluation is well-tolerated with a low side-effect profile and more instructive than some other conventional investigations.

Cystoscopy is of particular help and can be used to identify the exact location of the fistula tract in the bladder. A small ureteric catheter or pediatric foley catheter can be passed through a suspected fistula tract to determine if and where it enters the vagina. Vaginoscopy can be performed in the office using the cystoscope and may aid in localization of the fistula opening on the vaginal side. It is easily performed in the office and is well tolerated by most patients.

Contrast studies, such as a multiphasic CT urogram, are recommended before proceeding with surgical repair to identify concomitant ureteral fistulas or abnormalities. More invasive and advanced techniques are generally not required but may include endoanal ultrasound or subtraction magnetic resonance fistulography.

Simple vesicovaginal fistulas are singular, small in size (<0.5 cm), and found in non-radiated patients with no evidence of malignancy involvement. A vesicovaginal fistula is considered intermediate in size if measured at 0.5-2.5 cm. Complex vesicovaginal fistulas are large in size (>2.5 cm), associated with chronic disease, post-radiation, or failed previous fistula repair.