Due to the majority of the children having a diagnosis of retentive fecal incontinence, the treatment for encopresis relies on treating the root cause, which is chronic constipation. Management of constipation is covered in a different section in Statpearls, Pediatric Functional Constipation.

Providers must explain that constipation often leads to a vicious cycle that results in stool withholding, fecal retention, and eventually encopresis. It is essential to clarify to the family that fecal incontinence is caused by rectal impaction and is beyond the child's control. It should also be stressed that maintenance therapy usually takes 6 to 24 months. In most cases, a detailed plan eliminates the frustration of parents and children and improves compliance necessary for the prolonged treatment.

Disimpaction, or removal of the fecal impaction, is recommended before maintenance therapy.

The next step of treatment focuses on the prevention of recurrence, which can be achieved through a combination of dietary changes, behavioral interventions, and medication. Although diet modification is very popular, the data is lacking to support supplementation with fiber, extra fluids, prebiotics, or probiotics.

Oral daily laxative therapy should be initiated immediately after disimpaction. The laxative dose should be adjusted as needed to reach the desired stool consistency and frequency. These medications include mineral oil, osmotic laxatives (such as lactulose, magnesium hydroxide, and PEG) and stimulant laxatives (such as senna and bisacodyl).

Although conventional therapy usually successfully treats children with constipation induced encopresis, a small group continues to have intractable symptoms. Surgical interventions may benefit this minority, including intrasphincteric injection of botulinum toxin (Botox), antegrade enemas, and rectosigmoid resection.

The treatment of non-retentive encopresis has not been well defined. The treatment consists of education, keeping a bowel diary, and toilet training four times a day following meals and immediately after arriving home from school.