Subaortic stenosis is usually detected at birth while working up the infant for another congenital heart disorder. Most infants are asymptomatic at birth or may have a murmur during evaluation. Among infants who are symptomatic, dyspnea on exertion, angina, effort syncope and presyncope, orthopnea and sudden cardiac death are commonly observed. Heart failure may be seen in infants with severe obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract.

Exertional dyspnea is the most common symptom seen in 40% of symptomatic patients, and it reflects pulmonary venous hypertension that is induced by an increase in left ventricular filling pressure caused by the impaired diastolic compliance of the hypertrophied left ventricle.

In the presence of a severe obstruction, the cardiac output decreases resulting in systemic vasodilation causing a decline in arterial pressure and in cerebral perfusion hence causing syncope on exertion. In pediatric patients, syncope and presyncope are rare and if present, indicates a cardiac arrhythmia. The decrease in coronary perfusion coupled with an increase in oxygen demand causes angina in 25% of the symptomatic patients with a left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.

The physical examination helps to distinguish from the other causes of left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.

- Children with subvalvular aortic stenosis have a normal pattern of growth and development. Peripheral pulses are symmetrical except in cases of severe left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.

- One-third of the patients with mild subvalvular aortic stenosis is noted to have a palpable carotid thrill and a left parasternal thrill. Patients with moderate to severe subvalvular aortic stenosis have a forceful left ventricular apical impulse.

- During the first year of life, more than one-half of affected patients have a cardiac murmur. It becomes more prominent and typical of the left ventricular outflow tract obstruction as the patient gets older.[3] A low-pitched ejection systolic murmur is appreciated in the second and third left parasternal spaces, and it radiates to the suprasternal notch. The duration of the murmur is directly proportional to the degree of obstruction.

- The ejection click is absent in isolated subvalvular aortic stenosis and is an important differentiating point from the murmur of aortic valve stenosis.

- A high pitched early diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation is heard in 30% to 50% of patients.

- The Valsalva maneuver decreases the intensity of the murmur in subvalvular aortic stenosis.