Thalamocortical radiations are nerve fibers that connect the thalamus to the cerebral cortex. The thalamus is the primary relay center of the brain, sending all sensory information besides olfaction to the cerebral cortex, where it is further processed. Thalamocortical interneurons receive sensory or motor information from the body and signal distinct thalamic nuclei to relay selected information via relay neurons in the thalamocortical radiations to the cerebral cortex.

Relay neurons in the thalamus can be separated into core cells and matrix cells. Matrix cells, or calbindin-immuno-reactive (CIR) neurons, are diffusely distributed in each of the nuclei of the dorsal thalamus. Core cells, or parvalbumin-immuno-reactive (PIR) neurons, are only found in principal sensory and motor relay nuclei, such as the pulvinar and intralaminar nuclei. The PIR neurons tend to cluster together and create dense terminating afferent fibers. While CIR neurons have dispersed projections to non-specific areas of the cerebral cortex and terminate in the superficial layers I, II, and upper III, PIR neurons project via an organized topographic pathway and terminate in localized zones in deep layers III and IV.

Topographically, thalamocortical networks are organized into parallel pathways that link specific cortical areas to individual thalamic nuclei. The thalamus contains many distinct nuclei with multiple functions.

All thalamic nuclei project primarily to the cortex; for example, visual information is received in the thalamus by the pulvinar nucleus and lateral geniculate nucleus and relayed to the visual TAuditory information is received by the medial geniculate nucleus of the thalamus receives auditory information and relays it to the auditory cortex in the temporal lobe. Other examples include the ventral anterior and ventrolateral nuclei, which relay motor information, and the ventral posterolateral and ventral posteromedial nuclei, which relay somatosensory information.

Thalamocortical radiations, or fibers, have a tree-like appearance and extend from the thalamus through the internal capsule and project to the cerebral cortex. Once the information is processed in the cerebral cortex, it is relayed back to the area of original activity in the thalamus via corticothalamic fibers. These corticothalamic projections, which synapse with the thalamic reticular neurons, are more numerous than the thalamocortical projections to the cerebral cortex. This suggests that the cerebral cortex has a more significant role in processing information than the processes occurring in the thalamic interneurons.

Most of the thalamocortical radiations project to layer IV of the cerebral cortex, or the inner granular layer, where sensory information is then directed to other cortical layers.