Nonoperative management with a sling and progressive rehabilitation of proximal humerus fractures is indicated in minimally displaced surgical neck fractures, greater tuberosity fractures displaced less than 5 millimeters, and patients who are not surgical candidates. Closed reduction and percutaneous pinning is indicated for two-part surgical neck fractures, 3-part and valgus-impacted four-part fractures with minimal metaphyseal comminution, and an intact medial calcar. Open reduction and internal fixation is indicated in greater tuberosity fractures displaced more than 5 millimeters and head-splitting fractures in young patients. Intramedullary rodding indications include surgical neck fractures or 3-part greater tuberosity fractures in younger patients and combined proximal humerus and humeral shaft fractures. Hemiarthroplasty is a viable option in anatomic fractures in elderly patients and fractures not amenable to open reduction and internal fixation. Total shoulder arthroplasty is indicated if the glenoid surface is compromised, while reverse total shoulder arthroplasty is indicated in individuals in a nonfunctioning rotator cuff or elderly individuals with reconstructable tuberosities.

Traditionally, the mainstay of treatment of humerus shaft fractures is nonoperative. Due to the non-weight-bearing nature of the bone and the vast soft tissue envelope, slight deformity can be acceptable with favorable results. In most cases, nonoperative treatment consists of a Sarmiento brace.  An advantage of using this brace is that the joints above and below the fracture are mobile, minimizing joint stiffness. Another advantage is removability of the brace, allowing for better axillary hygiene. Fracture alignment is maintained by the soft tissue envelope of the upper arm which has been described as the inner splint. Indications for nonoperative treatment include acceptable alignment less than 20 degrees anterior angulation, less than 30 degrees varus, valgus angulation, and less than 3 centimeters shortening. Absolute contraindications include severe soft tissue injury or bone loss, vascular injury requiring repair and brachial plexus injury. Typically, a coaptation splint is first used for 3 to 4 weeks until the swelling resolves. Next, a functional brace is utilized extending from approximately 2.5 centimeters distal to the axilla to 2.5 centimeters proximal to the humeral condyles. Weekly radiographs are recommended for the first 3 weeks to ensure adequate reduction. After this period, radiographs can be taken every 3 to 4 weeks.

Open reduction and internal fixation are indicated in open fractures, vascular injury requiring repair, brachial plexus injury, floating elbow (ipsilateral forearm fracture), and compartment syndrome. Other relative indications include polytrauma, bilateral humerus fractures, pathologic fractures, and burns or soft tissue injury precluding bracing.  Benefits of this procedure include direct visualization of the fracture, anatomic fracture reduction, interfragmentary compression, identification of the radial nerve, and no violation of the adjacent joints. Disadvantages include the increased risk of soft tissue stripping, the risk of fracture at the end of the plate, and poor screw purchase in osteoporotic or comminuted bone. Dynamic compression plating is often the implant used when open reduction and internal fixation are performed, but locking plates can be helpful in osteoporotic bone.  Minimally invasive plate fixation is another method that can be used but is not commonly performed. Some of the theoretical advantages of this method include a decreased amount of soft tissue injury and stripping which increases the healing potential in the injured area.

Depending on the location of the fracture, different surgical approaches are used. The deltopectoral approach or lateral approach can be used for proximal humerus fractures. The anterolateral approach is used for proximal to middle third shaft fractures. In this approach, the radial nerve is identified between the brachialis and brachioradialis distally. The posterior approach to the humerus is utilized for distal to middle third shaft fractures. During the approach, the triceps can either be split or elevated with lateral paratricipital exposure. The radial nerve is medial to the long and lateral heads of the triceps, while it is approximately 2 centimeters proximal to the deep head of the triceps and leaves the posterior compartment through the lateral intramuscular septum approximately 10 centimeters proximal to the radiocapetellar joint.

External fixation of the humerus shaft is not commonly performed but can be used as a method for stabilization in the unstable patient or open fractures with severe tissue loss.

Intramedullary nailing has comparable union rates and is another viable option for patients. Indications are pathologic fractures, segmental fractures, and comminuted fractures. This method is less invasive and typically involves shorter operating time. Disadvantages include an increased incidence of shoulder dysfunction, pain at the entry site, and rotational deformity.

Treatment of distal humerus fractures includes cast immobilization for Milch type I fractures. Closed reduction and percutaneous pinning are performed in displaced Milch Type I fractures, and open reduction and internal fixation is performed in supracondylar fractures, intercondylar/bicolumnar fractures, and Milch Type II fractures. Total elbow arthroplasty is indicated in elderly patients with distal bicolumnar fractures.