The evaluation requires obtaining a good history and utilizing the relevant lab data. A complete blood count helps to distinguish the presence of thrombocytopenia, which is secondary to hypersplenism and anemia from gastrointestinal blood loss. A complete metabolic panel identifies renal failure and liver enzyme elevation present in liver disease, viral hepatitis, and also hypoalbuminemia. A coagulation profile helps to identify the synthetic function of the liver. A prolonged prothrombin time, together with a low serum albumin level, reliably predicts hepatic synthetic function. Dopplers of portal vein can detect the presence of stenosis or thrombosis. Doppler of the portal vein will show either hepatopetal portal vein flow (toward liver) or hepatofugal portal vein flow (away from liver). These vary depending upon the degree of portal hypertension. Hepatopetal flow is normal. An abdominal ultrasound can find evidence of cirrhosis of the liver, ascites, and splenomegaly.

Measurement of portal pressure is often not required to make a diagnosis of portal hypertension in cases where clinical signs and symptoms are readily manifest. The patency of the portal and hepatic veins may be assessed by duplex Doppler ultrasound, magnetic resonance, or computed tomography angiography. Direct measurement of portal pressure is invasive, expensive, and complicated. The indirect method of portal pressure determination is thus the preferred method. The direct method of measurement is by cannulation of the hepatic vein and measuring free hepatic vein pressure. The indirect method is done by balloon occlusion of the hepatic vein and measurement of the wedged hepatic vein pressure. These measurements are used to calculate the hepatic venous pressure gradient.