If microalbuminuria is present, aggressive measures should ensue with the ultimate goal of decreasing the risk of cardio-metabolic complications.

Maintaining an A1c of less than 7% has been shown to decrease the risk of developing not only microalbuminuria but also macroalbuminuria. The evidence shows that rosiglitazone and insulin have the best outcomes and the least side effects.

If treatment with an ARB or ACE inhibitor does not sufficiently control proteinuria in patients with chronic kidney disease, further control of proteinuria can be done by adding mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRA), such as spironolactone or eplerenone. However, MRAs are associated with an increased risk of hyperkalemia. A new agent, finerenone, which is a nonsteroidal MRA, decreased proteinuria while causing lower rates of hyperkalemia.

Immunosuppressants, such as cyclophosphamide and azathioprine, should be used in patients who have progressive renal insufficiency or who have vasculitic changes on renal biopsy.

Several experimental drugs show promising evidence but require further studies to evaluate if they decrease the long-term cardiovascular disease associated with microalbuminuria. For one of the groups, the mechanism is by decreasing protein glycation. These medications are thiamine, ALT-711 (a cross-link breaker of advanced glycation), and pimagedine (a second-generation inhibitor of advanced glycation). Additionally, ruboxistaurin, a protein kinase C-beta inhibitor, has been implicated in decreasing UAE.

When considering the associated comorbidities with microalbuminuria, the treatment recommendations should also include weight loss, aspirin, and maintaining low-density lipoprotein cholesterol of less than 100.

In terms of specific treatments, sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, such as canagliflozin and empagliflozin, have gained popularity not only in the management of diabetes mellitus but also in reducing the development or further worsening of albuminuria.

Non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (NDCCBs), such as diltiazem and verapamil, decrease proteinuria more than dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (DCCBs) because NDCCBs affect both the afferent and efferent arteriole.

Endothelin activation has an association with renal inflammation and fibrosis. Endothelin A (ETA) receptor blockade leads to the dilation of the glomerular capillaries, reducing albumin permeability. Endothelin B (ETB) reduces arterial pressure by decreasing salt and water reabsorption from the kidneys. Experimental ETA-selective antagonists, such as avosentan and atrasentan, have been shown to decrease proteinuria.