Diagnosing the underlying cause of respiratory failure and its treatment is challenging as this syndrome can result from numerous pulmonary and extrapulmonary causes. As such, consultation with other specialties (i.e., cardiology and neurology) may be mandatory. Moreover, discussing radiographic findings with a radiologist can sometimes be necessary. Additionally, complications from respiratory failure may be due to improper patient positioning and poor adherence to infection control policies. Fortunately, nurses are vital members of the interprofessional healthcare team, assuring appropriate patient positioning. Nursing is also responsible for feeding, monitoring, and suctioning the patient and can offer patient counseling while serving as a contact point for the various specialties involved in the case. All interprofessional team members are responsible for keeping meticulous records of every interaction and intervention with the patient so that every care team member has access to the same accurate, updated patient information.

Since patients with respiratory failure may require multiple medications, the pharmacist is instrumental in ensuring safe medication administration, performing medication reconciliation, answering drug questions for the care team, and providing medication counseling for the patient. Finally, respiratory therapists also care for a patient with respiratory failure (i.e., administration of oxygen and chest physiotherapy). All interprofessional team members must engage in meticulous documentation and report any changes in patient status to the appropriate team members for possible corrective action. This interprofessional team works to improve patient care and outcomes through collaborative activity and open communication. [Level 5]