Features of testosterone deficiency can be very apparent, which is why the first steps in diagnosing male hypogonadism involve adequate history taking and physical exam. The features indicative of male hypogonadism can be divided into pre and post-pubertal. Pre-pubertal features include small testes (less than 20 mL in volume), small phallus, decreased secondary sex characteristics (e.g., facial or axillary hair), gynecomastia, difficulty gaining muscle mass, eunuchoid proportions, low sperm count, and low energy/libido. Post-pubertal features include those previously mentioned (except phallus size and eunuchoid proportions) as well as osteoporosis and hot flashes with severe hypogonadism.

If a clinician expects hypogonadism based on history and physical, a total serum testosterone between 8 AM and 10 AM should be drawn. Normal levels may indicate eugonadal low testosterone. If levels are low, a repeat level should be obtained along with FSH and LH levels. Low testosterone in the setting of normal FSH/LH indicates secondary hypogonadism. The next steps would be to get prolactin, T4, 8 AM cortisol, iron, and ferritin levels as well as brain MRI. Low testosterone in the setting of elevated FSH/LH indicated primary hypogonadism. In the case of primary hypogonadism, a karyotype should be established.

Hyperandrogenism also has various clinical presentations, depending on puberty status and gender. Prepubertal boys with hyperandrogenism may present with virilization. Virilization includes penile enlargement, excess hair growth in androgen-dependent areas, and voice deepening. In prepubertal girls, hyperandrogenism may lead to clitoromegaly, acne, and hirsutism. In adult males, the effects of excess testosterone depend on whether the source is from the adrenals or exogenous. Adrenal androgen elevations have few observable effects in males and do not cause an increase in muscle mass or hair growth. In adult females, increased adrenal androgens can lead to acne, hirsutism, menstrual irregularities, infertility, male-pattern baldness, or virilization.

Testosterone can be used to treat and manage various medical conditions. Medical conditions in which testosterone can be used include metastatic breast cancer, delayed puberty, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (congenital or acquired), and primary hypogonadism. Toxic effects of testosterone and synthetic androgens include over-masculinization, hirsutism, decreased menses, acne, and clitoral enlargement. Rarely, synthetic androgens can cause hepatic adenoma, cholestatic jaundice, and prostatic hypertrophy. Synthetic androgens and testosterone are contraindicated in pregnancy.

Androgen antagonists come in different types. GnRH analogs, if given continuously, can act as medical castration drugs and are used in treating prostate cancer. Androgen receptor inhibitors, like flutamide and spironolactone, can be used for patients with hirsutism. Steroid synthesis inhibitors, like ketoconazole, can be used in Cushing disease. 5-alpha reductase inhibitors, like finasteride, can be used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia.