In addition to a standard history of present illness, past medical history, social history, surgical history, family history, review of systems, and current medication lists/allergies, there are several key points to the patient history specific to thermal burn care. Mechanism of injury will give insight into burn depth and concomitant trauma or inhalation injury. Certain patterns such as scald burns with discrete lines of demarcation and discrepancies between the physical exam and history should raise suspicion for abuse, especially in the pediatric and elderly population. One should ask about the volume and type of resuscitation fluid the patient received en route for proper calculation of resuscitation fluid rates. The history should specifically focus on factors that will negatively affect wound healing (smoking, diabetes, chronic steroids) or increase the risk of surgery (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD], coronary artery disease [CAD], personal/family history of problems with anesthesia, blood clotting, or bleeding disorders) as these can change treatment strategies.

A full head-to-toe physical examination is vital to identify all burn injuries and signs of any concomitant trauma or inhalation injury (singed facial hairs, mucosal irritation, increased work of breathing, poor oxygenation on pulse oximetry). Identification of the depth and extent of the burn injuries will give significant insight into the required treatment. Superficial burns will have erythema and mild-moderate pain, but there will be no blistering. Superficial partial burns will have blisters and vesicles or sheared epidermis with wet, pink dermis that readily blanches with pressure. These burns will be very painful due to intact, irritating nerve endings. Deep partial burns will be less painful as many of the nerve endings are damaged and will have white, waxy, non-blanching dermis with no blisters or vesicles. Full-thickness burns will be painless with leathery, dry skin, thrombosed blood vessels, and possibly black eschar. Total body surface area (TBSA) of second-degree burns or deeper should be estimated using the Wallace rule of nines for adults or a credible pediatric burn assessment chart such as the Lund Browder Assessment scale to assist in burn resuscitation. Finally, any part of the body with circumferential partial to full-thickness burns must be monitored for compartment syndrome as they may need escharotomies or even formal fasciotomies. Signs of compartment syndrome in an extremity include early pain out of proportion to exam, paresthesias, poikilothermia and late paralysis, and lack of pulse.