A number of conditions can cause right-to-left shunts that cause a V/Q mismatch. At a microscopic level, pulmonary arteriovenous malformations provide a route from arterial to venous blood in the pulmonary circulation that bypasses the pulmonary capillaries where gas exchange occurs. Congenital heart defects can cause right-to-left shunts at a macroscopic level. In the case of ventricular septal defects, the right ventricle may hypertrophy to the point that the right ventricle has a higher pressure during systole than the left ventricle, causing blood to flow from the right to left ventricle, bypassing the pulmonary circulation. Physiologic right-to-left shunts may also occur if perfusion reaches areas of the lungs that are not ventilated, which may result from airway obstructions, pulmonary edema, and pneumonia. The effect of physiologic right-to-left shunts is minimized by hypoxic vasoconstriction in the pulmonary circulation, which redirects blood flow to better-ventilated areas of the lungs for more efficient exchange.

Asthma is often referred to as a “false shunt” because bronchoconstriction decreases ventilation, resulting in a low V/Q ratio, as occurs in alveolar dead space. In the case of asthma, oxygen therapy is indicated because some ventilation of the bronchoconstricted alveoli still occurs, and oxygen therapy increases the PAO2 of alveoli with obstructed airflow. Treatment with a bronchodilator such as a beta-2 agonist is more beneficial to patients with asthma than oxygen therapy because of its reduction of bronchoconstriction.

V/Q mismatches can occur in the case of pulmonary embolism (PE). Emboli may restrict blood flow in the pulmonary circulation, resulting in alveoli that are ventilated but not perfused; this results in an increased V/Q ratio and decreased gas exchange. The impaired gas exchange may cause hypoxemia in cases of PE.

Inspiratory hypoxia, as occurs at high altitudes, can cause a V/Q mismatch and affect blood gases. The decreased atmospheric pressure at altitude causes a decreased PAO2. However, normal diffusion occurs (normal A-a gradient), the arterial PaO2 decreases, and hypoxemia results. Oxygen therapy can correct the hypoxemia in this instance because the inspired air increases the PAO2 back to normal levels.

Intrinsic diffusion barriers between alveoli and capillaries can result in hypoxemia. Although PAO2 is normal, impaired diffusion results in a decreased PaO2 and increased A-a gradient. Patients with diffusion problems have more hypoxemia than hypercapnia, and oxygen therapy improves hypoxemia in diffusion deficits. Supplemental oxygen increases PAO2, resulting in an increased oxygen gradient contributing to diffusion. Even with oxygen therapy, there is still an increased A-a gradient.

A variety of conditions can affect diffusion, which can be clinically assessed using DLCO. In lung fibrosis, the thickening of lung tissue increases the alveolar wall thickness, decreasing DLCO.

A significant cause of diffusion problems is pulmonary edema, as fluid in the lungs increases the effective thickness of the alveolar wall and decreases the area of gas exchange. Pulmonary edema results in greater hypoxemia than hypercapnia because carbon dioxide can more easily dissolve into the fluid to reach the alveolar membrane for exchange. The edema prevents air from reaching pulmonary capillaries, resulting in perfusion without ventilation and shunting.

Pulmonary edema has several causes, most of which affect Starling forces to increase filtration at alveolar capillaries. Left-sided heart failure may increase left atrial pressure, which in turn can result in increased capillary hydrostatic pressure to cause pulmonary edema. Over-administration of IV fluids may similarly increase capillary hydrostatic pressure to cause edema. Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and sepsis can cause increased capillary permeability to cause pulmonary edema. Decreases in capillary osmotic pressure can also cause pulmonary edema, as occurs in nephrotic syndrome and liver failure. Pulmonary edema may also result from obstructed lymphatic drainage of filtered fluid, as may occur with tumors.