Mutations in LDL-C affecting genes (SNPs) cause polygenic hypercholesterolemia. Global Lipid Genetic Consortium has identified about 95 loci which affect LDL-C levels. These loci contribute not only to variation in lipid traits but also to extreme lipid phenotypes. Accumulation of several small LDL-C raising alleles leads to polygenic hypercholesterolemia. The 12 SNPs used in the score is shown below.

Global Lipid Genetic Consortium 12 SNP LDL-C Gene Score, showing the LDL-C-raising allele and the published raising effect (in mmol/l).

Once these SNPs have been genotyped, they are entered into a scoring scheme to quantify their cumulative effect on the lipid trait. These scores sum the expected effect of each individual SNP in a given patient, yielding a polygenic SNP score (also called a ‘polygenic risk score’ or ‘polygenic trait score’) that can be compared to a normolipidaemic population. An individual with a high polygenic score, e.g., >90th percentile for the population, would be predisposed to develop clinically apparent dyslipidaemia.

After VLDL is synthesized from free fatty acids and triglycerides in the liver, it is cleaved into IDL(intermediate density lipid) and LDL. LDL is a major cholesterol-containing lipoprotein which causes atherosclerosis. LDL receptor in the liver regulates the serum cholesterol levels.

A decrease in serum cholesterol levels causes increased expression of hepatic LDL which causes greater clearance of dietary cholesterol. Increased dietary fatty acids lead to decreased expression of hepatic LDL receptors and increase serum cholesterol levels. High dietary cholesterol suppresses endogenous cholesterol production. High dietary fat will result in high serum cholesterol levels.