Shock is characterized by decreased oxygen delivery and/or increased oxygen consumption or inadequate oxygen utilization leading to cellular and tissue hypoxia. It is a life-threatening condition of circulatory failure and most commonly manifested as hypotension (systolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg or MAP less than 65 mmHg). Shock is the final manifestation of a complex list of etiologies and could be fatal without timely management. There are mainly four broad categories of shock: distributive, hypovolemic, cardiogenic, and obstructive.

**1. Distributive Shock**

Characterized by peripheral vasodilatation.

Types of distributive shock include:

**Septic Shock**

Sepsis is defined as life-threatening organ dysfunction resulting from dysregulated host response to infection.

The most common pathogens associated with sepsis and septic shock in the United States are gram-positive bacteria, including streptococcal pneumonia and Enterococcus.

**Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome**

Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) is a clinical syndrome of the vigorous inflammatory response caused by either infectious or noninfectious causes. Infectious causes include pathogens such as gram-positive (most common) and gram-negative bacteria, fungi, viral infections (e.g., respiratory viruses), parasitic (e.g., malaria), rickettsial infections. Noninfectious causes of SIRS include but are not limited to pancreatitis, burns, fat embolism, air embolism, and amniotic fluid embolism

**Anaphylactic Shock**

Anaphylactic shock is a clinical syndrome of severe hypersensitivity reaction mediated by immunoglobulin E (Ig-E), resulting in cardiovascular collapse and respiratory distress due to bronchospasm. The immediate hypersensitivity reactions can occur within seconds to minutes after the presentation of the inciting antigen. Common allergens include drugs (e.g., antibiotics, NSAIDs), food, insect stings, and latex.

**Neurogenic Shock**

Neurogenic shock can occur in the setting of trauma to the spinal cord or the brain. The underlying mechanism is the disruption of the autonomic pathway resulting in decreased vascular resistance and changes in vagal tone.

**Endocrine Shock**

Due to underlying endocrine etiologies such as adrenal failure (Addisonian crisis) and myxedema.

**2. Hypovolemic Shock**

Hypovolemic shock is characterized by decreased intravascular volume and increased systemic venous assistance (compensatory the mechanism to maintain perfusion in the early stages of shock). In the later stages of shock due to progressive volume depletion, cardiac output also decreases and manifest as hypotension. Hypovolemic shock divides into two broad subtypes: hemorrhagic and non-hemorrhagic.

Common causes of hemorrhagic hypovolemic shock include

- Gastrointestinal bleed (both upper and lower gastrointestinal bleed (e.g., variceal bleed, portal hypertensive gastropathy bleed, peptic ulcer, diverticulosis) trauma

- Vascular etiologies (e.g., aortoenteric fistula, ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm, tumor eroding into a major blood vessel)

- Spontaneous bleeding in the setting of anticoagulant use (in the setting of supratherapeutic INR from drug interactions)

Common causes of non-hemorrhagic hypovolemic shock include:

- GI losses - the setting of vomiting, diarrhea, NG suction, or drains.

- Renal losses - medication-induced diuresis, endocrine disorders such as hypoaldosteronism.

- Skin losses/insensible losses - burns, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, Toxic epidermal necrolysis, heatstroke, pyrexia.

- Third-space loss - in the setting of pancreatitis, cirrhosis, intestinal obstruction, trauma.

**3. Cardiogenic Shock**

Due to intracardiac causes leading to decreased cardiac output and systemic hypoperfusion. Different subtypes of etiologies contributing to cardiogenic shock include:

- Cardiomyopathies - include acute myocardial infarction affecting more than 40% of the left ventricle, acute myocardial infarction in the setting of multi-vessel coronary artery disease, right ventricular myocardial infarction, fulminant dilated cardiomyopathy, cardiac arrest (due to myocardial stunning), myocarditis.

- Arrhythmias - both tachy- and bradyarrhythmias

- Mechanical - severe aortic insufficiency, severe mitral insufficiency, rupture of papillary muscles, or chordae tendinae trauma rupture of ventricular free wall aneurysm.

**4. Obstructive Shock**

Mostly due to extracardiac causes leading to a decrease in the left ventricular cardiac output

- Pulmonary vascular - due to impaired blood flow from the right heart to the left heart. Examples include hemodynamically significant pulmonary embolism, severe pulmonary hypertension.

- Mechanical - impaired filling of right heart or due to decreased venous return to the right heart due to extrinsic compression. Examples include tension pneumothorax, pericardial tamponade, restrictive cardiomyopathy, constrictive pericarditis.