Herein, we describe the principle techniques required to perform a safe and reproducible transconjunctival lower lid blepharoplasty with fat transposition.

First, the surgeon incises the lower conjunctiva. If a pre-septal approach is utilized, the conjunctival incision is made 4 mm inferior to the tarsus with dissection proceeding anterior to the septum. Alternatively, a post-septal approach requires an incision made 6 to 7.5 mm inferior to the tarsus, with dissection following posterior to the orbital septum (middle lamella). Although the theoretical benefit to the post-septal approach is the preservation of the orbital septum, either approach may be used as they both posess similar risk profiles.

In order to protect the cornea and maximize exposure of the fat pads, the posterior conjunctival flap is secured cephalad with a traction suture, while the anterior edge of the divided conjunctiva is retracted caudally using a small retractor.

Before dissecting the orbital fat, a subperiosteal pocket for fat transposition is created by making a periosteal incision through the arcus marginalis just below the inferior orbital. An elevator is used to raise the periosteum over the upper maxilla for approximately 15 mm, with care not to injure the infraorbital nerve. Depending on the extent of fat repositioning, dissection may be carried laterally to release the orbital retaining ligament. As an alternative to the subperiosteal technique, a supraperiosteal pocket may be used for fat repositioning; both have similar clinical outcomes and high patient satisfaction.

The orbital fat is then dissected. If a pre-septal approach was used, the inferior edge of the septum is incised to expose the medial and central fat pads.  The extruded fat is then carefully dissected and made into a pedicle with care to prevent devascularization and to avoid injury to the inferior oblique muscle.

Transposition of the orbital fat into the subperiosteal or subperiosteal pocket is done with a series of transcutaneous horizontal mattress retention sutures placed beyond the marked tear trough. The suture is then secured using a bolster or fixed in place using adhesive tape.

The conjunctival incision may be left to heal secondarily or closed loosely with buried 6-0 fast-absorbable gut sutures.

Secondary procedures to maximize results:

- Skin pinch: to correct excess lower eyelid skin (dermatochalasis), performed via a subciliary incision extended out to the crow’s feet crease

- Suture canthopexy: to correct and/or prevent minimal (1 to 2 mm) lower lid laxity, a stitch capturing the periosteum of the inside orbital rim is placed with a vector posterior, superior, and lateral to shorten and tighten the lower lid.

- Malar/cheek lateral suspension: depending on the etiology and severity of the problem, multiple methods can be used to efface the transition from lid to cheek. These include 1) the suspension of the preseptal orbicularis, 2) the SOOF lift, and 3) the subperiosteal midface lift.

- Skin resurfacing (chemical peels or lasers): improves crepey (thin and wrinkled) skin appearance and dark pigmentation of the lower lid.

- Botulinum toxin injection: treats the crow’s feet area.

- Facial fillers and autologous fat-grafting techniques: supplement mid-face volume and further camouflage tear trough.