Hoffa pad impingement syndrome is a diagnosis of exclusion, mainly due to the numerous conditions that cause anterior knee pain and extension block. Soft tissue pathology, such as bursitis, must be ruled out. The anterior knee has four bursae: the prepatellar, superficial, infrapatellar, deep infrapatellar, and pes anserine bursae, and can become inflamed with repetitive microtrauma or sports requiring repetitive knee use such as cycling.

Patellar tendinosis must also be considered and is typically seen in high-impact jumping sports. It is characterized by activity-related pain localized to the inferior pole of the patella and occurs more prominently with eccentric quadriceps contraction. Intra-articular pathologies such as plica syndrome, meniscal tears, articular cartilage injuries, and osteochondral lesions must also be ruled out. Plica syndrome occurs when the incompletely-resorbed embryonic septa separating the knee joint into medial, lateral, and suprapatellar compartments become inflamed following trauma, overuse, long-standing patellar mal-tracking, diabetes, and inflammatory arthropathy.

Meniscus tears usually occur following a traumatic injury to the knee, resulting in pain and an intra-articular clicking/catching sensation. Mechanical blocks to full extension can also occur from hypertrophic fibrosis following ACL reconstruction. Also known as a "cyclops lesion," this nodule or hypertrophied graft tissue has been reported to occur between 1% and 10% of all ACL reconstructions and is the second most common cause of restricted knee extension following graft impingement.

Anterior interval scarring is another commonly known block to full knee extension, often causing pain, decreased patellar mobility, and quadriceps atrophy. The anterior interval is the space between the IFP and the anterior tibia and is also often implicated as the cause of extension block following arthroscopic ACL reconstruction.