Neural tube disorders are classified based on-site and covering and its contents. So they have to be differentiated from each other at first for proper approach and interventions. They may be open or closed, spinal cord originated, or brain originated. Open spinal dysraphisms are myelomeningocele, hemimyelocele and lipomyelomeningocele, meningocele, lipomyelocele are the few closed types. Anencephaly is also possible.

**Iniencephaly**

It is the rare and lethal spondylocostal dysplasia associated with spina bifida, heart defects, cleft palate, and renal abnormalities.

**Meckel-Gruber Syndrome**

Meckel-Gruber syndrome is an autosomal recessive disease comprised of a group of disorders involving the malfunction of cilia. Neural tube defects, mostly occipital encephalocele, are part of this syndrome. Besides encephalocele, this syndrome consists of other systems that have cilia as the main functioning role, such as respiratory tract, oviduct or efferent ducts, renal tubules, and brain ventricles, etc. The presence of respiratory disease, infertility, polycystic kidney disease hydrocephalus is important to rule out isolated neural tube disorders from Meckel-Gruber syndrome.

**Tethered Cord Syndrome**

Adhesions cause an abnormal stretching of spinal cords, mostly due to lipoma, dermoid cysts, rumors, etc.

**Viral and Neonatal Meningitis**

The primary causative organisms of neonatal meningitis are group B streptococcus and enterovirus for viral meningitis. Meningitis cause premature births along with signs and symptoms such as neck rigidity, fever that confuses with meningitis in patients with neural tube defects.

**Lipomyelomeningocele**

It is an intradural lipoma attached to surrounding soft tissue leading to the tethered spinal cord deteriorating the neurological functions.

**Myelocystocele**

Myelocystocele is a closed neural tube defect that resembles myelomeningocele, especially when complicated by hydrocele.

**Neurenteric Cyst**

It is formed due to an abnormal connection between ectoderm and endoderm. They are common in neural crest cells found in the brain and spinal cord in rare cases mimicking neural tube defects.

**Persistence of Terminal Ventricle**

It is a rare case present as a cavity in conus medullaris can be visualized in radiological investigations.