At birth, the ocular structures are fully formed. The eys continuously develop as the neonate grows to reach full refractive status. The developmental process in which the ocular system of the child obtains the expected refractive status is known as emmetropization. Several factors, such as corneal curvature, anterior chamber depth, axial length, and lenticular thickness, are known to be the main determinants of the final refractive outcome.

In early infancy, neonates are known to possess a large corneal curvature dioptric power, which is expected to regress to progressively reach emmetropia. These developmental changes of cornea curvature are usually rapid in the first two to four weeks of life and, subsequently, become slower after eight weeks.

Depending on genetic predisposition and environmental influence, the eye can be considered mostly hyperopic in the early stages of life. Changes in the refractive apparatus of the eye, as well as its axial length at this stage of life, significantly alter the initial refractive status.

Due to the prolate shape of the eye, the parallel light rays passing through the entrance pupil, when focused correctly on the macular, can exceed the retinal limit of the peripheral retinal, known as hyperopic defocus. The process of emmetropisation is theorized to be mostly controlled by the retina.

Theoretically, the retina tends to elongate when parallel light rays from an object at infinity are focused behind the retina, which is done to achieve a clear focus. Defocus, therefore, serves as the principal stimulus and the medium in which the retinal exerts control over emmetropization. There is an increased risk of anisometropia when an inequality of increase in axial length occurs in both eyes during childhood development.

The prevalence of anisometropia increases from childhood to teenage years (ages between 5 and 15).

When determining the degree of optical correction needed to compensate for the refractive deficiency of an ocular system, it is of utmost importance to refine the final spherical dioptric power obtained from prior refractive procedures. The duochrome red-green test can be employed as a standard method of verifying the final refraction.