The initial setup for the procedure is patient positioning which is performed in the sitting or lateral decubitus position. The positioning also includes the height of the OR table, providing blankets for comfort, and sedation for the patient if required. The sitting position is commonly favored because it avoids a potential rotation of the spine that can occur with the lateral decubitus position. The patient should flex the neck and push out the lower back to open up the thoracic intervertebral spaces. For the lateral decubitus position, the ideal positioning consists of having the patient's back in line with the edge of the bed closest to the anesthesiologist, with the patient’s knees flexed up to their abdomen.

Once the patient is positioned correctly, the insertion level is identified by palpation and the use of anatomic landmarks to identify the corresponding spinous process. The space between 2 palpable spinous processes is the site of entry. The inferior angle of the scapula (T7 spinous process) and the 12th rib margin (L1 spinous process) are widely used as landmarks to estimate the level. Each thoracic vertebra articulates with ribs along the lateral border of its vertebral body, which helps determine the lower thoracic and upper lumbar areas. Other interspaces can then be identified, depending on where the needle needs to be inserted, using the ‘counting up method.’

Another approach is to use ultrasound guidance with the ‘counting up' method starting from the 12th rib and moving up until the corresponding vertebral level is found.

In the midline approach, the needle is angled more cephalad for thoracic segmental anesthesia as the long thoracic spinous processes point caudally and are most sharply angled between T4 and T9, making insertion of the needle in the midline more difficult in the midthoracic region. Beyond T10, they start to resemble those in the lumbar region.

Once the needle is through the ligamentum flavum, the stylet is removed, and a clear flow of CSF should be seen at the hub of the needle. Once the flow of clear CSF begins, approximately 1 to 2 ml of 0.5% to 0.75% bupivacaine is injected, plus the addition of 15 to 20 ug of fentanyl intrathecally.  Depending on the operative location, a hyper, iso, or hypobaric anesthetic solution can be injected. Alternatively, a combined spinal-epidural (CSE) needle set can be used to first identify the epidural space with the “loss of resistance” method followed by the advancement of the spinal needle through the epidural needle. The CSE system can limit the amount of the needle that projects beyond the tip of the epidural needle, minimizing the risk of injuring the spinal cord.

Once the anesthetic is injected, the spinal needle is removed, and the patient is placed in a supine position. The patients should be assessed for an adequate sensory block to pinprick.