Some of the most common adverse effects of fibrates include headaches, dizziness, back pain, joint pain, asthenia, diarrhea, nausea, constipation, dyspepsia, cough, wheezing, nasopharyngitis, and flu-like symptoms. Some potentially serious adverse effects that may require dose adjustment or discontinuation may include elevated liver enzymes, elevated creatine phosphokinase (CPK), cholelithiasis development, arrhythmia exacerbation, pulmonary embolism, pancreatitis, agranulocytosis, and myocardial infarction.

**Drug Interactions**

Bile acid sequestrants: It is recommended to modify therapy when bile acid sequestrants are coadministered with fenofibrate as they may decrease the overall absorption of the fibric acid. If coadministration of these drugs is necessary, it is recommended to administer the fenofibrate one hour prior or four to six hours after a bile acid sequestrant.

Ciprofibrate: As both ciprofibrate and fenofibrate are fabric acid derivatives, the coadministration of these medicines may enhance the adverse toxic effect associated with fibric acid derivatives. It is highly recommended to avoid this combination.

Systemic cyclosporine: It is recommended to modify therapy when fenofibrate is coadministered with systemic cyclosporine. This combination may lead to the increased nephrotoxic effect of fibric acid. Therefore, it is recommended to either modify therapy or monitor renal function closely if these drugs are coadministered.

Warfarin or vitamin K antagonists: It is recommended to modify therapy when fenofibrate is coadministered with warfarin or vitamin K antagonists as fenofibrate may enhance the anticoagulant effect of warfarin or vitamin K antagonists.