Following the identification of symptoms, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the preferred modality to characterize IMSCT for further treatment planning. MRI can show the size, location, length, extent of surrounding edema, the presence of the cord-tumor interface, and associated cysts or syringomyelia. Although each of the three common types of IMSCT has a particular T1-, T2-, and contrast-enhanced T1 weighted imaging pattern, differentiation between them based on imaging alone remains difficult. Both ependymomas and astrocytomas span multiple vertebral segments, enhance with contrast, are hypo- or isointense on T1-weighted, and are hyperintense on T2 weighted images. Ependymomas often are located centrally within the spinal cord leading to symmetric expansion, occupy the whole width of the cord, and enhance diffusely with a well-defined border. Astrocytomas tend to be positioned more eccentrically, can be non-enhancing or have an enhancing nodule or large satellite cysts, and usually do not have a well-defined border. Intratumoral hemorrhage can be seen in both types but are more common in ependymomas. Hemangioblastomas have homogeneous contrast enhancement compared to the more heterogeneous pattern found in astrocytomas or ependymomas. They also have mural nodules, are associated with syringomyelia, and can have significant surrounding edema. As they are highly vascularized tumors, spinal angiography is helpful to characterize feeding vessels and associated dilated pial veins from vascular shunting and can help in the consideration for pre-operative embolization.