History

The history should be used to determine the type, severity, burden, and duration of urinary incontinence. Voiding diaries may help provide details about episodes of incontinence. Signs and symptoms pertaining to emergent conditions (such as cauda equina syndrome) and reversible causes should be queried.

The type of urinary incontinence can often be determined by the history:

- Stress urinary incontinence – Patients can predict the inciting activity.

- Urge urinary incontinence – Frequency, urgency, and nocturia may be present. There is variable volume loss, ranging from none to flooding.

- Mixed urinary incontinence – There are characteristics of both stress and urge incontinence.  Determine which component is most predominant and bothersome.

- Overflow urinary incontinence – This condition is associated with poor bladder emptying.  The patient may endorse straining.

- Functional urinary incontinence – The history may suggest physical or cognitive impairment.

The 3 incontinence questions (3IQ) is a brief questionnaire that may be useful to distinguish among stress, urge, mixed urinary incontinence, and other causes. The 3IQ predicts stress urinary incontinence with a specificity of up to 92%, but its utility may depend on the population studied.

Patients should be asked about medical conditions such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma (which can cause cough), heart failure (with related fluid overload and diuresis), neurologic conditions (which may suggest dysregulated bladder innervation), musculoskeletal conditions (which may contribute to toileting barriers), etc.

The surgical history should also be assessed as the involved anatomy and innervation may have been affected.

For females, a gynecologic history should be obtained to assess for the number of births, whether births were vaginal or by c-section, and whether or not they are currently pregnant. In addition, estrogen status should be determined as atrophic vaginitis and urethritis may contribute to reversible urinary incontinence during perimenopause.

Patients should be asked about medication and substance use (e.g., diuretics, alcohol, caffeine), as they can either directly or indirectly contribute to incontinence. Potential adverse effects include impairment of cognition, alteration of bladder tone or sphincter function, inducement of cough, promotion of diuresis, etc.

Symptom severity is asked about to determine the aggressiveness of treatment.

Physical

The history should guide the practitioner toward an appropriate physical exam. Again, emergent conditions and reversible causes should be explored.

The following physical exam components and findings should be assessed if appropriate:

- Cardiovascular - pedal edema, jugular venous distension

- Pulmonary - pulmonary crackles, cough

- Abdominal - masses, surgical scars

- Musculoskeletal - extremity strength, range of motion, and overall function

- Genitourinary/rectal - bladder distension, vaginal atrophy, pelvic organ prolapse, prostatic hypertrophy, fecal impaction, rectal tone

- Neurologic - cognitive function, sensory, reflexes

Tests and maneuvers to consider, but are not necessary, are:

- Cough stress test - The patient is asked to cough to demonstrate involuntary leakage of urine. The test is more sensitive when done in a standing position.

- Cotton swab test - The patient is asked to Valsalva after insertion of a swab placed into the bladder through the urethra to demonstrate urethral hypermobility (associated with stress urinary incontinence), with an angle change of greater than 30 degrees being a positive result. There may be poor agreement of the test result when the angle is from 21 to 49 degrees.