The supraoptic nucleus is located bilaterally to the optic chiasm and receives projections from the medial preoptic, arcuate, and parabrachial nuclei. The supraoptic nucleus subdivides into the pars principalis, the pars intraoptica, and the pars tuberalis. The pars principalis possesses neurons connected to the lateral borders of the optic chiasm and optic tracts while the pars intraoptica contains neurons along the axons of the optic chiasm, and the pars tuberalis consists of neurons that are medial to the optic tracts. The cell bodies of each neuron contained within the cluster produce vasopressin which is then transported through a series of long axons. Each of these axons ends within the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland. Here, the vasopressin is stored as secretory granules within structures known as Herring bodies. The firing of these magnocellular cells is under the control of both the intrinsic membrane properties of the cells themselves in addition to input by other osmosensitive neurons. The measurement of blood osmolarity is only achievable via the circumventricular organs (CVOs) of the brain. These structures provide extensive networks of highly permeable capillaries, allowing for areas of permeability to the blood-brain-barrier. Specifically, the CVOs that provide access to the blood for the sensation of osmolarity are the subfornical organ and the organum vasculosum. The sensation of increased blood osmolarity triggers activation of the MNCs of the supraoptic nuclei and thus the release of vasopressin. The released vasopressin then enters the bloodstream and is sensed by receptors in the kidney’s collecting duct, leading to increased water absorption in addition to systemic vasoconstriction. Under normal conditions, supraoptic MNCs release enough vasopressin to maintain plasma concentrations at 1 to 3 pg/mL, which causes the reabsorption of approximately 30 liters of water each day.