Human trafficking is the second-largest global criminal enterprise after drug trafficking.

In 2007, a non-governmental organization, Polaris, established the National Human Trafficking Hotline. The US Department of HHS funds the National Human Trafficking Hotline, which is operated by Polaris. The National Human Trafficking Hotline gathers invaluable information to assist victims domestically and abroad."

The National Human Trafficking Hotline is a 24-hour, confidential, multilingual hotline covering more than 200 languages for victims, survivors, and witnesses of human trafficking.

- The hotline number is 1-888-373-7888, provided by Polaris’s Be Free Text line.

- Text "HELP" to 233733 (BEFREE).

- Email help@humantraffickinghotline.org.

Analysis of calls made to this hotline provides some statistics regarding reported cases of human trafficking.

**Childhood Statistics/Cases**

Another resource for reporting cases and gaining information related to the trafficking of minors is the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC). In 2016, The NCMEC estimated that one in six endangered runaways were victims of sex trafficking. Children as young as nine are thought to be targeted by sex traffickers, with the average age between 11 and 14. Labor trafficking ages vary. The Global Estimates of Modern Slavery by the ILO, WFF, and IOM reported in September 2017 that in 2016 of the 4.8 million sexually exploited, 20% were children.

Data from the National Human Trafficking Hotline in 2019 involved 11,500 reported cases.

In 2019:

- **Texas ranked second**in reported cases (1080)

- The most common type of trafficking in the US was sex trafficking (8,248 out of 11,500)

- The top venues for labor trafficking were: domestic work (218) and agriculture (108)

- The top venue for sex trafficking was: Illicit massage/spa business (1,247)

Gender numbers for reported trafficking victims in the US were as follows:

- 9, 357 female/ 1,304 male/ 99 gender minorities.

- 6,684 victims were adults, and 2,582 were minors.

- 1,098 were reported US citizens, 1,417 were reported foreign nationals, the rest were unknown.

**Hotline Statistics | National Human Trafficking Hotline**

These statistics highlight that a border (national or state) does not need to be crossed for an individual to be a trafficking victim. Human trafficking victims may also be a part of minority groups treated inequitably, such as LGBT, undomiciled persons, persons from a war zone, victims of abuse, those with early childhood trauma.