Position your patient with the elbow bent 90 degrees and pronated palm down. This position rolls the radial head to open the joint space. Use an ultrasound if available to localize fluid collection and direct the needle. Mark the approach by identifying the insertion site inferior to the lateral humeral epicondyle, anterior to the olecranon, and superior/posterior to the radial head (anconeus triangle). Use a skin pen to mark or pressure to indent the surface of the skin. Now clean the area with a wide margin using chlorhexidine or iodine solution. Gown, glove, and then drape in a sterile fashion. Raise a bleb of 1% lidocaine using a sterile technique at the site of insertion. Once anesthetized, an 18 to 22 gauge needle 1.5 inches long is attached to a 5 to 10mL syringe and advanced into the joint space while retracting to watch for blood return. Once the joint space is accessed, synovial fluid, blood, or infectious material may be aspirated. With the needle held in place, multiple syringes may be used to aspirate all the contents of the joint. If inflammatory etiology is suspected, a glucocorticoid may be injected before leaving the joint space to prevent relapse of effusion.

**Other Considerations**

Joint aspiration is safe within the therapeutic range of anticoagulation with warfarin or properly dosed DOAC.  Considerations for the anticoagulated patient includes using a smaller needle size.

Ultrasonography may be used in a sterile fashion to guide the needle if dry tap occurs, and septic arthritis is suspected.

Shaving is of no benefit.