Depending on the population of cells affected, the mosaicism can affect the function.

Mosaicism expresses and affects the function as per the examples given below.

- Mosaic loss of chromosome Y in blood cells increases morbidity and mortality in old age.

- Mosaic Klinefelter syndrome (46, XY/47, XXY) causes the small size of testes and reduced production of testosterone by the gonads.

- Frequency of low-level and high-level mosaicism has a role in sporadic retinoblastoma severity and the onset of the retinoblastoma.

- A mosaic variant on SMC1A has been found in buccal mucosa cells of Clinically diagnosed Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) patients.

In some mosaics, the functions are not affected; it may be due to nonexpressive mutation, recessive mutation, or low amount of cells affected. It can be understood with the example of an X-linked recessive disorder.

X-Chromosome associated disorder like Rett's Syndrome, (Mutation of MECp2 gene) is fatal for male as the male have only one X chromosome. But if the male is mosaic for the specific gene, it means more cells are with normal X-chromosome than the male has chances of survival.

Some investigators suggest that mosaicism may be a potential protective survival mechanism. Based on the fact that only a few autosomal and sex aneuploidies are compatible with human life (i.e., trisomy of chromosomes 13, 18, 21), a broader range of aneuploidies has been described in the mosaic state. For example, mosaic trisomies reported in the literature include chromosomes 8 (Warkany syndrome), 14, 16, and 17. Furthermore, while autosomal monosomy in humans is considered essentially lethal, with only a couple of cases reported for monosomy 21, a mosaic state worth noting involves isochromosome 12p, also known as Pallister–Killian syndrome. Survival is hypothetically possible due to the presence of a sufficient proportion of healthy cells.