For methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning, ethanol administration can be either through an IV line, a nasogastric tube, or orally. Still, an IV ethanol infusion is always preferable to other routes. A plasma concentration of methanol exceeding 20 mg/dL is a reference for starting ethanol therapy.

Commercially available, 10% ethanol solution dosing is as follows:

- 7.6 mL/kg IV x 1 if the patient's ethanol level is zero, decrease if ethanol is present in the bloodstream

- Maintenance infusion is 0.83 mL/kg/hour for non-drinker, 1.96 mL/kg/hour for chronic alcohol consumers

This regimen can occur in an intensive care setting with the plasma concentrations of alcohol requiring hourly monitoring until reaching a desired plasma ethanol concentration of 100 mg/dL, following which the plasma sampling frequency is reducible to 2 to 4 hours. One must keep in mind that the FDA approved IV fomepizole for methanol/ethylene glycol poisoning, and it is a specific inhibitor of ADH. It has a far superior affinity for ADH than ethanol. Even though fomepizole is a superior antidote compared to ethanol, the availability and the limited knowledge of fomepizole have resulted in the continuance of ethanol infusions as a treatment in these cases.

Alcohol-based hand sanitizers (ABHS) are time-proven weapons for preventing nosocomial infections. However, the efficacy of the same against neutralizing microorganisms rests on the effectiveness of its use. Several studies dedicated to establishing complete disinfection on the surface of the hands have concluded that an amount of 2.4 to 3 mL is the recommendation with an application time of a minimum of 25 to 30 seconds to establish maximum disinfection.

Ethanol lock therapy (ELT) uses 70% ethanol over a minimum of 4 hours; reaching a maximum of 6 hours in conjunction with the regular antibiotic therapy has significantly brought down the rate of catheter-related bloodstream infection (CRBSI). This therapy is especially beneficial as there have been no reports of bacteria exhibiting resistance to ethanol.

As a chemical ablative/sclerosing agent, ethanol has been put to rigorous use in treating varying neoplasms, cysts, vascular malformations, and even chemical neurolysis. Ethanol is injected into the parenchyma/lesion of the specific organ. It can utilize the guidance of endoscopic ultrasound, or in some cases, the injection can be under CT guidance.