The patient is placed in the lateral decubitus position (most commonly left lateral) with their knees flexed to their chest. The lithotomy position was previously the standard. However, lateral decubitus is better tolerated by the patient. The transducer is covered and well lubricated. After the rectal exam, the transducer is inserted with the ultrasound directed anteriorly in respect to the patient. The least amount of pressure possible on the prostate gland should be applied to avoid altering the contour of the gland.

Scanning is typically first done in the transverse plane, from the base towards the apex. In this plane, the symmetry and shape are assessed, as well as the width of the gland and the associated seminal vesicles. Once the gland is evaluated in the transverse axis, either the probe is removed (if it is a single planar probe) or the axis is switched (if it is biplanar). The prostate is then evaluated in the sagittal plane, assessing the height and length as well as the seminal vesicles and prostatic urethra.

Overall echogenicity (focal and diffuse) and changes in echogenicity are primary considerations in the evaluation. To obtain the best imaging, magnification and gain should be adjusted such that the prostate is filling the screen and the peripheral zone is a medium gray. Additionally, if clinically warranted, the bladder may be assessed before and after voiding to evaluate for postvoid residual volume.

Throughout the exam, multiple additional features may be used to further assess the prostate, as described above:

- Color and power Doppler may be applied to any grayscale image.

- There are two different elastography techniques:

- 
              
- Compression elastography measures the amount of displacement after repetitive compression and decompression while scanning the prostate.
              
              
- Shear-wave elastography delivers shear waves to the tissue and measures the velocity of those waves. Velocity is then associated with how stiff the tissue is, i.e., waves move faster through stiffer tissue. Images are obtained by avoiding placing pressure on the prostate.

- Microbubble contrast agents are injected and, because of their small size (<1µm), pass through the pulmonary vasculature and can enhance end organs. Enhancement after bolus injection typically lasts only 1 to 2 minutes; slow intravenous infusion can instead be used to extend this enhancement. This is classically imaged with either Doppler or grayscale harmonic. However, newer techniques may also allow for increased penetration of the contrast into the organ (intermittent harmonic imaging or flash-replenishment technique).

- 3D images are obtained by slowly sliding the probe over the entire prostate from apex to base. The data is saved as voxels and can be viewed in any plane, providing a better assessment of spatial relationships.

Prostate cancer typically appears as a hypoechoic lesion in the outer gland (peripheral zone) and is often multifocal. However, the appearance is variable and may also appear isoechoic (only 1% are hyperechoic), which makes identifying these lesions more difficult, and therefore additional techniques are necessary for diagnosis. Increased color or power Doppler flow may be seen. However, this is not as sensitive and will likely only be seen in higher-grade cancers. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound will demonstrate increased flow due to increased microvessel density.

The areas of cancer will have decreased elasticity due to increased cell density. This helps confirm the diagnosis and may also guide biopsy. Tumor extension can be assessed with grayscale imaging and may demonstrate bulges and irregularity of the prostatic contour as well as disrupted periprostatic fat. A hyperechoic seminal vesicle, asymmetric enlargement, or anterior displacement (altered prostate-seminal vesicle angle) all suggest the involvement of the seminal vesicle. The presence of extracapsular extension may also be assessed with 3D ultrasonography in place of cross-sectional imaging to better demonstrate spatial relationships. One additional important relationship to evaluate is the relationship of cancer to the neurovascular bundle, which travels along the posterolateral aspect. If cancer spares this region, it allows the possibility of nerve-sparing prostatectomy.

Prostatitis may make the ovoid prostate appear rounded and decrease the echogenicity due to edema. This causes blurring of the distinction between the inner and outer gland. It may also create a heterogeneous appearance of the gland with small hypoechoic areas (possible early abscesses). The classic sign is a hypoechoic halo in the periurethral zone, which is fairly specific for prostatitis. However, this may be confused with the normal hypoechoic periprostatic sphincter. There will typically be increased vascularity seen on color or power Doppler. Chronic or recurrent infections may lead to dystrophic calcifications in the apical peripheral zone or fibrosis. An abscess is a late complication of prostatitis. This will appear the same as in other areas of the body and is typically found within the transitional zone.

Benign prostatic hyperplasia will appear as multiple hypoechoic nodular areas within the transitional zone. It may progress from fairly homogenous to heterogeneous echogenicity. As the transitional zone enlarges, it may start to compress the peripheral and central zones, causing them to become echogenic. As they flatten, they are known as the “surgical capsule,” which is the line of demarcation between the hyperplastic and normal peripheral prostatic tissue. The overall volume of the prostate is crucial to evaluate when concerned with BPH. The most widely used formula is for the volume of an ellipsoid: height (H) x width (W) x length (L) x π/6. An enlarged prostate is diagnosed when the volume is greater than 25 cm3.