The clinician must have a thorough understanding of the anatomy and mechanical function of the muscles of facial expression. Orientation, origin/insertion, and depth of facial muscles are important factors that must be considered and integrated into one's technique to achieve the desired outcome. Muscles of facial expression are unique from other muscles in the human body, owing to their numerous connections to the overlying cutaneous tissue (rather than having solely bony attachments) via the superficial musculoaponeurotic system, or "SMAS."

Botulinum toxin of the upper face, in addition to addressing rhytids, can also be used to manipulate the position of the eyebrow. The ideal locations of the male and female brow have been described, with the male brow resting at the orbital rim and the female brow lying several millimeters above the orbital rim. The female brow should start above the orbital rim directly superior to the nasal ala and reach its highest position at the lateral canthus or lateral limbus. It should terminate at an area that can be approximated by drawing an oblique line from the nasal ala and intersecting the lateral canthus and also lie at the same level as the medial brow. In males, the brow should generally remain at the height of the supraorbital rim, with the highest point being at the mid-pupillary line. These relationships can be manipulated or accentuated by manipulating the local musculature with botulinum toxin.

The muscles of facial expression are innervated by terminal branches of the facial nerve. The paired orbicularis oculi (OO) are oriented in a circular manner in the periorbital region bilaterally. They are supplied by the supraorbital, supratrochlear, infraorbital, and angular arteries. The OO function in eye closure and are one of the principal depressors of the eyebrow, along with the depressor supercilii and procerus muscles. The orbicularis oculi's brow depressor function is opposed by the brow elevation of the frontalis muscle. The muscle originates from the underlying frontal, maxillary, and lacrimal bones and the medial palpebral ligament. It inserts on the lateral palpebral raphe and the superior and inferior tarsi medially and the undersurface of the overlying skin.

The corrugator supercilii (CS) function to bring the eyebrows toward the midline and inferior.

The procerus is situated between the eyebrows in the glabellar area and functions to pull the eyebrows down towards the nose. Its blood supply is via the supratrochlear artery. The procerus originates near the junction of the nasal bony-cartilaginous junction and inserts on the skin between the eyebrows. It is located approximately 1-4 mm below the skin surface.

The frontalis is a thin muscle located in the anterior forehead region. It is supplied by the supratrochlear and supraorbital arteries. It is continuous with the galea aponeurotica layer of the scalp superiorly and interdigitates with the CS, procerus, and OO at the level of the eyebrow. The frontalis is implicated in horizontal forehead rhytids perpendicular to the direction of its contraction, and it functions to raise the eyebrow position.

The depressor supercilii (DS) is superficially located, originating from the OO and inserting on the subcutaneous portion of the eyebrow. Its individual presence is debated and is also argued to be a component of the orbicularis oculi. Its function is to depress the medial eyebrow. Injection should be performed superficially and within the eyebrow to avoid accidental injection into the frontalis muscle superiorly and deep to this area.