The open aortic repair was graded as a high-risk intervention (defined as carrying a risk of cardiovascular death or myocardial infarction of 5% or more within 30 days), whereas EVAR is graded as an intermediate risk intervention with a cardiac risk between 1% and 5%. Nearly all the evidence suggests a significant short-term survival benefit for EVAR over OSR, with a similar long- term outcome up to 15 years of follow up. Higher safety profile and efficiency, along with a lower rate of perioperative morbidity and mortality, have been associated with EVAR, compared to the OSR. Hence, the European society of vascular surgery recommends in most patients with suitable anatomy and reasonable life expectancy, endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair as the preferred treatment modality.

**Open aortic repair:**

The open surgical repair aim is replacing the aneurysmal sac with a synthetic graft tube. The procedure is carried out in a sterile environment under general anesthesia. First, the abdominal aorta is exposed most commonly via a midline incision from the xiphoid to the pubis. Alternatively, a transverse subcostal incision below the ribcage can be used, or less commonly, a retroperitoneal approach is chosen. While the lower postoperative incidence of hernia is associated with transverse subcostal incision, midline incision enables access to all abdominal organs with relative ease. Hence the decision about the incision should be driven by surgeon preference and patient factors. Second, a proximal clamp is placed just below the renal arteries. Later, distal clamps are placed on the common iliac arteries. Third, the aneurysmal segment is removed and replaced with a tube graft. Most commonly, textile polyester material, specifically polyethylene terephthalate, is used. It is recommended to anastomose the aortic graft as close as possible to the renal arteries to prevent later aneurysm development in the remaining infrarenal aortic segment. Only in some selected cases, reimplantation of the inferior mesenteric artery into the graft may be performed. It should be considered if insufficient perfusion of pelvic organs or risk for colonic ischemia is suspected. Finally, abdominal wall closure is performed.

**Endovascular placement of an aortic stent graft:**

The endovascular approach aim is excluding the aneurysmal sac from the systemic circulation by placing a stent graft inside the aorta. The procedure is carried out under fluoroscopic guidance and can be carried under general anesthesia or local anesthesia. First, access via the patient's common femoral artery established, utilizing a surgical incision or percutaneously, bilaterally, or unilaterally. Then, vascular sheaths are introduced into the femoral arteries, through which guidewires, catheters, and the endograft are passed. Second, angiography images are performed to determine: aneurysmal sac extent, graft landing zone, and renal arteries location. Third, the "main body" of the endograft is placed over the aneurysmal sac, followed by the "limbs" which join the main body and extend to the iliac arteries. Fourth, the graft is molded into place with a balloon, and an angiogram is used to confirm position and absence leaks. Finally, the wires, sheaths, and delivery systems are withdrawn, and femoral artery hemostasis achieved.