Varicose veins are very common and often lead to poor cosmesis and fatigue. However, most patients seek medical assistance because of poor cosmesis. Today, general and vascular surgeons perform several different types of procedures to treat varicose veins, but recurrence is a problem. More important, varicose vein surgery is considered cosmetic and not covered by most health plans, so the patient is left to pay for the entire cost. Each year, consumers spend millions of dollars on the care of varicose veins. In view of the fact that recurrences are common and that surgical procedures also have complications, prevention is critical. The primary care provider, pharmacist, and nurse are in a primary position to educate the patient on preventing varicose veins.

Most people can prevent varicose veins by wearing compression stockings, maintaining a healthy weight, and exercising. In addition, the patient should be educated that if the varicose vein is untreated, it can lead to a venous ulcer that is very difficult to cure and costs the healthcare system millions of dollars annually. Finally, when evaluating a patient with a varicose vein, suspicion of a DVT should be high, and the patient should be referred for a duplex ultrasound. Before referring any patient for surgery, the primary care provider, nurse, and pharmacist should advise the patient to change lifestyle, stop smoking, elevate the legs at bedtime and wear stockings- for those who comply; there is no need for surgery.

**Evidence-based Outcomes**

Every surgical procedure has good to excellent outcomes for varicose veins, but each is associated with recurrence. For those who develop a venous ulcer, the morbidity is very high as there is no cure. It is also important to note that patients with varicose veins are also at high risk for deep vein thrombosis, which requires prolonged treatment with an anticoagulant which carries further morbidity from the side effects like bleeding. [Level 5] Hence, an interprofessional team approach to varicose veins is recommended to achieve good outcomes.