Any liver transplant procedure has two components, the donor and the recipient.

**Recipient operations**are done through total removal of the patient's native liver after dissection of the hepatic ligamentous attachments and hilar structures. The inferior vena cava (IVC) should be encircled to ensure adequate blood control. Donors are either deceased or living donors, which are discussed below.

**Deceased Donor Liver Transplantation (DDLT):**Whole liver transplantation is more common. The donor's liver is usually prepared on a separate table, and once the recipient's body is prepared, the donor's liver is brought to the table, and anastomoses are initiated accordingly. First, the suprahepatic IVC is connected, then the infra hepatic IVC, followed by the portal vein. Once these steps are done, the clamps are removed, and the portal vein initiates the inflow of blood to perfuse the liver. The hepatic arteries of both the recipient and donor are connected near the anastomoses of the gastroduodenal artery; after that, the bile duct is reconstructed.

**Living Donor Liver Transplantation (LDLT):**In the past, living donors were only used in pediatric cases that require liver transplantation. Due to the increasing numbers of patients requiring liver transplantation and the shortage of deceased donors, living donors are also used in adults. LT from living donors is more complex and requires much careful dissection.

The anastomosis is performed for the hepatic vein, which needs to have an adequate length for anastomosis, then the portal vein, and finally, the hepatic artery, which is difficult due to many short tributaries. Lastly, duct to duct anastomosis is performed for the bile duct.