The diagnosis of CIDP can be very challenging, especially with different clinical presentations. Therefore, making the correct diagnosis is crucial as CIDP is amenable to treatment. While early diagnosis and treatment will prevent the progression of the disease to axonal damage, CIDP is also commonly overdiagnosed in almost 50% of the patients.

**Electrophysiological Findings of Classical CIDP**

Electrophysiological studies/Nerve conduction study (NCV) helps to differentiate a demyelinating process from an axonal. Axonal can be primary or secondary to demyelination and does not exclude CIDP. There are 15 different sets of diagnostic criteria to diagnose CIPD. The European fenestration of neurological societies and peripheral nerve Society (EFNS/PNS) 2010 diagnostic criterion

A. For the definite group, at least two nerves have required the following demyelination changes on NCV.

- Prolonged distal CMAP latencies more than 50% above the upper limit of normal value (excluding the median nerve)

- Reduction of motor conduction velocity of more than 30% below the lower limit of normal value (independent of the compression site)

- Prolongation of F wave latency more than 30% about the upper limit of normal value

- Absence of F waves in 2 or more nerves, if these nerves have distal negative peak CMAP amplitudes ≥20% of LLN + ≥1 other demyelinating parameter in ≥1 other nerve,

- Partial motor conduction block with at least 50% amplitude reduction of proximal CMAP relative to the distal negative peak

- Abnormal temporal dispersion (prolongation of proximal motor response duration by 30% or more)

- Distal CMAP duration (interval between onset of the first negative peak and return to baseline of the last negative peak) increase in ≥1 nerve (median ≥ 6.6 ms, ulnar ≥ 6.7 ms, peroneal ≥ 7.6 ms, tibial ≥ 8.8 ms) + ≥1 other demyelinating parameter in ≥1 other nerve

B. For probable

- At least 30% reduction of the amplitude of the proximal negative peak CMAP relative to distal, if the distal negative peak CMAP is at least 20% of the lower limit of normal values, in 2 nerves OR one nerve + at least one other demyelinating parameter in one or more other nerves.

C. For possible CIDP, the findings described in A need to be there in a single nerve

**Atypical Variant Electrophysiology**

- Distal acquired demyelinating symmetric neuropathy variant  (DADS)- initially, the sensory conduction is affected, with some overlap of posterior column deficits, as seen in the CISP variant. Often there are conduction deficits in motor potentials. A unique feature is that more than half of the patients generate IgM gamma antibodies against anti-myelin-associated glycoprotein (anti-MAG) in CSF.

- Multifocal acquired demyelinating sensory and motor neuropathy variant 6 to 15% (MADSAM or Lewis-Sumner syndrome)- abnormal nerve conduction studies (NCS), including multi-focal sensory and motor conduction blocks within one or both upper extremities. In a later course, the lower extremities may develop the typical CIDP pattern.

- Proximal radiculopathy variant (brachial or lumbosacral plexopathy)- proximal and distal sensory and motor nerve conduction is affected, usually affecting upper or lower extremities, depending on the plexus involved. Advanced imaging can help distinguish this variant from others by gross hypertrophy of the plexus affected.

- Pure motor variant 7% to 10%- minimal or absent sensory electrophysiological deficits.

- Pure sensory variant- 5% to 35%- pure sensory conduction abnormalities are rare. Most often, there is evidence of motor-axonal demyelination in advanced stages.

- Chronic immune, sensory polyradiculopathy (CISP) variant may have normal distal NCS sensory potentials with focal damage to the posterior columns and large fibers.

**Laboratory Finding**

CIDP is idiopathic; therefore, appropriate labs to evaluate for other causes of acquired, inflammatory, and demyelinating neuropathies such as Lyme borreliosis, West Nile, HIV/AIDS infection, lymphoma, or sarcoidosis, hemoglobin A1c, thyroid function testing, vasculitic markers should be done.

**CSF Criteria**

Similar to GBS, where albuminocytologic dissociation is seen. Most patients (around 85-90%) with CIDP have elevated protein and mild pleocytosis of less than 10/µL. WBC, more than 50/µL, should raise suspicion for alternate diagnoses. Elevated CSF protein is considered ancillary testing more than a diagnostic criterion; therefore, a normal CSF protein does not exclude the diagnosis.

**Nerve Biopsy**

It is ancillary with high specificity. The features of CIDP are described earlier in the histopathological section. It's instrumental in challenging cases. Nerve biopsy can exclude other neuropathy causes such as amyloidosis, vasculitis, and toxic or hereditary neuropathies.

**Imaging**

With more understanding of this entity and advancement, nerve and root imaging is incorporated to aid the diagnosis. The breach in the blood-brain barrier due to inflammatory cells can be seen as gadolinium enhancement on magnetic resonance imaging. Hypertrophy of the nerves can provide a clue of active inflammation. More recently, ultrasound techniques are being utilized to support the diagnosis of CIDP.