Venous anatomy starts with a thick outer layer of connective tissue called the tunica externa or adventitia, a middle layer of smooth muscle called the tunica media, and an interior layer of endothelial cells called the tunica intima.

Here the blood supply and lymphatics of the scalp veins, starting with the superficial components anteriorly, and moving posteriorly, will be described.

**Supratrochlear and Supraorbital Veins**

The supratrochlear vein originates on the forehead, where it drains the superficial muscles and skin of the forehead and the front of the scalp supplied by the supratrochlear artery into the angular vein; there is no associated lymph tissue.

The supraorbital vein originates on the forehead, and its anastomosis with the frontal branch of the superficial temporal vein serves to drain the area of the forehead, eyebrow, and upper eyelid supplied by the supraorbital artery that anastomoses with the frontal branch of the superficial temporal vein.

**Superficial Temporal Vein**

The superficial temporal vein has frontal and parietal branches, which drain the superficial muscles and skin of the temporal region. It originates from a venous plexus on the side of the head and travels laterally from the temporal region over the zygomatic arch, and enters the parotid gland to become the retromandibular vein, where it joins the transverse facial vein.

**Posterior Auricular and Occipital Veins**

The posterior auricular vein assists with the draining of the muscles and skin of the scalp. It originates from small vessels behind the ear superficial to the temporal fascia and anastomoses with the occipital vein superiorly.

The occipital vein originates from small vessels on the posterior aspect of the scalp and drains the superficial muscles and skin of the occipital region. It is superficial to the occipital fascia and the occipital artery and anastomoses laterally with the parietal branch of the superficial temporal vein and inferolateral to the posterior auricular vein. It then runs into the inferior portion of the posterior auricular vein, where it becomes the external jugular vein. The occipital vein also has an anastomosis with the intracranial confluence of the sinuses via the occipital emissary vein.

**Deep Venous Drainage**

The venous drainage of the deep scalp layers is via the pterygoid venous plexus, an extensive plexus of veins located between the lateral pterygoid and temporalis muscles, draining into the maxillary vein. It receives branches corresponding with the branches of the maxillary artery.

- Alveolar

- Buccinator

- Deep temporal (anterior and posterior)

- Infraorbital

- Masseteric

- Middle meningeal

- Pterygoid

- Sphenopalatine

The pterygoid venous plexus also receives blood from some branches of the palatine veins and contains a communicating vein that travels through the inferior orbital fissure to connect the ophthalmic vein to the cavernous sinus.