Given that intercostal neuralgia has many different causes, there are varying considerations regarding management; however, treatment of the intercostal neuralgia in and of itself remains similar and appears below after outlining unique factors.

When inciting factors can be identified, it is important to try to mitigate them. For example, if a patient has a chronic cough that may be contributing to this pain, perhaps a cough suppressant would prove beneficial.

Optimizing preventative strategies and mitigating the insulting etiologies, as well as the pain caused by those insults in the acute phase, can reduce the development of chronic pain.

Another option is the intercostal nerve blockade.

In the case of HZ, many instances can be minimized or avoided if patients receive vaccination with the live attenuated vaccine. It has been demonstrated that the vaccine can reduce the incidence by around 51% and that of PHN by upwards of 66% while simultaneously reducing the burden of disease in the remaining cases.

Systemic corticosteroids have some modest effect on acute HZ symptoms but no reduction in the development of PHN.

For pain control in the chronic phase of intercostal neuralgia in general, regardless of cause, medications including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), anticonvulsants (i.e., gabapentin, pregabalin), antidepressants (tricyclic antidepressants, selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), or bupropion), and opioids may be helpful. Topical medications (i.e., low concentration capsaicin, transdermal lidocaine) may be helpful as well.

A high concentration, 8% capsaicin patch may be applied topically in the clinic setting (requiring pre-placement topical or regional anesthetic placement) and is FDA approved for the treatment of PHN pain.

Interventional techniques like intercostal nerve blocks can also be helpful in the diagnosis and treatment of intercostal neuralgia. If repeated intercostal nerve blocks using a local anesthetic (with or without steroid) provide reliable and significant, yet short-lived pain relief, then neurolytic intercostal nerve block with phenol or alcohol may be considered.

Another possible intervention can include manipulation of the thoracic spine to relieve impingement. When there is aberrant or impeded motion at one or more thoracic vertebrae, it can set off an inflammatory response and physically irritate the costal nerve(s). This is particularly possible if the costovertebral joint is involved, preventing appropriate rib excursion. Manual release of the intervertebral and costovertebral joints in the area can remove impingement in some cases, providing relief.

More invasive options are surgical neurectomy, dorsal rhizotomy, or sensory ganglionectomy of corresponding intercostal nerves.

It is important to remember that the pain of intercostal neuralgia can lead to deconditioning as a result of avoiding physical activity. Physical therapy, psychotherapy, and acupuncture can be effective and synergistic additions to pharmacological and/or interventional treatments.