The mechanism involved with the function of the peripheral vestibular system involves the acceleration of endolymph within the various structures of the vestibular apparatus. Head movement in various directions is responsible for this acceleration that results in the stimulation of the stereocilia of hair cells. When the head stops accelerating, hair cells return to their baseline position which allows them to respond to further changes in endolymph acceleration. Depending on the direction of acceleration, the inertial drag of the endolymph will push the stereocilia either towards or away from the fixed kinocilium. Movement towards the kinocilium causes tip links to pull open cation channels resulting in depolarization of the hair cell via potassium ion influx. Movement away from the kinocilium results in closure of the cation channels and hyperpolarization and reduction in afferent firing rates. Depolarization results in the opening of calcium channels. Calcium channel opening results in neurotransmitter release across the synaptic cleft, leading to nerve transmission to the vestibular ganglion. Nerve signals pass through the 20,000 bipolar neurons in the vestibular ganglion and leave along the vestibular nerve. The vestibular nerve joins the cochlear nerve and enters the brainstem at the pontomedullary junction. The primary processor of vestibular signals is the vestibular nucleus complex that extends from the rostral medulla to the caudal pons. Many signals are sent from the vestibular nucleus to either the thalamus, cortex, or cerebellum that help to process and adjust efferent signals to postural or ocular muscles. Of note, the hippocampus plays an important role in spatial memory, including the functions of navigation and orientation.