A traditional bidirectional Glenn procedure, which is undertaken to balance pulmonary and systemic blood flow via a shunt, has a mortality rate of less than 2 percent.

Factors that exacerbate postoperative blood loss in this population include age less than 2 years, reoperation, use of aspirin, hypoxemia, and deep hypothermic bypass. Almost all patients undergoing a BDG will need a repeat sternotomy, with increased risk for blood loss due to mediastinal adhesions and CPB- induced arrhythmias. Anesthesiologists and surgeons should discuss the need for antifibrinolytic agents, multiple large-bore intravenous access for administration of blood products, and the application of external cardioversion or defibrillation pads. In addition, a CPB circuit should be primed and heparin available in case of an emergent need for a bypass.

Following the completion of the BDG, exacerbated hypoxemia is one of the most common postoperative complications, caused by a suboptimal ventilation strategy or diminished PBF. If oxygenation does not improve the following optimization of volume status and ventilation strategy, collateral vessels from the upper body to the systemic circulation should be investigated. These vessels may require coil embolization in a persistently hypoxemic patient. Early extubation is recommended in these patients as spontaneous ventilation will augment cavopulmonary-cerebral circulation, and PaO2and PaCO2 should be optimized. Elevating the head of the bed and maintaining the neck in a neutral position will enhance cerebrovenous drainage and prevent hypoxemia. Systemic hypertension can occur in patients following a BDG as the cerebral circulation requires a higher venous pressure following surgical intervention. Following the BDG, cerebral venous pressure is equal to PA pressure and elevated to a mean of 12-18 mmHg. Hypertension can result as the body aims to maintain cerebral perfusion pressure.

Pleural effusions are one of the important complications post-operatively that can prolong the duration of the hospitalization and are known to happen in 9% of the children. Though the cause remains uncertain, increased left to right shunting from some collaterals can be the cause in some cases. Sometimes pulmonary arteriovenous (AV) fistulas can be formed in children who have undergone BDG procedure and Kawashima operation as these exclude hepatic venous circulation to the lungs on the first pass suggesting hepatic factor as a cause for pulmonary AV fistulas which can cause desaturations.

Patients with failing BDG physiology develop elevated venous pressures that reduce PBF, impair oxygenation, and inhibit cerebral venous drainage. Decreased cerebral perfusion can result from high cerebral venous pressures in the setting of low systemic blood pressure. The failing Glenn circuit is often caused by atrioventricular valve regurgitation, leading to reduced cardiac output. Jolley et al. identified seizures, cerebral hemorrhage, and embolic stroke as common complications in this population. If a BDG patient requires extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support, increased morbidity and mortality were associated with renal injury, neurologic injury, and persistent acidosis.