The management of lymphocytosis depends on the underlying etiology. While some causes reflect only a reactive or physiologic process that does not need any intervention (e.g., stress or asplenia), others indicate a malignant or clonal process that might require intervention.

- Acute infectious mononucleosis: The management is typically supportive, with analgesics and/or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). As the majority of patients have splenomegaly, they should be instructed to avoid contact sports during the early acute stage to avoid splenic rupture. The use of corticosteroids is controversial, and the current body of literature does not provide enough evidence to support its use for symptomatic relief.

- Other infectious causes: The management of the underlying etiology directs the treatment. For example; The management of pertussis differs from infants to adolescents and adults. Antibiotics (e.g., azithromycin or clarithromycin) are generally indicated in adult patients when presenting within three weeks of the cough onset. Likewise, appropriate antimicrobials are an option Bartonella Henselae, MTB, HIV, or toxoplasmosis.

- CLL: The management of CLL has moved towards the use of targeted therapies such as BTK inhibitors (Ibrutinib), BCL-2 inhibitor (Venetoclax), and PI3K inhibitors (Idelalisib). In general, the first step in CLL management is by appropriate selection of patients needing therapy. These are patients with progressive cytopenias, constitutional symptoms, progressive or symptomatic lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly. The second important step in CLL management relies on risk stratification and predictive factors. Particularly, the presence of 17p del or TP53 mutation predicts for lack of response from standard chemoimmunotherapy with fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab (FCR) or bendamustine plus rituximab (BR). These patients are better suited for the use of BTK inhibitors (Ibrutinib) or Venetoclax in combination with the humanized anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody obinutuzumab. The phase III ECOG-E1912 has proved the superiority of the combination of Ibrutinib and rituximab (IbRx) over the FCR regimen in younger patients (age less than 70 years) diagnosed with CLL without del17 mutation. The progression-free survival (89.4% in the IbRx arm vs. 72.9% in the FCR arm at 3 years; hazard ratio for progression or death, 0.35; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.22 to 0.56; P<0.001)and overall survival (98.8% in the IbRx arm vs. 91.5% in FCR arm at 3 years; hazard ratio for death, 0.17; 95% CI, 0.05 to 0.54; P<0.001) were significantly prolonged in patients diagnosed with CLL, even in those with IGHV mutation.

- NHL: The management of NHL management depends on the histology. For instance, where a patient diagnosed with 'double-hit' DLBCL may require prompt initiation of treatment, a patient diagnosed with low-grade FL can be monitored clinically for signs of growth or transformation. The treatment options for NHL have increased with the advent of targeted agents. The typical medications, namely, rituximab, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and steroids (either prednisone or dexamethasone) are still in use as first-line treatment in various permutations and combinations. However, newer drugs like brentuximab vedotin (anti-CD-30 and drug conjugate), lenalidomide, obinutuzumab, etc. are being tested and approved in both first-line and second-line setting to improve patient outcomes. The treatment of MCL requires more intense chemotherapy, with a possibility of performing autologous stem cell transplantation in consolidation. Purine analogs (cladribine and pentostatin) are standard treatments for HCL. Methotrexate is usually the initial drug for T-LGL patients requiring therapy.

- MBL: All patients diagnosed with MBL can receive clinical monitoring. Typically, they follow up with their hematologist twice a year for the first two years for high count CLL-like MBL and atypical MBL, which can extend longer for stable patients. Only symptomatic patients or those whose blood tests show a worsening lymphocytosis warrant further imaging and bone marrow aspirate and biopsy.

- DRESS: The first step in managing patients with DRESS is to withdraw the offending drug. Supportive measures usually suffice. Topical or systemic corticosteroids may be needed depending on the extent of involvement of the skin and/or other organs.