Laboratory screening for abdominal injury (assessment of liver and pancreas function and urinalysis) is recommended in children under age five because the physical exam has a low sensitivity for detection of abusive intrabdominal injuries in young children. An abdominal CT should be completed if screening labs are elevated. A skeletal survey and repeat survey in 3 weeks are indicated in children younger than two years to identify occult fractures and assess bone health. Occult fractures are found on an initial skeletal survey 11% of the time, in infants with bruising 50% of the time, on a follow-up skeletal survey 46% of the time, and in siblings of abused children 12% of the time. The neurologic exam lacks sensitivity for AHT. Thus, a head CT in potentially abused infants younger than six months is recommended. If concerning intracranial injuries are noted, retinal examination by a pediatric ophthalmologist and MRI/MRV of the brain and spine are recommended. Occult drug exposure has increasingly been noted in victims of physical abuse, and some centers recommend comprehensive urine drug testing for children younger than age 5. It is important to remember that the lack of additional injuries on occult injury surveillance does not lessen the abuse concern for the initial injury.

Evaluation for medical mimics of abuse: Children with bruises or bleeding should be evaluated for bleeding disorders, including an assessment of the locations of bruises (children with bleeding disorders have excessive bruising in locations that are commonly bruised accidentally), and laboratory evaluation of coagulation, platelet function, and von Willebrand disease. Evaluation of fractures includes assessing for a family history of bone disease, radiographic and laboratory evaluation of bone health including disorders of bone metabolism and mineralization. In children with intracranial hemorrhage, consider metabolic diseases and other medical conditions such as glutaric aciduria, meningitis, and vitamin K deficiency in neonates.