MR is the second most common valvular heart disease after aortic stenosis in the general population and requires an interprofessional healthcare team for management. In industrialized countries, the most common etiology is degenerative MV disease leading to prolapse caused by either myxomatous degeneration or fibroelastic deficiency. MVr is preferred over MVR if complete and durable repair can be achieved. While the natural history of this valvular pathology is poor, leading to eventual LV decompensation, an appropriate and timely repair can be lifesaving and prolongs life expectancy to that of the healthy age-matched population. Mortality is increased in patients with symptoms of CHF and reduced EF. Transcatheter techniques may be challenging in patients with certain anatomical limitations, including calcified leaflets and advanced disease. Repair is not always effective, and patient selection is imperative to prevent the recurrence of MR.

The success of repair depends partially on the center and the surgeon’s level of experience. Intraoperative collaboration with cardiac anesthesia and TEE is critical. Current guidelines propose that these procedures should take place at “Heart Valve Centers of Excellence” (HVCE) that offer comprehensive options for diagnosis and management of the valvular disease.

An interprofessional team dedicated to these patients should include cardiologists, anesthesiologists, nurse anesthetists, and intensivists. Cardiology specialty nursing should be available to assist at every step, both perioperatively as well as during the procedures, working in collaboration with the clinicians and specialists to provide monitoring and patient and family education. Perioperative evaluation should consist of high-quality TEE with 3-dimensional technology. Goals for repair should include below 1% mortality for isolated repair, a near 100% repair rate, and less than 5% repair failure at a five-year follow-up. Centers should be involved in research and innovation of techniques for procedural improvement. A successful HVCE should adhere to international guidelines, engage in the appropriate and timely referral of patients, partake in evaluation and enhancement of patient outcomes, and participate in regional or national outcome registries. With an interprofessional team approach, including specialists, clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists, patient results can improve, and adverse events kept to a minimum, resulting in a better quality of life and better outcomes. [Level 5]