The major pathophysiological change seen in thalassemia is imbalanced globin chain production. As a result, Red Blood Cell (RBC) precursors are destroyed in the bone marrow or peripheral blood. This causes chronic anemia, splenomegaly, and typical skeletal deformities due to the expansion of the bone marrow.

The blood picture is often similar to that of iron deficiency anemia showing RBCs that are mildly microcytic or even normal in the case of alpha-thalassemia silent carrier. α-thalassemia 1 usually presents with mild anemia, a slight decrease in RBC indices (MCV, MCH), hypochromia, microcytosis, and anisopoikilocytosis. HbA2 level is in the low to low-normal range (1.5 to 2.5%). During the neonatal period, moderate amounts of Hb Bart (3 to 8%) can be seen on the blood film. A few (1:1000/10 000 RBC) Heinz inclusion bodies (intracellular Hb precipitates) may also be detected. Hematological parameters should be reevaluated after iron supplementation.

HbH disease, which is generally NTDT, occurs when α-globin synthesis is decreased by about one-fourth of the normal level. The presence of HbH (homotetramers of β-globin chains) can be detected by HPLC or electrophoresis. HbH amount is between 3 and 30% and is associated with mild-to-severe microcytic/normocytic anemia and elevated bilirubin level due to a moderate hemolytic component. Both parents, in such cases, are carriers of the α-thalassemia trait.

The most severe form of α-thalassemia disease is the homozygous state for α°-thalassemia, which is Hb Bart hydrops fetalis syndrome. The fetus is unable to synthesize any α-globin chains to make HbF or HbA. Fetal blood shows the presence of only Hb Bart (γ4) and some amount of embryonic Hb Portland. In such cases, prenatal diagnosis is very important, for which the diagnosis of the parents, who are thalassemia carriers, is vital.

TDT patients develop various complications due to iron overload in their bodies. Iron gets deposited in the RBC membrane due to the denaturation of hemoglobin, which causes the weakening of the membrane and hemolysis. The concomitant effects of ineffective erythropoiesis, chronic anemia, and hypoxia lead to increased GI absorption of iron. All these factors also cause increased iron deposition in tissues resulting in hemosiderosis. Free iron species generate Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS), leading to free radical-mediated tissue damage and, eventually, organ dysfunction and failure. TDT patients require regular iron chelation therapy and monitoring of iron levels to avoid such complications.