**Surgery**

Parathyroidectomy is the standard treatment for hyperparathyroidism. The goal is to remove the parathyroid gland or glands producing excess PTH. The standard procedure for patients with multi-gland disease, unsuccessful preoperative localization, is the traditional surgical approach of bilateral parathyroid exploration of 4 glands. Focused parathyroidectomy with a smaller incision and less dissection is used in patients with a well-localized solitary adenoma. Compared to bilateral parathyroid exploration, focused parathyroidectomy has similar clinical outcomes: including recurrence, persistence, and reoperation rates but significantly lower overall complication rates and shorter operative time.

Total parathyroidectomy and subtotal parathyroidectomy (a small remnant of gland left or auto-transplanted) are indicated in secondary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism with parathyroid hyperplasia. Total parathyroidectomy with auto-transplantation carries a higher risk of permanent hypocalcemia and cardiovascular events, whereas the risk of hyperparathyroidism recurrence is higher with subtotal parathyroidectomy.

**Preoperative Localization**

Preoperative localization is critical for focused, minimally invasive parathyroid surgery. The localization imaging studies include Sestamibi scintigraphy (technetium-99-sestamibi scanning), SPECT — sestamibi-single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT or MIBI-SPECT), SPECT and CT fusion, neck ultrasound, 4D-CT, MRI, and PET-CT.

**Pre-op Preparation**

**Anesthesia**

General anesthesia is preferred for parathyroidectomy, especially for patients who need sternotomy, neck dissection. Most surgeons prefer to use general anesthesia with intubation for single gland, focused parathyroidectomy.

**Positioning**

The patient is placed on the operating table supine with the neck extended and both arms tucked at the sides. A shoulder roll can be placed to improve the exposure of the neck. The operating table is slightly in reverse Trendelenburg position. Patients with cervical spine disease should be assessed for the safety of neck extension.