Lymphoscintigraphy is relatively noninvasive and has very few adverse effects. The most common complications would include extravasation of radiopharmaceuticals and an allergic reaction to the radiotracer. Extravasation of technetium 99 into the perivascular soft tissues has not been shown to cause significant adverse effects. Allergic reactions to radiotracers are rare; however, they do occur, and the American College of Radiology has provided appropriate steps for patients who are at risk and those with minor to severe reactions. Preparatory medication includes corticosteroids and antihistamine, while the emergent medications after the development of symptoms (ranging from a mild skin rash to anaphylaxis and hypotension) include epinephrine and labetalol.

Lymphoscintigraphy is used for identifying sentinel lymph nodes and the flow of lymph through the body. There have been reports of non-sentinel lymph node metastasis, and when an identified sentinel lymph node is proven negative by pathology, there is a chance that there is metastasis to other lymph nodes not biopsied. This suggests in some rare cases that the examination cannot be fully relied upon for determining the extent of nodal metastasis. Additionally, sentinel lymph node non-visualization on imaging occurs. If the patient is going to surgery after the examination, intraoperative gamma probes will often detect radiotracer in the sentinel lymph node.

Small lymphatic leaks will not be identified and produce a false negative because of the inherent low spatial resolution of nuclear medicine imaging. If a lymphatic leak occurs into the peritoneal or thoracic cavity, the water-soluble radiotracer will dilute quickly and will be difficult to evaluate on the imaging.