Valproic acid is a branched, and short-chain fatty acid is a derivative of naturally occurring valeric acid. Valproic acid's primary use is as an anti-seizure medication, as well as in migraine, bipolar, mood, and anxiety disorders. Recent work has also demonstrated its efficacy as adjuvant therapy in HIV, cancer, and neurodegenerative diseases as its histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition property. Valproic acid is a widely used therapy for pediatric epilepsy for its multiple targets and acceptable safety profile. The highly variable dose requirements and interactions with a wide range of drugs warrant regular patient follow-up and therapeutic drug monitoring. However, the clinical and adverse drug effects correlate poorly with the serum concentrations of the drug.

Divalproex sodium is the stable, coordinated compound of sodium valproate and valproic acid. Due to its characteristic broad spectrum anticonvulsive activity, divalproex sodium is used to treat a wide range of seizure disorders such as myoclonic epilepsy syndromes, absence epilepsy, generalized convulsions, partial seizures, and status epilepticus.

Patients who experience less severe events can have treatment with divalproex, lithium, or an atypical antipsychotic as monotherapy. Lamotrigine is a modern antiepileptic agent that has received approval for the prevention of depressive episodes in bipolar disorder. The pharmacological guidelines for treating bipolar disorder remain complex and recommend augmentation with lamotrigine for patients who respond partially to combined therapy with lithium and divalproex.