**Newborn Period and Primitive Reflexes**

The newborn period is significant in development. The adequate development of a newborn is assessed mainly by a complete physical exam. The neurologic exam is key for this assessment. Specifically, primitive reflexes reveal adequate Central Nervous System development. They appear and disappear in specific times of development. These include the rooting, sucking, stepping, palmar and plantar grasp, Babinski, Landau, glabella, Asymmetric Tonic Neck, and Parachute Reflex.

**Rooting/Sucking Reflex**

The rooting reflex consists of touching the infant’s mouth or cheek and the response of head-turning toward the stimulus. The sucking reflex is a sucking motion with placing a finger (or the nipple) inside the infant’s mouth; it can assess the trigeminal and hypoglossal cranial nerves. Both reflexes are present at birth and disappear by 4 months. Their absence may indicate prematurity or CNS depression.

**Moro Reflex**

This reflex can be present as early as 25 weeks. It is elicited with a loud noise, allowing the head to fall into the examiner’s hand or suddenly releasing their hands. The physiologic response is abduction and extension of the limbs. The normal reflex response is symmetrical. Asymmetry suggests injury to the brachial plexus, clavicular or humeral fracture, or hemiplegia. This reflex generally disappears by 4 months of age.

**Stepping Reflex**

This reflex is found in the first six weeks. It is elicited by holding the baby upright while both feed touch a surface. The normal response is that the baby raises the feet as if walking. It disappears by 2 months of age.

**Palmar Grasp and Plantar Grasp**

The palmar grasp reflex is found at 28 weeks gestation. It is prompted when the examiner places a finger into the infant’s palm. The normal response is the flexion of the fingers, forming a fist around the finger. Absent grasp response may indicate nerve injury. It disappears by 6 months of age.  The plantar grasp is similar to the palmar grasp, in which the examiner places a finger to the plantar aspect of the foot. The normal response is curling inward of the toes. It disappears by 15 months.

**Babinski Reflex**

It is prompted by stroking the lateral plantar surface from the heel to the toes and then towards the big toe. To this stimulus, there is the fanning of the big toe. This response is normal in the infant up to 2 years of age. In adults, a positive Babinski sign suggests an upper motor neuron disease.

**Landau Reflex**

It appears in the first 3 months. It is elicited by holding the baby in a supine position in mid-air. The response is an extension of the legs and head as if looking up. It disappears by 24 months.

**Glabella Sign**

It is elicited by tapping the glabella with the response of the bilateral blinking of the eyes.

**Asymmetric Tonic Neck Reflex**

Also called fencing reflex, this reflex is elicited when the infant is supine by turning the head to one side. The normal response is the extension of the arm to the opposite side. When it disappears, the infant can roll over.

**Parachute Reflex**

This reflex appears at about 8 months of life and never disappears. It is elicited by positioning the infant prone in mid-air, head first. The response of the infant is to extend the arms and spread the fingers to protect the head. Asymmetry may suggest extremity weakness or spasticity, or even complex neurological deficit.

**Later Infancy, School Age and Pre-Adolescence**

The child continues to grow and develop past the newborn period. The main developmental domains are gross motor, fine motor, language, cognition, and social-emotional behavior. Only in the first year, a baby learns to hold his head, grasp, crawl, sit, stand, and walk.

From 3 to 6 years, infants can learn to copy figures in a piece of paper and later draw a person, use a scissor, point to colors, and do some daily living activities like brushing their teeth or using the bathroom. They begin to learn to read and write and can have friends. They are also able to answer “why” questions.

**Adolescence**

The years of adolescence are ones of fast and big changes. It is the time when the child becomes mature, emotionally, biologically, and socially. The development consists of finding an identity and becoming autonomous. There are three main phases in adolescence: Early, from 10-13 years, Middle, from 14 to 17 years and Late, from 18-21 years. Early adolescence starts with puberty and is characterized by egocentricity, emotional liability, and concrete thinking. Socially, interest changes from family relationships towards friends, especially of the same sex. Middle adolescence is the time for abstract thinking. Social development includes friends of the opposite sex, and romantic relationships may also start. They spend more time alone or with friends instead of the family in an attempt to search for their own identity and autonomy. Most of the pubertal physical changes have already occurred, and it is at this time that they start feeling more comfortable with their body. This is also the time when sexual relationships start.

Last but not least comes late adolescence. For most, it is the time where they reach their maximum independence. Emotionally, identity is well-formed, interests are more stable, and there is interest in future decisions. Abstract thinking is firmly established. Socially, they are not so influenced by others anymore, the family becomes more important, and closer relationships with them can be formed. More serious and stable romantic relationships can be established.