Low-grade VUR typically resolves spontaneously over time, but in the meantime, it is very important to maintain sterile urine in affected individuals in childhood. In patients with symptomatic VUR, the main treatment modalities include long-term antimicrobial prophylaxis, prompt treatment of UTIs, and surgical correction.

Prophylactic antibiotics should be used depending on the frequency of UTIs, the age of the child, and the severity of the VUR. Appropriate agents include trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, trimethoprim alone, nitrofurantoin, and cephalexin. It is crucial to pay attention to the management of bladder and bowel dysfunction, with the following:

- Laxatives and stool softeners

- Frequent and timed voiding (2 to 3 hours)

- Pelvic floor exercises

- Behavioral modification

- Anticholinergic medications as needed

In chronic and severe VUR, surgical reimplantation of the ureters into the bladder to maintain the competency of the ureters is indicated. It is most beneficial in patients with failed medical management (antimicrobial prophylaxis) to prevent UTIs. Surgery has no role in adolescents and adults with established renal scarring and markers of advanced chronic kidney disease. Surgical indications include:

- Recurrent infections despite compliance with a prophylactic antibiotic regimen

- Worsening of renal scars on DMSA scan

- Non-adherence to the antibiotic prophylaxis

In patients with established RN, it is very important to prevent and aggressively manage hypertension. Appropriate use of renin-angiotensin system (RAS) blockade in patients with glomerular hyperfiltration and patients with established proteinuria.

Various modalities of renal replacement therapies (RRT) can be employed in patients who reach ESRD. Despite the higher incidence of UTIs, there was no significant difference in posttransplantation complications or patient and graft survival rates between RN patients compared with the control group.