# Definition/Introduction

On January 24, 2006, The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), an entity of the United States of Department of Health and Human Services, published a final rule on the content and format of labeling for human prescription drugs and biologics.

The FDA’s primary purpose of drug labeling is to ensure patient safety by giving healthcare professionals a summary of the safety and efficacy of a drug. The labeling is not aimed at a patient population because prescription drug administration is always under the supervision of a healthcare practitioner that is licensed to prescribe the medication.

The following list is an outline of the requirements in a drug label:

- Highlights (a concise summary of label information)

- Full prescribing Information

- Limitations Statement

- Product Names

- Date of Initial U.S. Approval

- Boxed Warning

- Recent Major Changes

- Indications and Usage

- Dosage & Administration

- Dosage Forms & Strengths

- Contraindications

- Warnings & Precautions

- Adverse Reactions (listing of most common adverse reactions)

- Drug Interactions

- Use in Specific Populations

- Patient Counseling Information Statement

# Issues of Concern

Over 50% of medication use errors in terms of dosing, intervals, route of administration, etc.,  are associated with poor prescription drug labeling.

# Clinical Significance

Medication error due to misunderstanding prescription drug labeling is the most common iatrogenic error leading to injury, hospitalization, and adverse medication reactions.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The healthcare team, e.g., physicians, pharmacists, nurses, need to work together to ensure that medications are used safely by patients. The healthcare team needs to enthusiastically educate patients repeatedly on how to correctly store and administer their medications especially for pediatric and geriatric patients. Physicians can discuss the medication with the patient, and the medication administration and storage instructions should be reinforced by the nurse and pharmacist for example in an ambulatory care setting. [Level V]