HAART regimens are essential to improve patient outcomes and reduce transmission of HIV, but medication management is a dynamic process that must be monitored by healthcare professionals. Proper utilization and adherence to a HAART regimen are essential to ensure a therapeutic response and prevent viral resistance. Healthcare professionals should obtain a detailed history and screening before initiating a regimen and consider factors such as comorbid conditions (cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis, renal dysfunction, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, psychiatric conditions, tuberculosis, drug abuse), desire to become pregnant, commitment to contraception usage, pill burden of the regimen, financial burden, prior HAART usage, and drug interactions. Patients living in a resource-limited setting with a history of substance misuse or a history of psychiatric illness are considered at high risk of non-compliance. Healthcare providers should be vigilant to ensure optimal health outcomes.

Baseline testing prior to initiation of HAART should include: plasma HIV-1 viral load (or HIV antibody or HIV serology), CD4 count and percentage, viral genotype assay to detect drug resistance, complete blood count with differential, basic chemistry panel with blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine, fasting glucose/hemoglobin A1C, alanine and aspartate aminotransferases, and total bilirubin. Additional screenings for pregnancy, sexually transmitted infections, and AIDS-defining illnesses are appropriate at this time. HAART should initiate immediately after obtaining resistance testing, and regimens can be adjusted after obtaining the results of a resistance profile of the virus. Additional testing may vary based on the HAART regimen under consideration. If considering using abacavir, haplotype testing for HLA-B*5701 is necessary. If maraviroc is an option under consideration, a tropism assay is essential before starting therapy. Healthcare providers should help maximize patient compliance through education about viral resistance, nonjudgmental conversations about prevention and adherence, and minimizing the pill burden on patients using co-formulated medications whenever possible.

HIV viral load should be tested two to eight weeks after initiation of HAART, then every four to eight weeks until the levels fall below the assay’s limit of detection (typically less than 20 to 50 copies/mL). If viral suppression does not occur after 24 weeks despite patient medication adherence, providers should retest resistance and adjust medications. Once patients are stable on their HAART regimen, follow-up visits should be scheduled every three to six months. All patients should have HIV-1 RNA viral load and CD4 count monitored to assess progress, as well as repeats of complete blood count with differential, basic chemistry panel with blood urea nitrogen and creatinine, fasting glucose/hemoglobin A1C, alanine and aspartate aminotransferases, and total bilirubin to assess for medication toxicity. Follow-up appointments may also include BMI and waist circumference monitoring to assess for lipodystrophy. This list is not all-inclusive, as other clinical indicators and patient histories may warrant further evaluation.