**Nucleoside Analogs**are used in chemotherapy for treating viral and other diseases by inhibiting the DNA replication or transcription (RNA synthesis). These analogs are competitive inhibitors of the DNA polymerases that cause termination of the growing nucleotide chain when incorporated into a nucleic acid. Acyclovir is a guanosine analog that incorporates into the DNA polymerase of the Herpes simplex virus and inhibits the replication of the viral DNA chain. Azidothymidine (AZT) is a synthetic pyrimidine nucleoside analog used against the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) that causes a termination of the viral DNA chain by inhibiting the reverse transcriptase enzyme, responsible for transcription of viral RNA to DNA. Cytarabine is a pyrimidine analog used for the treatment of hematological malignancies such as acute lymphocytic leukemia, chronic myelogenous leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Its mechanism of action involves the inhibition of DNA polymerase.

**RNA polymerase inhibitors:**Anti-tuberculosis drug Rifampicin is an effective inhibitor of RNA polymerase in Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and works by inhibiting the transcription of bacteria. PMID: 28392175 Alpha amanitin, a deadly toxin from the death cap mushroom (Amanita phalloides) is a cyclic peptide that inhibits eukaryotic RNA polymerase II and blocks the gene transcription. PMID: 26375431

**Beta-Thalassemia**is a blood disorder where there is a deficiency of hemoglobin caused by molecular defects. Hemoglobin is a tetramer comprised of two alpha and two beta chains. Gene defects such as mutations, insertion, deletions, or substitutions can affect the process of transcription, processing, and translation of beta-globin mRNA, and result in deficient production of the beta-globin protein.

**Gene Therapy:**DNA sequencing has become much more effective in recent years, allowing the possibility of gene therapy. Gene therapy aims to treat various diseases by replacing the incorrect or mutated gene sequence with the correct sequence to express the right protein. Currently, its application is limited, but it could prove to be a significant change in medical treatment for diseases such as recessive gene disorders, acquired genetic diseases like cancer.