A paradox exists in the evaluation of the comatose patient. History would reveal the etiology of the altered mental status, but the altered mental status obscures information of recent events. After stabilization, efforts should be made to obtain information from EMS providers, family, co-workers, or any bystanders.

When evaluating the comatose patient, it is axiomatic that the fundamentals of emergency care – airway, breathing, circulation – be addressed. Physical examination should be directed to detect any signs of trauma during the general physical examination. Initial neurological examination should include the response to pain, a brief assessment of motor function, eye-opening, and verbalization. Cranial nerve examination should include an evaluation of extraocular movements, pupillary, corneal, cough, and gag reflex. Any abnormal posturing should be noted. The presence of ipsilateral dilation of the pupil suggests the uncal herniation syndrome with compression of the third cranial nerve from a mass. Lack of focal findings on examination suggests a metabolic, infectious, or toxicologic cause of coma.

Recording of the neurologic examination and can be roughly quantified by the Glasgow Coma Scale, the FOUR score, or other rating scales. Brief rating scales are useful for sequential monitoring of the patient but do have limitations.

**Glasgow Coma Scale**

**Eye response**

4 = eyes open spontaneously

3 = eye-opening to verbal command

2 = eye-opening to pain

1 = no eye-opening

**Motor response**

6 = obey commands

5 = localizing pain

4 = withdrawal from pain

3 = flexion response to pain

2 = extension response to pain

1 = no motor response

**Verbal response**

5 = oriented

4 = confused

3 = inappropriate words

2 = incomprehensible sounds

1 = no verbal response

**Four SCORE**

**Eye response**

4 = eyelids open or opened, tracking, or blinking to command

3 = eyelids open but not tracking

2 = eyelids closed but open to a loud voice

1 = eyelids closed but open to pain

0 = eyelids remain closed with pain

**Motor response**

4 = thumbs-up, fist, or peace sign

3 = localizing to pain

2 = flexion response to pain

1 = extension response to pain

0 = no response to pain or generalized myoclonic status

**Brainstem reflexes**

4 = pupil and corneal reflexes present

3 = one pupil wide and fixed

2 = pupil or corneal reflexes absent

1 = pupil and corneal reflexes absent

0 = absent pupil, corneal, and cough reflex

**Respiration**

4 = not intubated, regular breathing pattern

3 = not intubated, Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern

2 = not intubated, irregular breathing

1 = breaths above the ventilator rate

0 = breaths at ventilator rate or below