# Continuing Education Activity

Thyroid lymphoma is classified as primary and secondary thyroid lymphoma. Primary thyroid lymphoma affects the thyroid gland first, followed by spread to the lymph nodes and other organs later. Secondary thyroid lymphoma affects lymph nodes and other organs first followed by spread to the thyroid later. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of primary thyroid lymphoma and the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiologies of thyroid lymphoma.
- Outline the components required for a proper assessment of a patient with thyroid lymphoma.
- Summarize the treatment options for various forms of thyroid lymphoma.
- Outline several interprofessional team strategies for improving communication to advance medical care and improve outcomes for thyroid lymphoma.

# Introduction

Thyroid lymphoma can classify as either primary or secondary thyroid lymphoma. Primary thyroid lymphoma affects the thyroid gland first, followed by spread to the lymph nodes and other organs later. Secondary thyroid lymphoma affects lymph nodes and other organs, first followed by subsequent spread to the thyroid. This review article focuses only on primary thyroid lymphoma.

# Etiology

Primary thyroid lymphoma is quite rare and accounts for less than five percent of all thyroid malignancies and less than three percent of all extranodal lymphomas.

# Epidemiology

The incidence and prevalence of thyroid lymphoma are higher in areas with higher rates of thyroiditis.

# Histopathology

Nearly all cases (98 percent) of primary thyroid lymphoma are B-cell lymphomas.

# History and Physical

The most common local symptom is a rapidly enlarging thyroid gland (goiter) along with the obstructive symptoms caused by the enlarged gland.

Physical examination is significant for a firm to hard, diffusely enlarged, and immobile thyroid gland along with cervical or supraclavicular lymphadenopathy.

# Evaluation

The workup should include:

**Laboratory**

There is no specific laboratory finding. Laboratory findings of hypothyroidism- elevated TSH, low T3, and T4; Hashimoto thyroiditis - elevated antithyroglobulin or antithyroid peroxidase antibodies occur commonly.

**Imaging**

Thyroid ultrasound is the recommended initial imaging modality. Thyroid ultrasound frequently shows multiple hypoechogenic areas appearing as pseudocysts.

**Pathology**

Fine needle aspiration (FNA) is the initial diagnostic procedure for thyroid tissue sampling.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of primary thyroid lymphoma depends on the histological subtype and staging of the tumor. Combined modality treatment with chemotherapy and radiotherapy is preferred over chemotherapy alone for limited-stage DLBCL as it is associated with a higher five-year failure-free survival rate.

Obstructive symptoms usually improve within hours of chemotherapy (R- CHOP) initiation due to the steroid (prednisolone) in the regimen. Due to this rapid effect, even patients with severe airway compromise due to tracheal compression can be safely and successfully managed medically, avoiding the need for tracheostomy or thyroidectomy.

# Differential Diagnosis

The principal differential diagnosis is anaplastic thyroid carcinoma as it clinically resembles primary thyroid lymphoma by presenting as a rapidly growing thyroid mass, which is firm and fixed to the surrounding structures. The other differentials include primary thyroid carcinomas like papillary thyroid carcinoma, follicular thyroid carcinoma, and medullary thyroid carcinoma, benign conditions like simple colloid goiter, and a benign thyroid nodule.

# Staging

Lugano staging system (modified Ann Arbor staging classification) is the means for staging primary thyroid lymphoma.

# Prognosis

Prognosis depends on the histology, tumor burden, stage, age, performance status, treatment type. The five-year failure-free survival rate is 91 percent, in patients with limited-stage (IE, IIE) disease who received combined modality (chemotherapy and radiotherapy) treatment, implying an excellent prognosis for thyroid lymphoma in general.

# Complications

Complications due to lymphoma include life-threatening complications like airway compromise due to tracheal compression, superior vena cava syndrome due to superior vena cava compression, dysphagia due to esophageal compression. Complications due to lymphoma treatment include radiation-associated hypothyroidism, radiation-associated malignancies of the thyroid or other exposed organs, peripheral neuropathy due to vincristine, congestive heart failure due to doxorubicin, hemorrhagic cystitis/bladder cancer due to cyclophosphamide.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Lymphoma is a solid, cohesive cancer of the lymphatic cells. In thyroid lymphoma, these lymphoid cancer cells in the thyroid cause the gland to enlarge. The patient may experience various symptoms due to thyroid gland dysfunction and enlargement; or symptoms like fever, night sweats, and weight loss due to the lymphoma itself. Multiple laboratory investigations, imaging, and biopsy of the thyroid gland are needed to establish the diagnosis and stage of the lymphoma. Good treatment options are available depending on the specific subtype and stage of the lymphoma. Usually, multiple specialists like the medical oncologist, radiation oncologist, oncology pharmacist, and oncology nurse are involved in healthcare. Prognosis depends on several factors like age, functional status, tumor type, and stage, but overall, primary thyroid lymphoma has an excellent prognosis if promptly identified and treated.

# Pearls and Other Issues

In patients presenting with a rapidly enlarging goiter, especially in the setting of Hashimoto thyroiditis, the diagnosis of primary thyroid lymphoma should always be considered.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Management of primary thyroid lymphoma requires the involvement of an interprofessional team of specialists from different departments that includes a medical oncologist, radiation oncologist, otolaryngologist, primary care physician, endocrinologist, pathologist, and specialty care nurses. Patients usually present to their primary care physician, nurse practitioner or endocrinologist with an enlarged neck mass and obstructive symptoms, and it is the responsibility of the initial physician to have a high degree of suspicion for thyroid lymphoma and involve the otolaryngologist and the pathologist for establishing a diagnosis with a core biopsy of the thyroid. Once the diagnosis is confirmed, the medical oncologist, radiation oncologist, and an endocrinologist should all have involvement in the case; additional workup and treatment should commence immediately. Primary thyroid lymphoma has a good prognosis if the patient receives well-coordinated care from all the specialists promptly. As can be seen, thyroid lymphoma diagnosis and management require an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. Oncology nurses administer chemotherapy, educate patients and their families, and keep the team apprised of the status of the patient. The pharmacist reviews medications for dose and drug-drug interactions and also participate in education. [Level 5]