Arterial supply:

The vertebral blood supply for the spinal cord comes from many different sources in the body depending on the region. The main blood supply to the spinal cord is via the single anterior spinal artery (ASA) and the two posterior spinal arteries (PSA). The anterior spinal artery is formed by the vertebral arteries which originate from the first part of the subclavian artery. The vertebral arteries pass through the transverse foramen of C1 through C6 and through the foramen magnum to become the basilar artery. However, before joining together to become the basilar artery, the vertebral arteries each give off a branch which becomes the anterior spinal artery; the anterior spinal artery travels caudally down the spinal cord through the anterior sulcus.

The anterior spinal artery and PSA are fed additional arteries throughout their course down the spinal cord at each spinal level through the intervertebral foramen. These additional arteries are called segmental spinal arteries. The segmental arteries then bifurcate into an anterior and posterior radicular artery which feed into both anterior and posterior spinal arteries respectively. Not only can they supply the ASA/PSA but also provide blood supply to the nerve roots along which they track. Theoretically there should be 31 radicular arteries for each foramen that receives an artery, but in reality, there is always less.

Venous supply:

The spinal cord drains via the single anterior spinal vein and single posterior spinal vein which in turn drain into the internal vertebral venous plexus located in the epidural space within the extradural fat.