Nasopalatine nerve blocks are often necessary for oral-maxillofacial procedures, including cleft palate repair. This procedure requires the deposition of anesthetic in the incisive canal to anesthetize the nasopalatine nerves bilaterally, blocking pain fibers in the area surrounding the anterior six maxillary teeth. The initial technique involved a single penetration into the canal, but the prevailing opinion is that this is traumatic and unnecessarily painful to the patient. The current practice involves multiple injections, first injecting on the labial side in the interdental papilla, entering horizontally with a 30-gauge needle. After achieving buccal anesthesia, the solution spreads by diffusion to the palate. However, in patients with complete cleft palate, this block cannot be done as the premaxilla is malformed.

Although anterior (greater) palatine nerve and nasopalatine nerve blocks are often both performed before procedures of the palate or anterior maxillary teeth, innervation is variable. Extraction of supernumerary teeth in adults with the related sacrifice of the nasopalatine nerve has shown to correlate with a persistent alteration in sensation in adults (see above), while other data demonstrates that sacrifice of the nasopalatine nerve will not result in the patient reporting of altered sensation. The anterior palatine nerve alone in this study could maintain adequate sensation, while the nasopalatine nerve alone could not.

Nasopalatine canal measurement is also important in the field of implant dentistry. It is useful in preventing intraoperative complications, such as perforation of the nasopalatine canal or buccal bone plate. To date, traditional imaging modalities have proven ineffective, given the bony complexity of this region. For this purpose, cone beam computed tomography has seen increased use with success.