Obesity is a complex, preventable disease that has a multifactorial process. Obesity is fundamentally associated with an excess calorie intake compared to expenditure at the individual level. At a population level, obesity is better understood by its interactions with the environment.

**Social and Economic Factors**

The effect of globalization and economic changes over the past decade has generated a decreased cost and growing prevalence of fast food as well as a decrease in physical activity. On the other hand, food accessibility is also a major factor. Especially in the United States, access to affordable healthy food varies by ethnic, racial, and socioeconomic status. In minority predominant and lower-income neighborhoods, there are approximately 30% fewer supermarkets.

In developing countries, there is a relationship between higher socioeconomic status and a higher likelihood of having obesity. However, there is an inverse relationship between socioeconomic status and BMI in developed countries. It is possible that in developing countries, the ability to afford food, cultural values, and less physical labor favors a larger body size, whereas developed nations can afford more nutritious food and favor high-energy exercise.

Community resources and neighborhood characteristics have also been shown to play a role. In Nigeria, a study revealed that even controlled for socioeconomic status, specific factors such as poor neighborhood aesthetics, safety in the area, and distance to commercial facilities were associated with higher weights. Similar findings were seen in Missouri in the United States as well.

Racial and ethnic variations of prevalence also exist. Non-Hispanic black and Hispanic women have a larger rate of obesity than non-Hispanic white women. This trend is seen similarly in men, although there is not a large difference between races. Asians have lower obesity rates than others. However, they have a higher body fat percentage.

**Lifestyle Factors**

Factors such as sedentary lifestyles and amount of physical activity, restful sleep time, and stress are all independently associated with weight gain. The US Department of Health and Human Services recommends at least 150 to 250 minutes of moderate exercise per week to prevent weight gain. Physical inactivity in children and extended screen time leading to more inactive lifestyles have become more prominent. Early childhood preventative interventions such as encouragement of athletics and outdoor recreation have been shown to have long-term health benefits.

Sleep was also found to be a factor. Less than six or greater than eight hours of sleep is associated with weight gain. This has also been studied greatly in children, demonstrating that even less than 1 hour of sleep per night from normal can lead to worsening obesity.

Homelife factors and family influences also indirectly affect a patient's eating habits and preferences from a young age.

Studies show that abrupt smoking cessation contributes to weight gain. Many patients may recognize this. However, the risks highly outweigh the benefits, and patients should be counseled to continue abstaining from smoking while working to maintain weight. The use of nicotine patches to help with quitting smoking reduces weight gain.

**Dietary Factors**

The energy balance pathway is the established pathophysiology of obesity. The energy value of food is often measured in calories. The average active female needs about 2000 calories, and a male needs 2500 calories a day to maintain a healthy weight. Excess energy intake is often due to the consumption of energy-rich diets such as high- fat and carbohydrates and low intake of fiber, fruits, and vegetables. Population-based studies unveil that a high intake of sugar-heavy beverages (e.g., sweet tea, soft drinks) and irregular eating patterns lead to obesity. Drinking alcohol heavily, above the recommended limit, eating outside often, and eating processed foods are higher risks. Comfort eating, such as eating when sad or depressed, may occasionally play a role.

**Genetic Factors**

Although isolated genetic factors are unlikely to explain the increasing prevalence of obesity over the last few years. Certain genetic elements and the influence of environmental conditions likely enhance the risk of obesity. An example is that physical activity levels and diet composition influence obesity risk alleles such as the FTO gene (“fat mass and obesity-associated protein”). Several non-coding genes affect obesity risk by influencing brain development or function or development of adipose tissue. Further research is required to illustrate this in better detail.

**Gastrointestinal Factors**

Various mechanisms have been studied to understand the effects of the gastrointestinal tract on the development of obesity. The intestinal microbiota can do this in many ways by causing low-grade inflammation, affecting fatty acid production, and increasing the energy production of food. Gut microbiome diversity has a protective effect against long-term weight gain.

Previous studies have shown a correlation between the amount of Bacteroides bacteria in stool samples and weight loss. These bacteria allow for improved metabolism of carbohydrates and lipids by facilitating increased digestion of indigestible carbohydrates into fatty acids. Microbiota also causes inflammatory cytokine secretion. Probiotics show a decrease in interleukins and C- reactive protein levels, which are known biomarkers of obesity. Studies have shown a significant association between antibiotic exposure and obesity due to alterations in the diversity of gut microbiota.

**Developmental Factors**

Other factors include perinatal and intrauterine exposure to high-energy diets, toxins, etc. Maternal undernutrition increases obesity risk in the first trimester. Despite this, exposure to maternal obesity with or without gestational diabetes mellitus is also associated with a heightened risk of adult obesity at later stages.