**Values**

- Normal: 0.9 to 1.4

- High: greater than 1.4, typically indicative of vessel stiffening

- Low:  less than 0.9 - narrowing of vessels

- Non-measurable: Unable to occlude blood vessel at 300mmHg of pressure application.

Minimal variations in ABI value occur with race, sex, age, and height, but the overall predictability of PAD similar amongst groups.

Special considerations for the pediatric population: In early infancy, ABI values average lower values than adults (58% below 0.9); however, ABI reaches normal values after 12 months.

In general, the variation in measurements is less in young, healthy individuals.

**Clinical Uses**

**Peripheral Arterial Disease (PAD)**

The AHA suggests clinicians consider evaluating patients who smoke over 50, patients with diabetes, or over age 70  for peripheral arterial disease.

Several studies have used ABI for predicting additional risk due to low invasiveness and relative ease of performance to the test:

- Studies show correlations of ABI less than 0.9 with increased risk for PVD, MI, renal disease, HTN.

- Lower ABI also correlates with a high carotid plaque score.

- There is a higher risk of recurrent stroke (HR 1.7) and vascular evens/ death (2.22).

**Ulcer Management**

Traditionally ABI was thought to have a role in wound healing. One study evaluating heel wounds showed ABI was not reliable for heel pressure sores.

ABI is useful in the evaluation of critical limb ischemia. One management protocol suggests that a normal or inability to perform ABI warrants more invasive evaluation in the setting of critical limb ischemia. If there is an abnormality in the ABI, promote surveillance if no tissue loss/gangrene and revascularization in the case of tissue loss or gangrene.

After revascularization, there is a correlation between change in ABI value and ulcer wound healing (ABI delta greater than or equal to 0.23, HR 1.87 for wound healing).

**ForPpost-surgical Healing**

Surgical healing prediction:

- ABI has been reported useful in total knee arthroplasty procedures. Lower ABI (less than 0.7) shows an increased chance of total knee arthroplasty failure.

- Patients with lower ABI more likely to have delayed healing when undergoing heart surgery.

- Evaluation of flap placement in foot/ankle trauma 0.9 to 1.2.

**Trauma**

ABI has a role in the initial evaluation and management of blunt trauma and knee dislocations as a method of assessing for vascular injury.

**Claudication**

Occult PAD in 20% of patients referred to orthopedic surgery for leg pain in patients over 50 years old.

One study found that the value of the ABI was not necessarily predictive of current functional status. Still, there is a prognostic value with a greater likelihood to have decreased functional status over time with lower baseline values.

Also, there are conditions associated with claudication unrelated to arterial disease. These conditions include functional popliteal syndrome and exercise-induced leg pain.