The 2 umbrella categorizations of parathyroid dysfunctions are hyperparathyroidism and hypoparathyroidism. The inappropriately high secretion of PTH is classified as hyperparathyroidism, while the inappropriately low secretion of PTH is designated as hypoparathyroidism.

**Hyperparathyroidism**

Hyperparathyroidism is further characterized as primary, secondary, and tertiary dysfunction.

Primary hyperparathyroidism refers to an abnormality in the parathyroid gland itself, such as an adenoma or hyperplasia, causing the gland to oversecrete. This is characterized by lab values that show elevated PTH levels, hypercalcemia, and hypophosphatemia. Primary hyperparathyroidism is customarily due to an adenoma, hyperplasia, or, even more rare, a carcinoma. Adenomas are very sporadic and can be surgically resected. Hyperplasia can be found in cases of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) types I and IIa and in an autosomal dominant condition called familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia. In MEN type I, patients are often characterized by having tumors in the pituitary gland, parathyroid gland, and pancreas. MEN type IIa is characterized by the presence of medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocytoma, and parathyroid hyperplasia. In familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, there is a mutation of the calcium-sensing receptor in the parathyroid gland and kidney, resulting in a higher-than-normal setpoint. This causes a lack of inhibition of PTH secretion until a higher level of serum calcium, thus resulting in increased bone resorption and hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia is further exacerbated with increased renal absorption of calcium, resulting in hypocalciuria. These conditions are rare and are not always favored for surgical resection. Patients with hyperparathyroidism will have correlated hypercalcemia which can cause symptoms of excessive thirst and urination, constipation, bone pain, fatigue, depression, and possibly kidney stones. This is commonly memorized as "stones, bones, groans, thrones, and psychiatric overtone."

Secondary hyperparathyroidism refers to the compensatory oversecretion of PTH in response to abnormally low calcium in the blood due to other pathological processes such as renal failure, gastrointestinal malabsorption, or simply a vitamin D deficiency. Lab values differ according to the underlying pathology. In chronic renal failure, there will be elevated PTH but with decreased calcium and elevated phosphate. In the setting of malabsorption and vitamin D deficiency, there will be elevated PTH but decreased calcium and phosphate.

Tertiary hyperparathyroidism is exceedingly rare but is seen in the context of continuous PTH secretion even after a secondary hyperparathyroidism precipitating condition is resolved. Lab values will show moderately elevated PTH, normal or elevated calcium, and decreased phosphate.

**Hypoparathyroidism**

Hypoparathyroidism doesn't occur with the same frequency as an overactive gland and can also vary in duration. Hypoparathyroidism can be chronic, or it can resolve transiently. Most commonly, a person becomes hypo-parathyroid when their parathyroid gland is removed with elective surgery or it is damaged iatrogenically during a thyroid resection procedure due to the close anatomical proximity. The next most common cause of the underproduction of PTH is associated with autoimmune disorders causing the destruction or damage of the glands individually or collectively. This can be found in Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I. Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I is due to mutation of the autoimmune regulatory (AIRE) gene and is characterized by the triad of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and Addison disease. Another cause of hypoparathyroidism is due to failure of embryological formation of the parathyroid glands. DiGeorge syndrome is a condition due to chromosomal 22q11 deletion and is characterized by the failure of the formation of the 3rd and 4th pharyngeal pouches, which are responsible for the embryological formation of the thymus and parathyroid gland. Manifestations of DiGeorge syndrome are chronic infections (due to lack of mature T lymphocyte proliferation in an absent thymus), hypoparathyroidism, cleft lip/palate, congenital cardiac defects (i.e., persistent truncus arteriosus, tetralogy of Fallot, or ventricular septal defect), and craniofacial abnormalities.

Hypoparathyroidism is similarly correlated with hypocalcemia which can cause abdominal pains, muscle cramping, and paresthesias. The 2 clinical tests commonly done to evaluate for hypocalcemia are Chvostek and Trousseau signs. Chvostek sign is positive when the cheek is tapped lightly and the face contracts on the same side. This indicates that the facial nerve is hyperexcitable due to hypocalcemia. Trousseau sign is positive when a blood pressure cuff is placed on an arm and inflated greater than the systolic blood pressure and maintained for three minutes, eliciting muscle spasms of the ipsilateral hand and forearm. This occurs after the brachial artery is occluded, allowing the hypocalcemia to induce nerve excitability.