Appropriate labwork to be ordered in the initial evaluation of a patient with suspected urolithiasis is as follows:

Urine analysis (UA) with microscopy (can show gross blood or + microscopic hematuria, +/-leukocyte esterase, +/- nitrites +WBC), urine HCG (all women of reproductive age), CBC, CMP, lactic acid, lipase, amylase, blood cultures (if the patient has +SIRS criteria).

The choice of imaging modality can be selected using factors such as the patient's body habitus, pregnant state, cost, and consideration of radiation exposure.

Renal ultrasound is a method that can be used to assess urolithiasis and is an ideal initial imaging study of choice in pediatric and pregnant patients to avoid radiation.

X-ray of kidney, ureter, and bladder (KUB) can be used to assess for radiopaque stones (calcium phosphate and oxalate), but not radiolucent stones (uric acid and cystine), and it has a sensitivity and specificity of 45% and 85%, respectively. Despite low yield in an acute setting, KUB is most helpful in monitoring for stone growth over time.

CT abdomen/pelvis without contrast has become the ideal study of choice to assess for ureterolithiasis if the patient can tolerate radiation, with sensitivity and specificity of 95% and 98%. It is possible that stones less than 3 mm in size might not be detected, as they may slip through the imaging slices of the CT scanner. CT will provide visualization of every type of stone, except for stones that are formed secondary to HIV medications (protease inhibitors). CT scan is also useful in that it can help to predict therapeutic response to shock wave lithotripsy, as stones that have higher attenuation on CT will likely require an increased number of shocks and less successful response to the treatment itself. BMI must be taken into consideration when selecting a standard dose vs. low dose CT scan, and current guidelines state that a low dose CT scan is not recommended for patients with a BMI of more than 30.

MRI is another option for imaging urolithiasis. It is better in sensitivity (82%) and specificity (98%) than ultrasound and KUB but is inferior to CT. MRI is reliable for determining hydronephrosis, but a stone may not always be visualized because it relies on identifying calcifications and signal voids. The benefit of MRI is that it provides 3D imaging without radiation, and it is a good second-line imaging option for pregnant and pediatric patients to be used adjunctively to ultrasound. The cons of MRI with respect to the diagnosis of urolithiasis are that it is three times as expensive as CT, time-consuming, and not readily available in the ED where the majority of these patients will present.

A validated risk assessment tool has been derived and validated called the STONE score, which stratifies patients in a low, moderate, or high probability of having a stone using five criteria; sex, timing origin, nausea, and erythrocytes.