Several muscles should be considered when discussing neck and thyroid surgical anatomy.

- Platysma: The first muscle encountered during neck dissection, it is enveloped by the superficial cervical fascia. It sits in the anterior neck and extends from the superficial fascia of the deltoid, over the clavicle, reaching the mandible and superficial fascia of the face superiorly.

- Sternocleidomastoid: This muscle forms the anterior portion of the posterior triangle of the neck. The muscle runs obliquely from the mastoid to the clavicle and sternum. The sternocleidomastoid is found anterolaterally relative to the thyroid gland.

- Digastric muscle: This muscle extends from the mandibular tubercle, passes deep and inferior to the hyoid, and loops back up to attach to the mastoid tip.

- Infrahyoid muscles: These are also referred to as “strap muscles.” They include four paired muscles found on the anterolateral surface of the thyroid gland. The strap muscles result in gross movement of the larynx during swallowing and also adjust the positioning of the larynx during vocalization.

- Omohyoid muscle: The omohyoid muscle is found deep in the sternocleidomastoid. It extends from the hyoid bone to the lateral aspect of the clavicle.

- Sternohyoid muscle: This muscle sits anterior the remaining strap muscles and the thyroid gland. The sternohyoid muscle extends from its superior attachment at the hyoid bone inferiorly to the sternum.

- Sternothyroid muscle: This muscle extends from the oblique line of the thyroid cartilage to the sternum. This muscle contacts the anterior surface of the thyroid gland.

- Thyrohyoid muscle: The thyrohyoid muscle extends from the oblique line of the thyroid cartilage to the hyoid bone superiorly.

-  Inferior pharyngeal constrictor: This muscle extends from its anterior attachment at the oblique line of the thyroid cartilage and lateral aspect of the cricoid cartilage to the pharyngeal raphe. This muscle contacts the superior pole of the lateral lobe of the thyroid gland medially.