**Electrode Placement**

**Recording Electrodes**

- Depending on the type of electrode (contact lens, foil, fiber electrodes), the recording electrode is placed on the corneal surface, on the bulbar conjunctiva adjacent to the inferior limbus of the cornea.

- The type of electrode can affect the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of a response. Of note, bipolar corneal contact electrodes characteristically exhibit the highest SNR. In contrast, foil or fiber electrodes require longer recording times, repeated measurements, along with a small number of stimulus elements to acquire comparable SNRs.

**Reference Electrodes**

- Separate surface electrodes are placed on the skin close to the outer canthus of each ipsilateral eye.

- In regards to monocular mfERG recordings, the contralateral occluded eye may be used for placement of the reference electrode.

- Forehead, earlobe, or mastoid are not recommended for placement as these sites may contaminate the mfERG with potentials generated by the fellow eye.

**Ground Electrodes**

- Typically placed on the forehead and connected to the “ground input" of the recording system.

**Patient Preparation**

**Per ISCEV Guidelines**

**Pupils**

- The pupils should be maximally dilated and centered within the ring of the corneal electrode during the use of contact lens electrodes.

- Patients who are unable to see the fixation point may be advised to look straight ahead while maintaining a steady gaze.

- The binocular recording is recommended as this improves fixation stability and reduces examination time.

- A monocular recording is recommended in individuals with ocular misalignment.

**Patient Positioning**

- Encourage comfortable seating and relaxation of neck and facial muscles to reduce-muscle related artifacts. Consider using a head or chin rest as needed.

**Fixation Monitoring**

- Instructing patients to fixate on a target within the stimulator while minimizing eye movement is critical. Careful direct monitoring of fixation is encouraged to ensure fixation stability. The fixation target may be moved for patients exhibiting eccentric fixation.

**Refraction**

- Eyes should be refracted at the viewing distance for optimal acuity, and the same correction should consistently be used for a given patient to ensure comparable results. Alternatively, lenses can be placed in a holder positioned in front of the eye. In the latter case, care must be taken to avoid blocking the view of the stimulus screen by the rim of the lens or the lens holder and thus creating an apparent scotoma.

**Monocular Versus Binocular Recording**

- The monocular recording is the standard for the mfERG.

- The binocular recording is only used when the eyes are aligned.

**Adaptation**

- A minimum of 15 minutes of recovery time in normal room lighting is required for patients exposed to strong light stimuli from alternative imaging techniques (i.e., fundus photography or fluorescein angiography).

**Room Illumination**

- Background illumination beyond the checkerboard stimulus typically involves using dim or ordinary room lighting. For all recordings, ambient lighting should be the same; reflections from lens surfaces and bright lights should be kept out of a subject’s direct view.