**Etiology of Intraocular Hemorrhage**

- **Systemic Causes**
- Diabetes mellitis
- Hypertension
- Trauma
- Blood dyscrasias
- Bleeding and coagulation disorders
- Shaken baby syndrome
- Purtscher retinopathy
- Terson syndrome
- Head injury
- Valsalva maneuver 
- Drug-induced (e.g., intravenous streptokinase injection and other anti-coagulants)
- Anemia
- Hemoglobinopathy (like sickle cell retinopathy and thalassemia)

- **Ocular Causes**
- Ocular trauma
- Proliferative diabetic retinopathy
- Arterial microaneurysm
- Retinal tear with rupture of bridging vessels
- Venous occlusive disease 
- Severe ocular hypotony
- Any intraocular surgical intervention

- **Hyphema**- It can occur in traumatic injuries(blunt or penetrating),post-surgical, bleeding from iris neovascularization(most common cause is proliferative diabetic retinopathy, bleeding and coagulation disorders, herpetic keratouveitis (Candy-cane hypopyon) It can occur in the following conditions-
- Post-traumatic hyphema can occur after blunt or penetration trauma due to direct or indirect injury to the anterior segment vasculature.
- Post-surgical hyphema can occur after any intraocular surgical procedures.
- Spontaneous hyphema:

- Local causes: rubeosis iridis(as in proliferative diabetic retinopathy, ocular ischemia), iris tumors like iris melanoma, retinoblastoma, uveitis, juvenile xanthogranuloma, herpetic keratouveitis (candy-cane hypopyon).
- Systemic causes: leukemia, VWD(von Willebrand disease), hemophilia.
- Patient on antiplatelet and/or thrombolytic medications like aspirin, warfarin, etc.

- **Vitreous hemorrhage**can occur:
- Due to systemic or local predisposing conditions leading to retinal vascular wall changes and changes in the blood viscosity and composition.
-  Due to local traction over the vascular sheath leading to breakthrough bleed. 
- Due to retinal ischemia leading to the formation of neovessels, which are devoid of pericytes, they can easily rupture, leading to vitreous hemorrhage.
- In rare circumstances, vitreous hemorrhage can occur spontaneously.
- Causes of vitreous hemorrhage include the following:

- Trauma
- Proliferative diabetic retinopathy
- Retinal venous occlusion
- Vasculitis (like Eales disease)
- Retinopathy of prematurity
- Wet ARMD
- Idiopathic polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy
- Valsalva retinopathy
- Sickle cell retinopathy
- Ruptured retinal arterial microaneurysms
- As a complication of any intraocular surgery
- Secondary to systemic hematological disorders like Anemia, leukemia, thrombocytopenia, hemophilia, thalassemia, and other bleeding and coagulation disorders 
- Shaken baby syndrome 
- Secondary to intraocular tumor
- Terson's syndrome

- **Suprachoroidal hemorrhage:**Ocular predispositions for the development of suprachoroidal hemorrhage are the history of glaucoma, aphakia, preoperative raised intraocular pressure, history of previous ocular intervention or trauma. History of trauma, high myopia, prolonged, complicated ocular surgery, posterior capsule rent with vitreous loss,s sudden marked hypotony, excessive vomiting, and Valsalva-like maneuvers like coughing or sneezing intraoperatively or early postoperatively.

- **Retinal hemorrhage and macular hemorrhage:**

- **Optic disc hemorrhage:**The exact etiology for the development of disc hemorrhage is a matter of debate for decades. Disc hemorrhage is thought to occur secondary to mechanical stretching near the lamina cribrosa or due to ischemic microinfarction at the optic disc head due to glaucomatous or non-glaucomatouscauses.