Treatment of atrophic vaginitis begins with a trial of intravaginal estrogen. Intravaginal estrogen products, Conjugated estrogen cream, estradiol cream, estradiol tablet, estradiol vaginal ring, and estradiol transdermal patch show equivocal relief of symptoms and improvement in acidification of vaginal tissues.

Some patients may require maintenance therapy indefinitely. Contraindications to estrogen therapy include a history of estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer, other estrogen-dependent cancers (subtypes of breast and uterine cancers), thromboembolism disorders, liver disease, undiagnosed vaginal bleeding, endometrial hyperplasia, heart disease, pregnancy, migraines with aura, or allergy to the estrogen or the carrier product.

The vaginal maturation index may be used as a clinical measurement to evaluate the response to estrogen therapy. Lactobacillus predominance is noted to be associated with fewer genital symptoms compared to a change in pH.

Additional therapy or alternative therapy includes selective estrogen receptor modulators, tissue-selective estrogen complexes, estriol, platelet-rich plasma, herbals, and other natural products.

A patient may use lubricants for symptomatic improvement and/or if contraindicated to estrogen therapy. Lubricants can improve symptoms; however, no chemical or histologic changes occur.

Other non-hormonal forms of treatments include fractional micro-ablative carbon-dioxide laser therapy and transcutaneous temperature-controlled radiofrequency with external and internal treatments that improve vaginal dryness, vulvovaginal laxity, and dyspareunia for 6 to 12 months.