The successful completion of the direct brow lift requires that the surgeon have excellent soft-tissue handling techniques and a thorough understanding of head and neck anatomy.

Routine steps are outlined below:

- Once the proper preoperative checklist has been completed, the patient is prepared for the surgical procedure.

- The patient is positioned and draped in a standard sterile fashion. A safety checklist is performed, followed by a surgical time-out.

- The planned amount of skin to be resected is verified and compared to the preoperative marking. Local anesthesia (1% lidocaine with 1 to 100,000 epinephrine with a maximum of 7 mg/kg of lidocaine) is injected into the planned surgical site.

- A 15 blade scalpel is used to create a slightly beveled incision such that the final closure will naturally evert the skin edges. Near the eyebrow, one should bevel the blade in the direction of the hair follicle to preserve the brow hairline.

- The skin and underlying soft tissue are resected while avoiding injury to underlying neurovascular structures and muscle (frontal and orbicularis oculi).

- The ptotic frontalis and orbicularis oculi muscles may be suspended to a more youthful position by superiorly anchoring them to the forehead periosteum. If prominent rhytids of the glabellar and procerus muscle need to be addressed, medial dissection may allow for sectioning of these muscles.

- Hemostasis is achieved using pressure and limited electrocautery.

- The deep layer of the wound is closed using absorbable sutures (e.g., vicryl or monocryl). The skin may be closed in a subcuticular or superficial fashion per the surgeon's preference.

- A dressing is placed per the surgeon's preference.