As the purpose of the placenta is to support and maintain the pregnancy, any abnormality in placenta formation can result in adverse outcomes for both mother and fetus. Abnormalities can be in the form of the structure of the placenta, the location of the placenta, and the implantation of the placenta.

Preeclampsia appears to involve both maternal and fetal factors, leading to abnormal development of the vasculature in the placenta; this ultimately leads to under-perfusion, resulting in hypoxia and growth restriction. Maternal endothelial dysfunction, believed to be due to antiangiogenic factors, leads to increased vascular permeability, with activation of the coagulation cascade, vasoconstriction, and microangiopathic hemolysis. These factors lead to the clinical manifestations of preeclampsia, including hypertension, proteinuria, seizure, cerebral hemorrhage, DIC, renal failure, pulmonary edema, uteroplacental insufficiency, placental abruption, premature delivery, and increased rate of cesarean section deliveries. Preeclampsia falls into two categories, preeclampsia without severe features and preeclampsia with severe features. To be diagnosed without severe features, third-trimester blood pressure greater than 140/90 mm Hg on two occasions at least 6 hours apart is needed, as well as proteinuria over 300 mg/24 hours or protein to creatinine ratio greater than 0.3. Women with preeclampsia without severe features are managed with delivery at 37 weeks. If diagnosed before 37 weeks, they are closely monitored as inpatients, although outpatient monitoring can be utilized if there are no other comorbidities. To be diagnosed as preeclampsia with severe features, blood pressure must be greater than 160/110 mm Hg in addition to proteinuria. Alternatively, blood pressure can be greater than 140/90 mm Hg on two occasions with at least one other feature, including renal insufficiency, thrombocytopenia, pulmonary edema, impaired liver function, or cerebral or visual disturbances. These patients should be delivered at 34 weeks and should receive treatment with magnesium sulfate for seizure prophylaxis. If blood pressure is greater than 160/110 mm Hg, antihypertensives should be used to decrease the risk of stroke.

Approximately 10% of patients with preeclampsia with severe features will go on to develop HELLP syndrome—these patients present with hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets. Hypertension and proteinuria do not need to be present in these patients. These patients diagnosed after 34 0/7 weeks should be delivered once stabilized. If diagnosed before 34 weeks, these women should be delivered 24 to 48 hours after betamethasone administration. They should also be administered magnesium sulfate until 24 hours postpartum.

Eclampsia is diagnosed when grand mal seizures occur in a preeclamptic patient. It can occur in women both with and without severe features. Eclampsia appears to occur when there is a breakdown in autoregulation of cerebral circulation due to endothelial dysfunction, hyperperfusion, and brain edema. Treatment includes seizure management and prophylaxis, blood pressure control, and delivery once the patient has been stabilized and convulsions controlled.

Placenta previa occurs with abnormal implantation of the placenta covering the internal cervical os. It can be considered complete, in which the internal os is completely covered by the placenta, partial previa, with the placenta covering a portion of the internal os, or marginal previa, where the edge of the placenta approaches the margin of the os. The placenta is considered low-lying when it is in the lower uterine segment but does not extend to the internal os. During the third trimester, the lower uterine segment begins thinning, leading to disruption in the placental attachment and painless bleeding. This bleeding irritates the uterus, stimulating uterine contractions that cause further separation and bleeding. As the cervix dilates and effaces during labor, placental separation and unavoidable bleeding occur, which may result in hemorrhage and shock. These patients are managed with pelvic rest after 20 weeks, decreased physical activity, and cesarean delivery between 36 and 37 weeks.

Placenta accreta occurs when the placenta invades into the uterine wall during implantation. If the invasion extends to the myometrium, the term for the condition is placenta increta. If the invasion extends further through the myometrium and into the serosa, this is considered placenta percreta. Placenta percreta may also invade into surrounding organs, such as the bladder or rectum. In these conditions, the placenta is unable to separate from the uterine wall properly, which can lead to hemorrhage and shock. As such, this condition can lead to the need for a hysterectomy at the time of delivery.