**Anatomy**

The aortic root connects the left ventricular outflow tract to the ascending aorta and out to the systemic circulation. The aortic root is a very complex system with multiple components that make this area very unique, as it has the ability to maintain hemodynamic conditions during varying demands. The aortic root is made up of very distinct parts that function in a well-coordinated fashion as a complete unit to propel fluids forward and also perfuse the coronary arteries. The aortic root is made up of the aortic valve with its semilunar leaflets and attachments, sinuses of Valsalva, the sinotubular junction, and the aortic annulus. The aortic root has three sinuses, the left and right sinuses give rise to their respected coronary arteries. The third sinus, which is called the noncoronary sinus, does not have a coronary artery arise from its sinus. The aortic valve has three leaflets named according to their location: left, right, and posterior. The leaflets may also be referred to from their respected coronary sinus. Between each leaflet lies a commissure which separates the leaflets. The sinotubular junction separates the aortic root from the ascending aorta. The aortic annulus is the area where the leaflets attach as there is no distinct anatomical or histological ring structure. The annulus is the smallest area in diameter between the left ventricle and aorta. The annulus is the area where the aortic valve is measured for the placement of the prosthetic valve. The aortic outflow tract is best viewed when looking down the tract into the annulus.

**Physiology**

The aortic valve and outflow tract anatomical components play a large role in the patient’s physiology, especially when there is pathological disease present. The discussion of aortic regurgitation and stenosis physiological components are discussed elsewhere.

The size of the aortic valve replacement should be proportional to the patient’s body surface area to help maintain physiologic homeostasis of the aortic root. Patient prosthesis mismatch was first discussed in the 1970s. A patient prosthesis mismatch occurs when the effective orifice area of the newly inserted prosthetic valve is less than that of a normal human valve. The accepted patient prosthesis mismatch definition is defined as a prosthetic valve effective orifice area indexed to a body surface area less than 0.85 cm2/m^2. A severe patient mismatch is considered when it is less than 0.65 cm^2/m^2. When evaluating patients for patient prosthesis mismatch possibility in the pre-operative setting, we can multiply the patient's body surface area by 0.85 cm^2/m^2, which will give the minimum-sized effective orifice area that will ultimately tell us the smallest sized valve we can place while avoiding patient prosthesis mismatch. One of the main issues with patient prosthesis mismatch is the creation of very high transvalvular pressure gradients through the newly placed valve.

The high transvalvular gradients cause an interruption in the normal flow patterns through the root, thus causing an inability to maintain the cardiac output requirement. Patient prosthesis mismatch has been reported to be as high as 20% to 70% after aortic valve replacement, which has proven to have more cardiac events and poor outcomes in patients with higher patient prosthesis mismatch severity. Patient prosthesis mismatch is tolerated better in higher body mass index patients. If patients have impaired left ventricular function prior to surgery, it is imperative to avoid patient prosthesis mismatch as studies have shown impaired left ventricular function has decreased survival and more heart failure symptoms.