Wound healing occurs in an organized sequence of overlapping phases that results in tissue reconstitution. This process involves hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation, and ends with the formation of mature scar tissue.

**Hemostasis**

Hemostasis begins immediately after the injury. Bleeding from the wound is controlled with vascular constriction, the formation of a platelet thrombus, propagation of the coagulation cascade, termination of clotting, and lastly removal of the clot by fibrinolysis.

Damage to the vascular endothelium brings blood to the wound site and exposes the basal lamina. Activated platelets then bind to the exposed collagen which stimulates the release of various growth factors, inflammatory mediators, and cytokines. The intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation pathways are activated, and a fibrin clot forms a seal to prevent further blood loss.

Cytokines released during the hemostasis phase go on to play a role in extracellular matrix deposition, chemotaxis, epithelialization, and angiogenesis. These include transforming growth factor-beta, platelet-derived growth factor, fibroblast growth factor, epidermal growth factor, and vascular endothelial growth factor.

**Inflammation**

Inflammatory cells migrate to the wound site after platelet activation during the first several days following injury. Mast cells release vasoactive cytokines such as prostaglandins and histamine which increase capillary permeability and promote local dilation to aid the migratory process.

Initially, neutrophils predominate and are attracted to the wound bed by bacterial products. Neutrophils engulf the bacteria along with any dead tissue, forming the pus seen in wounds after the first 48 to 72 hours. Next, monocytes become macrophages and debride the wound further, clearing the matrix and other cell debris such as fibrin and spent neutrophils. Macrophages are also responsible for releasing most of the inflammatory cytokines such as transforming growth factor-beta, platelet-derived growth factor, fibroblast growth factor, and epidermal growth factor. These tasks make macrophages essential to successful wound repair; inhibition of macrophage function causes delayed wound healing.

Through these mechanisms, the inflammatory phase creates a clean wound bed for the basis of further repair mechanisms.

**Proliferation**

The proliferative phase occurs 3 to 21 days after injury and involves processes of angiogenesis, granulation tissue production, collagen deposition, and epithelialization. The primary outcome of this phase is the filling of the wound defect. Hypoxic conditions in the wound bed lead to the synthesis of nitric oxide (NO) by endothelial cells which stimulate vascular endothelial growth factor to release and promotes angiogenesis.

The release of fibroblast growth factor and platelet-derived growth factor also triggers angiogenesis, which supplies the new wound with oxygen, glucose, and other factors necessary for proper healing. Here, thin-walled endothelium branch from preexisting vessels and lay their foundation on the newly synthesized extracellular matrix. As blood flow returns to the area, oxygen saturation normalizes and NO levels along with vascular endothelial growth factor decrease to slow the process of angiogenesis. This autoregulatory mechanism plays a role in preventing excess collagen production and abnormal scar formation.

Migrating fibroblasts synthesize elastin and collagen to form the new extracellular matrix necessary for vascular support and granulation tissue. Granulation tissue is a highly vascular connective tissue and is essential to the final stages of wound healing, maturation, and remodeling.

**Maturation**

The final stage of wound healing is the maturation phase, and includes collagen cross-linking, remodeling, and wound contraction. Initially, fibroblasts synthesize type 3 collagen which is thinner than mature, type 1 collagen is abundantly found in healthy skin. During the maturation phase, type 1 collagen replaces the type 3 collagen found in granulation tissue, and a scar forms. This increase in type 1 collagen correlates with the increased strength of wounds seen 4 to 5 weeks after healing. A wound will regain 80% of its original strength 3 months after injury. Unfortunately, attaining the full strength of the skin before the injury is impossible.

Wound contraction occurs in open wounds to decrease the amount of connective tissue required to fill in the wound bed. One proposed theory suggests that contraction occurs with the help of myofibroblasts and their synthesis of alpha-smooth muscle actin.

The formation of a new, protective epithelial layer is synthesized by epithelial cells migrating inward from the wound edges. Varying migration rates allow for both stratification of the epithelial layer and increasing tissue depth to restore the epithelium's normal thickness.

Once healed, a wound leaves behind a scar. The scar tissue will be firm, slightly raised, and red from excess collagen deposition and increased vascularity, respectively. Typically this would stay like this for the first 6 to 9 months and then begin to soften, flatten and become paler.