The strongest risk factor for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is smoking and not just cigarette smokers but also pipe, and cigar smokers are at higher risk. Obesity (especially in women) is another major risk factor. It is thought that the incidence of kidney cancers can be halved by eliminating tobacco smoking and excess body weight. Several other factors also contribute to increased risk and include high blood pressure, chronic renal failure, and occupational exposure to certain chemicals, such as trichloroethylene. Moderate amounts of alcohol consumption (up to about two drinks per day), fruits and vegetables rich diet, and long term fatty fish consumption is associated with a reduced risk of kidney cancer.

Current studies implicate the VHL gene in the development of both sporadic and familial type of clear cell-RCC (CCRCC).MET gene is a feature of the familial type of papillary-RCC (PRCC).

About 4% of renal cell cancers are the result of rare hereditary conditions as detailed below:

- **Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) Syndrome:**is associated with the development of the formation of cysts and tumors in various organs e.g., pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, pancreatic cysts, cerebellar and spinal hemangioblastomas, ovarian cysts, and pheochromocytoma; along with multiple bilateral tumor nodules of clear cell RCC.

- **Hereditary Leiomyomatosis and Aggressive Papillary Carcinoma Syndrome:**is an autosomal dominant disease. There is a mutation of theFH, and associated features include uterine leiomyomatosis. Metastatic spread occurs early in the disease.

- **Hereditary Papillary Carcinoma:**This is also an autosomal dominant form withMET gene mutation. It is manifested by bilateral and multiple papillary tumors. They may have a number of additional cytogenetic abnormalities.

- **Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome:**is an autosomal dominant disease due to mutations involving theBHD gene, which transcribes folliculin. The syndrome manifests a range of histological types for renal tumors. Associated features include fibrofolliculomas, trichodiscomas, and acrochordons. Pulmonary cysts may also be seen.

- **Tuberous Sclerosis Syndrome:**presents withTSC1 and TSC2 gene mutations that transcribe hamartin and tuberin protein. The syndrome manifests with multiple bilateral renal angiomyolipomas and CCRCC along with extra-renal manifestations.