SBME should provide trainees with an education that is valid, feasible, cost-effective, and has high inter-assessor reliability. SBME alone as a concept is no more valid than the concept of lecturing – each session is only as efficacious as its content, learner, trainer, and environment. There is, therefore, a large amount of literature regarding the validity of individual SBME courses. There are also concerns within the literature regarding negative bias against the benefit of simulation.

Numerous concepts exist regarding simulation validity. ‘Face Validity’ is a descriptor of how realistic a simulator resembles a clinical scenario – how close is it to the real thing? ‘Content Validity’ is a descriptor of whether a simulator can provide trainees with the stated learning objectives – is this simulator able to teach what we want it to teach? ‘Concurrent Validity’ is a term used to describe how well a new simulator compares to the gold standard methodology for that task. ‘Construct Validity’ is a descriptor of the ability of a simulator to discriminate between novice and experienced practitioners. ‘Transfer Validity’ is a descriptor of the ability of a simulator to have the desired effect – will this simulator achieve an increase in technical skill?

There are on-going controversies within the literature about the appropriateness of the above descriptors in defining the efficacy of a simulator. Newer concepts have been suggested, whereby validity is considered unitary and that all validity is just a type of construct validity. Arguments exist that studies should focus on either supporting or refuting the construct validity of simulators by assessing multiple criteria.