Sertoli cell-only syndrome most likely is a multifactorial and idiopathic condition. The diagnosis is often made when young male patients come for an evaluation of infertility. They present with reduced or absent spermatogenesis and usually have a normal physical examination.

Multiple possible pathways may be involved in the pathogenesis of this condition. Researchers hypothesize that congenital absence of germ cells can result from proper failure of migration of gonocytes. The Yq11 region on the long arm of the Y chromosome is also known as the azoospermia factor region (AZF region). Microdeletions in the Yq11 area of the Y chromosome, especially in the AZFc region, have been found in patients with Sertoli cell-only syndrome. In infertile men with AZFc microdeletions, Sertoli cell-only syndrome will be found histologically in 46%, maturation arrest will be seen in 38.2%, and hypospermatogenesis will be present in 15.7%.

Deletions between palindromes P5 and P1 and between P4 and P1 have also been reported. Yang et al. also hypothesized that two deletions in the interval region between P4 and P3 might also be involved in the pathophysiology of the condition. Apoptotic elimination and altered maturation of germ cells through mutations of Fas, FasL, and active caspase-3 have also been reported recently in the literature.

The patients present with normal levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and testosterone. A low level of inhibin-B may lead to a higher than normal level of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH).

A study by Stouffs et al. showed that in White-race males with Sertoli cell-only syndrome, karyotype abnormalities (such as Klinefelter syndrome) were the most common genetic disorders.

The pathophysiology of the disease can be summarized as follows:

- Mostly idiopathic

- Genetic due to Y chromosomal microdeletions primarily in the AZF region

- Toxin exposure that leads to lower spermatogenesis

- Radiation exposure to the testicular region

- History of trauma leading to decreased sperm cell production

- Viral infection