The **posterior compartment**of the forearm is also known as the extensor compartment since the muscles primarily function to extend the wrist and digits of the hand. The posterior compartment of the forearm contains a superficial and deep muscle group. The superficial group includes the extensor digitorum communis, extensor digiti minimi, extensor carpi ulnaris, and anconeus. These muscles are relatively subcutaneous as there is usually not much subcutaneous fat on the dorsal aspect of the forearm. The primary function of these muscles is digit and wrist extension, with the extensor carpi ulnaris assisting in ulnar deviation of the wrist during wrist extension. The deep group contains the supinator, abductor pollicis longus, extensor pollicis brevis, and the extensor pollicis longus. The supinator functions to supinates the forearm. Supination is defined as the radius rotating laterally around its longitudinal axis over the ulna, causing the palm to face anteriorly. The remaining deep muscles function to extend and abduct the thumb.

The **mobile wad**contains three muscles. The brachioradialis originates over the proximal two-thirds of the lateral supracondylar ridge of the humerus, while both extensor carpi radialis longus and extensor carpi radialis brevis originate over the distal lateral supracondylar ridge. The brachioradialis inserts just proximal the radial styloid. The brachioradialis which is the strongest flexor of the forearm.

The **anterior compartment**is known as the flexor compartment since the muscles primarily function to flex the wrist and digits. The anterior compartment consists of a deep and superficial layer. The superficial compartment contains the pronator teres, the flexor carpi radialis, and the flexor carpi ulnaris. The palmaris longus is also present in the superficial compartment but is often absent in many people. All these muscles originate as part of the common flexor origin at the medial epicondyle. The intermediate compartment contains the flexor digitorum superficialis. The deep compartment of the contains the flexor digitorum profundus, flexor pollicis longus, and pronator quadratus. The pronator trees and pronator quadratus assist in pronation of the forearm. Pronation is defined as the radius pulling medially along its longitudinal axis over the ulna, causing the palm to face posteriorly. The carpal tunnel consists of nine tendons and the median nerve. It includes four tendons of the flexor digitorum profundus, four tendons of the flexor digitorum superficialis, and one tendon from flexor pollicis longus.

The **interosseous membrane**of the forearm is a Z shaped fibrous sheet that connects the radius and ulna forming a syndesmosis. The membrane divides the forearm into the anterior and posterior compartments and is the site of attachment for many muscles. Its main function is to transfer forces from the radius, ulna, and humerus. The lateral intermusclar septum is an additional structure that helps delineate the compartments of the forearm.