Onset and presenting severity dictates the treatment and management of aortoiliac occlusive disease (AIOD). Diagnosis of chronic limb-threatening ischemia (CLTI) needs urgent intervention to prevent further necrosis and the formation of gangrene. Patient risk, limb staging, and anatomic pattern (PLAN) can assist in the staging of disease.

Medical management is available for non-acute cases, especially in poor surgical candidates. Primary measures include the outpatient optimization and management of diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, prothrombotic states, and tobacco use.

Claudication symptoms are treatable with cilostazol or pentoxifylline. Cilostazol is a phosphodiesterase III inhibitor that may also provide benefits in graft patency and the prevention of stenosis after surgical intervention.

**Anti-thrombotic Agents**

The clopidogrel versus aspirin in patients at risk of ischemic events (CAPRIE) trial exhibited better antiplatelet management using clopidogrel over aspirin by lowering death rates from ischemic stroke, myocardial infarctions, or other vascular-related causes. Other antiplatelet agents have not been studied head-to-head, but dual antiplatelet therapy is not indicated for primary treatment. Vorapaxar, an antagonist of the protease-activated receptor (PAR-1), has shown improvements in acute limb ischemia events when administered with antiplatelet agents.

**Surgical and Endovascular Revascularization**

Revascularization options include aortoiliac bypass, aortobifemoral bypass (AFB), percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA), which can be with or without stent placement, and thromboendarterectomy (TEA).

Open surgical revascularization bypasses the area of stenosis or occlusion through the use of a vascular conduit. Options for surgical bypass include aortoiliac bypass graft or axillary-bifemoral bypass graft.

An aortoiliac bypass graft requires greater exposure and aortic clamping, making it less suitable for some patients.

An axillary-bifemoral bypass is less demanding and may be used for less optimized surgical candidates. In this procedure, an extra-anatomic anastomosis is formed by tunneling the PTFE graft from the axillary artery to the bilateral common femoral arteries. Similar variations include femorofemoral bypass and axillopopliteal bypass. The AFB has a patency rate of 85-90% at five years and 75-80% at ten years, making it a more common option for surgical intervention.

Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) is a valid alternative to open surgical approaches. The PTA is completed using an inflatable balloon device over a guidewire placed across the lesion (atherosclerotic plaque), which is inflated, compressing the plaque against the native arterial wall.