Diagnosis and staging start with a detailed history and examination. The surgeon should obtain plain radiographs of the affected bone in AP and lateral views. A computed tomography (CT) scan can provide more information on the degree of cortical destruction and may reveal an occult pathologic fracture. MRI of the lesion is necessary for diagnosis and planning treatment. Extension of the lesion into the medullary canal or extraosseous soft tissues can be detected and would suggest a diagnosis of AD as opposed to OFD, in which the lesion is generally contained within the cortex. MRI is also critical in demonstrating the full proximal and distal extent of the lesion, allowing the surgeon to plan a proper operation with tumor-free margins in cases of AD.

MRI can also aid in identifying the presence of multifocal disease, such as occult involvement of the ipsilateral fibula. A well-planned biopsy should be considered to confirm the diagnosis, even if the lesion is radiographically typical for OFD. The lesion may represent early AD. Alternatively, OFD may be a precursor to AD. In either case, a biopsy would facilitate a search for an epithelial component to the tumor. A large diagnostic tissue specimen is required for an accurate diagnosis.

The biphasic nature of classic AD (i.e., benign fibrous and malignant epithelial) can lead to sampling error and to an erroneous diagnosis of a malignant AD as OFD. Therefore a large biopsy of the lesion's most radiolucent area is recommended. Immunohistochemical staining for keratin can help in identifying the scattered epithelial cells in OFD-like AD and the nests of epithelial cells in classic AD. When the biopsy shows malignant AD, the patient should be evaluated for metastatic disease. The commonest sites for metastasis are the lungs, regional lymph nodes, and other bones. Physical examination for lymphadenopathy should be performed, and a high-resolution CT scan of the thorax and nuclear bone scan should be performed.