There is no indicated antidote for thalidomide overdose. Thalidomide toxicity directly correlates with drug dosage and duration of therapy.

Steps for addressing symptoms of thalidomide-related toxicity are listed below.

-  Birth Defects 

- All female patients with childbearing potential should receive two methods of contraception.
- All male patients should abstain from intercourse or use a condom - even those with a vasectomy.
- Both physician and patient should register for the S.T.E.P.S. program

- Peripheral neuropathy

- Mild: Decrease the thalidomide dose by 50%
- Moderate: Withhold thalidomide therapy until there is a resolution of toxicity and then restart at a 50% reduction
- Severe: Discontinue thalidomide therapy

- Somnolence

- Instruct patients to administer their total daily dose before going to bed
- Patients should avoid driving or operating machinery
- In cases of stupor or coma, suspend thalidomide therapy until toxicity resolves, then restart treatment at a 50% dose

- Constipation

- Advise alteration of diet and exercise
- Start the patient on a low-dose stool softener or laxative
- In severe cases, withhold therapy until the condition resolves, then restart thalidomide with the addition of prophylactic laxative therapy and/or a 50% reduction in dose

- Skin rash

- Mild to moderate skin rash: withhold thalidomide until there is a resolution of the toxicity and then resume treatment at a 50% reduction in dosage
- Stevens-Johnson syndrome: discontinue therapy with no attempt to restart

- Orthostatic Hypotension 

- The patient should sit upright for a few minutes before standing up from a recumbent position.

- All other toxicities

- Withhold thalidomide until toxicity resolves to baseline, then restart at a 50% reduction in drug dosage
- For all severe and life-threatening complications, discontinue thalidomide indefinitely.

Further steps for addressing thalidomide toxicity involve enrolling both physician and patient into the System for Thalidomide Education and Prescribing Safety (S.T.E.P.S) program.