Complications following percutaneous liver biopsy are rare. Approximately 60 percent occur within the first 2 hours and 96 percent within 24 hours post-procedure.

- Transient hypotension (as a result of vasovagal response and/or hemorrhage)

- Hemorrhage (subscapular, intrahepatic, intraperitoneal, hemobilia, hemothorax)

- Pneumothorax

- Biliary peritonitis

- Transient bacteremia

- Portal vein thrombosis

- Subphrenic abscess

- Carcinoid crisis

- Death

Although the exact mechanism for pain following a biopsy is uncertain, it is believed to be a result of subcapsular swelling and/or bleeding. Anti-inflammatory medication is given for relief, but if there is no resolution, then inpatient hospitalization and radiographical imaging may be warranted.

Intrahepatic and/or subscapular hematomas can be painful or asymptomatic. These typically do not require radiographic imaging or surgical intervention.

Intraperitoneal hemorrhage, albeit rare, is the most serious bleeding complication. Patients typically report severe pain, and vital signs may reveal hypotension with tachycardia. The etiology may stem from a severe laceration during the biopsy or injury to the hepatic arterial system. An urgent consultation is necessary with the surgeons and interventional radiologists, along with radiographic imaging.

Hemobilia is a rare complication that is reflected by a triad of gastrointestinal bleeding, biliary pain, and jaundice (can be referred to as Quincke’s triad). This condition may resolve with supportive care, but continual bleeding would require angiographic embolization or surgical intervention.

Reports also exist of cases of transient bacteremia, hemothorax, pneumothorax, biliary peritonitis, portal vein thrombosis, subphrenic abscess, and carcinoid crisis.