A variety of healthcare professionals and medical specialists manage TMJ dysfunctions. Dentists, especially oral surgeons, can contribute to pain management when OMT may not work; for instance, a chronic degenerative joint disease in the TMJ may not respond to OMT. General dentists may develop custom bite splints to encourage proper chewing, leading to long-time healing and prevention of any further deterioration. Neurologists who have completed fellowship training in neuromuscular medicine or pain medicine may also contribute to the treatment. It is not uncommon for TMJ pain to radiate and convert into a headache. In such cases, TMJ joint blocks may minimize the pain. Internists, psychiatrists, pediatricians, or neurologists who have completed an advanced fellowship in sleep medicine may encourage anterior advancement of the lower jaw to minimize obstructive sleep apnea caused by TMJ pain or dental implants.

Acupuncturists have developed a method of maximizing TMJ functions by intervening in points located at the iliotibial tract along the right lower extremity, named GB31. Physiotherapists can work towards relieving musculoskeletal pain and normalize ROM via posture correction and full opening exercises. TMJ pain instigates via psychological mechanisms. Behavioral health specialists may minimize stressors that lead to an incorrect posture or movement, which creates the pathologic barrier. Occupational therapists may help the patient make lifestyle changes that contribute directly to the stressors; a change of sleep posture or workplace movements may minimize further microtears.