The three modes of ACL injuries are direct contact, indirect contact, and non-contact. Approximately 30% of ACL injuries are contact injuries, and 5% of those are from indirect contact. Approximately 70% of the injuries are non-contact, which can be caused by wrong movements.

ACL tear is frequently associated with a sudden directional or speed change while the foot remains firmly planted, rapid deceleration, jumping, pivoting, and direct impact to the anterior aspect of the tibia.

An ACL injury can further classify as a grade I, II, or III sprain.

- Grade I: The ligamental fibers are stretched, with a tear that is less than one-third of the ligament. Mild tenderness and swelling are present. The knee joint feels stable with a knee laxity < 5 mm.

- Grade II: A partial tear (between one-third to two-thirds of the ligamental fibers) is present. Mild tenderness and swelling with some loss of function are present. The joint may feel unstable with increased anterior translation (a knee laxity of 5 to 10 mm). The patient feels pain, and the pain may become exacerbated with Lachman's and anterior drawer stress tests.

- Grade III: The fibers have completely torn. Tenderness and limited pain (relative to the seriousness of the injury) are features. The degree of swelling may be variable. The knee feels unstable, with rotational instability (positive pivot shift test). A knee laxity is greater than 10  mm. Haemarthrosis (bleeding into the knee joints) is observable within 1 to 2 hours.

An acute ACL rupture commonly occurs among sports players, especially those aged 14 to 19 years.

- Smaller ACL and narrower intercondylar notch: Females who are non-athletes and aged 41 to 65 are predisposed to ACL injuries if they have narrow intercondylar notches.

- Wider pelvis and greater Q angle: A wider pelvis increases the angle of the femur toward the central patella. The greater the Q angle, the greater pressure is applied to the medial aspect of the knee, which can lead to an ACL tear.

- Lax ligaments: Female ligaments with more elastic muscle fibers tend to be laxer than male ligaments. Excessive joint movements with increased flexibility may contribute to the higher incidence of ACL injury among females.

- Greater quadriceps to hamstring strength ratio: Females tend to have poor hamstring strength compared to men. The imbalance of strength between the hamstring and quadriceps muscles may increase the risk of ACL injury.

Presentation:

- a sensation of painful "pop" during the impact

- immediate swelling of knee/haemarthrosis

- painful and restricted range of movements in the acute phase

- often associated with medial meniscal tears

- 'giving way' or instability symptoms, during later stages, when they attempt to return to their original activities