Infantile Respiratory Distress Syndrome

Infantile respiratory distress syndrome, or IRDS, is often seen in premature births due to either insufficient production of pulmonary surfactant or abnormal lung development. Because surfactant production begins at 20 weeks gestation and continues through birth, the risk of IRDS is inversely proportional to gestational age. Decreased surfactant concentration increases surface tension in the alveoli, leading to alveolar collapse on expiration and increased work of breathing. The inefficient ventilation and gas exchange results in hypoxia and hypercarbia. Clinical signs of respiratory distress in a newborn include labored breathing, tachypnea, and nasal flaring. Prompt recognition and treatment of this syndrome are important to prevent respiratory arrest.

Asthma

Asthma is a common inflammatory disease of the airway that can range from mild respiratory compromise to life-threatening airway closure. It is classically considered a disease of the conducting airways and generally spares the lung parenchyma. Although the etiology is not well understood, affected individuals generally have a genetic predisposition to an allergy that is exacerbated by a variety of environmental factors that cause inflammation. The hallmarks of asthma include bronchial hyperresponsiveness, chronic inflammation, and reversible airway obstruction.  Symptoms include coughing, wheezing, chest tightness, and shortness of breath. Symptoms generally begin in childhood, but the presence of symptoms early in life does not guarantee disease persistence into adulthood. Diagnosis is made when airway obstruction shows to be reversible with pulmonary function testing. Treatment is based on symptom severity and requires routine monitoring and adjustment to optimize disease control. Today, the gold standard of treatment includes inhaled corticosteroids for maintenance therapy supplemented by a short-acting beta-agonist used as needed for the rapid relief of symptoms. Without adequate recognition and treatment, mortality for this condition is high.