A relative afferent pupillary defect usually indicates disease in the pre chiasmal visual pathway.

**Tests to Identify and Quantify RAPD**

- Gunn test

- Kestenbaum-Gunn test / modified Gunn test

- Swinging flashlight test

- Pupillography

Use on neutral density filters and cross-polarized filters aid in the quantification of RAPD in conjunction with swinging flashlight test or Modified Gunn test.

**Modified Gunn Test / Kestenbaum Gunn Test**

In this test, the pupillary reaction to prolonged light exposure is assessed. When any patient has unilateral optic nerve dysfunction or asymmetric involvement of optic neuropathy, with the patient in the light, covering the eyes alternatively reveals, that pupil of the normal eye constricts when it is uncovered, and the abnormal eye is covered. In contrast, the pupil of the eye with optic neuropathy dilates when it is uncovered, and the pupil of the normal eye is covered. Here the size of pupils is measured.

**Swinging Flashlight Test**

Levatin modified the Gunn test for the detection of the relative afferent pupillary defect. He replaced alternate covering of eyes with alternate flashlight stimulation. The swinging flashlight test is superior to the Marcus Gunn test for the detection of RAPD.

Procedure

- In a semi-dark room, ask the patient to fix at a letter or pattern on the distance chart (looking at a near object causes accommodative miosis)

- Shine a penlight or indirect ophthalmoscope light into one eye from below the patient's eye at a distance of 5 to 10 cm.

- After a pause of 3 seconds, quickly shift the light to the other eye.

- Repeatedly alternate the light between the two eyes, with a pause of 3 seconds on each eye.

- Look for the change in pupil size as light is alternated.

An eye with RAPD will dilate as the consensual dilatation response due to light moving off the good eye overpowers the poor constriction (direct pupil light reflex) response from the affected eye.

Clinical grading of RAPD based on swinging flashlight test.

- **Grade I:**A weak initial constriction and greater redilatation

- **Grade II:**An initial stall and greater redilatation

- **Grade III:**An immediate dilatation

- **Grade IV:**An immediate pupillary dilatation (followed by secondary constriction) following prolonged illumination of a good eye for 6 seconds (bleaching of the normal eye)

- **Grade V:**An immediate pupillary dilatation with no secondary constriction following prolonged illumination of a good eye for 6 seconds

Grade IV and V are elicited after bleaching the photoreceptors of the good eye to reduce its pupil power.

**Special Situations**

- **Detection of RAPD in a fixed pupil**

For example –

- If the afferent defect is present in the eye with a fixed pupil, when light is thrown onto the normal eye, its pupil constricts. When the light is moved to the abnormal eye, the pupil in the normal eye dilates or constricts less. Returning the light to the normal eye causes its pupil to constrict again.

- If the normal eye has fixed pupil, here, shifting the light from this eye to the other, the reactive pupil will dilate.

- **In cases with subtle RAPD******– To unmask subtle RAPD, a**Tilt test**is performed.

A neutral density filter of 0.3 log units is placed in front of the eye with suspected optic neuropathy. Then the swinging flashlight test is performed. Placing the neutral density filter in front of the weak eye further decreases the pupillomotor input of that eye and heightens the inter eye pupillomotor input difference. Thus RAPD is unmasked.

**Quantification of RAPD****Using Neutral Density Filters**

This is done by placing neutral density filters over the better eye and performing swinging flashlight test.

In this test, we dim the stimulus in the better eye by known amounts with neutral density filters (usually 0.3, 0.6, 0.9, and 1.2 log units) and perform the swinging flashlight test until the two eyes are balanced and no RAPD is noted. The density of the filter is recorded in log units as a measure of the size of the defect. The smallest defect that can be measured with confidence is 0.3 log units. It is important to avoid light spill at the edge of the filters as the light is swung from one eye to the other. It is difficult to visualize pupil beyond 1.2 log units of neutral density filter, necessitating the examiner to peek around the filter to watch the pupillary reflex. During the first attempt, it is better to overshoot the endpoint and induce an RAPD in the filtered eye; then, as one approaches the endpoint for the second time, the readings can be made more accurately.

**Kestenbaum’s pupil number**

In patients with unilateral optic nerve disease, with one eye covered and other eye exposed to bright light, the pupil of affected eye settles at a larger diameter. This difference (in millimeters) in size of two pupils, is a measure of the difference in pupillomotor input between the two eyes. It roughly corresponds to the relative afferent pupillary defect measured in log units of neutral density filter.

**Limitations**

Swinging flashlight test is subject to various inconsistencies due to interindividual variability, the experience of clinical performing the test, ambient light conditions, and cooperation of the patient and lack of precise criteria for quantification. It is difficult to measure Kestenbaum's number or quantify relative afferent pupillary defect in children due to hippus and in adults due to miosis and poor iris mobility.

**Pupillography**

Modern pupillography uses a computerized device to simulate the swinging flashlight test and allows more accurate detection and quantification of RAPDs.