Both environmental and genetic factors are contributing to the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and its progression. First-degree relatives of patients with NAFLD are at higher risk than the general population. Histone amino-terminal ends, maintain the chromatin structure and gene expression that is cAMP-responsive element-binding protein H (CREBH) or sirtuin (SIRT1). Genetic studies have shown that activation of SIRT1 is thought to play a role in the development of NAFLD. The trigger of the progression of NAFLD to cancer is via abnormal DNA methylation.

Day and James proposed a two-hit model of pathogenesis in 1998. The first hit is caused by insulin resistance, which leads to the accumulation of fat droplets that is triglycerides in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes leading to the development of steatosis. Insulin resistance causes excess delivery of free fatty acid and triglycerides to the liver and decreased excretion leading to accumulation. Also, excess carbohydrates are a stimulus for de no fatty acid synthesis in the liver.

The second hit causing hepatocellular injury and the development of NASH is multifactorial. Excessive fatty acids in the liver make the liver more vulnerable to injury. Peroxisomal fatty acid oxidation, reactive oxygen species (ROS) production from the mitochondrial respiratory chain, cytochrome P450 metabolism of fatty acids, hepatic metabolism of gut-derived alcohol is hypothesized to cause the injury. Obesity also contributes to the second hit as adipose tissue releases inflammatory mediators such as leptin, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- alpha, and interleukin (IL)-6, causing hepatocyte damage. The hepatocytes undergo ballooning, cytoskeletal aggregation, apoptosis, and necrosis.

Insulin resistance is also a part of the second hit. The sinusoidal collagen deposition caused by the activation of hepatic stellate cells and the portal fibrosis caused by the ductular proliferation leads to the development and progression of NASH. These changes have correlated with insulin resistance, which is now believed to cause the progression of steatosis to NASH and progressive fibrosis.