The etiology of urethral injuries can commonly be classified as anterior or posterior injuries. With some exceptions, anterior injuries involve a crushing mechanism, whereas posterior injuries involve sheering forces. Injury to the anterior urethra is more common motor vehicle traumas, straddle injuries, and blunt/penetrating trauma, whereas pelvic fractures and iatrogenic etiologies are more consistent with injury to the posterior urethra.

Iatrogenic injury secondary to improper urethral catheterization and transurethral instrumentation is the most common cause of urethral traumas worldwide.

Another frequent cause of urethral trauma, especially in men, occurs when confused, disoriented or agitated patients pull out their Foley catheters resulting in urethral trauma. Traditionally, such patients have required restraints, sedation or a bedside sitter to prevent such traumas but more appropriate and highly successful methods have been described. Essentially, nurses are asked to make an assessment of all male patients with Foley catheters on their likelihood of inappropriate self extraction. If this is judged to be a potential problem, various steps are taken to minimize this which include:

- Taping the catheter directly to the skin which makes it more difficult for patients to tightly grip the catheter.

- Running the catheter and tubing underneath the thigh which makes it much harder for confused patients to find.

- Liberal use of pads, pajamas, mesh pants and diapers to help protect the catheter.

- Use of decoy catheters taped over their pads or diapers. Such decoy catheters are not attached to anything so confused or disoriented patients can pull them all they want without any harm.

Because these steps are all initiated by nursing, no physician's order is required and therefore there is no delay to immediate utilization. Implementation of these procedures can dramatically reduce the incidence of patient self-induced urethral trauma from inappropriate Foley catheter extraction.

Penile fractures will sometimes include a partial or compete urethral injury. These injuries are best managed by immediate surgical exploration and repair which is described elsewhere.

In females, urethral trauma most commonly occurs as an obstetrical complication with 10.3 per 1000 vaginal deliveries resulting in some degree of urethral injury.