In addition to their activity at D2 antagonists, first-generation antipsychotics exert significant effects on 5-HT2A, alpha-1, histaminic, and muscarinic receptors, which correspond to their side-effect profiles. These pharmacological differences are the basis for the classification of first-generation antipsychotics as either high or low-potency medications.

The high-potency, first-generation antipsychotics, such as fluphenazine, trifluoperazine, haloperidol, loxapine, pimozide, perphenazine, and thiothixene, are dosed in the range of one to tens of milligrams. They display low activity at histaminic and muscarinic receptors. They are associated with weight gain, sedative effects, or anticholinergic activity. They have a high risk of extrapyramidal side effects (dystonia, bradykinesia, rigidity, tremor, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and tardive dyskinesia due to dopamine receptor hypersensitivity and hyperprolactinemia.

Low-potency, first-generation antipsychotics like chlorpromazine and thioridazine are dosed in hundreds of milligrams and have high histaminic and muscarinic activity with a corresponding heightened prevalence of dizziness, sedation, and anticholinergic effects (dry mouth, urinary retention, constipation), but carry a lower risk of extrapyramidal side effects.

Due to the fewer extrapyramidal and anticholinergic effects, second-generation antipsychotics are the first-line treatment for psychotic disorders (e.g., schizophrenia). Second-generation antipsychotics have correlations with weight gain, type 2 diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome, fatigue/drowsiness, sedation, and QTc prolongation. Among the second-generation antipsychotics, clozapine is most effective in reducing psychotic symptoms and suicidality. The use of clozapine is mostly for treatment-resistant schizophrenia. However, due to the significant adverse side effect of agranulocytosis, clozapine is reserved for severe cases of psychotic disorders after a patient has had an insufficient response to two adequate trials of other antipsychotic medications.