Careful patient selection and a thorough review of risks and benefits with patients are essential to maximizing good visual outcomes and patient satisfaction. Patients should receive information about the excimer laser and postoperative evaluation requirements through information sheets, patient counselors, and/or the ophthalmic surgeon. Patients should also understand the sequence of events during surgery and what they might expect to feel, see, smell, or hear; this will serve to reduce patients’ anxiety. Patients’ medical history and medication list should be screened for any contraindications, as listed above. Most importantly, patients should only be selected if they have realistic expectations of visual outcomes. Patients should be made aware that the goal of refractive surgery is to allow for less of a reliance on glasses and contact lenses rather than achieve the complete absence of refractive error.

As part of the preoperative evaluation, the clinician must obtain the patient’s refraction. Also, the patient’s refractive stability, degree of refractive error, and astigmatism require documentation. Both manifest and cycloplegic refraction should take place. Any disparity between these two values greater than 1 D of sphere warrants reevaluation. Discrepancies may occur due to accommodative spasm, which is relatively common in middle-aged patients. Patients with a high degree of refractive error should know that outcomes are less predictable and that there remains an increased risk of scar formation and degradation of the optical performance.

There remain several other components of the preoperative evaluation that are necessary to ensure appropriate patient selection. The cornea must undergo evaluation for scars, vessels, or previous inflammation. Pupil size should be measured with the commercial pupillometer as large pupils may contribute to glare and haloes postoperatively. Slit-lamp examination is necessary to rule out significant corneal abnormalities such as neovascularization, keratoconus, scarring, or the presence of a cataract. Corneal pachymetry allows for the determination of corneal thickness and will detect keratoconus or other types of corneal ectasia. Eyelids and tear film require an examination for signs of blepharitis or dry eyes. Computed corneal topography allows for the detection of irregular astigmatism and keratoconus. Notably, soft contact lenses should not be worn for three days and hard contact lenses for two weeks before preoperative evaluation as they cause corneal warpage, which subsequently interferes with the accuracy of preoperative refractive measurements. Intraocular pressure should be measured to identify glaucoma. Fundoscopy is performed to rule out a retinal hole, degenerative retina, and other types of macular disease. Lastly, computed videokeratography may be conducted to rule out early keratoconus, corneal warpage, and asymmetrical or irregular astigmatism.

Preoperative medications are generally given in the 20 minutes immediately before refractive surgery. To reduce post-operative pain, instill non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drops such as ketorolac tromethamine 0.5% or diclofenac 0.1%, one drop given three times every ten minutes. Topical anesthetic drops such as proparacaine hydrochloride 0.5% are also placed onto the eye immediately before surgery. Topical fluoroquinolones such as moxifloxacin 0.5% and gatifloxacin 0.3% are given to reduce the chance of infection. Sedation may be a consideration if the surgeon plans on holding the eye during ablation but is generally not recommended if the patient maintains self-fixation.