The etiology of NVG is multifactorial, and the clinical history should cover the detailed aspects of the particular etiology. Patients with diabetes mellitus should be evaluated thoroughly regarding their glycemic control, other associated comorbidities like hypertension, hyperlipidemia, anemia, nephropathy, and cardiopathy.

Patients with CRVO should be evaluated for various etiologies of thrombotic events. The systemic etiologies include diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, hyperviscosity syndromes, myeloproliferative disorders, protein C and protein S deficiency, Factor V Leiden mutation, smoking, oral contraceptive pills, and pregnancy. An important associated ocular factor is glaucoma.

Patients with OIS may have a history of transient ischemic attack or stroke. Detailed neurological evaluation is necessary for these patients.

Patients with prior ocular surgeries like pars plana vitrectomy, glaucoma filtration surgeries, and cataract surgeries should be evaluated for previous intra-operative complications, if any. Intra-operative posterior capsule tear and vitreous loss are associated with a higher rate of NVG in the eyes of patients with PDR. Similarly, eyes with aphakia are at higher risk of NVG compared to pseudophakia. Recurrent retinal detachments in the eyes having undergone vitreoretinal surgeries are risk factors for NVG.

Patients coming from geographic locations or ethnicities with significant rates of sickle cell disease and other hemoglobinopathies need to be evaluated regarding the possibility of sickle cell anemia, prior blood transfusions, pain in the extremities.

Pediatric age group patients should be evaluated for low birth weight, premature birth, neonatal septicemia, twin babies, neonatal oxygen administration. All these predispose to retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) and can cause NVG. Children should be evaluated for retinoblastoma, and a family history of retinoblastoma needs to be taken. Examination for pediatric conditions such as persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV) or Coat disease should be performed.

Patients with prior history of uveitis need to be evaluated regarding the frequency and chronicity of red and painful eyes.

Any history of ocular tumors such as choroidal melanoma, retinoblastoma, iris melanoma, and ciliary body melanoma should be elicited.  Similarly, a history of ocular or periocular radiation therapy for tumors should be elicited.

**Symptoms**

An eye with NVG is typically a chronic, painful, and red eye. Sometimes the intensity of pain and redness may be less pronounced, particularly in young patients with good endothelial reserve.  Light sensitivity and blurry vision may be the initial symptoms in some patients.

**Signs**

The intraocular pressure in the eyes with NVG is high, often more than 50 mm Hg. Corneal edema may or may not be present. The hallmark signs of NVG on anterior segment examination are neovascularization of iris (NVI) and neovascularization of angle (NVA). The earliest detection of NVI can be done by the leakage of dye noticed after intravenous injection of fluorescein dye. The NVI appears as fine; new blood vessels typically present at the border of the pupillary margin. [Figure 1]  Sometimes, these vessels can be found at the margin of the iridotomy. These vessels can be differentiated from the normal vessels originating from the ciliary body present over the iris. The latter originates from the root of the iris, travels towards the pupillary border, and disappears in the iris stroma midway. NVA is a finding of gonioscopy. NVA appears as thin vessels over the trabecular meshwork crossing the scleral spur. Though isolated NVA without NVI is rare, sometimes NVA can be found prior to developing clinically detectable NVI.

NVG can be divided into four stages. First, the pre-rubeotic stage, where the new vessels over the iris are not clinically detectable but can be found on fluorescein angiography by the leakage of dye from the margin of the pupillary border. The second, rubeotic stage, where the new blood vessels can be detected in the form of NVI or NVA. The third is the open-angle stage, where the fibrovascular membrane covering the anterior chamber and iris angle causes the obstruction to the aqueous outflow. Fourth is the closed-angle stage which happens due to the contraction of the fibrovascular membrane over the angle of the anterior chamber.