Mycobacterium tuberculosis is primarily a lung pathogen; therefore, for all types of tuberculosis, the primary specimen required in acid-fast smear microscopy is sputum. There are 4 chief ways of collecting sputum.

- **Coughing**is the most common and widely used method for sputum collection. A healthcare worker wearing appropriate personal protective equipment must supervise and guide this process. The patient must be explained that the sputum must be brought out from the lungs and that mucus from the nose and saliva from the mouth is not appropriate samples.

- **Sputum induction**is used for patients who are unable to expectorate sputum by just coughing alone. Deep productive coughing may be induced by inhalation of aerosolized warm hypertonic saline (3 to 5%). This sputum is thinner in consistency and may resemble saliva. Care must be taken in labeling the sample as “induced sputum” so that it may not be discarded due to its thin consistency.

- **Bronchoscopy**is an invasive procedure used to visualize the respiratory passages of the lungs. This procedure may be used to extract sputum via bronchial washing, brushing, and/or biopsying. This procedure is avoided in patients who are infectious or have not undergone other methods of sputum collection. In other words, this procedure should not be used as a substitute for sputum collection but rather as an adjunct investigation for diagnosis.

- **Gastric aspiration**can be used to obtain sputum previously expectorated and swallowed by the patient. This procedure is particularly useful in children. To yield a better sample, gastric aspiration should be done early morning, when the patient has not had anything to eat.

Sputum collection must be performed in dedicated areas that are well ventilated to prevent the nosocomial inhalation of aerosols by uninfected people. Purulent and mucopurulent sputum are considered good specimens for microscopy. Suboptimal samples include mucoid, mucosalivary, and salivary specimens. It is important to differentiate salivary sputum specimens from saliva and mucus, as the latter are not representative of lung status and may give false-negative results. The presence of food debris and contaminants is not advised. However, blood-tinged or bloodstained sputum is considered acceptable. Medical laboratory personnel should also regularly evaluate specimen quality before performing TB microscopy.

Sputum specimens must be collected in appropriate containers. A 50-ml plastic, screw-capped, transparent container is usually used to foster a secure containment. The transparency of the container allows for visual inspection of the specimen to assess its consistency and quality. Appropriate labeling of the sample with the patient’s name and date of the collection must be ensured. The collected sample should be stored at 2 to 8°C until transported to the laboratory. According to the American Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, at least 3 consecutive sputum samples, each collected at 8 to 24-hour intervals, with at least one sample being an early morning expectorate, are required for diagnosis. In those countries with an established and well-implemented external quality assessment (EQA) program but limited human resources, the World Health Organization recommends using two specimens for diagnosis. This is to facilitate the early or “same day” diagnosis of tuberculosis patients from the community.