The approach to evaluate and diagnose pneumonia depends on the clinical status, laboratory parameters, and radiological evaluation.

- **Clinical Evaluation**
- It includes taking a careful patient history and performing a thorough physical examination to judge the clinical signs and symptoms mentioned above.

- **Laboratory Evaluation**
- This includes lab values such as complete blood count with differentials, inflammatory biomarkers like ESR and C-reactive protein, blood cultures, sputum analysis or Gram staining and/or urine antigen testing, or polymerase chain reaction for nucleic acid detection of certain bacteria.
- An arterial blood gas may reveal hypoxia and respiratory acidosis.
- Pulse oximetry of less than 92% indicates severe hypoxia, and elevated CRP predicts a serious infection.
- Blood cultures should be obtained before administering antibiotics. Unfortunately, they are only positive in 40% of cases.
- If good quality, sputum evaluation may reveal more than 25 WBC per low-power field and less than 10 squamous epithelial cells.
- Some bacterial causes present with specific biochemical evidence, such as Legionella, may present with hyponatremia and microhematuria.

- **Radiological Evaluation**
- It includes a chest X-ray as an initial imaging test, and the finding of pulmonary infiltrates on plain film is considered a gold standard for diagnosis when the lab and clinical features are supportive.
- The chest x-ray may reveal a consolidation or parapneumonic effusion.
- Chest CT is done for complex cases where the cause is not known.
- Bronchoalveolar lavage is done in patients who are intubated and can provide samples for culture.