**History**

The symptoms in patients with heterozygous protein S deficiency and mild reductions in protein S activity can range in severity. Almost half of all individuals with protein S deficiency will become symptomatic before age 55.PROS1 mutations, incomplete gene penetrance, exposure to thrombotic risk factors, and environmental or other genetic influences.

Severe protein S deficiency resulting from congenital homozygous mutations presents in neonates soon after birth and has a characteristic presentation of purpura fulminans (PF). Affected individuals rarely survive childhood without early diagnosis and treatment.

**Physical**

The results of the physical examination are generally nonspecific and often misleadingly lead to the diagnosis of DVT. Uncommon sites of thrombosis, such as a mesenteric vein, cerebral sinuses, etc., are rare.

**Deep Vein Thrombosis**

Venous thrombosis is the most common presentation in almost 90% of cases. The classic presentation of DVT includes calf pain, edema, and pain on dorsiflexion of the foot (i.e., Homan sign). All these three findings are present in less than a third of DVT cases. The most common finding is unilateral leg or calf swelling with mild or moderate pain. Superficial thrombophlebitis can also be seen in some cases, with or without DVT.

**Pulmonary Embolism**

Patients with pulmonary embolism present with dyspnea, chest pain, syncope, and palpitations. Tachypnea is the most frequent sign. Massive pulmonary embolism can present with syncope or cyanosis. Massive embolism also presents with acute right-sided heart failure. Patients have distended neck veins, a left parasternal lift, and an accentuated pulmonic component of the second heart sound.