# Continuing Education Activity

There are approximately 300,000 individuals living with spinal cord injury (SCI) in the United States, with approximately 18,000 new cases annually.[1] Central cord syndrome, first described in 1954, is the most common form of incomplete spinal cord injury (SCI) and has an annual incidence of approximately 11,000 cases in the United States. It leads to motor deficits that are more pronounced in the upper extremities compared to the lower extremities, as well as bladder dysfunction (retention) with sacral sparing. Because of its unique clinical presentation, central cord syndrome is also described in the differential diagnosis of "man in a barrel" syndrome. The degree of clinical presentation is quite variable and corresponds to the extent of the injury to the nerve root. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of central cord syndrome and discusses the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of central cord syndrome.
- Review the necessary steps and tests to evaluate a patient with central cord syndrome.
- Summarize the treatment and management of central cord syndrome.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by central cord syndrome.

# Introduction

There are approximately 300,000 individuals living with spinal cord injury (SCI) in the United States, with approximately 18,000 new cases annually.

# Etiology

Central cord syndrome is an incomplete cord syndrome that most commonly results following a hyperextension injury of the cervical spine leading to spinal cord impingement. The proposed mechanism of action is hyperextension resulting in anteriorly simultaneous compression of the spinal cord, either by bony spurs or intervertebral disc material and posteriorly by the ligamentum flavum. This theory was aligned with early myelogram studies performed on cadavers.

Furthermore, Schneider believed that the upper limbs were more affected than the lower limbs because of the somatotropic organization of the lateral corticospinal tract, with arm function lying more medial within the tract. Neuroanatomic studies have since shown a diffuse distribution of upper and lower limb nerve fibers within the corticospinal tract, leading to the possibility that the unique presentation of central cord syndrome is due more to the hand and upper limb being more densely represented within the lateral corticospinal tract.

Other less common causes include cervical spondylosis, atlantoaxial instability, tethered cord, osteoporosis, and spinal arthropathies.

# Epidemiology

A retrospective review by McKinley et al. of 839 spinal cord injury patients at a tertiary care level one trauma center found CCS to be the most common clinical spinal cord syndrome.

# Pathophysiology

Central cord syndrome occurs most commonly in those who suffer a hyperextension injury. This usually happens with a forward fall while striking the chin and having the neck extend backward at the time of the fall. Older patients generally have underlying cervical spondylosis (stress defects). This leads to the posterior cord being either compressed or irritated by the posterior ligamentum flavum or anterior cord compression from underlying spondylosis. These two contusion-type injuries to the cord can lead to clinical symptoms secondary to edema of the cord at the site of injury. It could also lead to bleeding into the cord at the injury site, which understandably has a worse prognosis.

Usually, young patients often suffer from a higher velocity of trauma, leading to cervical spine subluxation or fracture that leads to the above-described compression, contusion, and bleeding.

The physical examination findings result from the compression of the spinothalamic and corticospinal tracts. The upper limb tracts are medial compared to the lower extremity, while sacral segments lie on the most lateral aspect. The central portion becomes more affected than the outer segments when compression occurs in the cervical cord due to external pressure.

First described by Schneider et al. based on medial somatotopy of the arms within the lateral corticospinal tract as described by Foerster.

# History and Physical

Most of these patients will be older and present with symptoms after a fall with hyperextension of their neck. On examination, patients will have more significant strength impairments in the upper extremities (especially the hands) compared to the lower extremities. Patients often complain of sensory deficits below the level of injury, but this is variable. Pain and temperature sensations are typically affected, but the sensation of light touch can also be impaired. The most common sensory deficits are in a "cape-like" distribution across their upper back and down their posterior upper extremities. They will often have neck pain at the site of spinal cord impingement.

Bladder dysfunction (most commonly urinary retention) and priapism can also be signs of upper motor neuron dysfunction. The sacral sensation is usually preserved, but the clinician should assess the rectal tone to evaluate the severity of the compression.

# Evaluation

**Radiographic**

Patients deemed medically stable, awake, and symptomatic should proceed with a radiographic evaluation of the spinal cord and axial skeleton.

**Clinical**

Central cord syndrome is a clinical diagnosis with a presentation that includes disproportionate impairment of the upper limb motor function compared to the lower limbs, along with varying degrees of sensory deficits below the level of the spinal cord lesion and possibly urinary or gastrointestinal dysfunction. Pouw et al. proposed that a difference of 10 between upper and lower limb motor scores on the International Standards for Neurological Classification of SCI (ISNCSCI) may be a more objective diagnostic criterion.

The gold standard examination tool for any spinal cord injury is the ISNCSCI. More severe findings on neurological examination should raise suspicion of a cervical vertebral fracture. When central cord syndrome is associated with a cervical spine fracture, it can prolong recovery.

# Treatment / Management

**Prehospital**

Management of spinal cord injuries begins at the scene of the injury with a primary survey involving the airway, breathing, circulation, and disability (ABCD). Disability includes calculating a Glasgow coma scale (GCS), pupil examination, and identifying any lateralizing signs. This should be repeated as often as necessary whenever the patient's status changes. Next, a secondary survey should be performed that involves a focused examination of the patient that includes spinal examination (3-person logroll in order to assess and palpate the spine), assessing distal motor function in both upper and lower limbs, incontinence and skin appearance. Lastly, providers in the field should collect as much patient history as possible, noting any subjective complaints of neck pain. Restricting spinal motion is of the utmost importance in patients with suspected spinal cord injuries.

**Immediate Hospitalization Period**

In the immediate period following a spinal cord injury, providers should pay particular attention to optimizing tissue perfusion to the penumbra to reduce secondary injury. Hemodynamic stability and mitigating the meta-inflammatory response are the prime initial focus.

The use of corticosteroids in spinal cord injury has a long history of controversy. The goal of intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone therapy is to halt the inflammatory cascade that results in secondary spinal cord injury. The landmark Second National Spinal Cord Injury Study (NASCIS-II) did show statistically significant neurological benefits with the administration of IV methylprednisolone if given within 8 hours of initial injury; however, there was also an increased risk of adverse events. Therefore, the Congress of Neurological Surgeons recommends against IV methylprednisolone administration.

Any backboards should be removed as soon as possible to reduce the occurrence of pressure ulcers. All patients with concern for spinal cord injury should have a thorough trauma evaluation performed in the emergency department. These patients should have cervical immobilization maintained during the initial evaluation. Providers should utilize the Canadian C-spine Rule and National Emergency X-Radiography Utilization Study (NEXUS) to help guide diagnostic imaging needs, as well as help determine the continued need for cervical immobilization.

Conservative management should only be considered in situations without fracture, dislocation, disc herniation, or spinal instability; otherwise, surgical intervention is preferred.

In patients without instability, the decision for conservative versus surgical management of acute central cord syndrome is highly debated, with no clearly established guidelines. Research studies have produced mixed results comparing conservative management with early surgical intervention. Numerous studies showed that delaying surgery in traumatic central cord syndrome may be beneficial where the odds of mortality decreased within each day of delay. The goal of delayed surgery was to improve the patient's underlying health, especially in older adults, and treat other potential comorbidities before the surgery.

Recently, the Spinal Cord Society (SCS) and Spine Trauma Study Group (STSG) released a position statement after a systematic review and meta-analysis regarding the management of acute central cord syndrome. Their recommendation was patients with acute traumatic central cord syndrome due to hyperextension injury and cervical stenosis without fracture, dislocation, disc herniation, or spinal instability should be given the option of early spinal cord decompression (less than 24 hours after injury) or initial conservative management followed by delayed cord decompression (greater than 24 hours after injury) if there was a neurological decline or a plateau with neurological recovery. The review did not find a difference in complications or outcomes between early surgery and conservative management with delayed surgery.

**Surgical Approach**

At this time, there are no guidelines for the surgical approach, and it is left to the surgeon to decide the most appropriate course for intervention that will optimize outcomes and reduce complications. Generally, single-level anterior compressive lesions necessitate an anterior approach. A posterior approach should be considered in patients with compression at multiple levels. Patients with spinal fractures or dislocations should undergo reduction and stabilization, which may require a combined anterior and posterior approach.

# Differential Diagnosis

When evaluating patients with central cord syndrome, conditions that closely mimic CCS should be ruled out, including cruciate paralysis and the avulsion of cervical roots. Cruciate paralysis is a rare neurological disease involving the cervicomedullary junction. The main precipitating factors of cruciate paralysis are mechanical trauma, metabolic disorders, or post-surgical complication. Typically, the patient with cruciate paralysis presents with bilaterally upper extremity paresis while sparing the lower extremities in most cases.

A cervical root avulsion is a severe form of nerve root injury that usually results from high-energy trauma to the neck or ipsilateral arm. Neurological deficits from nerve avulsion range from a mild motor function deficit to complete paralysis that requires surgical correction.

# Prognosis

The natural history of the entity has an inherent potential for recovery even without surgery.

Patients with central cord syndrome recover substantial neurological function after the injury; their capacity to walk recovers in most cases. However, some neurological deficits remain.

Recovery generally plateaus at two years post-injury.

A European multicenter study comparing 110 patients with central cord syndrome with other incomplete spinal cord injury patients revealed that central cord syndrome patients tended to have greater improvement in their ASIA Impairment Scale (AIS) grade as well as better ability to ambulate after one year. However, central cord syndrome patients had lower “self-care” scores from injury onset up to one year based on the Spinal Cord Independence Measure (SCIM), likely due to impaired hand function.

A national database study from 2009 through 2012 showed fall as the predominant cause, with a mean age of involvement of 60 years. 55% of cases were managed conservatively, 39% with cervical fusion surgery (62% anterior decompression and fusion), and 6% underwent laminoplasty.

Early decompression and stabilization have been advocated for cohorts presenting with instability and major or worsening neurological deficits.

No difference has been observed in the overall outcomes between early and late surgical interventions.

Lower preoperative Japanese Orthopedic Association (JOA) score, long segment signal changes, and impingement connote poor prognosis.

The neuroanatomical–functional paradox observed among patients with central cord syndrome is due to the interplay between motor synergy encoding (MSE) neurons, as well as lesion-affected and recovery-related networks.

Diffusion tensor imaging is a promising radiological armamentarium.

# Complications

Patients with central cord syndrome are at risk for a multitude of complications, like other spinal cord injuries.

**Pulmonary**

Respiratory complications are the most common cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with spinal cord injuries.

**Cardiovascular**

Cardiovascular complications arise largely due to impaired autonomic function.

Low baseline blood pressures in acute injury are managed with fluid resuscitation. Orthostatic hypotension can be managed both with and without medications. Non-pharmacologic strategies include reducing rapid changes in posture, avoiding hot environments, and eating smaller meals to reduce postprandial cardiovascular shunting to gastrointestinal organs.

Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a significant problem in spinal cord injury patients. Due to the nature of central cord syndrome, patients are less likely to develop VTE. The incidence of VTE in spinal cord patients ranges from 12 to 100%. While most commonly occurring in the lower limbs, upper limb VTE can also occur.

Patients with central cord syndrome are usually prone to autonomic dysreflexia, a potentially life-threatening emergency that is more common in patients with spinal cord injury above the T6 level. It is an uncoordinated response of the autonomic system to heart rate and the vascular walls. This phenomenon usually occurs in the first month of the injury. Common clinical presentations include headaches, flushing, piloerection, increased blood pressure, anxiety, and nausea.

Blood pressure monitoring may be required in selective cases for the long term, even if the patient is not diagnosed as hypertensive. For blood pressure control, nitrates, hydralazine, and labetalol are used, but prescribers should avoid giving nitrates to patients taking sildenafil.

Lastly, Readdy et al. showed that cardiogenic complications appeared in 68% of patients with no relation to conservative management, surgical management, or surgical timing. Furthermore, they noted that in patients 55 years or older, there was a significant increase in complications with dopamine compared to phenylephrine (83% versus 50%, respectively).

**Neuropathic Pain**

Patients with central cord syndrome can develop neuropathic pain at the level of the injury and below the level of injury. Neuropathic pain can be caused by damage to either the spinal cord or nerve roots. It is typically described as “hot,” burning,” tingling,” “pins and needles,” “sharp,” “shooting,” or “electric.”

**Spasticity**

Spasticity can be defined as “disordered sensory-motor control resulting from an upper motor neuron lesion, presenting as intermittent or sustained involuntary activation of muscles” and is a significant problem in spinal cord injury patients.

Common oral pharmacologic options include gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonists baclofen, gabapentinoids and benzodiazepines, alpha-2-adrenergic agonists tizanidine and clonidine, and peripherally acting dantrolene.

In patients with minimal response to oral medications or have contraindications to oral medications, chemodenervation with botulinum toxin or chemolysis with alcohol are alternative interventions.

Chronic Pain, Spasticity, and Autonomic Dysreflexia have been postulated to result from the loss of descending serotonergic fibers. Therefore bolstering 5-HT function and ionic plasticity may provide therapeutic benefits.

**Genitourinary**

Neurogenic bladder is another prevalent condition among patients with central cord syndrome. In central cord syndrome, the sensation of bladder fullness, sphincter function of the bladder, and motor control of the bladder are impaired. Patients experience urgency, spasms, and frequency, along with urine incontinence.

**Pressure Injury**

Pressure ulcers are formed due to the tissue damage that typically occurs at bony prominences. Approximately one-third of the patients with central cord syndrome have multiple pressure ulcers. It is usually managed by avoiding immobility, regularly examining the prone parts, applying an emollient on the part exposed to friction, using cushions, and maintaining adequate weight and nutrition.

**Additional Complications**

Traumatic spinal cord injury (tSCI) patients are at an increased risk of sustaining a concomitant traumatic brain injury (TBI). A meta-analysis by Budisin et al. found that approximately 40 to 50% of tSCI patients were also diagnosed with a TBI. Motor vehicle collisions were more likely to cause comorbid TBI compared to falls (57.6% versus 31.6%).

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

There are currently no studies comparing central cord syndrome patients who received acute inpatient rehabilitative services with those who did not. Central cord syndrome patients should receive occupational and physical therapy after discharge from acute care facilities. While each rehabilitation program should be tailored specifically to the patient and their functional goals, some generalizations can be made. Physical therapy focuses on maintaining an adequate range of motion, increasing strength, and fine-tuning coordination of the lower limbs and trunk to improve ambulation (with or without assistive devices), transfers, and balance.

Interventions include stretching, therapeutic exercise, aerobic conditioning, stair and transfer training, gait training, functional electrical stimulation, and aquatic therapy. Since upper limb strength and function are more impacted than lower limbs in central cord syndrome, occupational therapy should focus on hand strength and dexterity to maximize patient function with activities of daily living (ADLs) such as feeding, dressing, bathing, and self-hygiene.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with central cord syndrome are challenged not only physically but also psychologically as well. Effective communication between interprofessional teams, including neurologists, internists, neurosurgeons, psychiatrists, physiatrists, physical and occupational therapists, and nurses, can lead to better outcomes. These patients are prone to depression and suicidal ideation. Furthermore, the lack of motivation can delay the treatment progress and may lead to permanent disability.

The following strategies can assist in achieving better recovery:

- Close routine follow-up with the neurologist/physiatrist/internist.

- Educate patients on clean intermittent catheterization (CIC) to avoid urinary tract infections and secondary complications.

- Educate patients to avoid immobility and regularly change position after 2 to 4 hours.

- Close follow-up with a physical therapist for muscle and core strengthening exercises to avoid muscle atrophy.

- Blood pressure monitoring at home.

- Close follow-up with the psychiatrist to look for signs of depression and suicidal ideation.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Central cord syndrome patients usually require extensive physical therapy for significant neurologic recovery. These patients may develop chronic issues, including autonomic dysregulation with uncontrolled blood pressure, neurogenic bladder requiring catheterization, pressure ulcers, neuropathic pain, and spasticity with chronic pain issues.

Autonomic dysreflexia should be initially managed by sitting the patient upright, loosening tight clothes, and removing any noxious stimuli that may be present. Hypertension due to autonomic dysreflexia may be managed with nifedipine or transdermal nitroglycerin if conservative measures do not resolve the autonomic dysreflexia.

Patients with neurogenic bladder may require intermittent self-catheterization but will remain at risk for iatrogenic bladder infections. The majority of the patients will have the return of bladder function after six to eight months.

Neuropathic pain and spasticity are common. First-line medications for neuropathic pain are gabapentinoids and TCAs. Other considerations include SSRI/SNRI, transcranial electric stimulation, and physiotherapy. Spasticity should be managed with a regular stretching program and antispasmodic medications. Baclofen is the hallmark of spasticity management. Patients may require additional medicinal therapy in consultation with a pain specialist or neurologist for their neuropathic pain and spasticity. Also, providers should consider chemodenervation with botulinum toxin or alcohol injections. Lastly, baclofen pumps can be implanted as well.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis and management of central cord syndrome are with an interprofessional team consisting of a neurologist, physiatrist, emergency department physician, neurosurgeon, trauma physician, intensive care unit nurses, physical therapist, internist, and neurology specialty nurses. Once diagnosed, high-dose corticosteroids are the first-line treatment if indicated. Surgery may be an option for select patients.

Most patients show recovery with physical therapy, but the recovery is not always complete. Recovery typically begins with lower limb function, then the proximal arms, and finally, hands and bladder/bowel function. Besides, the recovery may take months or even years, and these patients are prone to pressure ulcers, deep vein thrombosis, urinary tract infections, and muscle wasting. The key is to have the surgeons involved early in the care because, in some cases, surgical decompression may help boost recovery.