Mannitol is a six-carbon, linear, simple sugar that is only mildly metabolized by the body and primarily excreted rapidly by the kidneys when given intravenously and poorly absorbed when taken orally.

The FDA-approved indications for mannitol are all for intravenous mannitol and are detailed below.

**Mannitol for Increased Intracranial Pressure**

Mannitol may be used for the reduction of intracranial pressure. In this indication, mannitol administration is intravenous. Mannitol then constitutes a new solute in the plasma, which increases the tonicity of the plasma. Since mannitol cannot cross the intact blood-brain barrier, the increased tonicity from the mannitol draws water out of the brain parenchyma and into the intravascular space. The water then travels with the mannitol to the kidneys, where it gets excreted in the urine.

The mannitol causes the cells in the brain to dehydrate mildly. The water inside the brain cells (intracellular water) leaves the cells and enters the bloodstream as the mannitol draws it out of the cells and into the bloodstream. Once in the bloodstream, the extra water is whisked out of the skull.  When the mannitol gets to the kidneys, the kidneys filter the mannitol into the urine. The mannitol again draws the water with it, and diuresis (increased urination) ensues.

**Mannitol to Reduce Intraocular Pressure**

Mannitol may be used to reduce intraocular pressure when given intravenously. The mannitol is a new solute in the intravascular space, which increases the tonicity of the blood plasma. The increased tonicity of the blood plasma draws water out of the vitreous humor of the eye and into the intravascular space. Once in the intravascular space, the mannitol and associated water are excreted by the kidney. The decreased water of the vitreous humor lowers the intraocular pressure.

The mannitol dehydrates the vitreous humor. The mannitol draws water out of the vitreous humor and into the blood vessels as it passes by. When the vitreous humor has less water, after being dehydrated by the mannitol, it has less mass and thus creates less pressure. The lower pressure is less likely to damage the retina. The mannitol remains in the blood vessels and is excreted in the urine with its associated water.

**Mannitol to Promote Diuresis in Acute Renal Failure**

Mannitol can be used in acute renal failure to help prevent or treat the oliguric phase. During the oliguric phase, urine output decreases to less than 0.5 mg/kg/hour for children and less than 400 mL/day for adults. The fluid which does not get excreted remains in the body and causes fluid overload. Fluid overload causes issues such as decreased oxygenation and ventilation, electrolyte abnormalities, swelling, encephalopathy, and cardiac arrest. An individual with acute renal failure can sometimes be given intravenous mannitol. Even during acute renal failure, much of mannitol excretion is done by the kidneys. As the mannitol gets excreted, it draws water with it, increasing the water excretion of the patient and helping avoid or treat the fluid overload caused by oliguria in acute renal failure. However, mannitol causes significant osmotic injury to tubules leading to ATN(acute tubular necrosis), so its use for this indication is almost obsolete.

**Mannitol to Excrete Toxic Materials**

Much like mannitol given for oliguria of acute renal failure, mannitol can be given to increase the excretion of toxic materials, substances, and drugs. The kidneys excrete mannitol, which is poorly reabsorbed once excreted and thus draws extra water with it into the renal collecting ducts. The excess water in the renal collecting ducts can help increase the excretion of water-soluble toxic materials, substances, and drugs.

**Mannitol to Prevent Intradialytic Hypotension**

Intradialytic hypotension and dialysis disequilibrium symptoms are common in hemodialysis patients.  This is due to a drop in intradialytic osmolality. Mannitol can be used to prevent intradialytic hypotension by raising serum osmolality.

**Additional Mechanisms of Action**

Since mannitol is a sugar and it provides a sweet taste when ingested orally. Mannitol also mostly passes through the intestine and is excreted in the feces as the small intestine absorbs it poorly. Thus, mannitol is used as a sweetener in food for diabetic patients as mannitol can provide sweetness to the food without increasing the blood sugar as much as sucrose.