The incidence of LV free wall rupture in autopsy studies of patients with sudden death after an acute myocardial infarction is approximately 5%.  A one-third of the pseudoaneurysms are located inferiorly. If free wall rupture occurs, but hemorrhage is contained by pericardial adhesions of peri-infarction pericarditis, the patient may survive, and left ventricular pseudoaneurysm is formed. The outer wall of the left ventricular pseudoaneurysm has no myocardial tissue and is avascular. Communication with the left ventricle is relatively narrow. The chest x-ray may show a pericardial mass with a characteristic notch at the border of the mass. Ventriculography will show the pseudoaneurysm unless a thrombus fills the cavity of the left ventricular aneurysm. Two-dimensional echocardiography will reveal a bulge in the left ventricle free wall characterized by a narrow neck and the presence of a clot in most cases. A characteristic finding is an abrupt discontinuity of the endocardial image between the pseudoaneurysm and the adjacent normal myocardium. The presence of a localized pericardial effusion should also suggest the diagnosis. Because of its tendency to rupture, a left ventricular pseudoaneurysm must be excised irrespective of symptomatology.

Risk factors for hospital mortality include increased age, incomplete revascularization, increased heart failure class, female gender, emergent operation, an ejection fraction of less than 20% to 30%, concurrent mitral valve replacement, preoperative cardiac index of less than 2.1 L/m^2 per minute, mean pulmonary artery pressure greater than 33 mm Hg, serum creatinine concentration greater than 1.8 mg/dL, and failure to use the internal mammary artery.