Data reveals that most medical schools and residency programs do not prepare junior doctors with adequate training in managing patients on mechanical ventilation. A great deal of variability exists among medical residents in providing care for ventilated patients. Registered nurses have very limited knowledge of mechanical ventilation and receive very little formal nursing education on this topic.

To ensure that competence is maintained, the National Academy of Medicine recommends that hands-on training demonstration and clinical simulations be required to engage the learner and improve the ability to retain the knowledge. All continuing education programs should address these gaps. Otherwise, patient care can be jeopardized.

**Important Points**

- All healthcare personnel involved in looking after ventilated patients should have regular educational seminars on mechanical ventilation.

- This personnel should be mandated to take continuing education programs on ventilation safety every 1 to 2 years.

- The competency of the healthcare workers involved in the care of ventilated patients must be assessed every year, and whenever new equipment is introduced.

- Healthcare workers should document ventilator settings and any alarm changes. These changes must be communicated to oncoming staff and the entire healthcare team looking after the patient.

- A committee should be created to make policies and procedures on mechanical ventilators. Alarm settings should be evidence-based. Additionally, directives as to who can change or modify the alarms should explicitly be stated. The policy should clearly state the time required to respond to a ventilator alarm. The parameters for the alarm should be established.

- The primary person in charge of the ventilator should be a respiratory therapist.

An interprofessional team should manage every ventilated patient in the intensive care unit. Clinical providers, respiratory therapists, and critical care certified nurses participate in hundreds of hours of didactic and laboratory instructions on the application and function of mechanical ventilation to achieve these goals. The role of the respiratory therapist and the critical care nurse in the care of ventilated patients is indisputable. The respiratory therapist and critical care nurse can assist the clinician in managing these complex patients by monitoring changes in vital signs and pressure parameters on the ventilator. Monitoring for changes becomes crucial when ventilator changes are made. Informing the clinician early about potential complications or patient tolerance of ventilator changes can help provide coordinated care and improve patient outcomes. A collaborative interprofessional team can safely and effectively provide mechanical ventilation with limited complications. [Level V]