Enhancing our understanding of the premalignant stages of EC development will allow us to pursue earlier diagnosis and facilitate appropriate stratification of women at risk of developing EC, permitting timely and appropriate therapeutic interventions. This involves an interprofessional team approach. Patients will often present to their primary care provider with abnormal vaginal bleeding. These physicians, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners in obstetrics/gynecology and family medicine will be the first-line providers to assess the patient. To assist with the diagnosis, these providers will rely on pathologists to review and diagnose endometrial tissue samples.

For radiological evaluation, radiology technicians conduct ultrasound exams on the patients, while radiologists interpret the images. The lab and imaging results communicated to the primary care provider allows the diagnostic picture to come together. If surgery is the chosen treatment, the obstetrician/gynecologist and the surgical team manage the patient. Nurses care for the patients in the outpatient environment, as well as the pre- and post-operative settings. Medical management involves pharmacists who dispense the hormone therapies to the patient and answer any drug-related questions.

Involving and recognizing the interprofessional team’s involvement in the process will help with better care and outcomes. The correct diagnosis, if made early enough in the course of the disease, can lower the risk of advancement to malignancy.