The urgency with which hyperkalemia should be managed depends on how rapidly the condition develops, the absolute serum potassium level, the degree of symptoms, and the cause.

Patients with neuromuscular weakness, paralysis, or ECG changes and elevated potassium of more than 5.5 mEq/L in patients at risk for ongoing hyperkalemia or confirmed hyperkalemia of 6.5 mEq/L should have aggressive treatment. Exogenous sources of potassium should be immediately discontinued. Calcium therapy will stabilize the cardiac response to hyperkalemia and should be initiated first in the setting of cardiac toxicity. Calcium does not alter the serum concentration of potassium but is a first-line therapy in hyperkalemia-related arrhythmias and ECG changes.

Calcium chloride contains three times more elemental calcium than calcium gluconate but is more irritating to peripheral vessels and more likely to cause tissue necrosis with extravasation, so it is usually only given through central venous lines or peripherally in cardiac arrest. Thus, calcium gluconate is the usual initial drug of choice in patients with evidence of cardiac toxicity. Insulin and glucose, or insulin alone in hyperglycemic patients, will drive the potassium back into the cells, effectively lowering serum potassium. A common regimen is ten units of regular insulin given with 50 ml of a 50% dextrose solution (D50). Patients should be monitored closely for the development of hypoglycemia. A 10% dextrose infusion at 50-75 ml/hour is associated with less hypoglycemia than bolus dosing with D50. Beta-2 adrenergic agents such as albuterol will also shift potassium intracellularly. To be effective, beta-2 agonists are given in much higher doses than commonly used for bronchodilation. Sodium bicarbonate infusion may be helpful in patients with metabolic acidosis. Bolus dosing of sodium bicarbonate is less effective.

Loop or thiazide diuretics may help enhance potassium excretion. They may be used in non-oliguric, volume overloaded patients but should not be used as monotherapy in symptomatic patients. Gastrointestinal cation exchangers such as patiromer may be helpful, particularly in patients with renal insufficiency who cannot receive immediate dialysis. Sodium polystyrene sulfonate, though commonly used, is falling out of favor due to lack of effectiveness and adverse effects, particularly bowel necrosis in elderly patients. If used due to a lack of alternatives, it should not be given with sorbitol, which increases toxicity. Hemodialysis should be performed in patients with end-stage renal disease or severe renal impairment.