**Infusion reactions****-**These are the most common and most serious adverse effects of the drug. Allergic or anaphylactic reactions were seen in 80 to 90% of patients receiving rituximab in randomized controlled trials

**Infections -**Serious bacterial, viral, and fungal infections can occur. New or reactivated viral infections can include JC virus infection, herpes simplex, CMV, varicella-zoster, West Nile Virus, and hepatitis B and C. Due to the risk of reactivation, live vaccines are contraindicated during treatment with rituximab. They should be given at least four weeks before starting rituximab.

Reactivation of hepatitis B with fulminant hepatitis, hepatic failure, and death can occur. Before starting rituximab, all patients should be screened with hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and hepatitis B core antibody (anti-HBc). Patients should also be monitored for hepatitis B reactivation during and after treatment.

Reactivation of Hepatitis B and the development of PML (progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy) due to the JC virus are indications to discontinue rituximab.

PCP is an opportunistic fungal infection whose prophylaxis is recommended in patients receiving fludarabine/cyclophosphamide/rituximab combination in CLL. It should be started during treatment and continued for a year following completion. It is also recommended in patients with GPA and MPA during treatment and for at least six months after stopping rituximab.

**Hematologic -**Lymphopenia is the most commonly seen hematologic adverse effect. Others include leukopenia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia.

**Dermatologic/mucocutaneous reactions -**Include pruritis, alopecia, skin rash, and life-threatening reactions like toxic epidermal necrolysis, paraneoplastic pemphigus, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome.

**Renal -**Tumor lysis syndrome can present with hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, hyperkalemia, hyperuricemia, and acute renal failure within 24 hours of the first infusion. Aggressive hydration and uric acid lowering therapy should be given to high-risk patients. Renal toxicity has been seen in trials where rituximab was administered with cisplatin.

**Respiratory -**These include cough, upper respiratory tract infections, rhinitis, epistaxis, bronchospasm, dyspnea, pulmonary toxicity, ILD. There have been reports of rare cases of hypersensitivity pneumonitis, status asthmaticus, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, and bronchiolitis obliterans.

**Cardiovascular -**Tachycardia, supraventricular arrhythmias, non-ischemic cardiomyopathy, peripheral edema, chest pain, hypertension.

**GI -**Diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting can be seen. Symptoms of abdominal pain should be thoroughly investigated as there have been reports of bowel obstruction and perforation.

**Neuropsychiatric -**Dizziness, headache, anxiety, depression, and insomnia can occur.

**Pregnancy -**A limited amount crosses the placental barrier during the first trimester but crossing increases in the second and third trimester. Administration of rituximab during the third trimester can lead to immunosuppression in the neonate. Levels of rituximab in fetal circulation are similar to maternal levels near term, and live vaccines are contraindicated in the neonate during the first six months of birth.

Due to a poor understanding of long-term effects, it is recommended to use effective contraception during treatment with rituximab and for a year after the last dose.

**Constitutional adverse effects**include asthenia, fever, chills, myalgia, arthralgia, muscle spasms, back pain, night sweats, and fatigue.