**Antenatally**

Cri du chat is diagnosable via amniocentesis during the antenatal period, where the deletion of chromosome 5 will be visible. The structural abnormalities are observable sonographically. Also, fetuses who show mosaicism may display fetoplacental and feto-amniotic chromosomal abnormalities along with microcephaly and cerebellar hypoplasia.

**Postnatally**

A diagnosis can be made based on clinical findings. The occurrence of specific characteristic findings such as microcephaly, low birth weight, moon face, muscle hypotonia, and a cat-like cry together should raise clinical suspicion of the condition. Sometimes this can be difficult because the features may not be obvious as patients show a cytogenetic variation leading to phenotypic variation. The clinical features, as well as the severity and prognosis, can be determined by the size and position of the deletion.

If clinical suspicion is present, one of the first tests that can confirm the diagnosis is a karyotype analysis. However, in cases where the clinical suspicion is high in the presence of a normal karyotype, further specific tests can be carried out, such as FISH, CGH (comparative genomic hybridization), or quantitative PCR (polymerase chain reaction).

FISH has led to an improvement in the diagnosis of genetic disorders caused by chromosome deletion and has provided a phenotypic map and the associated genome of an individual. Newer techniques, such as CGH, have opened up new doors by including the whole genome and the associated markers, which can identify genetic alterations.

There have been very few studies on the MRI findings. However, pontine hypoplasia seems to be the most common feature. This presentation is associated with other findings such as cerebellar hypoplasia and microcephaly, as well as corpus callosum anomalies. Supratentorial abnormalities also have been observed.