Complications associated with adult tracheostomy are well reported in the literature, which is around 15 percent.

Early Complications

- Air Leak: 3 to 9 % of tracheostomies in pediatric patients is associated with subcutaneous emphysema, pneumothorax, or pneumomediastinum. As a result, a chest radiograph is routinely advised whenever the patient returns to the ward/ICU to check the position of the tube and condition of the chest.

- Hemorrhage: Perioperative bleeding can be stopped by judicious use of cautery and paying fine attention to hemostasis. Most of the bleeding is in the form of capillary ooze from the thyroid gland or inferior thyroid vein, but sometimes significant hemorrhage can occur from aberrant vessels or vascular anomalies. Children with coagulation abnormalities or thrombocytopenia should undergo complete evaluation before undergoing tracheostomy.

- Injury to Surrounding Structures: cricoid cartilage and the tracheal ring should be identified before making an incision, as accidental incision on cricoid cartilage may result in subglottic stenosis.

- Pulmonary Edema: sudden relief of upper airway obstruction due to tracheostomy may result in re-expansion pulmonary edema in pediatric patients.

- Respiratory Arrest: rapid washout of retained carbon dioxide and loss of ventilatory drive may result in respiratory arrest during tracheostomy.

- Injury due to Tracheostomy Tube Placement: Complications like the creation of false passage may occur if the tracheostomy tube is pushed forcefully or the incision on the trachea is too small as compared to the tracheostomy tube. It may also lead to laceration of the posterior wall of the trachea, and sometimes larger size tubes may result in cannulation of the mainstem bronchus.

- Accidental Decannulation: this complication can happen in the immediate postoperative period. It can be prevented by proper patient positioning, correct selection of size, and placement of a tracheostomy tube.

- Mucus Plugging: it may obstruct the tracheostomy tube resulting in respiratory distress. Such complications can be prevented by proper stoma care, humidification, and regular tube changes.

Delayed Complications

- Granulation Tissue: friction due to movement of the tracheostomy tube and chronic inflammation may lead to the development of peristomal granulation tissue. This complication can be prevented by local wound care and regular tracheostomy tube change and dressing.

- Scar: formation of scar tissue around the stoma may lead to difficulty in changing the tube, and sometimes, stoma needs surgical revision and excision of scar tissue.

- Tracheocutaneous Fistula: it is formed when there is an apposition of skin to the mucous membrane of the trachea. It is common in chronically tracheostomy-dependent children.

- Suprastomal Granuloma: it is one of the commonest complications of longstanding tracheostomy, which is diagnosed by fibreoptic bronchoscopy.

- Suprastomal Collapse: longstanding pressure on the first and second tracheal rings can lead to the development of chondritis, weakening of tracheal ring, which ultimately results in tracheomalacia in the suprastomal region.

- Subglottic Stenosis: high placement of a tracheostomy tube in the airway may result in subglottic stenosis. Other factors that contribute to such side effects are prolonged endotracheal intubation and chronic inflammation. It can be prevented by careful tube placement and stoma care.

- Tracheoesophageal Fistula: Erosion of the posterior wall of the trachea and anterior wall of the esophagus from the distal end of the tracheostomy tube may lead to the development of a tracheoesophageal fistula. It is one of the delayed complications of tracheostomy in children.

- Swallowing Problem: it may occur due to anchoring of trachea to the strap muscles. Sometimes cuff of the tracheostomy tube may result in increased pressure in the esophagus and hypopharynx, causing dysphagia. But tracheostomy should not be considered as a contraindication to oral feeding.