Because ketamine overdose is a relatively uncommon condition and co-ingestions often complicate severe cases, limited information is available with regards to survival rates. Cases of addiction to ketamine are relatively infrequent, and there are scant statistics on relapse rates and prognosis. Nonetheless, ketamine remains one of the few psychoactive drugs with serious complication rates of less than 1%.

The risk of death from accidents when intoxicated with ketamine is associated with the highest mortality rate, according to several studies.[24][25] In a longitudinal study, two ketamine users died within one year, one from drowning in a bath and the second from hypothermia.

Ketamine in the setting of other cardiovascular comorbidities can lead to catastrophic outcomes. Ketamine stimulates the sympathetic nervous system resulting in increased heart rate, cardiac output, and blood pressure. Hence, intoxicated patients with severe cardiovascular disease or hypertension may be at increased risk for stroke, myocardial ischemia, or increased intracranial pressure. The chronic pain ketamine guidelines note several case reports of ketamine precipitating unstable angina and arrhythmias.

Acute use of ketamine may rarely cause encephalopathy, seizures, or coma. Acute kidney injury, electrolyte abnormalities, liver failure, and rhabdomyolysis may also occur.

Chronic ketamine misuse is associated with ulcerative cystitis

Some psychiatric effects of ketamine, including hallucinations and vivid dreams, may recur days or weeks following ketamine use, although these effects are usually transitory.