# Introduction

The sternum is a partially T-shaped vertical bone that forms the anterior portion of the chest wall centrally. The sternum is divided anatomically into three segments: manubrium, body, and xiphoid process. The sternum connects the ribs via the costal cartilages forming the anterior rib cage. The manubrium is the broad superior segment, the body is the middle portion, and the xiphoid process is a narrower distal segment forming the partial T-shape. The anatomical position and variations make the sternum an important bony structure of surgical significance. In addition to the anatomy of the sternum, clinical and forensic implications of the sternum are also topics in this article.

# Structure and Function

- The manubrium (manubrium sterni) is quadrangular shaped with four borders. The suprasternal notch (jugular notch) is at the superior segment of the manubrium sterni. On either side, the left and right clavicular notches are present. The clavicular notches of the sternum articulate with the medial end of each clavicle to form the sternoclavicular joints. The manubrium sterni also articulates with the costal cartilages of the 1st pair of ribs.

- The body of the sternum (mesosternum) is the longest part of the sternum. It is flat with depressed ridges along the sides where the costal cartilages of the 3rd to 7th pairs of ribs articulate inferior to the sternal angle.

- The xiphoid process (xiphisternum/xiphoid) is triangular shaped and forms the distal-most part of the sternum. The size and shape of the xiphoid process are highly variable. It is mostly cartilaginous until the age of 40 and becomes completely calcified by the age of 60. However, these age-related changes in the adult xiphoid process are also highly variable.

- The sternal angle is the projection formed by the junction between the manubrium sterni and the body of the sternum. These two parts of the sternum lie in slightly different planes causing the angulation. This angle corresponds anteriorly to the intervertebral disc between the 4th and 5th thoracic vertebrae. This angle is also known as the angle of Louis.

- The sternum's primary function is to protect the underlying mediastinum and its contents from injury.

# Embryology

During the 6th developmental week of fetal life, the sternum develops independently from a pair of sternal bands called “sternal bars” which are concentrations of mesenchymal cells on either side of the midline.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The blood supply of the sternum is mainly derived from the medial horizontal branches of the right and left internal thoracic arteries which originate directly from the first part of the subclavian arteries bilaterally or occasionally originate from a common trunk. The internal thoracic artery gives off sternal, anterior intercostal, perforating and non-collateral branches. Sternal branches of the internal thoracic arteries which are the main branches supplying the sternum are primarily located in the intercostal spaces. Not only sternal branches but also perforating branches appear to contribute to the sternal blood supply.

The blood supply of the sternum has a major role in the process of healing following sternotomy procedures.

For the venous drainage, the internal thoracic veins drain into the brachiocephalic vein on each side.

# Muscles

There are several muscles (muscles of the neck, muscles of the thorax, muscles of the anterior abdominal wall) attached to the sternum.

# Physiologic Variants

Usually, females have a shorter and thinner body of the sternum when compared to males.

**Anatomic Variations**

There are many variations in the sternum that commonly exist. Variations are most common in the distal-most region of the sternum. One of the most prevalent sternal variations is the bifid xiphoid.

Anatomical variations of the sternal angle also exist, for example, the sternal angle can be misplaced resulting in inaccurate counting of the ribs and thereby resulting in errors on physical examination of the chest and procedural errors during nerve blocks and needle thoracostomies. Also, a misplaced sternal angle can increase the risk of sternal fracture in blunt chest trauma. Sometimes an additional sternal symphysis “angle” can exist, which on imaging studies can mimic a sternal fracture, traumatic fissure or osteolytic lesion.

Another congenital defect of the anterior chest wall is the sternal cleft, which results from the failure of midline fusion of the sternum. Depending on the degree of separation, the sternal cleft can be complete or incomplete. The sternal cleft leaves the heart and great vessels unprotected and exposed. A narrow sternal cleft can be even mistaken for a sternal fracture which is another reason why this cleft is of clinical significance.

Incomplete fusion of the cartilaginous sternal model can lead to the formation of a circular shaped sternal foramen.

# Surgical Considerations

The sternum makes up one of the most important landmarks used by surgeons for various procedures.

**Median Sternotomy:**Sternotomy is considered the benchmark incision for cardiac surgery.

**Sternal Aspiration and Sternal Biopsy:**These are procedures adopted to collect specimens of bone marrow from the sternum. The sternum is a commonly used site for collection of bone marrow because sternal hematopoietic marrow persists throughout life.

# Clinical Significance

**Sternal Malformations/Defects**

- **Cleft sternum**
- A cleft sternum (sternal cleft) is a developmental anomaly caused by the failure of fusion of the two lateral mesodermal sternal bars which later form the body of the sternum.

- **Pectus excavatum**
- Interestingly, there are reports of the sternal malformation of pectus excavatum even in ancient Egyptian mummies in medico-historical literature.

- **Pectus carinatum**
- The estimated incidence of pectus carinatum is 4 to 13 times less than that of pectus excavatum.

- **Sternal Foramen**
- The estimated incidence of sternal foramen is 2.5% to 13.8% of the general population.

# Other Issues

**Forensic Profile of the Sternum**

Examination of skeletal remains for forensic purposes may include the examination of the sternum. Often the forensic pathologist or osteologist aims to establish the forensic identity, which primarily includes ethnicity, sex, age, and stature, of an individual from the skeletal remains subjected for examination. Stature estimation from the sternum is a relatively new trend under research when compared to age estimation and sex determination from the sternum. However, not much is published on the determination of ethnicity from the sternum. Forensic anthropological studies are population-specific, and various studies on forensic identification of the sternum are conducted concerning specific populations worldwide.

- Sex determination from the sternum

- Osteometric studies aiming at sex determination from the sternum were conducted in different populations.

- Age estimation from the sternum

- The time of fusion or synostosis of the body of the sternum with the manubrium sterni and xiphoid process varies to such an extent that it is often considered unreliable for age estimation in adults.

- Stature estimation from the sternum

- The sternal body length and the combined length of the body of the sternum and manubrium sterni are useful predictors of stature. However, it bears repeating that the correlation of stature with the various lengths of the sternum is not better than the correlation of stature with the length of long bones of the lower and upper limbs. Population-specific and sex-specific (within a population) regression equations/formulae are derived to estimate stature from the sternum.

**Sternal Injuries**

- Blunt force traumatic injury of the sternum

- Sternal fractures predominantly correlate with deceleration injuries from road traffic accidents or blunt anterior chest trauma due to physical assault. Sternal fractures either occur in isolation or with other concomitant injuries.
- In the clinical setting, whenever a sternal fracture is suspected, it is crucial to ensure that structures underlying the sternum (heart and lungs) are not injured. On imaging, sternal fractures are visible on lateral chest X-rays or computed tomography (CT) scan. However, according to the current algorithm for the management of isolated sternal fractures, electrocardiogram (ECG) should be conducted to rule out any cardiac associated injuries. If the fracture is displaced, rewiring is needed.

- Iatrogenic sternal fractures

- Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) related injuries include fracture of the sternum.

**Forensic Implications of Sternal Bone Marrow Aspiration Fatalities**

A surgical procedure-related fatality is a medicolegal death that requires further investigation. In such cases, a meticulous forensic autopsy is necessary. A forensic autopsy case report exists documenting a death from hemorrhage due to an iatrogenic penetrating injury of the thoracic aorta secondary to the procedure of bone marrow aspiration from the sternum.