The lateral pterygoid muscle is a single unit divided into two bellies with clearly identified anterior insertions and posterior attachments that remain controversial.

The superior belly, also known as the sphenoid head, inserts anteriorly on: the infratemporal surface of the sphenoid bone's greater wing and the superior quarter of the pterygoid process' lateral wing. Its posterior attachment has been widely debated, but it is believed to insert on the disc (anteromedial border and medial aspect) and mandibular condyle (the anterior part of the neck).

The inferior belly, also known as the pterygoid head, is three times larger than the superior belly and anteriorly attaches on: the inferior two-thirds of the lateral area of the pterygoid process' lateral wing, lateral area of the pyramidal process, and part of the maxillary bone tuberosity.

On the lateral side (superficial surface), the lateral pterygoid muscle relates to the mandibular ramus, maxillary artery, temporalis tendon, and the masseter muscle. On the medial side (deep surface), the muscle is related to the mandibular nerve, the middle meningeal artery, the sphenomandibular ligament, and the upper part of the medial pterygoid muscle. Deep temporal and masseteric nerves and vessels emerge from the upper border of the superior belly. The lingual and inferior alveolar nerve and vessels pass beneath the lower edge of the inferior belly, and the second part of the maxillary artery runs between the two bellies to enter the pterygomaxillary fissure. The buccal nerve and respective blood vessels traverse the two bellies of the lateral pterygoid muscle mediolaterally.

The two bellies of the lateral pterygoid muscle were always believed to have an antagonist action due to their different anterior insertions. But, recent studies suggest that they may function similarly. This is due to errors when interpreting electromyography (EMG) studies, where the sensors' position couldn't be precisely determined.

The inferior belly was classically described to function in depressing, protruding, and deviating the mandible to the contralateral side. The superior belly was mostly believed to become active during the elevation of the mandible to close the mouth. However, the superior belly may have little role in closing the mouth and may become active during mouth opening, protrusion, and contralateral deviation, just like the inferior belly.

The lateral pterygoid muscle depresses the mandible and opens the mouth when assisted by the anterior belly of the digastric muscle and the mylohyoid muscle. Among all the four muscles of mastication (medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid, masseter, and temporalis), the lateral pterygoid is the only muscle that participates in depressing the mandible.

The unilateral contraction of the lateral pterygoid muscle with the ipsilateral medial pterygoid muscle results in lateral mandibular movement to the contralateral side. This movement is observable during functional and parafunctional lateral excursive movements, i.e., during chewing stroke, masticating, and clenching. When both bellies of the lateral pterygoid muscle contract bilaterally, the mandible travels anteriorly (protrusion).

Unlike the jaw-closing muscles, this jaw depressor does not contain muscle spindles. Due to the absence of muscle spindles, the lateral pterygoid muscle plays a secondary role during the mandibular depression. Muscle spindles (stretch receptors) are required to detect any change in the working length and velocity of the muscle. During functional movements, this prevents excessive muscle stretching.

The lateral pterygoid muscle plays a crucial role in controlling the function of the jaw and temporomandibular joint. It also appears to function during the generation of horizontal forces required during mastication and parafunctional activities.