A local anesthetic is administered subcutaneously at the access site. Venous access is obtained with or without ultrasound guidance. Access can be obtained using a standard 18-gauge needle or a smaller 21-gauge needle in the femoral and jugular sites. In the case of the antecubital vein, the use of the 21-gauge needle may reduce the chances of injury to nearby arterial structures. Ultrasound guidance requires a sterile ultrasound probe sleeve so as to avoid contaminating the rest of the sterile field. Once venous access is obtained, an appropriately sized sheath is placed in the vein and secured. The pulmonary artery catheter is advanced through the sheath into the vein. The balloon is inflated after the catheter is advanced to roughly 15 cm so to avoid inflating it within the access sheath. Balloon inflation will then make advancing the catheter to the right atrium much easier. If the catheter advances easily, the use of wire cannulation is not necessary. The catheter will reach the right atrium from the internal jugular vein when it is advanced to roughly 20 cm. From the femoral venous access site, it will reach the right atrium when it is advanced to roughly 45 cm. Nonetheless, the catheter movement can also be observed using fluoroscopy.

When the catheter reaches the right atrium, a pulsatile right atrial waveform will be observed. Prior to recording pressures, a reference is established by zeroing the system. Zeroing involves opening the air-fluid transducer to air so that it equilibrates with atmospheric pressure. When this is being performed, the air-fluid transducer must be at the level of the heart. Roughly this is done by holding the air-fluid transducer at the level of the fourth intercostal space, at an imaginary plane between the anterior and the posterior chest walls. If it is lower than the heart level, the observed pressures may be falsely high. If the transducer is higher than the heart level, then the observed pressures may be falsely low.

Once the right atrial pressure waveform is obtained, the catheter is manipulated to turn towards the right ventricle, and right ventricular pressure is obtained. Following this, the catheter is usually advanced to a wedge position to measure the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. Once this is done, the balloon can be deflated and brought back a few cms into the pulmonary artery, where pulmonary artery pressure can be recorded. It is important to know that all pressures should be measured ideally at end-expiration. The pulmonary artery blood sample is withdrawn using the distal yellow port, and mixed venous oxygen saturation is obtained. Arterial saturation has to be obtained separately so as to determine the cardiac output using the Fick method. Thermodilution can be performed by injecting cold saline into the proximal blue port into the right atrium, where it mixes with blood, and the temperature difference is detected by a thermistor. Thermodilution has repeated a minimum of three times to obtain an average cardiac output and cardiac index. The pulmonary artery catheter can be manipulated and placed in the superior or inferior vena cava for withdrawing blood samples and estimating oxygen saturations. The same can be done in the right ventricle or the right atrium.