Untreated genital lesions associated with chancroid in individuals not seeking care will spontaneously resolve within 1 to 3 months. Untreated individuals run the risk of progressing to painful regional lymphadenitis and, in approximately 25% of cases, the development of suppurative buboes.

In the early 1990s, the World Health Organization (WHO), given the difficulties in identifying the causative agents in genital ulcer disease (GUD), recommended the implementation of syndromic management of these diseases. Fully implemented by 2000, this has led to a precipitous decline in chancroid, leaving genital herpes simplex to be the leading cause of genital ulcer disease.

Antibiotic treatment should be initiated for any individuals with either a confirmed or presumed diagnosis of chancroid. Consideration should be given to frequent coinfections, most often with either syphilis or herpes, and the potential need to initiate empiric treatment if there is any question regarding compliance in follow-up with diagnostic testing. In addition, the role played by chancroid as a cofactor in the transmission of HIV should trigger testing or treatment of known HIV positivity.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends the following antibiotic options:

- Azithromycin 1 gm, orally as a single dose or

- Ceftriaxone 250 mg, intramuscularly (IM) as a single dose or

- Erythromycin 500 mg, orally 3 times per day for 7 days or

- Ciprofloxacin 500 mg, orally twice a day for 3 days

Objective improvement in symptoms and findings should occur within one to 2 weeks of the initiation of antibiotics, although the response of the associated regional lymphadenitis may occur more slowly. Fluctuant lymphadenitis may require needle aspiration or incision and drainage to assist in their resolution.

Lack of improvement with appropriate antibiotics may be the result of incorrect initial diagnosis, coinfection with another sexually transmitted infection (STI) or HIV, drug resistance, or non-compliance with multi-dose regimens.

Sexual partners should be treated if exposed within the preceding 10 days of symptom development. Reinfection is possible due to contact with the source individual without the use of barrier protection, although it has been experimentally demonstrated that initial treatment with single-dose azithromycin may offer prophylactic protection for as long as 7 weeks after treatment.