The following are some tools and “pearls” to help prepare for high-risk patients and when faced with unanticipated difficult intubation.

Place a low-flow nasal cannula or high-flow oxygen if available on patients. It will extend safe apnea time, especially in obese patients.

**NO DESAT**is an acronym coined by Dr. Richard Levitan.

- **N**- nasal

- **O**- oxygen

- **D**- during

- **E**- efforts

- **S**- securing

- **A**- a

- **T**- tube

The Vortex cognitive aid is a simple, practical but effective visual tool.

There are also reminders of interventions that might help.  Some of these include re-positioning the head or neck, applying external laryngeal manipulation (ELM), changing laryngoscope blade type, or attempting video laryngoscopy. Adjuncts such as a bougie or stylet may be helpful. Suctioning may aid.  Additionally, administering a drug for paralysis likely will improve the situation.

The Difficult Airway Society (DAS) has published several algorithms. One especially salient to this article is for the management of unanticipated difficult intubation in adult patients.

- Plan A: Effective mask ventilation and successful intubation. If unsuccessful, then there are suggestions to improve mask ventilation and successfully intubate. These include repositioning the patient's head or neck, administering a paralytic drug, applying external laryngeal manipulation, removing cricoid pressure, or using an adjunct such as a bougie.  If still unsuccessful, then the algorithm moves to Plan B.

- Plan B: Maintaining oxygenation with a supraglottic airway.  If successful, there is an opportunity to regroup. These options include aborting the procedure, using the supraglottic airway as is, and proceeding or using it as a conduit to intubation. If still unsuccessful, then the algorithm moves to Plan C.

- Plan C: Reattempt mask ventilation with paralysis and using a two-person technique. If still unsuccessful, the algorithm moves to Plan D.

- Plan D: Emergency front of neck access (eFONA) - open scalpel cricothyrotomy

A maximum of 3 + 1 laryngoscopy attempts (direct or video) is emphasized. It is unlikely that more than three attempts by the same clinician will be successful and can result in airway trauma.

Use of a second-generation supraglottic airway is recommended. This separates the respiratory from the gastrointestinal tracts, has a cuff with higher sealing pressures, and is more protective against aspiration compared to earlier supraglottic airways.

Open cricothyrotomy, also called the emergency front of neck access (eFONA), is now preferred. The NAP 4 executive summary findings found that an open approach achieved higher rescue success with fewer complications than the needle cricothyroidotomy when an emergency surgical airway was required.

As previously mentioned, there is also an algorithm for the failed intubation in obstetric patients requiring general anesthesia.

Other guidelines address airway management in the intensive care unit (ICU), awake intubation, and extubation. All are based on an extensive review of the literature, excellent resources, and free. Readers are encouraged to review all these guidelines on the DAS website.