Diagnosis of peripheral vascular disease can be difficult due to the increasing prevalence of similarly presenting comorbid conditions and large numbers of patients having an asymptomatic or atypical presentation.

Atypical presentation of PAD occurs when patients have existing comorbidities such as lumbosacral disease, spinal stenosis, or advanced diabetes mellitus - all of which may alter the perception of pain. Atypical pain is characterized by pain unrelated to physical activity, pain that occurs both at rest and exertion, and pain lasting longer than 10 minutes after exercise cessation.

Patients with hemodynamically significant PAD based on ABI testing are more likely to have asymptomatic rather than symptomatic disease. This illustrates the importance of maintaining a high clinical suspicion of underlying PAD for effective secondary prevention. Over 50% of patients with PAD are asymptomatic.

Intermittent claudication is the most classic symptom of PAD characterized by an exercise-induced cramping sensation with associated fatigue, weakness, and or pressure. It is not uncommon for patients to deny pain, and therefore asking about discomfort while ambulating is a more useful screening question. Symptoms are exacerbated by leg elevation and relieved by placing the limb in a dependent position. Paresthesias, lower extremity weakness, stiffness, and cool extremities may also be present. Anatomically the level of obstruction is usually seen one level above the area of discomfort; for example, patients with aortoiliac disease will have buttock and thigh symptoms. 70% to 80% of patients have stable intermittent claudication over 10 years; however, a portion of patients may progress through debilitating ischemic rest pain, critical limb ischemia, and eventual amputation.

The physical exam begins with a general inspection with attention to fingernail tar indicative of cigarette smoking, scars from previous vascular surgeries, and the presence of amputations. A focused cardiovascular examination begins with a pulse examination to determine rate, rhythm, and strength. Chest auscultation should be performed to evaluate for pulmonary diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and pulmonary fibrosis and heart sounds or murmurs. Neurological examination is essential to evaluate for pseudo claudication. Examination of the limbs should involve assessment for pulselessness, pallor, muscular atrophy, cool or cyanotic skin, or pain with palpation.