The superior gluteal nerve provides innervation to the gluteus medius, gluteus minimus, and tensor fasciae latae muscles. The gluteus medius is responsible for hip joint abduction and works in conjunction with the gluteus minimus and tensor fasciae latae. The gluteus minimus not only allows for hip abduction but is also integral to medial rotation of the thigh due to its anterior component. The tensor fasciae latae, on the other hand, provides traction on the iliotibial tract, thereby assisting in hip extension via the gluteus maximus muscle. Together, all three components comprise the abductor mechanism, which stabilizes the pelvis during the single leg phase of gait while enabling foot clearance during the swing phase.

The superior gluteal nerve originates from the posterior divisions of the L4, L5, and S1 nerve roots of the sacral plexus, and accompanies the inferior gluteal nerve, sciatic nerve, and coccygeal plexus. The nerve then travels posterolaterally, eventually leaving the pelvis through the greater sciatic foramen accompanied by the superior gluteal vessels. The superior gluteal nerve is unique in that it is the only nerve to exit through the greater sciatic foramen superior to the piriformis muscle. All other nerves which exit through the greater sciatic foramen, such as the pudendal nerve, inferior gluteal nerve, and sciatic nerve, do so inferior to the piriformis. It then enters the gluteal region and travels over the inferior aspect of the gluteus minimus, then courses anteriorly and laterally within the plane between the gluteus minimus and gluteus medius muscles, with branches terminating in the tensor fasciae latae muscle.

Superior to the piriformis muscle the superior gluteal nerve divides into its superior branch and inferior branch. The superior division travels with the upper component of the deep division of the superior gluteal artery and innervates the gluteus medius and occasionally the gluteus minimus as well. The superior gluteal nerve courses across the deep aspect of the gluteus medius at an estimated 5cm above the tip of the greater trochanter.