The clinical significance that the deep fascia had until part way through the previous century primarily revolved around the spread of infection, but with the advent and widespread use of antibiotics, knowledge of the anatomy of these structures has become less important. However, knowledge of the deep spaces of the neck, in particular, the retropharyngeal and danger spaces, are of still of potential clinical significance, particularly in areas of international medicine where vaccine rates and antibiotic use may be lower than in the United States. Additionally, the clinician should have a basic understanding of the relative spatial relationships of the structures within the neck as they relate to the deep fascia.

In a patient presenting with an untreated chronic infection in the nasopharyngeal or cervical areas, who complains of dysphagia, dysphonia, or dysarthria, a clinician should consider an infection in the deep neck spaces. Note that the retropharyngeal space communicates with the superior mediastinum and infection in this space can spread to this area with potentially very serious consequences. The danger space, lying just posterior to the retropharyngeal is in free communication with the posterior mediastinum and infection in this space can likewise spread inferiorly to the mediastinum. The danger space is continuous with the mediastinum to the level of the diaphragm whereas the retropharyngeal spaces does not continue past about T1 or T2 as the alar fascia attaches to the retropharyngeal fascia at this level, forming this area's inferior boundary.

Compared with the spread of infection, a more common clinical scenario that involves the deep cervical fasciae is lymph node removal in cases of metastatic nasopharyngeal cancers. The major lymph node groups of the neck mostly lie in the compartment between the investing and visceral layer anteriorly and between the investing and prevertebral layers posteriorly.