The setting for amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) is a disruption of the placenta-amniotic interface with the subsequent entry of amniotic fluid and fetal elements (such as hair, meconium, squama, and mucin) into the maternal circulation. Portals of entry may include the placental attachment, the cervical veins, or uterine surgical incisions. Upon entering the pulmonary arterial tree, intense pulmonary vasoconstriction occurs. This may be associated with concomitant bronchoconstriction. The hemodynamic result is acute pulmonary arterial obstruction, dilatation of the right ventricle and the right atrium, and significant tricuspid regurgitation.

The right ventricular enlargement causes the intraventricular septum to bow into the left ventricle creating obstruction and systolic dysfunction, further raising pulmonary artery pressure and decreasing cardiac output. Hypoxemia and hypotension lead to sudden cardiovascular collapse. Normally, pregnancies are procoagulant, to begin with, having increased levels of clotting factors X, IX, VIII, von Willebrand factor (VWF), and tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI). The introduction of amniotic fluid and fetal elements trigger inflammatory mediators such as platelet-activating factor, tissue necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-six, interleukin-one, phospholipase A2, endothelin, plasminogen activators, thromboplastins, and complement factors.

The coagulation cascade and fibrinolytic systems are thus activated. Amniotic fluid in the maternal circulation activates platelet factor III, stimulates platelet aggregation, and activates clotting factor Xa. The superimposed pathologic activation of the coagulation and fibrinolytic pathways create severe coagulopathy. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) occurs in approximately 80% of patients with AFE. This may be immediate at the time of the cardiopulmonary collapse or delayed. Bleeding may be severe, unrelenting, and fatal. Amniotic fluid and fetal elements are also known to infiltrate the uterus, causing severe uterine atony, which further exacerbates the hemorrhage. Autopsies on women succumbing to AFE show pulmonary edema, amniotic component emboli in the lungs, and alveolar hemorrhage. Myocardial infarction, acute renal failure from acute tubular necrosis, and cerebral infarctions are also found.