There are reports of the following adverse effects in different age groups. Following are the reports of common adverse events following immunization (AEFI).

**PCV13**

Infants and toddlers

- Irritability

- Injection site tenderness

- Decreased appetite

- Sleep alterations

- Fever

- Injection site redness

- Injection site swelling

**Children 5 to 17 Years**

- Injection site tenderness, redness, and swelling

- Irritability

- Decreased appetite

- Sleep alterations

- Fever

**Adults 18 Years and Older**

- Pain, redness, and swelling at the injection site

- Fatigue

- Headache

- Muscle pain

- Joint pain

- Decreased appetite

- Limitation of arm movement

- Vomiting

- Fever

- Chills

- Rash

**PCV 15**

**Children 2 to 15 months**

- Injection-site erythema, induration, and swelling

- Irritability

- Somnolence

- Fever

- Decreased appetite

**Children and adolescents 2 through 17 years of age**

- Injection-site pain, erythema, swelling, and induration

- Myalgia

- Fatigue

- Headache

**Adults 18 years and older**

- Injection-site pain, swelling, erythema

- Fatigue

- Myalgia

- Headache

- Arthralgia****

**PCV20**

- Pain and swelling at the injection site

- fatigue

- headache

- muscle pain

- arthralgia

**PPSV23**

- Injection site pain/soreness/tenderness

- Injection site induration/swelling

- Headache

- Injection site erythema

- Fatigue/weakness

- Myalgia

**Interactions with drugs and vaccines**

- Concomitant administration of PPSV23 and live zoster vaccine showed a reduced immune response to the live zoster vaccine. The recommendation is for administrations to be at least four weeks apart.

- Immunosuppressive treatment: Patients on immunosuppressive therapy, including corticosteroids, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy, may have diminished seroprotection to the pneumococcal vaccine. A booster dose may be considered according to guidelines.

- Antipyretics: Antipyretics blunts the immune response to some serotypes following immunization of PCV 13. However, this interaction requires significant additional research.