Low-molecular-weight heparins are commonly used in clinical practice, especially in VTE (DVT and PE) prophylaxis. Estimates are that over half of the patients admitted to hospital acutely unwell are at risk of thromboembolic disease and that 5% to 10% of hospital deaths are due to VTE, necessitating the need for accurate VTE risk assessment and appropriate prophylaxis.

Risk assessment for VTE prophylaxis considers the reason for hospital admission, potential benefits, and risks of prophylaxis using pharmacologically measured such as LMWH. NICE Guideline NG89 (Venous thromboembolism in over 16s) discusses the need for VTE assessment on admission to hospital that a National Tool for VTE risk assessment was implemented in 2010, and since then, over 90% of patients admitted to hospital have a VTE risk assessment completed. This guideline describes other VTE prophylaxis measures, including; anti-embolism stockings, foot, and calf pump devices, LMWH, and other oral anticoagulants such as warfarin and direct Xa inhibitors (direct oral anticoagulants [DOACs], rivaroxaban). Estimates are that prophylaxis, with appropriate risk assessment, has reduced DVT incidence by 70%.

Interprofessional healthcare team members must understand the risks posed by VTE and engage in appropriate risk assessment and pharmacological or mechanical prophylaxis. When there is an interprofessional approach, it has shown benefits in VTE prophylaxis prescription rates.

Clinically, the use of low-molecular-weight heparins is diverse, both in treatment and in prophylaxis. The pros and cons of LMWH, as compared with other anticoagulants and mechanical VTE prophylaxis measures, are numerous. However, the key factor is patient assessment, discussing options with them, and ultimately, making a decision that will promote compliance with their VTE prophylaxis or anticoagulation and understand the clinical need for them. The nurse and the pharmacist play a vital role in ensuring that the patient is prescribed an LMWH before and after most surgical procedures. Also, before discharge, the patient needs to be educated on how to administer the LMWH and the benefits of compliance. The patient should also learn the signs and symptoms of VTE to watch out for and when to return to the primary care provider.

**Evidence-Dased Outcomes**

There are dozens of randomized studies showing that several LMWHs can lower the risk of VTE and PE in patients with cancer, post-surgery, and after admission to the hospital with a medical illness. Today, the risk of bleeding from LMWH has been minimal. However, the use of LMWH in pregnancy remains debatable because there are not many good, long-term studies that have elucidated the effects of these agents on the fetus.