Tocolysis is achieved through different processes, all with the same eventual goal of quelling the smooth muscle activity in the uterus. Different tocolytic agents are preferred based on maternal medical history, current gestational age, and cost. There is no definitive first-line tocolytic agent by the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) but nifedipine and indomethacin are most commonly used. Furthermore, combination tocolytic therapy might be more effective than using a single tocolytic agent.

- Beta-Adrenergic receptor agonists

- Calcium channel blockers

- Magnesium Sulfate

- Nonsteroidal antiinflammatories

- Oxytocin inhibitors

Beta-Adrenergic receptor agonists specifically work on the beta-2 receptor. Activation of the beta-2 receptors causes an increase in cyclic AMP (cAMP) which is associated with increased smooth muscle relaxation. The most common medication in this class is terbutaline. Hexoprenaline, a beta-2 receptor agonist, is used in many countries but has yet to be approved by the US Food and Drug Administration. Ritodrine is also another medication in the category that is used internationally for tocolysis but is not approved in the United States. There has been a black box warning issued by the US Food and Drug Administration against the use of injectable terbutaline in the setting of prolonged preterm labor-management (over 72 hours) due to maternal cardiac complications. These complications are suggested from terbutaline's activity at beta-1 receptors, which are located in cardiac muscle. Studies have suggested the tocolytic agents in this family might confer a risk of the development of childhood asthma.

Calcium channel blockers specifically work on T-type calcium channels by inhibiting the entry of calcium into the uterine smooth muscle.

Magnesium sulfate has an unresolved mechanism of action regarding uterine contractions, but it has been described to inhibit the entry of calcium into the uterine smooth muscle.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories work through inhibiting cyclooxygenases (COX).

Oxytocin inhibitors work by competitively acting at the oxytocin receptor site. Oxytocin acts to increase the intracellular levels of inositol triphosphate. The medications currently in this class are atosiban and retosiban.

In addition to the above tocolytic agents, nitroglycerine has also been tested for effectiveness with preterm labor. Nitroglycerine works by inducing myometrial guanylyl cyclase to produce cyclic GMP (cGMP). Increases in cGMP inhibit the ability of intracellular calcium levels to rise. Furthermore, cGMP is also used to dephosphorylate myosin heads which halts the ability for contractions to proceed. The two routes for nitroglycerine are intravenous and transdermal. Though the side effect profile is better when compared to beta-adrenergic receptor agonists, transdermal nitroglycerine isn´t recommended for tocolysis.