**Recognition and Intervention**

Once a practitioner identifies a potentially trafficked person, it is imperative to establish a private, quiet, safe place to assess the patient. Further, building rapport and providing an opportunity for the victim to feel empowered is of utmost importance. This builds trust and helps establish a network of people and institutions to assist the victim.

It is preferable to perform the assessment and physical examination with the patient’s cell phone turned off or out of reach. Cell phones can be a way the traffickers control the victim. For example, the victim may have arrived alone but is always on her cell phone. The cell phone may be the trafficker's way of "keeping tabs" or listening to everything going on in the room.

Maintain eye contact during conversation. Speak slowly and quietly, and avoid looking down at the potential victim. Instead, sit in a chair at eye level, unless contrary to the patient's cultural norms. Ensure an environment where the victim can establish a sense of power and control. This zone of safety may allow them to reveal their situation to the provider.

Ask the patient if it is safe to talk and if they are comfortable with their providers. Ask if they would prefer a different provider. Never assume it is safe for the victim; they must confirm that it is safe. Safety is critical for the victim, staff, and nearby patients. Trafficking protocols can guide your care. A pre-determined location such as a bereavement room may be used.

Inform the potential victim of trafficking that you are mandated by law to report certain disclosures. Monitor their verbal and nonverbal cues. Be alert to your facial expressions, body language, and any nonverbal cues you are exhibiting. Avoid stereotyping and revictimizing the potential victim as they disclose information.

**Communicating with Potential Victims**

Communicating with victims of human trafficking can be intimidating for healthcare providers. Therefore, the Department of HHS created a resource called Messages for Communicating with Victims of Human Trafficking as part of their Rescue and Restore Campaign in 2016. These messages assist healthcare providers in building a rapport with the victim and promoting a trusting environment.

**Sample Messages to Ease Communication**

Sample messages for communicating with a victim of human trafficking, according to the Department of HHS.

- We are here to help you, and our priority is your safety. We can keep you safe and protected.

- We can provide you with the medical care you need and find you a place to stay.

- Everyone has the right to live without being abused or hurt, and that includes you.

- You deserve a chance to live independently, take care of yourself, be independent, and make your own choices. We can help you with that.

- We can get you help to protect your family and your children.

- You have rights and deserve to be treated according to those rights.

- You can trust me. I will do everything within my power to help you. Assistance is available for you under the law, and there are special visas to allow you to live safely in this country.

- No one should have to be afraid all the time. We can help.

- Please help us so this does not happen to anyone else.

- You can decide what is best for you, but let me provide you with a number to call for help 24-hours a day. You do not even have to tell them your name if you do not want to. They are there to help you anytime, day or night. The National Human Trafficking Resource Center hotline number is 1.888.3737.888.

Do not make false promises. Only offer what you can provide.

Providers are not required to determine if a crime or a prosecutable offense has taken place. However, they can foster an empowering, caring environment to identify a victim for a potential rescue.

**Creating an Opportunity for Intervention**

The trafficker may be an accompanying family member or friend that declines to leave the patient alone. Similar to intimate partner violence, it can be useful to create an opportunity for privacy by taking the patient to the bathroom or radiology, informing the family member that they cannot go with the patient. In addition, it may be useful to notify the family or significant other that hospital policy requires you to interview and examine everyone alone.

Before you separate the potential victim from the family member or controlling individual, make sure you or a dedicated, trained staff member has the time to conduct an interview/assessment at that moment.

Traffickers can be parents, boyfriends or girlfriends, husbands, women, men, friends, and those you would otherwise see as protectors. If privacy cannot be obtained to interview the suspected victim alone, do not confront the situation. The trafficker may harm the victim if they suspect that the victim reported abuse.

While there are no validated screening tools for the evaluation of human trafficking, some are being evaluated.

**Motivational interviewing**

**O**: Use**o**pen-ended questions to allow patients to give more information such as their feelings instead of just "yes" or "no."

**A:**Provide the patient with**a**ffirmations such as statements of understanding and emphasize that being a victim is not their fault.

**R: R**eflections on what the patient has said to allow them to continue personal exploration.

**S: S**ummarize what the patient has said.

When determining if an adult patient is a victim of human trafficking, it is important to identify components of the A-M-P model. However, for victims of sex trafficking who are minors, means of exploitation do not need to be determined and should immediately be reported per organizational policy.

**Safety**

Assessment of the level of danger or threat to the patient and staff is imperative. Pay attention to your immediate area and follow preset protocols by your institution in notifying law enforcement and security personnel.

The NHTRC can assist you in threat level assessment, danger risk, and contacting law enforcement if the patient consents. For example, is the trafficker still nearby? How will the trafficker act if the victim does not return? Are there minors or other family members that are in danger? Is the patient a minor?

An interprofessional approach is best. Use a trained social worker, if available. Involve security or law enforcement, if needed. Follow preset policies and procedures regarding abuse and neglect at your institution and according to local and state statutes. The NHTRC hotline offers invaluable assistance with resources, assessment, and best courses of action.

Much like intimate partner violence, ensure the patient has a safe place to go upon discharge.

**Reporting**

If a patient reveals they are victims of human trafficking, ask the patient if it is alright to call the NHTRC hotline number. Encourage the patient to call and provide them with the phone number. It may be dangerous for them to keep the number on hand, so ask them if they can memorize it or give them a card that can be hidden in their shoe or other discrete location.

The National Human Trafficking and Resource Center hotline is a tip hotline, a place to find out about services and to ask for help. The hotline can translate and communicate with individuals in more than 200 languages. A caller does not need to disclose any personal information to the hotline; it can be anonymous.

The NHTRC is available to help healthcare providers in the event of a potential trafficking case when no protocols are available. Healthcare providers can gain information in social referrals such as anti-trafficking organizations, shelters, local social services agencies, legal services, and law enforcement numbers. The NHTRC provides training information and technical support on its website. The NHTRC can guide a provider in an assessment of a potential victim.

- Report Online or Access Resources & Referrals: www.traffickingresourcecenter.org

- Call: 1-888-373-7888 (24/7) Email: nhtrc@polarisproject.org

**Mandatory Reporting/HIPAA Considerations**

Guidelines for the reporting of suspected cases of human trafficking for adults and children will vary depending on facility, location, state and federal laws. Adults may not want to report the incident. This must be considered. The decision to alert law enforcement should be based on predetermined protocols, local and state laws coupled with patient wishes. For example, some states mandate reporting if serious bodily injury or a firearm is involved.

The patient's right to privacy must be considered when reporting possible trafficking. The practitioner must obtain permission from an adult victim of human trafficking to release any protected health information (PHI) or personally identifiable health information to the NHTRC. The NHTRC may be contacted and provided general information for a consult as long as no protected, identifiable health information is released. If the victim is under the age of 18 and involved in a commercial sex act, follow mandatory state reporting laws for child abuse and institutional child abuse policies.

HIPAA will permit the release of protected health information under certain circumstances such as suspected injury or abuse. Examples of mandated disclosure of protected healthcare information include child abuse or neglect, elder abuse or neglect, and in cases, reports to the medical examiner. Reporting is permissible under HIPAA regulations if the disclosure involves a crime, is an emergency, if the disclosure is necessary to prevent harm to the patient if the patient consents to the disclosure and any situation where local, state, or federal law requires reporting. In general, follow institutional guidelines and policies in place for HIPAA reporting requirements.