Leukemia occurs due to the malignant transformation of pluripotent (i.e., it can give rise to both myeloid and lymphoid precursors) hematopoietic stem cells. Rarely, it can also involve a more committed stem cell with limited self-renewal capacity. In acute leukemias, these malignant cells are generally immature, poorly differentiated, abnormal leukocytes (blasts) that can either be lymphoblasts or myeloblasts. These blasts can undergo clonal expansion and proliferation, leading to replacement and interference with the development and function of normal blood cells, leading to clinical symptoms.

**Acute Leukemia**

In ALL, chromosomal translocation or abnormal chromosome numbers can lead to mutations in precursor lymphoid cells leading to lymphoblasts. Common mutations include t(12;21) and t(9;22). In AML, chromosomal translocations, rearrangements, and gain or loss of chromosomes can lead to mutations and abnormal production of myeloblasts. One important translocation is t(15;17), which leads to the fusion of retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) and a promyelocytic leukemia transcription factor (PML). This leads to the development of acute promyelocytic leukemia, which can present with hallmarks of disseminated intravascular coagulation and need emergent treatment with all-trans retinoic acid.

**Chronic Leukemia**

Chromosomal abnormalities in hematopoietic stem cells that are precursors to leucocytes are the most common cause of chronic leukemia. Examples of abnormalities are deletions, translocations, or extra chromosomes. In CML, mutations mainly affect granulocytes (most commonly the t(9;22) translocation), and in CLL, they primarily affect lymphocytes (especially B lymphocytes). Unlike acute leukemias, in chronic leukemias, cells are partially mature. These partially mature cells do not function effectively and divide too quickly. They accumulate in the peripheral blood and lymphoid organs, which can lead to anemia and thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia.