Osteopathic manipulative treatment for somatic dysfunctions of the thoracic spine may require an interprofessional team that includes the osteopathic clinician, a resident or fellow practicing neuromuscular medicine, a pharmacist, a nurse specialist, a musculoskeletal physiotherapist, and a psychiatrist. Without proper management, acute somatic dysfunctions of the thoracic spine can spiral into severe chronic issues.

While the primary facilitator of treatment is the osteopathic clinician, a multidisciplinary and holistic approach is now preferred requiring several specialists. Nurses are a critical component of the patient’s care because they monitor vitals and communicate with the patient and family. In an osteopathic clinic, the nurse will take the patient’s vitals before the treatment. A resident or fellow clinician practicing neuromuscular medicine will gather information about the patient’s past medical, social, and family history and provide pertinent information to the osteopathic clinician. They will also assist the osteopathic clinician during the treatment while communicating effectively with the patient.

A pharmacist will help ensure that the patient is on the appropriate pain medication and dosage. The musculoskeletal physiotherapist plays an essential role in treating thoracic dysfunctions of the spine. They will provide the patient exercises to strengthen the musculature around the spinal dysfunctions, which the osteopathic clinician addressed.

When both the surrounding musculature and spinal segments are addressed, the patient will have longer-lasting relief and a better outcome. Lastly, a psychiatrist is a vital component of treating spinal pain according to the biopsychosocial model of care.