The management of a solitary pulmonary nodule is best performed by using an interprofessional approach. Assessing for nodule size, appearance, patient risk factors, and patient preference are integral in treating SPNs. The following is a summary of the 2017 Fleischner Society Guidelines.

Solid nodules: <6 mm in a low-risk patient do not need any routine to follow up; if it is a high-risk patient, then a repeat CT scan at 12 months is optional. If between 6 to 8 mm, regardless of the patient's risk, a repeat CT in 6 to 12 months and again at 18 to 24 months is warranted. If the nodule is >8 mm, consider repeating CT at 3 months versus obtaining a PET/CT or tissue sample. If high risk, a diagnostic biopsy is essential to distinguish the nodule's etiology.

Gound glass nodules: <6 mm require no routine follow up. If >6 mm, then repeat CT at 6 to 12 months, then every 2 years for a total of 5 years. If parts of the nodule are solid, consider resection.

Partly solid nodules: <6 mm require no routine follow up. If >6 mm, the repeat CT at 3 to 6 months, if nodule continues to grow or has persistent solid component >6 mm, the patient is deemed high risk, and resection should be considered. A CT should be performed annually for 5 years if the nodule is unchanged from a prior and solid component <6 mm.

If multiple nodules, repeat CT at 3 to 6 months. Refer to the above information for further management of individual nodules.

In 2013, the American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) came out with its guidelines for SPNs. It states that CT imaging should be utilized if a nodule is found on a chest x-ray. These need to be compared to old images to evaluate for any change. If a nodule has been stable for 2 years, then no more testing is needed.

Solid nodules <8 mm are more likely to be benign and are divided into two groups: those with or without risk for malignancy. If there is no risk for malignancy and the nodule is <4 mm, follow up is optional. For nodules 4 to 6 mm, follow-up CT at 12 months. For nodules 6-8 mm, follow up at 6 to 12 months and then again at 18 to 24 months. Patients with risk factors for malignancy and nodules <4 mm should have repeat CT at 12 months. If the nodule is 4 to 6 mm, follow up CT at 6 to 12 months and again at 18-24 months. For nodules of 6 to 8 mm, follow up with repeat CT at 3 to 6 months, 9 to 12 months, and again at 24 months.

Solid nodules between 8 and 30 mm are be divided into three groups: low, moderate, and high pretest probability. Low pretest probability should have low dose CT at 3 to 6 months, 9 to 12 months, and 18 to 24 months. Moderate pretest probability should have PET or serial CT scans. High pretest probability should go straight to surgical diagnosis with either biopsy or surgical excision.

Part-solid nodules should have repeat CT imaging at 3 months. If at 3 months, the solid component is <5 mm, then annual CT imaging is recommended for at least 3 years. If it is >5 mm at 3 months, then a biopsy or surgical excision is warranted.

Non-solid nodules <5 mm need no further evaluation. Those >5 mm should get annual CT scans for 3 years. If the non-solid nodule is >1 cm, repeat imaging at 3 months, biopsy, or surgical excision is warranted.

Ground glass nodules <5 mm should have a repeat CT in 2-3 years. In those >5 mm, a repeat CT in 3 months with subsequent CTs up to 3 years if the nodule continues to persist. If the nodule persists at 3 years, then a biopsy or surgical excision is recommended.

Nodules classified as a Lung-RADS category 0 need to be compared to the previous imaging or need complete lung imaging before they can be classified. Category 1 and 2 findings may continue with yearly low dose CT. Category 3 findings should be followed up with a low dose CT at 6 months. Category 4A findings should be followed up with low dose CT in 3 months or PET/CT if there is a >8 mm solid component. Category 4B and 4X should get a full dose chest CT with/without contrast, PET/CT, biopsy, or repeat low dose CT at 1 month.

Of course, with all incidental findings of an SPN, there is a risk for malignancy. Due to this, it is important to discuss with the patient about other options, including surgical resection either by open thoracotomy, VATS (video-assisted thoracic surgery), or RATS (robotic-assisted thoracoscopic surgery). Overall 3-year survival is the same for all three surgical options, but VATS and RATS have improved morbidity compared to open. SBRT (stereotactic body radiotherapy) is another form of treatment that is recommended only for poor surgical candidates with stage I non-small cell lung cancer. The 5-year survival for patients undergoing SBRT is 37% versus 68% of the patients who received a VATS lobectomy. Surgical candidates need to be evaluated for preoperative functional status with pulmonary function tests in addition to the standard presurgical testing to determine the risk to a patient following a wedge resection or lobectomy.