Cryoballoon catheter pulmonary vein electrical isolation is performed along with a full diagnostic cardiac electrophysiology study. Such procedures are performed in either a dedicated cardiac electrophysiology laboratory, which is preferred or in a cardiac catheterization laboratory. Either must have a cine-fluoroscopy capability that can save images for review as well as a recording system for simultaneous surface 12-lead ECG and multiple intracardiac electrograms. The lab must be able to perform intravenous (IV) contrast dye injections as well as record multiple pressure waveforms to facilitate transeptal catheterization. Intracardiac ECHO (ICE) is used extensively to assist in transeptal catheterization as well as rule out atrial thrombi and recreate real-time images of the patient’s left atrial anatomy. This can be imported into a 3-dimensional imaging program to identify variants in left atrial anatomy to guide the procedure. Certain laboratories will obtain preoperative CT or MR angiograms, but these are inaccurate unless they are obtained in real-time during the procedure as the left atrial volume can change dramatically with changes in patient hydration and cardiac rhythm. Intraoperative ECHO can also minimize the need for contrast dye, and reports have been published of completely fluoro-less cryoballoon pulmonary vein isolation.

In 2012, the second-generation cryoballoon was approved by the FDA for the use of percutaneous catheter ablation. It has undergone a 2-generation evolution that now comes equipped with an 8-pole circular recording catheter compatible with the balloon. Begin by inserting 5 introducer sheaths via the femoral venous approach. Patients are premedicated with oral anticoagulation, either with warfarin or a direct oral anticoagulant, for at least 2 weeks prior to the procedure, and the medication is held for a single dose. In the right femoral vein, place an 8-Fr sheath that will act as access for the transeptal sheath, and a 5-Fr sheath that will act as access for a 5-Fr quadripolar catheter, with 5-mm spacing. The catheter will initially be placed in the high right atrium near the RA/SVC border for recording and pacing if the patient is not in atrial fibrillation at the time of the procedure. It can then be passed to the junction of the SVC and right subclavian vein to pace the right phrenic nerve during cryoablation to the right pulmonary veins. This allows for monitoring for phrenic nerve injury during application of the balloon to those veins. Three introducer sheaths are placed in the left femoral vein acting as access for: (1) a 6-Fr hexapolar catheter for recording and locating the His-bundle site, a fluoroscopic marker of the tricuspid valve anteriorly, helping to locate the fossa ovalis for transeptal access; (2) a 6 Fr decapolar catheter to record and pace the coronary sinus; and (3) a pulse wave ICE catheter, which can remain in the right atrium but record anatomy of all cardiac structures.

If the patient is in sinus rhythm, a full diagnostic study is performed first to rule out a reentrant supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) or a concealed accessory pathway. If none are found, we proceed directly to transseptal catheterization. Start by exchanging the 8-Fr introducer sheath in the right femoral vein for a transseptal sheath, and utilize a radiofrequency transseptal needle to cross the septum posteriorly and somewhat low in the fossa ovalis, to improve the ability to manipulate the cryoballoon to the right pulmonary veins when needed. The needle in the transseptal sheath is exposed and visualized using ICE and/or fluoroscopy. Radiofrequency/electrocautery is delivered to 10 watts for 2 seconds when the intracardiac ECHO confirms the proper location. The needle should be pointing at the left pulmonary veins when entering the left atrium (see figure). On fluoroscopy in the 30-degree LAO position, the needle will face parallel to the coronary sinus catheter but posterior (away from) to the catheter recording the His-bundle.

Patients are treated with heparin 1500 IU per hour at the start of the procedure, but once across the septum, the patient immediately receives a heparin bolus of 200 IU/kg, and a continuous drip is maintained at 20 IU per hour to assure the ACT is kept greater than 300 seconds throughout the rest of the procedure. ACT measurements are drawn every 15 minutes while any catheter remains across the interatrial septum. The needle is removed, and a 210-cm exchange stiff J-wire is then passed as deep as possible into preferably a superior branch of the left superior pulmonary vein. The preformed guiding sheath is then removed leaving the wire in position. If the left superior vein is too difficult to cannulate, the wire can be placed deep into the left inferior vein or right superior vein. This way the path across the atrial septum is the straightest when passing the larger cryoballoon flex sheath steerable through the fossa.

The insertion site in the right femoral vein is then gradually enlarged using a 12 Fr introducer and then exchanged over the stainless steel wire with a flat-wire coil and PTFE coating with the larger 14-Fr cryoballoon steerable delivery flex sheath. The sheath is then passed across the fossa slowly so as not to dislodge the wire from the anchored pulmonary vein. The dilator and sheath can be steered up and down to ease the passing through the fossa ovalis, which can be viewed under fluoroscopy and ICE. The sheath is then passed first into the left superior pulmonary vein over the stainless steel wire with a flat-wire coil and PTFE coating. The tip of the sheath is positioned at the PV os, and the sheath’s dilator and the wire are withdrawn, and the sheath is then continuously flushed using an irrigation pump at 2 mL per hr.

At this point, the appropriately sized cryoballoon (either 23 or 28 mm in diameter) is chosen based on measurements of the PV ostia diameter taken via ICE. Use the 28-mm balloon universally except when one of the veins bifurcates very shallow preventing the larger balloon from sitting adequately, preventing complete occlusion of the vein. The cryoballoon is then flushed manually, twice forward as well as backward, through the connection, to ensure all air-bubbles have been eliminated. The 22-mm diameter mapping loop catheter is then inserted, and the cryoballoon is again flushed manually, twice forward and backward. The balloon is inserted into the introducer sheath for only approximately 1 to 3 cm, and then 10 to 20 mL of blood is withdrawn from the sheath before further introducing the cryoballoon, until no air bubbles are detected, to completely bathe the balloon in blood before passing into the sheath further to prevent advancement of air bubbles.

The cryoballoon is then inserted until its tip is at the tip of the sheath, which can be denoted by the indicator on the cryoballoon reaching the entrance to the sheath. The 8-pole circular catheter is then pushed forward and exposed, and intracardiac electrogram recordings of the electrical activity of the PV os (PV potentials) are visualized (see figure). If the patient is in sinus rhythm, pacing around the vein at 5 mA ensues to confirm baseline PV conduction to the left atrium performed before ablation. After this, the cryoballoon is inflated within the body of the atrium first, and liquid nitrogen is allowed to fill the balloon and chill to 0 C, after which it is then manually deflated to remove any humidity that may have built up within the balloon or hoses attached. After this, the cryoballoon is once again inflated and advanced and pressed against the ostium of the superior PV. A 50/50 mixture of IV dye and saline is then flushed into the tip of the balloon to demonstrate that no, or minimal, leaks surrounding the balloon are present. If complete occlusion is achieved, keeping constant heavy forward pressure on the balloon, cryoablation is then initiated. A drop in temperature of 1 C per second is ideal for the first 30 seconds. At 1 minute of cryoablation, the end-tidal CO2 (ETCO2) pressure is measured. Loss of PVP on IEGM recording, a drop of ETCO2 by 4 mm Hg from baseline, and a nadir temperature of -50 dC all are indicators of successful, durable PV electrical isolation (Kroman, et al). Goal temperature troughs should be less than -40 C as lower temperatures coupled with tighter occlusions are predictive of PVI. A study by Furnkranz et al demonstrated that a minimal cryoablation temperature of less than -51 C was invariably associated with PVI. After 120 seconds of freezing, a CBT of equal to -36 C/-33 C (superior/inferior PVs) predicted failed PVI with 97%/95% specificity.

During PV cryoablation, the esophageal temperature is continuously monitored with an esophageal probe that is moved up or down by anesthesia to position the sensor equidistant to the balloon. Thus, this procedure must be performed under general anesthesia with no paralytic agents given so as not to impact the ability to test phrenic nerve function during cryoablation to the right pulmonary veins. Cryoablation is performed stepwise starting with the left superior pulmonary vein, the left inferior pulmonary vein, the right inferior pulmonary and last, the right superior pulmonary vein. Phrenic nerve function is closely monitored when delivering cryoablation to the right pulmonary veins because of the proximity of the path of the right phrenic nerve to the right pulmonary veins ostia. One monitors the right phrenic nerve function using the quadripolar right atrial catheter by repositioning the catheter to the junction of the right subclavian vein and superior vena cava and deliver bipolar stimulation at high output pacing at 50 bpm. At the same time, one should use the tactile feel of the abdomen as well as C-MAP recording (recording the muscle action potential across the diaphragm through the skin) to monitor the phrenic nerve function during application of cryotherapy to the right pulmonary veins.

Once all PVPs are confirmed to be eliminated 30 minutes after the last application to the veins, if the patient is in sinus rhythm, programmed stimulation is performed to atrial refractoriness, and burst at 230 ms (atrial rate of 260 bpm) is delivered at the coronary sinus os to try to re-induce an atrial tachyarrhythmias. If none is induced, no further ablation is performed. If an atrial flutter that sustains greater than 10 minutes is induced, we will remove the balloon catheter and insert an 8-mm tip or 3.5-mm tip irrigation RF ablation catheter to intracardiac map and ablate the flutter. 3-dimensional electroanatomic mapping guides locating the reentrant circuit. If the patient is in sustained AF after PVI, we electrically cardiovert them and assure entrance and exit block at the vein ostia by pacing inside and outside all the PVs.

Once the ablation catheter and sheath are retracted into the venous system, anticoagulation is reversed with protamine, but oral anticoagulation continues uninterrupted.