**Adenocarcinoma Development**

Adenoma-carcinoma sequence explains the molecular changes that lead to the formation of carcinoma from adenomas. More than 95% of colon adenocarcinomas arise from colonic polyps, while approximately 1.5% to 9.4% of adenomas turn to a malignant lesion within an interval of 8 to 10 years. The length of the adenoma-adenocarcinoma interval depends on the size of the adenoma, its morphological features, and the pathological type.

**Adenoma-Carcinoma Transformation**

Two main molecular pathways lead to adenocarcinoma of the colon. The chromosomal instability (CIN) pathway is the most attributed pathway and accounts for almost 80% of colorectal adenocarcinomas in the U.S. In this pathway, cancer develops within adenomas through a series of progressive mutations in several genes, including adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), K-ras, SMAD4, and p53, as follows: The first step in the adenoma-carcinoma sequence is sporadic or germline inactivation of the tumor suppressor gene, APC, that increases the likelihood of developing a polyp due to β-catenin accumulation, which can then translocate to the nucleus and drive cell proliferation. K-ras mutation occurs afterward and leads to the formation of the polyp. Inactivation of the other tumor suppressor gene, p53, and increased expression of COX allow for progression to carcinoma. Aspirin may play a role in this process by impeding the progression from adenoma to carcinoma, which leads to improved survival outcomes in colorectal cancer. Carcinomas that develop in this pathway exhibit CIN are microsatellite stable (MSS) and mismatch repair proficient (MMR-P). In the second pathway, called the serrated pathway, cancer develops through the malignant transformation of sessile serrated adenoma/polyp (SSA/P) precursor lesions. This pathway is not the focus of the present report.