Cyanocobalamin administration can be through oral, sublingual, intramuscular, subcutaneous, and intranasal routes. The choice of oral and other parenteral routes depends on the cause as well as the presentation of the patient.

The initial replacement of overt deficiency is usually through parenteral therapy. Typically, 100 mcg cyanocobalamin is given daily for one week, weekly for a month, and monthly for life. Oral/sublingual treatment is given after the initial correction of vitamin deficiency.

An intradermal test dose is an option for patients suspected of cyanocobalamin sensitivity before any parenteral treatment. Due to the possibility of anaphylaxis, cyanocobalamin should never be given intravenously (I.V.).

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No information regarding the use of cyanocobalamin in patients with hepatic impairment has been provided in the manufacturer's product labeling. Vitamin B12 therapy has not been linked to transaminase elevations or clinically apparent acute liver injury.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No information regarding the use of cyanocobalamin in patients with renal impairment has been provided in the manufacturer's product labeling. However, according to kidney disease improving global outcomes (KDIGO) guidelines, vitamin b12 supplementation may be helpful in patients with anemia in chronic kidney disease.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Vitamin B12 deficiency increases the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Vitamin B12 is present in human milk. However, risk factors for vitamin b12 deficiency in infants are exclusively breastfeeding by nursing mothers having vitamin B12 deficiency due to minimal intake of animal products or malabsorption. Adverse health outcomes in infants with vitamin B12 deficiency include anemia, failure to thrive, and neurological complications. Hence it is important to improve vitamin B12 status in infants through maternal supplementation during lactation.