Management focuses on restoring the natural skin barrier and avoiding behaviors that dry and irritate the skin.

If there are signs of a secondary bacterial infection or a bacterial swab of lesional skin is positive, treat with topical or oral antistaphylococcal antibiotics depending on whether lesions are localized or diffuse. Sensitivities and local antibiotic resistance patterns may impact the choice of antibiotic.

Use of mid-to-high potency (class 2-5) topical corticosteroids 1 to 2 times daily directly to affected skin helps decrease the inflammation and pruritus. Topical calcineurin inhibitors (tacrolimus, pimecrolimus) may be used as steroid-sparing topical agents.  A typical alternating schedule includes topical corticosteroids on weekdays and topical calcineurin inhibitors on weekends.

Sedating antihistamines such as hydroxyzine or diphenhydramine may be used to provide relief for severe pruritus, especially at nighttime.

For widespread disease in which topical treatment may not be feasible, narrowband UVB light therapy should be considered. Light therapy should be administered 2 to 3 times weekly, slowly titrating to the appropriate duration and desired clinical response. If light therapy is not available, systemic immunosuppressants and immunomodulators have been used to treat extensive recalcitrant disease. Systemic corticosteroids may lead to rapid improvement but are associated with high rates of rebound when discontinued. Few studies have shown lasting efficacy after the use of methotrexate in children.