If the patient is developmentally appropriate for the age and has a normal neurologic exam, there are no abnormal features to suggest a specific genetic syndrome, and there is no family history of any developmental or neurologic problems, then Weaver curves may be utilized using both parents' head circumferences. If the patient is within normal range after plotting on this curve, then no further evaluation is needed.

Otherwise, additional evaluation may be warranted when a measurement is above the 97th percentile on the patient's growth chart. If serial measurements cross one or more major percentile lines (the patient's head is growing significantly faster than expected for his or her growth curve), or if the patient is less than 6 months old and head size increases greater than 2 cm in a month, further testing may be warranted.

Head imaging may be required to evaluate the underlying process causing a patient to have macrocephaly. If the anterior fontanelle is open, a head ultrasound may be the simplest and most cost-effective method for the evaluation of any intracranial abnormalities. A CT scan can be done quickly but does expose the young infant to radiation, which in this age is typically avoided unless deemed medically necessary. An MRI, which would likely require an infant to undergo sedation and is more expensive than ultrasound or CT, can be done without the risk of radiation that a CT carries and would provide more detailed structural information.

In the case of benign macrocephaly, dilatation of the subarachnoid spaces can be seen on imaging. Additional findings may include slightly enlarged ventricles and/or prominence of the basilar cisterns.