The following are contraindications to receiving the influenza vaccine. However, clinicians should check the prescribing information of the vaccine before administration.

- History of severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis) to any component of the vaccine

- Infants less than six months of age

Additionally, LAIV is contraindicated in the following population.

- Concomitant aspirin/salicylate-containing medicine in children/adolescents

- Children aged 2-4 years age with asthma or reported wheezing/asthma in the preceding 12 months or whose health record of wheezing episodes in the preceding 12 months

- Children/adults who are immunocompromised due to any cause, including but not limited to medications, anatomic asplenia, congenital or acquired immunodeficiency states, functional asplenia (e.g., due to sickle-cell anemia), or HIV infection

- Close contacts/caregivers of severely immunosuppressed persons requiring a protected environment

- Pregnancy

- Individuals with active communication between the CSF and the nasopharynx, oropharynx, nose, ear, or any other cranial CSF leak

- Persons with cochlear implants (because of the potential for CSF leak)

- Administration of influenza antiviral drugs within the previous 17 days for baloxavir, five days for peramivir, and 48 hours for oseltamivir/zanamivir

**Precautions**

• Moderate/severe acute illness with or without fever. • History of Guillain-Barré syndrome(GBS) within six weeks of receipt of influenza vaccine.

LAIV has additional precautions for recipients with asthma aged five years and older. Precautions are warranted for patients with medical conditions that might predispose them to complications from influenza (e.g., cardiovascular [except isolated hypertension], chronic pulmonary, hepatic, renal, neurologic, metabolic [including diabetes mellitus], or hematologic disorders).

**Egg Allergy**

- Individuals who have experienced only hives after exposure to eggs: may get an influenza vaccine (i.e., any IIV4, RIV4, or LAIV4) appropriate for their health status and age.

- Persons reporting angioedema, respiratory distress, lightheadedness, or recurrent emesis; or who require epinephrine or another emergency medical intervention may also get an influenza vaccine that is otherwise recommended. If a vaccine other than RIV4 or ccIIV4 is selected, it should be administered in an outpatient/inpatient medical setting, supervised by a clinician to recognize and manage severe allergic reactions.