Treatment modalities —Invasive management is recommended for younger patients with the presence of one or more of the high-risk features for an AVM rupture, whereas in the case of older individuals with no high-risk features, the usual best treatment is medical management. In these particular patients, anticonvulsants for seizure control and pertinent analgesia for headaches may be the only management required. Several studies report that a history of the previous rupture is one of the most significant risk factors that predict long-term bleeding risk. Other important factors include patient age, AVM location, the presence of aneurysms, size, and other vascular features. Patients with AVMs and intractable epilepsy are also candidates for AVM treatment.

Surgical excision — Open microsurgical excision is the mainstay of treatment and offers the cure for patients considered to be at high risk of hemorrhage.

Spetzler-Martin Grade (SMG) scale is commonly employed for the assessment of the risk of surgical morbidity and mortality with brain AVMs. It is a composite score of nidus size (<3 cm, 3-6 cm, >6 cm; 1-3 points), the eloquence of adjacent brain (1 point for lesions located in the brainstem, cerebellar peduncles, thalamus, hypothalamus, or language, sensorimotor, or primary visual cortex), and venous drainage (1 point if any or all of venous drainage is via deep veins, such as basal veins, internal cerebral veins, or precentral cerebellar veins). The higher the score, the higher the associated surgical morbidity and mortality risk.

Radiotherapy and endovascular embolization are not only useful alternatives to surgical treatment in patients at high risk for surgical therapy but can also be useful adjuncts to the main surgical management.