Some women will not be candidates for TOLAC. Patients having had prior classical cesarean section or prior incision into the contractile portion of the uterus have higher rates of uterine rupture, and thus, a planned, repeat cesarean section is the recommended mode of delivery. Ideally, operative reports from prior surgeries should be obtained and reviewed for a description of the previous uterine incision.  When this is not possible, for example when prior surgery was performed in another country, the patient is considered to have an "unknown scar."  Because the vast majority of cesarean sections are performed with a low, transverse, uterine incision, it is reasonable to query the patient about the circumstances surrounding her delivery.  If the history does not suggest a scenario in which vertical incision would have been likely, for example, cesarean section performed at 24 weeks when the lower uterine segment is less likely to be developed, it is reasonable to allow TOL. The rate of uterine rupture in this situation has been found to be similar to the rate for patients with prior low transverse cesarean section.

Likewise, the rate of uterine rupture is felt to increase with increasing number of prior cesarean sections. With 1 prior  LTCS, the rate of uterine rupture is less than 1%; whereas, the rate is slightly higher with 2 prior cesarean sections at 1% to 2%. Most practitioners consider patients with up to two prior cesarean deliveries to be candiates for TOLAC, this recommendation is also endorsed by the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

Patients with other conditions involving incision into the upper or contractile portion of the uterus are generally felt not to be candidates for TOLAC as the rate of uterine rupture is unacceptably high in these situations. In addition to prior classical uterine incision such conditions would include prior "T" or "J" type incision at cesarean delivery or prior transmyometrial incisions to resect uterine fibroids or to facilitate open fetal surgery. Patients with a prior history of uterine rupture also have a high rate of uterine rupture and planned repeat cesarean delivery is recommended prior to the onset of labor at approximately 36 to 38 6/7 weeks estimated gestational age.

Facilities offering TOLAC should have the capability to perform an emergency cesarean delivery. While the availability of such resources seems prudent concern has been raised that this requirement limits some patients, such as those living in rural areas, from having the option of vaginal delivery after cesarean section. In the most recent ACOG Practice Bulletin on this topic, it was recommended to consider referral of such patients to sites able to offer TOLAC when appropriate.  It was also noted that with careful counseling some patients might choose TOLAC even in situations where resources are limited.

In considering TOLAC versus PRCD patients may also benefit from counseling regarding liklihood of vaginal delivery. The rate of successful vaginal delivery after a prior cesarean section is found to be 60% to 80%.

Patiets entering labor spontaneously have higher success rates as well, when compared to women undergoing induction of labor.