The life cycle of S. stercoralis has three components: direct, indirect, and autoinfection. In the direct cycle, **the rhabditiform larva**from stool matures into filariform larvae in the soil and penetrates the skin to travel to the lungs and, eventually, the gastrointestinal system. The indirect cycle follows, where eggs are excreted and returned to the soil to live as free-living adults or develop into filariform larvae or reinvade the host through the perianal skin. This reinvasion characterizes the autoinfection cycle, where the infective filariform larva completes its formation in the host’s intestines.

Direct contact of intact skin with contaminated soil results in inoculation of the larva, which then migrates through lymphatics and venules to reach pulmonary circulation and then alveoli. Larvae are then coughed up proximally into the trachea and then swallowed from the upper respiratory tract into the gastrointestinal tract. Within the intestine, they mature, and eggs are produced by females.

- Eggs may pass intact through stool

- Eggs may hatch in the intestine and pass in stool as rhabditiform larva

- Or produce infective filariform larva prematurely,  which then reinvades the host either via the intestinal wall or perianal skin to create a perpetual cycle of infection known as **autoinfection**.

The rhabditiform larva is the initial noninfective stage, whereas the filariform larva is the infective stage. The incubation period ranges between 2 to 4 weeks which is almost the same for autoinfection as well. Autoinfection usually occurs in individuals with impaired cell-mediated immunity. It is the key pathway to both hyperinfection syndrome and disseminated strongyloidiasis.