The muscular system is part of the fascial continuum, and in the presence of systemic diseases and disorders of the visceral, genetic, vascular, metabolic, and alimentary type, it undergoes a nonphysiological alteration of its function. The epigenetic processes lead to adaptation in response to a lack of mechanotransductive, causing a further decline in its properties.

**Chronic Fatigue**

Chronic fatigue can be related to the fascial system, especially if the pathological disorder has been present for several years. If the fascia becomes fibrotic or if the layers of the tissues do not flow properly, bodily movements will be difficult. The movements will be uncoordinated, producing more anaerobic metabolites, which will be recorded by the central nervous system as fatigue. An example is fibromyalgia.

**Pain**

Increased levels of circulating cytokines from the connective tissue system, triggered by systemic diseases, could cause neuropathic pain. Connective tissue can directly send pain signals; it possesses nociceptors capable of translating a mechanical stimulus into painful information, and if there are non-physiological mechanical stimuli, proprioceptors can become nociceptors. The nociceptors themselves synthesize neuropeptides that can alter the surrounding tissue and form an inflammatory environment. The epineurium and perineurium are part of the fascial system innervated by nervi nervorum, which, if in contact with pro-inflammatory molecules, can cause sensations of pain and create a vicious circle.

All the fascial layers need hyaluronic acid to slip one on the other. Decreased quantity or non-homogeneous distribution comprises the ability of local or systemic sliding of the connective tissue. There is much evidence that the change in the viscoelasticity of the fascial system is an important cause of nociceptor activation. Hyaluronic acid would become adhesive and less lubricating, altering the lines of forces within the different fascial layers. This mechanism could be one of the causes of joint stiffness and pain in the morning.

An alteration of the adjustable tension may derive from the contractile capacity of fibroblasts, creating a fascial tone that is independent of neurological intervention. This contractile mechanism could cause an inflammatory environment with fibroblast hyperplasia, resulting in chronic inflammation and sensitization of nociceptors. The inflammation that can be registered by fibroblasts will increase extracellular edema that does not depend exclusively on the increased vascular permeability but also on the loose fascial tissue that recalls liquids inside it. The edema will bring an increase in tension and rigidity, with difficulty in sliding the fascia layers and the appearance of pain. The described framework will stimulate the fibroblast to release ATP (adenosine triphosphate), stimulating the nociceptors.

The sensitization of nociceptors could derive from local ischemia caused by nonphysiological fascial tension, which prevents the proper functioning of the skeletal muscle and creates, for example, trigger points.

**Immune Response**

Fibroblasts influence the immune system and, consequently, the bone tissue; this relationship is osteoimmunology. The immune system and bone tissue share some molecular interactions, including transcription factors, signal molecules, and membrane receptors. In particular, osteoclasts sensitize cytokines and vice versa. When the fascial continuum fails to flow properly, its different layers, one on top of the other from the most superficial layer up to the periosteum, an inflammatory environment, acute or chronic, is created; the cytokines produced could stimulate the activation of osteoclasts and bone resorption, leading over time to an osteoporosis situation.

Fibrosis or fibromatosis is the result of disorganization of connective tissue with hyperplasia and hypertrophy of fibroblasts due to a chronic inflammatory environment, nonphysiological mechanical stress, or immobility. It is a recognized calcification phenomenon. When fibromatosis is registered as similar to scar tissue, for example, in Dupuytren pathology, the percentage of fibroblasts that change into myofibroblasts increases, with alteration of the tension that the fascial continuum senses. This creates a vicious circle of inflammation and activation of nociceptors as connective tissue is much more sensitive to nociceptor activation than muscle tissue.

Many chronic conditions, such as heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, fibromyalgia, diabetes, always show alterations in the fascial system. These changes make the symptomatic picture more burdensome for the patient.