The vertebral column is composed of seven cervical vertebrae, twelve thoracic vertebrae, five lumbar vertebrae, five fused sacral vertebrae, and four fused coccygeal vertebrae. The typical osseous anatomy of a vertebra consists of a vertebral body, two pedicles extending posteriorly, and the posterior elements. The component parts of the posterior elements are the laminae with two superior and two inferior articular facets on either side, transverse processes extending laterally, and a spinous process. The synovial articulation of the superior and inferior articular facets of the adjacent vertebra is termed the zygapophyseal joint or facet joint. The spinal cord runs through the vertebral canal which has osseous boundaries of the vertebral body anteriorly, the pedicles laterally, and the laminae posteriorly. Ligamentous boundaries of the vertebral canal as the spinal cord descends include the posterior longitudinal ligament anteriorly and the ligamentum flavum between adjacent vertebral laminae posteriorly.

Intervertebral discs exist between adjacent vertebral bodies. The discs contain a central nucleus pulposus with surrounding annulus fibrosus. The composition of the nucleus pulposus is semifluid collagen mixed with ground substance while the outer annulus fibrosis is composed of densely layered collagen fibers which extend into the endplates of the vertebral bodies. When a disc herniation occurs, and disc contents are released, there is an increase in pro-inflammatory molecules which can irritate surrounding structures, including the nerve roots and spinal nerves.

The spinal cord begins caudally to the medulla at the C1 vertebra and terminates as the conus medullaris in the vicinity of the L1-L2 region of the spinal column. At each level, dorsal and ventral roots combine to form spinal nerves which exit through neuroforamina. The remaining lumbar and sacral roots descend with the filum terminale collectively forming the cauda equina. The spinal cord has a wrapping comprised of protective meninges – the innermost pia mater, the arachnoid, and the outermost dura mater. The epidural region is located in the region between the dura mater and the osseous/ligamentous boundaries of the vertebral canal previously described. Areolar fatty tissue, lymphatics, and connective tissue comprise the epidural region.

The interlaminar approach for epidural injection involves needle passage ultimately through the ligamentum flavum to deliver injectate to the epidural space.