Normal labor is characterized by regular and painful uterine contractions that conclude in progressive labor. A discussion on abnormal labor patterns is reviewed as abnormalities of the first stage (cervical dilation to complete cervical dilation) and the second stage (descent of the presenting part leading to delivery of the baby). The third stage of labor describes the expulsion of the placenta. An overview of labor abnormalities encompasses all the stages of labor. First and second-stage abnormalities are described either as protraction disorders (which means that delivery is progressing but is lower than normal) or as arrest disorders (complete cessation in progress).  Abnormal third-stage labor meriting intervention is placenta retention beyond 30 minutes, as most third stages are concluded within the first 10 to 20 minutes of delivery.

Normal labor is characterized by regular and painful contractions plus cervical change.  Labor is divided into three stages as well as phases within the first stage:

- First Stage: 0-10 cm

- Latent phase
- Active phase (begins at 6 cm dilation and ends with complete cervical dilation)

- Second Stage

- Maternal expulsive efforts and uterine contractions
- Begins with complete dilation and ends with the delivery of the fetus

- Third Stage

- Placental delivery

Abnormal labor patterns in the first and second stages of labor are defined as either protraction or arrest disorders. Protracted labor stages indicate that labor is progressing but at a slower pace than expected. Arrest disorders indicate the complete cessation of the progress of cervical dilation and/or descent of the fetal presenting part.  Abnormal third-stage labor warrants intervention when the placenta is retained for > 30 minutes.