The decision to intervene during the postictal state depends on the postictal symptoms and the individual patient's epilepsy history. Knowledge of the previous ictal and postictal events is of great importance to determine if all the symptoms can be attributed to the postictal state. A patient with a history of a postictal headache does not require urgent brain imaging. A patient presenting with a new focal sign (e.g., unilateral weakness) after an unwitnessed but suspected seizure requires brain imaging to rule out alternative etiology like a stroke.

Similarly, a patient presenting with new-onset seizure with prolonged postictal alteration of mental status requires an elaborate workup, including cerebrospinal fluid analysis, to look for an etiological diagnosis. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus should be in the differential of a patient with prolonged postictal confusion. As already mentioned above, determining the end of a seizure and the beginning of the postictal state is often difficult. Electroencephalogram (EEG) helps distinguish between the two states. Neuroimaging may detect changes in the postictal brain, but its clinical utility is yet to be established and is more a research tool at this time.

**EEG**

The transition from ictal to postictal EEG can be classified either by rate or location; some seizures end abruptly, while others have gradual termination. In terms of location, some seizures terminate in all involved regions of the brain at the same time, while others terminate at various regions at various times. Postictal EEG typically shows attenuation or slowing (usually in delta frequency range) or a combination of both.

**Neuroimaging**

Positron emission tomography (PET) scan of the brain can be used to study the changes in neurotransmitters and receptors in the postictal state. In one study,[8], it was found that opioid receptors were upregulated in the postictal period in a patient with temporal lobe epilepsy in the epileptogenic side. PET scan also showed that benzodiazepine receptor levels vary with the duration of the postictal period. The shorter the duration, the lower is the levels of benzodiazepine receptors.