Shock resuscitation remains clinically significant simply due to the life-threatening nature of blood loss. Due to the body's ability to bleed a significant amount into either the chest, abdomen, pelvis, or thighs, the first signs of hemorrhagic shock may not always be so easily noticed. In addition, many cases of shock resuscitation are not prompted by traumatic events, but by other forms of blood loss. Whether it be due to a GI bleed, or hemorrhage due to coagulopathy, physicians must be mindful of changes in vital signs should they occur in order to recognize shock. Furthermore, the patients' general appearance may be helpful in determining the diagnosis. If the patient appears diaphoretic and visibly uncomfortable along with having vital signs suggestive of early stages of hemorrhagic shock, clinical suspicion for shock should be high.

As previously stated, a common sign of impending shock can be a decrease in pulse pressure, an increased heart rate, or a slight increase in breathing. Most important of all, the clinical evidence of decreased urine output can indicate impending shock as kidneys become slightly hypoperfused. A decrease of urine output below 30 ccs/hr, or more exactly less than 0.5 ccs/kg/hr, suggests renal hypoperfusion and could be the first sign of stage 1 shock. Of course, there are other reasons which could be causing renal hypoperfusion. It is vital to keep in mind the patient's full history and physical exam, as these may suggest other etiologies besides blood loss. For example, if a patient has been taking a new beta-blocker, they may be having decreased blood pressure and renal hypoperfusion unrelated to blood loss. The physical exam must be used to assess the chest, abdomen, pelvis, and thighs to ensure there is no evidence of blood loss present. These signs could be as apparent as decreased breath sounds due to blood in the pleural space, or increased abdominal distention or pain due to blood in the abdomen. Patients with some level of coagulopathy may also have hematomas that may develop along with the psoas, which may be difficult to diagnose on exam along. Any new pain in lower extremity flexion/extension should be the reason for concern. A CT of the abdomen/pelvis with contrast can be helpful in diagnosing a psoas hematoma, or retroperitoneal bleed.