# Introduction

Pudendal nerve arises from the sacral plexus in the pelvis. It is the chief nerve of the perineum and external genitalia. It derives from S2, S3, and S4. Several branches of the pudendal nerve innervate the penis, including the dorsal nerve of the penis. The pudendal nerve carries axons responsible for sensation and motor responses for defecation, micturition, and procreation.

Inside the pudendal canal, the pudendal nerve divides into several branches. It first gives off the inferior rectal nerve followed by the perineal nerve and, finally, the dorsal nerve of the penis. The dorsal nerve of the penis or clitoris is a smaller terminal branch of the pudendal nerve. It runs forward first in the pudendal canal above the internal pudendal vessels and then in the deep perineal space between these vessels and the pubic arch. After branching off of the pudendal nerve, the dorsal nerve of the penis runs along the inferior ischial ramus; then, it is joined by the deep dorsal vein at the base of the penis.

In addition to the efferent fibers of the dorsal nerve of the penis, this nerve includes afferent fibers that innervate the penile skin, clitoris in females, and also the glans penis. These afferents propagate sensory signals to the central nervous system that are critical to achieving an erection and sexual function.

# Structure and Function

The dominant function of the dorsal nerve of the penis is primarily somatosensory with a small motor component. The dorsal nerve of the penis has a direct connection to sexual function and micturition as its afferent transmit signals to the central nervous system.****Its small muscular branches supplies to the deep transverse perinei and the urethral sphincter.

The dorsal nerve of the penis has branching fibers that course laterally and transect the corpus spongiosum to the sinusoidal erectile tissue containing the urethra. The fibers of the dorsal nerve of the penis penetrate the corpus spongiosum to innervate the urethral lumen as afferents. These fibers receive input and relay the information during micturition and ejaculation. Semen is primarily expelled from the bulbous urethra via contraction of the bulbospongiosus muscle.

Neural pathways are arranged in reflex arcs that provide the reflex for ejaculation and bulbospongiosus contraction. The sensory axons of the afferent perineal nerve and the dorsal and ventrolateral branches of the dorsal nerve of the penis merge at the pudendal motor neurons in the conus medullaris portion of the central nervous system. The motor portion of the arc branches from the spinal cord as the perineal nerve to terminate in muscle fibers of the bulbospongiosus muscle for the contraction of these muscles leading to ejaculation.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

A neurovascular bundle runs along the dorsal aspect of the penis in a groove between the corpora cavernosa hemispheres. This groove includes the dorsal nerve of the penis, dorsal penile vein, and dorsal penile artery. These lay beneath the deep fascia, also known as Buck's fascia.

# Nerves

The dorsal nerve of the penis is composed of multiple different collections of axons along the dorsal aspect of the erect penis. They traverse the dorsum of the penis deep to Buck's fascia and superior to the cavernous bodies.

The initial cluster consists of fibers parallel to the shaft of the penis that moves distally and ends at the glans of the penis. An additional group of fibers branches from the main body towards the lateral aspects of the penis.

The dorsal nerve bundles continue straight into the glans penis to form midline branches, and ventrolateral branches arise from the lateral bundles. The distal branches of the terminating nerves travel toward the meatus of the urethra.

# Physiologic Variants

The number of dorsal bundles most commonly reported are two and three, but there have been periodic reports of up to 8 variants. Most of the dorsal nerves run parallel to each other in the dorsal aspect of the penis, traveling distally. Communicating branches are commonly viewed in no specific orientation or frequency. These branches usually communicate amongst each other, but ventral nerve communications are noted in cadaver studies infrequently. Most dissection studies comment on the absence of nerves that cross the dorsal midline.

# Clinical Significance

Clinicians often employ a dorsal penile nerve block for anesthesia before circumcision, ischemic priapism treatment, the release of paraphimosis, cystoscopy, and the repair of penile lacerations.

Many advancements have been made in the transplantation of nerves to restore sexual function and sensation.