The genes that encode LDH are LDHA, LDHB, LDHC, and LDHD. LDHA, LDHB, and LDHC encode for L-isomers of the enzyme, whereas LDHD encodes the  D-isomer. The L-isomers use and produce L-lactate, which is the major enantiomeric form of lactate present in the vertebrates. The gene that encodes the LDHA form of the enzyme is located on chromosome 11p15.4 and is transcribed into a 332 amino acid protein. The LDHB gene is located on chromosome 12p12.1 and encodes a protein of 334 amino acids. The isozyme forms of Lactate dehydrogenase enzymes, LDH-1 through LDH-5 are translational products of two genes LDHA and LDHB gene

In the mammalian system, two more subunits, LDHC and LDHBx, are also included to form LDH tetramer. The LDHC gene encodes the LDHC protein that is specific to the testes, while the LDHBx gene encodes the LDHBx protein specific to the peroxisome.

The active site of the enzyme is located in its substrate-binding pocket and contains catalytically important His-193 as well as Asp-168, Arg-171, Thr-246, and Arg-106. His-193 is the active amino acid present in the active site of humans as well as other species of the animal kingdom. All the LDH isozymes are structurally very similar; however, each one has distinct kinetic properties resulting from the differences in the charged amino acids flanking the active site

The two different subunits of LDH (the M subunit and H subunit of LDH) both maintain the same active site structure and amino acids that participate in the reaction. In the tertiary structure, the alanine of the M-chain is replaced with glutamine in the H-chain. Alanine is a nonpolar and small molecular weight amino acid, while glutamine is a positively charged amino acid. This chemistry provides different biochemical properties to the two subunits. Hence, the H subunit can bind faster but has fivefold reduced catalytic activity as compared to the M-subunit. LDHA subunit carries a net charge of -6 and exhibits a higher affinity towards pyruvate, thus converting pyruvate to lactate and  NADH to NAD+. On the other hand, LDHB has a net charge of +1 and demonstrates a higher affinity towards lactate, resulting in a preferential conversion of lactate to pyruvate and NAD+ to NADH.

LDH is inherent in maintaining homeostasis when there is a lack of oxygen. Oxygen levels in the muscle tissues drop quickly upon heavy exercise. Since oxygen is typically the final electron acceptor of the electron transport chain (ETC), the chain halts along with ATP synthase. Nonetheless, muscle cells continue to function by creating ATP through NAD+. LDH produces lactic acid as an end product through a fermentation reaction. In the process, LDH removes electrons from NADH and makes NAD+, which is channelized in the glycolysis pathway to create ATP.