Glucose first converts to glucose-6-phosphate by hexokinase or glucokinase, using ATP and a phosphate group. Glucokinase is a subtype of hexokinase found in humans. Glucokinase has a reduced affinity for glucose and is found only in the pancreas and liver, whereas hexokinase is present in all cells. Glucose 6-phosphate is then converted to fructose-6-phosphate, an isomer, by phosphoglucose isomerase. Phosphofructose-kinase then produces fructose-1,6-bisphosphate, using another ATP molecule. Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate are then created from fructose-1,6-bisphosphate by fructose bisphosphate aldolase. DHAP will be converted to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate by triosephosphate isomerase, where now the two glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate molecules will continue down the same pathway. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate will become oxidized in an exergonic reaction into 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate, reducing an NAD+ molecule to NADH and H+. 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate will then turn into 3-phosphoglycerate with the help of phosphoglycerate kinase, along with the production of the first ATP molecule from glycolysis. 3-phosphoglycerate will then convert, with the help of phosphoglycerate mutase, into 2-phosphoglycerate. With the release of one molecule of H2O, Enolase will make phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) from 2-phosphoglycerate. Due to the unstable state of PEP, pyruvate kinase will facilitate its loss of a phosphate group to create the second ATP in glycolysis. Thus, PEP will then undergo conversion to pyruvate.