**NSAIDs**

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are common over-the-counter medications used daily for pain and inflammation. The mechanism of NSAIDs has been traditionally described by their peripheral efficacy on decreasing the pro-inflammatory mediators, prostaglandins. More recently, NSAIDs have been attributed to having a central role that augments its known peripheral action, by which it promotes the production of endogenous opioid peptides.

Due to fracture healing and fusion concerns, there are conflicting arguments in the orthopedic literature on the use of NSAIDs for pain control. Basic science studies have shown increased time to fusion in animal models using NSAIDs, though fracture healing has demonstrated mixed results. Hsu et al. recommend using NSAIDs in the MMA model due to a lack of high-quality evidence supporting decreased fracture healing in the clinical setting.

NSAIDs are used to target the associated inflammation. Recent studies have looked at the efficacy of pre-operative administration of NSAIDs and its result on postoperative pain scores. Pre-operative loading of meloxicam has been shown to decrease VAS pain scores in patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty for primary arthritis as compared to post-operative administration alone.

**Acetaminophen/Paracetamol**

Acetaminophen is a commonly used over-the-counter analgesic, as well as antipyretic. It is the most common alternative for patients who cannot use NSAIDs due to contraindications stated previously. Its mechanism of action is complex as it acts on both the peripheral and central COX pathways, affecting the serotonergic, cannabinoid, and nitric oxide pathways

**Gabapentinoids**

Gabapentin, originally used as an anticonvulsant drug, is a commonly used modulator of neuropathic pain. It acts to inhibit the trafficking of protein subunits to decrease the amount of voltage-gated calcium channels on the plasma membrane of dorsal root ganglion neurons.

Gabapentin is a scheduled drug that has been misused in opioid-addicted patients. It can act to potentiate methadone high and negate symptoms of opioid withdrawal.

**Transcutaneous Electrical Stimulation (TENS)**

TENS is a method of pain control in which a small voltage electrical current is delivered to the skin over the desired site of analgesia. This is a modality that can be used in the post-operative period to stimulate large diameter peripheral nerves, which are believed to decrease pain by activating opioid receptors through an endogenous pathway.

**Cryotherapy**

Cryotherapy is a part of the traditional physical aspect of decreasing pain in an extremity, whether it is post-operative or treating a closed injury such as an ankle sprain. It is the use of an external cold source in an attempt to decrease the temperature of the tissue in that area. Ice packs, cold water therapy, gaseous cryotherapy, and continuous flow cryotherapy are all modalities used in cryotherapy. The effects on tissue include: decreased edema, decreased inflammatory mediators, and decreased blood flow via vasoconstriction or local vasculature.

Various studies have looked at the effect of cryotherapy after orthopedic surgeries. Studies show a decrease in pain score as compared to controls, as well as a decrease in opioid use postoperatively when cryotherapy is used in conjunction with traditional methods of pain control.

Complications with cryotherapy include nerve palsies, mostly involving superficial peripheral nerves. These injuries range from brief paresthesia to complete nerve injury without return of function. It is important to have appropriate insulation between the cold source and the targeted area. This is especially important in areas with less subcutaneous fat or patients with less fat content.

**Nerve Blocks**

Nerve blocks include local and regional anesthesia to the targeted area. Nerve blocks are commonly used methods of analgesia in elective orthopedic surgery cases, including arthroscopy and arthroplasty. These can be utilized preoperatively, intraoperatively, or post-operatively. Hsu et al. recommend using a continuous catheter over a single shot when administering a nerve block. They report better pain control with a decreased chance of rebound pain often associated with lower extremity blocks. There are various nerve block methods, and they may differ based on surgeon preference depending on the type of patient and surgical site. Problems include rebound pain and an increased risk of falls.

**Opioids**

As discussed previously, opioids are a common medication used for severe acute pain. They are commonly used by orthopedic surgeons in the post-operative period for pain control. There is significant risk associated with their use, including misuse, addiction, and overdose. Opioids act by binding the mu-opioid receptor and inhibiting neurotransmitter release in the central nervous system. In their clinical practice guidelines, Hsu et al. recommend that opioids be used in the smallest dose and for the shortest amount of time possible. Short-acting opioids are preferred and recommended, as compared to long-acting opioids, which provide less opioid absorption per unit time.

Multiple sources strongly recommend that opioids not be prescribed in conjunction with benzodiazepines due to the risk of increased sedation, overdose, and abuse. Park et al. noted a 3.9-time increase in overdose due to respiratory depression when using opioids in conjunction with benzodiazepines.

This leads to the notion that when utilizing opioids in the postoperative patient, orthopedic surgeons are writing prescriptions too high in quantity. This results in a medication surplus that is then available for misuse. This misuse may also involve diversion to use by persons not under the physician’s care. Adverse effects of opioids include nausea, vomiting, dizziness, constipation, somnolence, and headache.

**Cognitive Strategies**

Cognitive strategies are great tools to implement for all patients before and after surgery. Providing patients with an appropriate estimate or overestimate of the pain level to expect postoperatively is a good strategy to help prepare patients for their surgery. In patients with co-morbid psychological issues including anxiety, low appreciation of self-worth, and major depression have been noted to experience more pain per nociception.

There is significant variation in the pain perceived among patients due to varying psychosocial issues. Patients who suffer from comorbid anxiety, major depression, opioid tolerance, and low self-worth may benefit from psychiatry consultation while admitted to the hospital. Of utmost importance is the honest, direct dialogue between the surgeon and the patient regarding pain relief expectations. Enlisting the support of acute pain services and addiction medicine services is recommended in the clinical guidelines by Hsu et al.