Lower respiratory tract development begins on day 22 and divides into five stages: embryonic, pseudoglandular, canalicular, saccular, and alveolar. Although the development of the respiratory tract begins early in fetal development, complete maturation does not occur until approximately the eighth year of life.

Embryonic Stage – 3 to 6 Weeks

The embryonic stage begins at approximately day 22 when the respiratory diverticulum forms on the ventral wall of the foregut endoderm. After one week of caudal elongation, the trachea bifurcates and forms the right and left primary bronchial buds. The formation of the primary bronchial buds marks the beginning of branching morphogenesis. After the fifth week of development, the right primary bronchial bud divides into three secondary bronchial buds, and the left primary bronchial bud divides into two secondary bronchial buds. The secondary bronchial buds will eventually give rise to the lobes of each lung. At the end of the sixth week of development, the secondary bronchial buds further divide to form the tertiary bronchial buds, which will become the bronchopulmonary segments in the fully developed lung. The formation of the tertiary bronchial buds is the last round of branching that occurs during the embryonic stage of development.

Pseudoglandular Stage – 5 to 17 Weeks

The pseudoglandular stage begins at approximately the fifth week and results in the formation of the bronchial tree. The tertiary bronchial buds continue to undergo branching morphogenesis until the end of week 16. Respiratory epithelium differentiation begins during this stage when cilia form on the surface of columnar epithelial cells in the proximal airway. Differentiation then progresses in a proximal-to-distal pattern for the duration of this phase of rapid branching. At the end of this stage, the respiratory tree has developed until the terminal bronchioles with the associated arterial system, cartilage, and smooth muscle.

Canalicular Stage – 16 to 25 Weeks

The canalicular stage begins at approximately 16 weeks as the terminal bronchioles continue to elongate, forming an acinus composed of respiratory bronchioles. Splanchnic mesenchyme angiogenesis surrounding the newly formed acinus gives rise to a capillary network that will function as part of the blood-air barrier. During this stage, Type II pneumocytes begin producing surfactant and storing it in intracellular lamellar bodies. The presence of lamellar bodies can help to distinguish Type II pneumocytes from other cell types. Once secreted, surfactant is crucial in reducing alveolar surface tension and preventing atelectasis.

Saccular Stage – 24 Weeks to Birth

The saccular stage begins at approximately 24 weeks and demonstrates a significant expansion in the gas-exchange surface area and termination of branching morphogenesis. During this stage, the terminal (acinar) portions of the airways expand, forming large airspaces lined with primarily Type I pneumocytes known as saccules. Saccules are separated by primary septa composed of a double-layered capillary network and a central layer of condensed mesenchyme. By the end of this stage, the capillaries contained in the primary septa invade the walls of individual saccules, creating the blood-air barrier.

Alveolar Stage – 36 Weeks to 8 Years

The alveolar stage begins at approximately 36 weeks with the appearance of alveolar protrusions in the primary septa of individual saccules. The new septations formed are referred to as secondary septa to distinguish them from the primary septa formed during branching morphogenesis. These secondary septa will eventually be responsible for the division of saccules into alveoli. The process of alveolar division begins as a burst and gradually slows during the first three years of life. During this time of rapid alveolar expansion, the double-layered capillary network present in immature primary and secondary septa fuses to create a single-layered capillary network. This microvascular maturation allows for more efficient gas exchange.

Until age three, the driver behind lung growth is primarily increased numbers of alveoli. After primary alveolarization is complete, lung growth is a product of both secondary alveolarization and enlargement of preexisting alveoli. Lung maturation is generally complete by the eighth year of life.