After a detailed history is obtained and thorough physical examination is performed, baseline investigative workup should be done, including serum creatinine, urea, serum electrolytes, and blood urea nitrogen. In addition to these, urine analysis should be done along with a renal tract/abdominal ultrasound. Urine collection should be done before fluid replacement and drug administration.

Urinalysis can aid in distinguishing the causes of oliguria as well. The specific gravity of the urine is >1.02 in prerenal and <1.01 in renal causes. Urinary sodium concentration (mmol/liter) value is <20 in prerenal causes whereas it is >40 in renal etiologies. Similarly, fractional excretion of sodium (%) is <1% in prerenal and >1% in renal causes. The ratio of urinary to plasma creatinine is >40 in prerenal causes, whereas <20 in renal causes. Urine osmolality is >500 in prerenal and <350 in renal etiologies, and the ratio of urine to plasma osmolarity is >1.5 in prerenal and <1.1 in renal etiologies.

It is due to the fact that the resorptive abilities of the kidney remain normal in prerenal causes. Urinary sediments can also aid in differentiating the prerenal and renal causes of oliguria. Urine samples from patients with prerenal failure often have hyaline and fine-granular casts, whereas brown granular casts with tubular epithelial cells are seen in patients with renal causes.

Renal ultrasound with doppler of renal vasculature can help in the assessment of renal perfusion through the Doppler-based renal resistive index (RI). Imaging, including renal tract ultrasound and CT scan of the abdomen, can help in the identification of the post-renal causes of oliguria. In cases of obstructive uropathy, dilatation of the urinary tract may or may not be present. The dilatation is specifically absent in cases with malignancy, severe dehydration, and the patients who present early for medical attention.