The primary evaluation tool for dyslipidemia is a fasting lipid panel which consists of total cholesterol, LDL, HDL, and triglycerides. There is some debate on at what age dyslipidemia screening should start. The United States Preventative Services Task Force recommends screening all males 35 and older as well as high-risk males age 20 to 35. Also, all-woman 45 years and older as well as high-risk individuals 20 to 45 years of age. Other recommendations suggest getting fasting lipid panels for all individuals age 20 to 78 years at least every five years if no atherosclerotic disease is present.

Classification of dyslipidemia subdivides into five different categories, according to Frederickson phenotype. Phenotype I is an abnormality of chylomicrons and will result in triglycerides greater than 99 percentiles. Phenotype IIa consists mainly of LDL cholesterol abnormality and will have total cholesterol concentration greater than 90 percentile and possible apolipoprotein B greater than 90 percentile. Phenotype IIb consists of abnormality in LDL and very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) cholesterol. This type will result in total cholesterol and/or triglycerides greater than 90 percentile and apolipoprotein greater than 90 percentile. Phenotype III is an abnormality in VLDL remnants and chylomicrons, which results in elevated total cholesterol and triglycerides greater than 90 percentile. Phenotype IV is mainly when VLDL is abnormal and will result in total cholesterol greater than 90 percentile. This type can also present with triglycerides greater than 90 percentile and low HDL. Phenotype V is when chylomicrons and VLDL are abnormal, and triglycerides are greater than 99 percentiles.