Aducanumab was fast-track FDA-approved in 2021 and is indicated for its use in Alzheimer disease (AD) patients with mild cognitive impairment or mild dementia stage of the disease. The care of patients with AD requires management and supervision from an interprofessional healthcare team. This healthcare team should include a primary care physician (PCP) and mid-level practitioner, a neurologist, nursing staff, and a pharmacist. Routine care and follow-up for patients with AD by the interprofessional healthcare team can lead to efficient clinical evaluations, leading to precise management plans, and more reliable patient outcomes.

Before initiating aducanumab, the prescribing clinician should obtain brain imaging by MRI within a 12-months period. The healthcare professional administering aducanumab should carefully follow the titration schedule during the first seven infusions. During infusion administration of aducanumab, the provider should be prepared and equipped in a setting with appropriate management in the event of hypersensitivity-like reactions. Another MRI should be obtained during the seventh infusion (first 10 mg/kg dosage) and the twelfth infusion (sixth 10 mg/kg dosage). Patients should be fully advised about the adverse effects of therapy.

The neurologist should fully advise patients of the potential adverse effects of ARIA and its asymptomatic or clinical manifestations. The interprofessional healthcare team should routinely follow up with patients receiving aducanumab and thoroughly inquire about any new-onset symptoms indicative of ARIA. Symptoms include headache, confusion, delirium, altered mental status, disorientation, dizziness, vision abnormality, and nausea. A follow-up MRI may be necessary to determine the severity of ARIA and the determination to continue or halt therapy.

Pregnant patients considering aducanumab should be advised that there are no data from reproductive studies in humans. Adacunumab in animal reproductive studies demonstrated no adverse effects, but the findings may have no relevance in humans. The interprofessional healthcare team should thoroughly educate and discuss aducanumab, its adverse effects, and therapy aims with patients and their caretakers. Perpetual intercommunication within the healthcare team in managing AD patients receiving aducanumab can potentially improve patient outcomes.