**Surgical Approaches**

De Wecker was the first to describe optic nerve sheath fenestration in 1872. There are several surgical approaches for accessing the orbit for fenestration of the optic nerves; however, the final goal is to create a window or a series of slits in the optic nerve sheath just behind the globe to release CSF under pressure causing compression of the nerve.

Ophthalmologists typically perform the surgery after training in orbital surgery and/or neuro-ophthalmology. Based on a 2015 survey of ophthalmologists who perform ONSF, the three most commonly utilized surgical approaches are the medial transconjunctival approach (59%), the superomedial lid crease incision (31%), and lateral orbitotomy (10%).

All procedures are performed under general anesthesia and magnification either with loupes or a surgical microscope. Surgical preparation and draping should take place in the usual fashion for ophthalmic plastic surgery. Avoidance of injury to the posterior ciliary arteries that course along the surface of the optic nerve sheath and supply the optic nerve and choroid is critical to prevent ischemic optic neuropathy or choroidal infarction.

**Medial Transconjunctival Approach**

The medial transconjunctival approach is the most widely used approach for exposure and fenestration of the optic nerve. It was first described in 1973 by Galbraith and Sullivan.

**Technique**

After the establishment of general anesthesia and patient preparation, a lid speculum is placed. A limbal peritomy is made nasally, and dissection is performed down to bare sclera, where the medial rectus muscle is identified. The medial rectus muscle is isolated with muscle hooks and secured with a 6-0 double-armed polyglactin at the insertion. The muscle is transected from the globe anterior to the suture. A traction suture may be passed through the muscle stump at the insertion so that the globe may be abducted for enhanced exposure. Continuous attention to pupil size and reaction to light is critical in the monitoring of optic nerve integrity throughout the rest of the procedure. Gentle blunt dissection is carried down along the medial aspect of the globe and into the intraconal space using the surgeon’s orbital retractor of choice. Once the optic nerve is visualized, the operating microscope is brought over the field. A fine, long forceps, such as a myringotomy or bayonet, is used to grasp the optic nerve sheath. Sharp scissors are used to incise the optic nerve sheath at least 1 mm away from the insertion of the nerve. Alternatively, a long fine-cutting instrument, such as a super sharp paracentesis knife, may be used to make the first cut. A gush of CSF indicates successful full-thickness penetration of the sheath. Additional cuts with the scissors are made until a window of tissue is excised and removed. All orbital instruments are removed, and the medial rectus muscle is reattached at its insertion. Hemostasis is confirmed, and the conjunctiva is closed with the surgeon’s suture of preference.

Farris and Lai described an alternative to this procedure in 2014. Their approach entails a transconjunctival approach to the medial intraconal space; however, instead of detaching the medial rectus muscle, this muscle and the superior rectus are engaged on bridle sutures used to rotate the globe inferiorly and temporally. The orbit is then entered with an orbital retractor in the space between these muscles to access and fenestrate the optic nerve as described above.

**Superomedial Lid Crease Incision**

Pelton and Patel described this surgical approach in 2001.

**Technique**

The lid crease is marked, and a local anesthetic with epinephrine is injected subcutaneously. After the establishment of general anesthesia and patient preparation, an incision is made through the medial one-half to two-thirds of the crease over the previously made marking. Sharp dissection is carried through the orbicularis and the septum either with cutting cautery or Wescott scissors. The nasal and central (preaponeurotic) fat pads are identified, and careful blunt dissection is performed between them into the orbit between the levator aponeurosis and superior oblique muscle. Dissection is carried out inferiorly and posteriorly toward the back of the globe in the loose areolar orbital fat until the optic nerve is strummed and then visualized. Continuous attention to pupil size and reaction to light is critical for the monitoring of optic nerve integrity throughout the rest of the procedure. Neurosurgical cottonoids may then be used to pack around the nerve. An operating microscope may be brought over the field at this point per surgeon preference, or loupes may be utilized for magnification. A fine long forceps, such as a myringotomy or bayonet, is used to grasp the optic nerve sheath. An incision is then made in the optic nerve sheath at least 1 mm away from the insertion of the nerve using the surgeon’s instrument of choice, taking care to avoid contact with the nerve itself. A gush of CSF indicates successful full-thickness penetration of the sheath. Additional cuts with the scissors are made until a window of tissue is excised and removed. Hemostasis is confirmed, and all instruments are removed from the orbit. The skin is closed with 6-0 plain gut sutures.

**Lateral Orbitotomy Approach**

This approach was first described for use in ONSF in 1872 by De Wecker and then subsequently in 1988 by Tse et al. and Patel and Anderson, who performed the lateral approach without removal of the lateral orbital wall.

**Technique**

After the establishment of general anesthesia and patient preparation, a lateral canthotomy with cantholysis is performed. A traction suture is placed through the cut edge of the upper eyelid and the lid margin. This process is repeated for the lower eyelid. Finally, a third traction suture can be placed at the insertion of the lateral rectus muscle. The globe is adducted using the traction suture. The conjunctiva is incised with Wescott scissors as far laterally as possible, taking care not to injure the lacrimal gland or lateral rectus muscle belly. Blunt dissection with small malleables is carried out between the lacrimal gland and the lateral rectus muscle, directed posterior to the globe. It is often necessary to cut through any intermuscular septa that may be present before the intraconal compartment becomes accessible. Blunt dissection is continued through the intraconal fat until the optic nerve is identified. Neurosurgical cottonoids may then be used to pack around the nerve. As focus shifts to the optic nerve, an operating microscope may be brought over the field at this point per surgeon preference, or loupes may be utilized for magnification. A fine, long forceps, such as a myringotomy or bayonet, is used to grasp the optic nerve sheath. An incision is then made in the optic nerve sheath at least 1 mm away from the insertion of the nerve using the surgeon’s instrument of choice, taking care to avoid contact with the nerve itself. A gush of CSF indicates successful full-thickness penetration of the sheath. Additional cuts with the scissors are made until a window of tissue is excised and removed. Hemostasis is confirmed, and the canthotomy and skin are closed using the surgeon’s preferred technique.

A revised lateral approach is another technique that obviates the need to traverse the intraconal fat by following the curve of the globe with the posterior dissection. In this way, it is similar to the medial transconjunctival approach but takes advantage of the additional space afforded by the anatomy.