Once the wound has been evaluated, anesthesia can decrease discomfort during wound preparation for repair by promoting better tolerance of wound manipulation and allowing the healthcare provider to be thorough with irrigation and debridement. There are various anesthetic options available. Topical 4% lidocaine, 0.1% epinephrine, 0.5% tetracaine (LET mixture), and tetracaine, adrenaline, and cocaine (TAC mixture) are aqueous or gel-based solutions that can be applied to the area before local anesthetic injection.

Regional anesthesia or single-nerve blockade is a useful alternative to local infiltration because it can provide anesthesia to entire facial areas without distortion of wound edges, particularly when there is already posttraumatic edema. This is especially helpful in areas where approximating the wound edges based on anatomical landmarks is necessary, such as the border of the lip. The following list of nerve blocks will permit nearly complete anesthesia of the face.

- Supraorbital and supratrochlear nerves: forehead and anterior scalp

- Infraorbital nerve: upper lip, lateral nose, lower eyelid

- Dorsal nasal nerve: nasal dorsum and tip

- Zygomaticofacial nerve: cheek

- Zygomaticotemporal nerve: temple

- Inferior alveolar nerve: lower lip, chin, teeth

- Mental nerve: lower lip and chin

- Auricular block: ear

When nerve blocks fail or are unnecessary, local infiltration through the wound edges should provide adequate anesthesia. Local infiltration with a mixture including epinephrine improves hemostasis, an advantage not conferred by regional anesthesia.

Local or regional application of anesthetic solutions may impact motor function; evaluating motor and sensory function before injection is critical. If a motor deficit requiring nerve repair is identified, laceration repair should be performed under general anesthesia. Any injection of local anesthetic or long-term paralytic medications will prohibit using a nerve stimulator to locate the distal nerve stump. However, plain 1:100,000 epinephrine may be injected to improve hemostasis, even without a local anesthetic agent.

After obtaining adequate anesthesia and before any suturing, the wound must be thoroughly irrigated to remove debris and blood. Cleaning the wound decreases the risk of infection and improves visualization of tissue layers and surface landmarks. Warm sterile saline irrigation alone is adequate to cleanse facial lacerations. Antiseptic solutions such as dilute povidone-iodine and sodium hypochlorite have bactericidal properties but can inhibit fibroblast cell growth and delay overall wound healing.

After irrigation and debris removal, the wound bed must be inspected for hemostasis. Active bleeding may require direct pressure or vessel ligation.

Next, the wound should be examined to determine if a tension-free closure will be possible. Surrounding hair can be shaved to improve visualization; care must be taken with eyebrow hair, which can take six months to regrow.

Below are technical considerations specific to different aesthetic and functional subunits.

**Scalp**

Evaluation of intracranial injuries must occur before scalp laceration repair. Significant tissue loss requiring complex reconstruction necessitates plastic surgery or otolaryngology consultation. Violation of the cranial vault warrants neurosurgical consultation. The scalp often bleeds profusely; transfusion may be necessary. After hemostasis is achieved, superficial scalp lacerations can be closed with staples or sutures, with outpatient removal scheduled in 7-10 days. Absorbable sutures such as 5-0 plain gut may be used if follow-up may be difficult.

**Forehead**

Like scalp wounds, forehead lacerations require layered closure if multiple tissue layers are violated. A 6-0 non-dissolvable or dissolvable suture may be used for the skin, with a 5-0 dissolvable suture in the subdermis and, if necessary, a 4-0 in the frontalis muscle. If possible, orienting repair within the RSTL will help camouflage the scar. Wounds that cannot be closed without tension due to substantial tissue loss should be repaired in a delayed fashion with grafts or flaps as necessary. If the supraorbital or supratrochlear nerves are transected, repair should be attempted; most patients will recover at least some sensation even without neurorrhaphy. Transection of the frontal branch of the facial nerve should also be repaired, if possible; good functional outcomes, even after neurorrhaphy, are far from guaranteed. Neurorrhaphies are best performed under an operating microscope with 10-0 interrupted sutures placed into the epineurium.

**Cheek**

Cheek lacerations require evaluation of the parotid gland, duct, and extratemporal facial nerve before repair can begin. The parotid gland may be milked while observing the Stensen ductal papilla to verify that saliva is expressed. If milking produces blood, a gland or a duct injury should be assumed. A lacrimal probe or small angiocatheter may be used to cannulate the parotid duct intraorally, taking care not to injure the duct itself. A ductal or parotid gland injury requires further evaluation and repair before repair of the cutaneous laceration. Saliva may collect subcutaneously and cause a sialocele or cutaneous salivary fistula if a skin laceration is repaired without addressing a ductal injury.

The extratemporal branches of the facial nerve should be evaluated before the injection of a local anesthetic to determine baseline facial nerve function. If there is a transection of the facial nerve or a branch thereof, the nerve stumps should be coapted under an operating microscope using 10-0 interrupted epineural sutures, provided the nerve stumps can be located. For injuries to major branches, a formal facial nerve exploration may be required. If there is significant tissue loss and the nerve ends cannot be coapted in a tension-free fashion, using a collagen nerve sheath for gaps less than 6 mm or an interposition cable graft for gaps greater than 6 mm of the greater auricular or sural nerve should be considered. Immediate repair is preferable to delayed repair; the ability to locate the distal nerve stump by electrical stimulation will be lost after roughly 72 hours due to Wallerian degeneration.

The skin of the cheek may be sutured with a 6-0 running or interrupted, non-dissolvable or dissolvable suture, taking care to produce adequate wound edge eversion; adequate eversion may require a vertical or horizontal mattress suture technique. Buried 5-0 dissolvable sutures should be placed in the subdermis, and a 4-0 dissolvable suture should be used in the SMAS, if necessary.

**Periorbital Region**

Periorbital trauma requires an ocular exam to evaluate visual acuity and rule out globe injury. Visual deficits or gross injury to the globe warrant emergent ophthalmology consultation. Next, the canthal ligaments and the nasolacrimal duct should be evaluated. Any deformity of the medial canthus or lateralization, bleeding from, or direct involvement of the punctum or the medial canthus in the laceration warrants emergent ophthalmology consultation to evaluate the lacrimal drainage system. An oculoplastic surgery consultation is warranted if there is canthal ligament disruption, orbital fat herniation, or involvement of the eyelid margin. Orbital fat herniation signifies postseptal injury and potential damage to deeper orbital structures that must be evaluated and addressed, and eyelid margin injuries require careful closure to prevent notching.

The goal for eyelid repair is a tension-free closure that prevents lagophthalmos and exposure keratitis. Careful eversion and approximation of wound edges are especially important for the eyelid because scar contraction close to the margin can cause cicatricial ectropion, particularly in full-thickness lacerations. When suturing eyelid lacerations, suture placement approximately 1 mm from the skin edge with 6-0 or 7-0 suture; deeper layers can be repaired with 5-0 or 6-0 absorbable sutures, avoiding excess tension on the thin eyelid skin. Passing suture through the full thickness of the eyelid incorporating the conjunctivae should be avoided; exposed conjunctival suture can cause corneal abrasions. Minor, superficial wounds that comprise less than 25% of the lid surface area may heal by secondary intention in 2 to 6 weeks. The oculoplastic surgery team may employ complex grafts or flaps for larger tissue defects.

**Nose**

Control of epistaxis, ruling out cerebral spinal fluid leaks, and identifying nasal septal hematomas are of the utmost importance with nasal trauma. If no other injuries are apparent, nasal lacerations must be repaired in layers, especially if the cartilaginous framework is violated. First, the nasal mucosa should be reapproximated with 5-0 dissolvable sutures, followed by the cartilage with a long-lasting 5-0 dissolvable suture, then the muscle and subcutaneous tissue with a 5-0 dissolvable suture, and finally, the skin with a 6-0 suture. If the laceration comes within 5 mm of the alar or columellar margin, a cartilage graft from the septum or auricle may be required to provide additional support and prevent alar notching or columellar retraction.

**Ear**

Complex ear lacerations also require layered closure. If the underlying cartilage is violated, it should be repaired with a 5-0 dissolvable suture. Auricular cartilage is fragile, and care must be taken not to tear or avulse the cartilage and overlying perichondrium during reapproximation. Next, the skin must be aligned and repaired with 5-0 or 6-0 sutures. Lacerations along the helical rim or lobule should be closed with significant eversion, as with vertical mattress sutures, to avoid notching. Exposed cartilage without sufficient soft tissue for coverage may be left in continuity with the auricle and buried via an incision in the scalp; this may improve the chance that the cartilage survives and permit reconstruction in a delayed, staged manner with skin grafting or local flap transfer. In the event of complete avulsion of all or part of the auricle, the chance that reimplanting the avulsed segment will lead to its survival is meager; however, if the avulsed segment remains attached by even a small skin bridge, reimplantation may be successful. If the laceration extends into the external auditory canal, an ear wick or Ambrose pack should be placed to prevent postrepair stenosis of the canal.

A quilting suture with or without a bolster may be placed to prevent auricular hematoma and can be removed roughly 1 week later. Although there is no consensus on antibiotic coverage for ear lacerations, antibiotic prophylaxis may be considered, particularly when the cartilage has been exposed; fluoroquinolones are effective against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a common pathogen in cartilage infections.

**Lip**

Lip injuries require an examination of the oral cavity to evaluate for intraoral lacerations and broken teeth. Sensorimotor deficits should be assessed and noted before injection of local anesthetic. These nerves should be repaired as described above, as scar contracture from perioral lacerations can exacerbate oral incompetence and smile asymmetry. Minor lacerations of the lip may be left to heal by secondary intention, but deep lip lacerations require reapproximation of the muscle underneath. Undermining subcutaneous tissue allows for the development of muscle flaps to facilitate repair. If there is a significant amount of tissue loss, as in partial avulsion, and the edges of the lip cannot come together without tension, delayed closure should be considered. Forcing the edges of the lip together for closure can cause unnecessary scarring and subsequent microstomia, limiting the functionality of the mouth.

Lip lacerations that cross the vermillion border should be approximated with care and ideally less than 1 mm of error; this prevents noticeable step-offs or peaking of this obvious aesthetic subunit boundary. Aligning the vermillion border with an interrupted suture should be the first step in laceration repair and facilitates the appropriate placement of the remaining soft tissues; this suture may even be placed before reapproximating the deeper tissues. When injecting a local anesthetic, it is best to avoid infiltration near the vermillion border; any epinephrine will blanch the vermillion and make distinguishing it from the cutaneous lip difficult. Additionally, the volume of local anesthetic injected may distort the lip, making precise suturing unnecessarily challenging.

The wet lip and dry lip require different suture materials. The wet lip should be closed with a 4-0 or 5-0 chromic gut or polyglactin suture; a non-dissolvable 5-0 or 6-0 polypropylene suture is appropriate for the dry lip. If the patient cannot return for suture removal, a dissolvable suture can be used on the dry lip.

**Chin**

Chin lacerations can be closed similarly to cheek lacerations, with 6-0 dissolvable or non-dissolvable sutures in the skin, 5-0 deep dermal sutures, and 4-0 sutures in the mentalis muscle. If the mentalis muscle is involved, repairing it is very important because failure to do so may result in chin ptosis.

**Special Considerations for Suture Choice**

The choice of suture material depends on the patient's ability to return for outpatient suture removal. If the patient cannot return for suture removal, an absorbable suture is a good alternative to polypropylene and nylon. Dissolvable sutures remain intact for varying lengths of time, depending upon composition and whether they are braided or monofilamentous.

- Nonabsorbable, non-braided suture includes polypropylene, hexafluoropropylene, and nylon. Non-braided sutures have lower tissue reactivity than braided sutures, theoretically decreasing the risk of scarring. Non-braided sutures are typically removed from the face six days after placement. Adhesive strip tapes or antibiotic ointment are typically placed on top of these sutures. Braided nonabsorbable sutures include silk, polyester, and braided nylon, but these are not typically used for skin closure, except for silk, which is often used on eyelids.

- Absorbable sutures persist for different lengths of time and require living mammalian tissue and a functioning immune system to produce the inflammatory reaction necessary to dissolve the suture material. Braided synthetic sutures typically dissolve faster than monofilaments, but gut sutures dissolve faster than braided synthetic sutures. Polydioxanone monofilament suture dissolves over 6 to 7 months, poliglecaprone monofilament suture over about 3 months, and polyglactin braided suture over about 2 months. Chromic gut dissolves in 2-3 weeks, plain gut in 10-14 days, and fast gut in about 7 days.

Other non-suture closure methods, such as skin staples and glue, may be considered. Staples are frequently employed on the scalp and occasionally on the neck and should be removed roughly one week after placement to avoid characteristic "train track" punctate marks along the incision. Cyanoacrylate is a glue commonly used instead of skin sutures; it tends to fall off after roughly 7-10 days but provides a water-tight seal and tensile strength to the wound for its duration of action. Both staples and cyanoacrylate are easier and faster to use than suture, but they are far less precise for wound edge approximation; staples work well for wound edge eversion. However, skin staples and glue are only useful for superficial lacerations. A layered suture closure is necessary for deeper lacerations, although staples or skin glue may be used for the most superficial tissue layer. Cyanoacrylate may be placed after removing nonabsorbable sutures to provide prolonged wound support and prevent dehiscence or scar widening.

The goals of laceration repair are adequate wound cleansing, hemostasis, gentle tissue handling, tension-free, everted approximation, and, ultimately, an aesthetically aligned scar. To optimize the final appearance of the scar, the technical considerations and suture material selection decisions are critical, but attentive postrepair care is nearly as crucial.

Scars will continue to mature for approximately 12 months; avoiding sunlight for that period will help prevent hyperpigmentation. If scars appear excessively erythematous in the initial 2 to 3 weeks postrepair, treatment with a pulsed-dye laser will help to decrease the redness. Raised or widened scars may be treated with steroid injections or potentially with ablative lasers like carbon dioxide or erbium: YAG lasers. Some patients, particularly those predisposed to keloid development, may also benefit from silicone sheeting or topical gel, which should be used consistently for the first year after injury.