Management of osteoporosis in women could be approached with two aspects, namely lifestyle modifications, and pharmacological therapy. The recommended guidelines are based on fracture risk assessment,co-morbidities, and any history of fragility fractures.

**Non-Pharmacological Therapy**

- **Smoking cessation**is strongly recommended, as smoking has been strongly associated with bone loss.

- Routine exercise of about 30 minutes per day three to four times a week is recommended and shown to improve Bone Mineral density (BMD).

- One of the mainstays of treatment of osteoporosis is an adequate dietary intake of calcium and vitamin D. If a woman is not getting about 1200 mg of calcium per day in regular diet intake, she should be supplemented with daily calcium or encouraged to eat calcium-rich foods. Calcium is available mainly dairy products, including milk, cheese yogurt, etc. Calcium supplementation dose is usually 500 mg to 1000 mg per day in single or divided doses. Along with calcium, Vitamin D supplements are also very essential typically given in the form of Vitamin D3 ranging from 400 IU to 800 IU per day, but various dosing regimens are available based on the patient vitamin D levels and other risk factors. Another important aspect of the management of osteoporosis is fall prevention. All patients at risk should be educated and provided adequate help to prevent falls and subsequent fractures.

**Pharmacological Therapy:**After replacing and supplementing adequate calcium and vitamin D, specific medications for osteoporosis could be initiated based on fracture risk assessment using FRAX as suggested by WHO.

As per the National Osteoporosis Foundation (NOF) guidelines, pharmacological therapy is initiated in any of the three scenarios:

1. Patient with a history of hip or a vertebral fracture

2. T-score less than or equal to -2.5 at femoral neck or spine

3. T-score between -1 and -2.5 with a 10-year probability of more than 3 percent hip fracture or more than 20 percent probability of osteoporosis-related major fracture.

**First-line Therapy**

Bisphosphonates are still considered to be the first-line treatment of osteoporosis, which ranges from oral to intravenous use, the commonest ones include Alendronic acid, risedronate, etidronate, ibandronate, pamidronate, and zoledronate.

Although a precise mechanism of action is unsure, the evidence so far with their use is based on two facts. One, its affinity for hydroxyapatite (an essential constituent of the bone mineral matrix) and second, targeting FPP inhibition (farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase), an important enzyme which eventually prevents the formation of essential signaling proteins for osteoclastic activity reducing bone resorption and overall turnover.

Dosing and route of administration of bisphosphonates depend on the specific medication and the formulation, whether it is an immediate release or delayed-release.

- The most commonly used oral bisphosphonates, alendronate, is typically dosed 70 mg once weekly and Risedronate 35 mg weekly.

- Multiple regimens ranging from daily to monthly dosing are available, but most patients prefer to take oral bisphosphonates once-weekly dosing.

- Oral bisphosphonates should be taken on an empty stomach at least half-hour before the first meal of the day with at least 8 oz of water to prevent the pills from getting stuck in the esophagus.

- Zoledronic acid is given intravenous route 5 mg either once yearly or once in two years. Duration of treatment is usually a minimum of three to five years and, after which patients should be closely evaluated for further need and should be considered for a drug-free interval, called “bisphosphonate holiday.”

- For women who remain at high risk of fractures should continue therapy for a maximum of ten years.

Patients with esophageal motility disorders, including severe hiatal hernia and patients with a history of certain Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery, oral bisphosphonates are contraindicated, but intravenous zoledronic acid could be considered.

As the drug has a half-life of over ten years, it can remain for a few years in the body tissues even after stopping. Side effects of bisphosphonate therapy include transient hypocalcemia, bone pain, rare ocular, and renal effects, but few critical side effects of note are osteonecrosis of the jaw and atypical femur fractures after prolonged use.

**Other Pharmacological Therapies**

- Patients intolerant or contraindicated to bisphosphonates can be offered denosumab, which is preferred in patients with poor renal function.

- Anabolic agents like teriparatide, abaloparatide, (parathyroid hormone or parathyroid hormone-related protein analog) and romosozumab (monoclonal anti-sclerostin antibody) are considered for postmenopausal women who are at very high risk of fracture with a T-score of less than -3.5 or T-score of less than -2.5 plus history of multiple osteoporotic fractures. Teriparatide and abaloparatide must be injected subcutaneously daily, whereas romosozumab is injected once monthly. Also, given in patients who failed other treatment options or hormonal disturbances, especially parathyroid oversecretion. This treatment is given from eighteen months to two years only.

- **Raloxifene**(selective estrogen receptor modulators -SERMs) is less effective than bisphosphonates, usually considered in less severe osteoporotic postmenopausal women who cannot tolerate bisphosphonates or denosumab and have an increased risk of invasive breast cancer.

- **Hormone replacement therapy with estrogen**may be advised to****postmenopausal women less than ten years from menopause, at low risk of deep vein thrombosis, especially in those who can not take or are intolerant to bisphosphonates or denosumab.

- **Intranasal calcitonin**is another option in patients who are not candidates for all the above-mentioned therapies. Calcitonin has shown to significantly reduce vertebral fractures, but long term safety is a concern.

**Surgical Treatment**

Few numbers of patients where the pharmacological treatment has not been helpful, especially in at-risk vertebral fractures, well-known procedures from orthopedics can be helpful for stabilization of fractures and pain relief as well. The two commonest one used is

- **Kyphoplasty**: Baloon is inflated and introduced surgically, and then after the approximation of fractured bone pieces, a material to harden and stabilize the bone is introduced.

- **Vertebroplasty:**This involves inserting low viscosity cement material directly into the collapsed vertebral body for unstable fractures, to prevent further deformities and loss of height. It is different from kyphoplasty as it does not involve any manipulation of fractured bone pieces before injecting.

As with all surgical procedures, they are not risk-free and can lead to bone cement leak, the persistence of pain, allergic reaction to bone cement, infection, paralysis, or rarely pulmonary embolism.