Anterior pituitary consists of cells that can be classified based on their specific secretory products as somatotrophs (growth hormone [GH]-secreting cells), lactotrophs (prolactin [PRL]-secreting cells), thyrotrophs (cells secreting thyroid-stimulating hormone [thyrotropin; TSH]), corticotrophs (cells-secreting ACTH [corticotropin] and related peptides), and gonadotrophs (luteinizing hormone [LH]– and follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH]–secreting cells). During pregnancy, these hypothalamic-pituitary axes present the following physiological adaptations.

**Hypothalamic–Pituitary–Adrenal Axis**

Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) gets released from the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus in response to stress. It stimulates the release of adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary gland. Following that, ACTH stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete cortisol into the bloodstream. During pregnancy, the maternal hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis (HPA) activity increases, although the corticotroph number in the anterior pituitary remains stable. This activity leads to an increase in plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), cortisol (both free and protein-bound), free urinary cortisol, and corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG). The majority of ACTH in plasma comes from the pituitary, although the placenta produces ACTH as well.

**GH – Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 Axis**

GH mediates multiple anabolic effects on the body, particularly somatotrophic, lactogenic, and lipolytic, by interacting with a specific GH receptor (GHR). In pregnancy somatotroph, cells become reduced. However, maternal levels of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) are slightly elevated. There are two origins of GH: placental and maternal. The syncytiotrophoblast produces placental GH. The pituitary somatotroph cells produce GH as well, and this is the main form in the maternal circulation from conception to 15 weeks of gestation. Between 15 and 17 weeks of gestation, the placental form almost entirely replaces it; this happens because placental GH binds to hepatic GH receptors and stimulates IGF-1 production, causing negative feedback to the pituitary GH production. Research suggests that placental GH induces maternal insulin resistance to ensure the adequacy of nutrients supply to the growing fetus. Moreover, there is blockage of the production of IGF-1 by maternal GH due to high levels of estrogen.

**Prolactin Axis**

The increase in PRL secretion is important for the development of breast tissue for lactation. Prolactin is the only anterior pituitary hormone that does not have an endocrine target tissue, so it is not under the regulation of classical hormonal feedback. Instead, there is short loop feedback, where prolactin stimulates the secretion of its own inhibitor, dopamine. The dopamine neurons are present in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus. In pregnancy, the lactotroph cells' hyperplasia leads to the enlargement of the pituitary gland. Estrogen and progesterone both stimulate maternal PRL production. The majority of PRL derives from the maternal pituitary gland, while a contribution of the decidua and the fetal pituitary gland is small. Other factors which stimulate maternal pituitary PRL secretion, is thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), arginine, meals, and sleep similar to what we expect in nonpregnant women.

**TRH–TSH Axis**

Thyroid hormones are indispensable for the differentiation of most tissues during ontogenesis. They have a direct effect on brain development, somatic growth, bone maturation, and metabolic regulation. There are two sources of thyroid hormones: the developing fetal and maternal thyroid gland. Both of them require a sufficient amount of iodine intake.

**Gonadotropin Axis**

During pregnancy, gonadotrophs decline in number, leading to a decline in maternal serum gonadotropins by 6 to 7 weeks of pregnancy.

**Posterior Pituitary**

Vasopressinergic and oxytocic neurosecretory neurons are present in the supra-optic (SON) and paraventricular (PVN) nuclei of the hypothalamus. These neurons synthesize vasopressin (AVP) and oxytocin, which get stored in the posterior pituitary. AVP secretion maintains serum osmolarity within a tight range (284 to 295 mOsmol/kgH2O). The mean osmotic threshold of thirst is 281 mOsmol/kgH2O, whereas the threshold for of AVP release is 284 mOsmol/kgH2O. When plasma osmolality rises beyond these thresholds, it stimulates thirst, and AVP is released. The peripheral actions of vasopressin are the stimulation of renal water reabsorption (via V2 receptors) and vasoconstriction (via V1a receptors).

Oxytocin, like vasopressin, is secreted in conditions of hyperosmolarity of the extracellular fluid and has peripheral natriuretic actions. These actions consist of direct effects in the kidney, as well as effects in the right atrium, aiming to stimulate atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) secretion. During pregnancy, osmolarity becomes adjusted to a 10 mOsm/kg lower level. This decrease begins at the first missed menstrual period and gradually decreases until the tenth week of gestation. Serum sodium is decreased by about 4 to 5 mEq/ml as well. As a result, the osmotic threshold for AVP secretion becomes altered during pregnancy.

**LACTATION**

During pregnancy, although lactation practically does not happen, the increased serum concentrations of prolactin, placental lactogen, estrogen, and progesterone favor the development of the milk-secretory alveolar apparatus. The breast tissue in non-pregnant women has small, solid alveoli filled with a mass of granular tissue. During pregnancy, the final differentiation of the mammary gland takes place between 6 and 8 weeks of gestation. The breasts increase in size and volume, through the effects of progesterone, estrogen, insulin, prolactin, thyroid hormones, and multiple other growth factors.

Lactogenesis requires PRL and non-pituitary hormones (insulin, adrenal steroids) and is associated with further enlargement of the lobules as well as with synthesis of milk proteins. Moreover, PRL induces maternal behavior, stimulates food intake, potentiates oxytocin secretion, stimulates neurogenesis, suppresses stress responsiveness, and inhibits the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis.****As far as mammogenesis is concerned, the mammary epithelial cells obtain secretory differentiation around mid-pregnancy. At first, mammary epithelial cells become able to produce and secrete milk, referred to as colostrum thanks to the expression of several milk protein genes, the production of lactose, and the accumulation of lipid droplets. In the middle of pregnancy, the proliferation of the alveolar epithelium ceases, since there is a decrease in the number of cell mitoses. Following this, the alveolar tissue begins to differentiate into a secretory epithelium, which is reflected by the increased numbers of Golgi apparatus and rough endoplasmic reticulum. Toward the end of gestation, the alveoli begin to fill up with amorphous material that consists of proteins, desquamated cells, and leukocytes. At late pregnancy, milk production is inhibited by high plasma concentration of progesterone and estrogen until parturition.