Vellus hair is short, thin, and present on most of the body. Terminal hair is long, thick, and present on the scalp, eyelashes, eyebrows, beards, axillae, and pubic regions. Both types have a stationary upper segment and a dynamic lower segment, with the lower segment going through the follicular cycle of anagen (growing, 85-90%), catagen (involuting, <5%), and telogen (resting, 5-10%) phases.

The mean duration of the anagen phase is 2 to 7 years. The hair follicle then enters the catagen phase, the shortest phase of the cycle, with an approximate 2- to 3-week duration, then telogen, which lasts 2 to 4 months. The duration of anagen determines hair length.

**Nonscarring alopecias**

Androgenetic alopecia (male and female pattern hair loss) develops after puberty, with variable progression and severity. Although the androgen-dependent nature of male pattern hair loss is well established, this is not the case with females. Both conditions are due to altered hair follicle cycling and miniaturization, leading to the transformation of terminal hair follicles to vellus hair follicles, resulting in shorter, finer hair shafts. Additionally, the duration of the anagen phase shortens from years to only weeks or months. A strong genetic predisposition is clear, but no causative gene has been identified, and epigenetic modifications may alter the genetic susceptibility.

Male pattern hair loss is ascribed to genetic variants of the androgen receptor, particularly the androgen receptor gene (AR) at the AR ⁄ectodysplasin A2 receptor gene (EDA2R) locus.

Female pattern hair loss (FPHL) shows no involvement of the locus on chromosome 20p11, but the X-chromosomal AR ⁄ EDA2R locus may be involved in the pathogenesis of early-onset FPHL.

Alopecia areata is a chronic immune-mediated disease characterized by acute or chronic hair loss, with the anagen phase of the hair growth cycle significantly shortened during acute flares. Although the exact pathophysiology is not fully understood, the collapse of the immune privilege (IP) that usually protects the hair follicle bulb plays an important role.

Genome-wide association studies provide evidence for susceptibility loci on chromosomes 6, 10, 16, and 18. Furthermore, the major loci on 16 and 18 coincide with loci for psoriasis seen in other studies.

Telogen effluvium occurs if a significant number of anagen hair is triggered to prematurely stop growing, and enter the catagen phase, then the telogen phase. Approximately, 2 to 3 months after the triggering event, the patient’s hair sheds excessively. If the trigger is not repetitive, the alopecia will resolve as the new anagen hair grows over 3 to 6 months.

**Scarring alopecias**

FFA and LPP are characterized by inflamed hair follicles surrounding an area of permanent scarring alopecia. The central pathophysiological process in FFA and LPP is inflammation-induced, irreversible damage to epithelial stem cells in the hair follicle bulge. Massive inflammation can attack the proximal hair bulb in alopecia areata without destroying the hair follicle; however, in FAA and LPP, relatively discrete infiltrates around the bulge are sufficient to damage hair follicles irreversibly. Sclerotic fibrous tracts replace the destroyed hair follicles, with no follicles in the catagen or telogen phase.