Members of the interprofessional healthcare team, including physicians (MDs or DOs), endocrinology specialists, and mid-level practitioners (NPs or PAs) who prescribe alogliptin for type 2 diabetes, should also educate the patient on the importance of changes in lifestyle, diet, and exercise. Nursing can play a crucial role in this aspect of care, particularly a nurse who is certified as a diabetes educator. The pharmacist should also have input into the regimen, check for interactions, note the appropriateness and synergy of the chosen agents, and offer counsel to the patient on dosing and administration. Both nurses and pharmacists need to be able to reach out to the prescribing clinician regarding any concerns or adverse events they may encounter.

At the same time, serum glucose, renal function, and baseline liver function tests (as indicated) also should be monitored. Patients should also be monitored for signs and symptoms of heart failure, pancreatitis, and dermatologic or allergic reactions, which is another area where nursing will make a significant contribution. All providers, including clinicians, pharmacists, and nursing staff, need to exercise open collaboration and communication and function as an interprofessional team when a patient receives therapy with alogliptin to direct the case towards optimal outcomes while simultaneously reducing potential adverse events. Research demonstrates the interprofessional team approach to healthcare is the most effective paradigm. [Level 5]