Although tibia and fibula shaft fractures are amongst the most common long bone fractures, there is little literature citing the incidence of isolated fibula shaft fractures. One reason for this may be the treatment for the vast majority of isolated fibula shaft fractures is non-operative - this contrasts with the treatment of lateral malleolus fractures, which, although it is part of the fibula, technically, are categorized as ankle fractures and, therefore, have different treatment principles. The following article will focus on fractures of the fibula that are proximal to the ankle joint and the treatment of such fractures.

The fibula is one of the two long bones in the leg, and, in contrast to the tibia, is a non-weight bearing bone in terms of the shaft. Located posterolaterally to the tibia, it is much smaller and thinner. At its most proximal part, it is at the knee just posterior to the proximal tibia, running distally on the lateral side of the leg where it becomes the lateral malleolus at the level of the ankle.

The fibula and tibia connect via an interosseous membrane, which attaches to a ridge on the medial surface of the fibula. There is very limited mobility between this syndesmosis.

There are several distinct portions of the fibula in terms of structure, including the head, neck, shaft, and the distal end termed the lateral malleolus. This article focuses on the shaft of the fibula, which can be located between the neck of the fibula, the narrowed portion just distal to the fibular head, and the lateral malleolus, which in concert with the posterior and medial malleoli, form the ankle joint. Both the posterior and medial malleolus are part of the distal end of the tibia.

The fibular shaft is an origin for multiple muscles of the leg, including muscles of the anterior compartment (extensor digitorum longus, extensor hallucis longus, peroneus tertius), the lateral compartment (peroneus longus, peroneus brevis), the superficial posterior compartment (soleus), and the deep posterior compartment (tibialis posterior and flexor hallucis longus). The triangular shape of the fibula is dictated by the insertion points of the muscles on the shaft.

The superficial peroneal nerve innervates the musculature of the lateral compartment and is responsible for eversion and, to a much milder degree, plantarflexion of the foot. Damage to this nerve may result in deficits in those movements. The superficial peroneal nerve also gives sensation to the dorsum of the foot.

The deep peroneal nerve innervates the musculature of the anterior compartment and is responsible for the dorsiflexion of the foot and toes. A common result of damage to the deep peroneal nerve is drop foot, in which there is a loss of the capacity to dorsiflex the foot. The deep peroneal nerve is responsible for sensation over the first dorsal webspace.