**Sural Nerve Entrapment**

Entrapment of the sural nerve is most often caused by fascial thickening at the site where the nerve becomes superficial to the gastrocnemius, called the superficial sural aponeurosis. A patient with sural nerve entrapment will present with sensory changes in the area the nerve innervates. There can be burning pain, hyperaesthesia, dysaesthesia, or paraesthesia in the region of the postero-lateral distal leg and lateral foot to the fifth digit. The area of entrapment may also be tender on examination. It must be distinguished from sciatica originating from sacral roots, exertional compartment syndrome, piriformis syndrome, and popliteal artery entrapment as these would present similarly. Decompression can be completed surgically by releasing the fascia that is compressing the nerve.

**Sural Nerve Biopsy**

In patients with peripheral neuropathy that has no clear underlying cause, a sural nerve biopsy may help discover the histopathological etiology. It is not often used in modern medicine due to advances of less invasive technology such as electrophysiological and genetic testing. A biopsy may still be useful in cases where these newer methods provide no answer or a muddled picture; there is still a place for biopsy in cases such as vasculitic neuropathy, amyloid neuropathy, and multifocal leprosy. The sural nerve is a great candidate for biopsy as it is superficial and easily found anatomically, is purely sensory, and permanent anesthesia to its distribution is not likely to cause long-term patient harm. Possible complications include irritation, allodynia, and infection to the surgical wound. The more of the nerve that is taken out relates directly to the amount of sensory loss and recovery of the sensory deficit. However, in one study by Bevilacqua et al., 91% of those who had a section of the nerve had recovered the sensory deficit by 18 months.

**Sural Nerve Graft**

Nerve grafts are used to replace or bridge a section of an injured or resected nerve, creating a sort of "track" for the injured nerve axons to grow along to reach the target area. The sural nerve is an excellent candidate as it is sensory-only, easy to harvest, and can provide a decent length of graft tissue. Though sensory deficits were somewhat large after grafting, a study by Butler et al. showed that patients had low postoperative pain and minimal functional deficit after endoscopic resection of the nerve. The study's findings support the continued use of the sural nerve as a common source of nerve grafts.