Permanent pacemakers are most commonly placed via the transvenous route in a procedural suite or operating room. Patients are frequently sedated or under monitored anesthesia care (MAC) for the placement of these devices. For open epicardial placement by a cardiac surgeon, a patient will require general anesthesia.

The American Society of Anesthesiologists released a practice advisory for the perioperative management of cardiac implantable electronic devices in 2011.

- Perform a focused history and physical to determine the presence of a CIED utilizing a review of medical records, chest x-rays, electrocardiograms, and palpation of the device.

- Determine the type of CIED and its function by inspecting device card, utilizing chest x-ray, and interviewing the patient. It is critical to determine if the device is a pacemaker or ICD.

- Determine if the patient is dependent on the device's pacing function.

- Determine if electromagnetic interference will occur during the surgical procedure and if so, suspend the anti-tachyarrhythmia functions by reprogramming or use of a magnet if applicable; consider placing external defibrillator pads if the device has been deactivated and placed pads as far from an implantable device as possible.

- Monitor function of the device intraoperatively; special conditions include lithotripsy, MRI, electroconvulsive therapy, and radiation therapy.

- Postoperatively, monitor rhythm and device function, obtain interrogation of the device, and restore settings as appropriate.