The clinical picture of chronic interstitial nephritis in agricultural communities is similar in many areas. CINAC progresses slowly but at a varying pace based on the level of exposure to agrochemicals/herbicides and/or contaminated water. In the majority of cases, there are no symptoms at the beginning of the disease.

Urinary symptoms include the following:

- Nocturia

- Dysuria

- Post-void dribbling

- Hesitancy

- Foamy urine

Symptoms appear as early as stage 2 CKD, and the frequency and intensity of symptoms progress as the disease advances. However, at times decreased urine stream, hesitancy, and dysuria are evident from the start.

Patients may also present with extrarenal symptoms when different organs and systems are also affected, while others show no sign of damage.

- Cardiovascular system: blood pressure is either normal or mildly elevated, and electrocardiogram (ECG) is mostly normal. The cardiac stress test, pressor response, and echocardiogram are normal in most cases, whereas mild diastolic dysfunction can be noted. CINAC patients in El Salvador showed few abnormalities of the aortoiliac and carotid arteries but significant tibial artery abnormalities.

- Peripheral arteries: Doppler ultrasound describes a few abnormalities of the carotid and aortoiliac arteries; most of the damage is seen in the tibial arteries. The most common tibial lesion has been reported to be wall irregularities.

- Nervous system: tendon reflex abnormalities are seen in the early stages and sensorineural hearing loss. Both heavy metals and organic solvents are observed to cause sensorineural hearing loss.

- Eyes: fundoscopic examination, intraocular pressure, and visual field tests are normal in most patients, suggesting that these patients do not have significant microvascular damage as in diabetic or hypertensive retinopathy.