Lamivudine is a dideoxynucleoside cytosine analog that inhibits viral DNA synthesis via reverse transcriptase DNA chain termination post phosphorylation. Once inside the cell, lamivudine, 2'-deoxy-3'-thiacytidine, is metabolized to the triphosphate form, lamivudine triphosphate (abbreviated as 3TC-TP or L-TP), and the monophosphate form, lamivudine monophosphate (abbreviated as 3TC-MP or L-MP), during intracellular kinase phosphorylation. Both forms, L-TP and L-MP, inhibit viral DNA synthesis. It is advantageous as an antiviral drug because it is primarily not recognized by human polymerase as a substrate. As an L-(-)-nucleoside enantiomer instead of a D-enantiomer, active lamivudine (3TC) is not primarily recognized by human polymerases as a substrate but actively competes with natural cytidine triphosphate to inhibit reverse transcriptase DNA synthesis seen in both HIV-1 and HBV infection.

Lamivudine is absorbed rapidly, with a maximum lamivudine concentration of 0.5 to 1.5 hours following oral dose administration and absolute bioavailability of approximately 82% in adults and 68% in children.

Lamivudine distributes into the total body fluid/extravascular spaces. It has a long intracellular half-life of as long as 15.5 hours for HIV-infected cells and 19 hours for HBV-infected cells.

Lamivudine is eliminated in the urine as an active organic cation secretion.  The mean elimination half-life was 5 to 7 hours.

Lamivudine does not undergo metabolism via the CYP450 pathway and minimally binds to plasma protein. Therefore, CYP450 inducers and inhibitors will not affect its metabolism, nor does it have many drug interactions with protein-bound medications. While lamivudine has some drug-drug interactions, like interferon-alpha-blockers, ribavirin, zidovudine, and drugs that inhibit MATE-1, MATE-2K, OCT2transporters, like trimethoprim and indinavir, which increases the plasma concentration of lamivudine, no interactions have clinical significance.

There are no known pharmacokinetic differences related to gender or race. Pharmacokinetic differences have not been sufficiently studied to extrapolate adjustments for either older age or glomerular filtration rate (GFR).