In patients with complete atrioventricular canal defects, mostly symptoms of pulmonary over circulation develop before the age of 6 months, and the severity of symptoms depends on the size and the type of the defects.

Tachypnea and difficulty to gain weight are the first signs noticeable in patients with AV canal defects. The occurrence and severity of symptoms depend on the degree of AV valve regurgitation and other associated CHD, which can contribute to the early development of congestive heart failure (CHF).

In patients with partial AV canal defect, symptoms might not be detected in the first few years of life and might manifest later in childhood. Of note, ostium primum atrial septal defect (ASD) seen in AV canal defects presents earlier than ostium secundum ASD. The most common presentation is for the evaluation of a murmur, heard secondary to increased flow across the pulmonary valve, which is heard best at the upper left sternal border.

**Symptoms of Congestive Heart Failure:**These include increased work of breathing, sweating while feeding, poor feeding, lethargy, or increased sleepiness.

**Signs of Congestive Heart Failure:**These include tachypnea, tachycardia, failure to thrive (fall across two major centiles on the growth chart), wheezing or rales on lung auscultation, S3 gallop rhythm, apical displacement of the apical impulse, hepatomegaly, or increased jugular venous pressure (JVP).

A careful and complete cardiac exam should be done to look for:

- Wide and fixed split S2 heard due to left to right shunting across the ASD causing increased blood flow in the right side of the hear irrespective of the phase of respiration.

- S3 due to increased flow of blood splashing across the left ventricular walls which are still compliant.

- Additional murmurs such as:

- Holosystolic murmur secondary to left AV valve regurgitation is heard best at the apex.

- Mid diastolic murmur if the shunt is large or if there is significant AV valve regurgitation.

**Signs on General Physical Exam**

Dysmorphic features, such as flat facies, upslanting palpebral fissures, single palmar crease, saddle toe are commonly seen in children with Down syndrome and should be evaluated for especially in a patient whose karyotype is not known (40% to 45% of patients with Down syndrome have AV canal defect).

A survey to look for other congenital anomalies including cleft lip, cleft palate, musculoskeletal abnormalities should also be done.