The neck is a complex anatomical structure. To obtain a youthful and aesthetically pleasing contour, a thorough knowledge of its anatomy and physiology is essential for the operating surgeon.

The neck is divided into three aesthetic subunits: (1) the chin subunit, (2) the submental subunit, and (3) the anterior neck subunit. Anatomically, the neck has three layers; skin, superficial fascia, and deep fascia. The superficial fascia consists of fat, connective tissue, platysma muscle, superficial veins, lymph nodes, and cutaneous nerves. The deep fascia has three layers: the external or investing layer of deep fascia, the middle or pretracheal fascia, and the deep or inner prevertebral fascia.

The platysma is a broad, thin muscle located in the anterolateral aspect of the neck, thicker in men than in women (see figure). It is controlled by the cervical branch of the facial nerve, which travels beneath the muscle, and its action is to assist in depressing the lower lip in concert with the depressor anguli oris. The platysma is a continuation of the superficial musculoaponeurotic system (SMAS) that begins just above the inferior border of the mandible. Both the SMAS and the platysma divide the subcutaneous fat of the neck and face into two layers. The subplatysmal plane in the neck contains the deep layer of fat, facial nerve branches, submandibular gland, the tail of the parotid gland, and the external jugular vein. In the submental and suprahyoid region, a thick fat layer overlies the platysma and becomes thinner inferiorly, such that the platysma lies in close approximation to the skin.

It is essential to understand the anatomy of the marginal mandibular and cervical branches of the facial nerve, and the great auricular nerve (GAN) when performing a neck-lift or a cervicofacial rhytidectomy.

The marginal mandibular nerve exits from the anteroinferior portion of the parotid gland and courses anteriorly and deep to the SMAS and platysma. It then courses along the inferior border of the mandible. At the mid-body of the mandible, it rises into a superficial plane between the platysma and deep fascia, and crosses the facial artery to supply the depressor labii inferioris and mentalis muscle. The "danger area" of the marginal mandibular nerve extends from the angle of the mandible to the facial artery, where it is most prone to injury if the dissection goes deep to the platysma. Therefore, the safe plane of dissection in this area is superficial to the platysma.

The cervical branch of the facial nerve, which supplies the platysma, travels along with the marginal mandibular nerve (in 20% of cases), or after exiting the parotid gland, it may travel posterior to the angle of the mandible (in 80% of cases). Ultimately, both branches diverge at the submandibular gland just anterior to the hyoid bone. The "danger area” for the cervical branch is at the level of the hyoid bone, when the dissection is deep to the platysma. Therefore, when performing a neck-lift, the surgeon must be extra-cautious while dissecting deep to the platysma in the posterior neck.

The most commonly injured nerve in rhytidectomy is the great auricular nerve. It emerges from the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle at a point 6.5 cm inferior to the external auditory meatus, known as McKinney's point. The GAN is a sensory nerve and supplies the cutaneous territory over the parotid gland and lobule of the ear. During posterior skin flap elevation, the surgeon must be careful to avoid elevating a thick flap that runs deep into the subcutaneous layer, as the GAN runs very superficial in this area.

An attractive, youthful neck is defined by the following criteria which are used in the evaluation of age-related changes in the neck, including:

- Cervico-mental angle (CMA) is the angle between the chin and the neck. It should be well defined, with the ideal angle being between 105 and 120 degrees

- Mental prominence – the mentum, or chin, should be prominent, well defined, and sculpted on anterior and profile views

- Hyoid position – the ideal position of the hyoid bone is superior and posterior, thereby creating an acute and prominent CMA

- Well-defined inferior mandibular border

- Visible anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM)

- Subhyoid depression

- Visible thyroid bulge (thyroid cartilage)

Some of the age-related changes leading to neck deformities can be attributed to a loss of skin elasticity due to degeneration of dermal collagen and elastin, accumulation of fat, chronic sun damage, lipodystrophy, and hormonal changes. With aging, the platysma muscle becomes lax, and the fascia supporting the midline decussation also attenuates, leading to hanging medial borders of the platysma, forming the platysmal bands. The lateral borders of the muscles may also sag. Additionally, there is ptosis of the submandibular glands, which leads to loss of definition of the mandibular border. There is also attenuation and relaxation of retaining ligaments of the face and neck. The zygomatic and masseteric cutaneous ligaments become lax and stretch, permitting a descent of facial soft tissue into the neck and leading to prominent nasolabial folds with reduction of neck-face definition. Similarly, labiomandibular folds (jowls) are caused by weakening and stretching of the masseteric cutaneous ligament and mandibulocutaneous (mandibular) ligaments, which allow the excess and lax soft tissue of the cheek to descend and spill over the inferior border of the mandible. Fat accumulation within the jowls further disrupts the jawline.

The secondary changes that contribute to the aged neck include prominent labiomandibular folds or jowls, prominent nasolabial folds associated with facial soft tissue descent, loss of volume of the bony facial skeleton, and submental fullness. However, recent studies have challenged the idea that platysmal bands are due to sagging skin and muscular atony, and suggest that they are actually caused by muscular hyperactivity.