**Amphotericin****B**has several formulations, including amphotericin B, deoxycholate (d-AMB, or AMB-d), liposomal amphotericin B (L-AMB), amphotericin B lipid complex (ABLC), and amphotericin B colloidal dispersion (ABCD; not available in the United States); all approved indications are intravenous administration. Off-label administration of AMB-d is also given intraventricularly and as an irrigation solution.

**Nystatin,**the other polyene drug, is only approved for topical and oral "swish-and-swallow' applications. Nystatin is available as a powder, cream, and oral solution.

The available preparations for systemic **azole**antifungals include tablets, capsules, oral solutions, and IV solutions. Azole drugs for local or topical use include powders, creams, ointments, gels, shampoos, and lozenges.

**Terbinafine,**from the allylamine class of antifungals, can be administered topically or orally, which is dependent on the fungal infection being local or systemic, respectively.

**Caspofungin, anidulafungin,**and**micafungin,**the three main drugs in the echinocandin class, are all given intravenously as a reconstituted solution.

**Griseofulvin**is only given orally as a tablet or suspension, which should be taken with a fatty meal to aid absorption.

To treat mycoses, **flucytosine,**also commonly known as 5-fluorocytosine, is almost always administered intravenously as a combination therapy with amphotericin B.

**Ciclopirox**is approved for topical use only but not for intracavitary or ophthalmic applications. For these purposes, it is available as a compounded gel, cream, lacquer, shampoo, and suspension.

The **quinolines**iodoquinol and clioquinol had approval for topical administration. Clioquinol is combined with hydrocortisone in a compounded cream.

**Potassium Iodide**is most commonly administered topically as a saturated solution of potassium iodide (SSKI)

**Zinc Pyrithione,**a compound used to treat topical fungal infections, is applied topically as a shampoo, a solid soap-like bar, or as a non-shampoo liquid.