As newer inroads are underway towards understanding this complex pathophysiology, etiology, and pharmacotherapy targets of SIRS and sepsis, the race against time for early identification of individuals prone to more severe disease manifestation is now the priority. Along with the utilization of highly sensitive clinical definition to identify the susceptible patient, newer clinical scores and laboratory indices are being considered to quickly separate infectious from noninfectious etiologies and identify the risk of organ dysfunction and death early.

Such an orchestrated time-sensitive intervention involves prompt and effective execution from the triage level to the emergency room to the intensive care unit, all functioning as a cohesive interprofessional team. It probably starts even earlier in susceptible individuals at the point of early recognition of instability by self or family with appropriate education and awareness.

Given the challenges of precise diagnosis and the gravity of the condition, diagnosis and management of systemic inflammatory response syndrome requires an interprofessional team approach. A variety of clinicians to include primary care/family doctors, specialists in a variety of fields (hematology, infectious disease), specialty-trained nursing staff, and pharmacists, must all make unique contributions to the management of these patients. Clinician interventions have been the subject of much of this article. Nursing staff will often have the responsibility to monitor the patient and administer the medications needed to stabilize the patient. Given the wide variety of drugs that may be necessary, pharmacists should be consulted to ensure proper dosing regimens and to assess the potential for drug interactions, making themselves available to both clinicians and nursing staff to assist with coordination of care and patient education. All team members need to chart their findings and maintain open lines of communication for consult and reporting so that everyone on the care team operates from the same information base.  Only through this type of collaborative interprofessional paradigm can these patients receive the timely and proper therapy needed. [Level V]

Uniform scoring systems endorsed by clinical societies and hospital-wide sepsis or SIRS programs and bundles render uniformity to the interventions. Most hospital systems across the US have been utilizing checklists and have incorporated them in their quality control measures to achieve perfection in execution.

CMS/Medicare supervision of healthcare system performance has added incentive to the effort and opens up new debates and discussions for improvisation.