**The course of the facial nerve axons inside the brainstem**

The facial nerve is comprised of a motor root (containing motor fibers) and the nervus intermedius (containing sensory and parasympathetic fibers). The axons from the motor nucleus curve posteriorly around the abducent nucleus; they then pass through the facial colliculus of the floor of the fourth ventricle and, finally, emerge from the anterolateral brainstem. The nervus intermedius of the facial nerve also emerges from the anterolateral brainstem (pontomedullary junction).

**Segments of the facial nerve**

The first segment of the facial nerve is the intracranial/cisternal segment. This segment comprises the two roots of the nerve which emerge from the pons. The motor root and the nervus intermedius then pass through the posterior cranial fossa along with the vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII cranial nerve) at the cerebellopontine angle, finally entering the internal acoustic meatus in the temporal bone.

The second segment of the facial nerve is the meatal (canalicular) segment. This part of the facial nerve appears in the superior quadrant of the internal acoustic meatus.

The third part is the labyrinthine segment. This segment begins after the facial nerve has passed through the internal acoustic meatus. After the internal acoustic meatus, the motor root of the facial nerve and the nervus intermedius enter the facial canal, and they then pass between the cochlea and vestibule before bending posteriorly at the geniculate ganglion, at which point the motor root and nervus intermedius join. The labyrinthine segment gives off three branches: the greater superficial petrosal nerve (containing parasympathetic fibers for the lacrimal gland and taste fibers from the palate) and the external petrosal nerve.

The fourth segment of the facial nerve is the tympanic segment. The tympanic segment begins as the facial nerve passes posteriorly at the geniculate ganglion. This segment is in the medial wall of the middle ear cavity, directly below the lateral semicircular canal.

The fifth segment of the facial nerve is the mastoid segment. This segment begins after the tympanic segment moves downwards, distal from the pyramidal eminence of the middle ear cavity. From here, the mastoid segment travels through the facial canal and up to the stylomastoid foramen. This segment gives off three branches: the nerve to stapedius muscle, the chorda tympani (containing parasympathetic fibers to sublingual and submandibular salivary glands and taste fibers from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue), and the sensory branch, which joins the auricular branch of the vagus nerve. The sensory branch carries general somatic afferent fibers from the pinna and the external auditory meatus.

The final segment of the facial nerve is the extratemporal segment. This segment begins as the facial nerve exits the temporal bone through the stylomastoid foramen. After exiting, the facial nerve gives off two branches; the posterior auricular nerve (supplying the posterior auricular muscle, the superior auricular muscle, and the occipital belly of the occipitofrontal muscle) and the digastric nerve (supplying the posterior belly of the digastric muscle and the stylohyoid muscle). Next, this segment of the facial nerve enters the parotid gland. Within the parotid gland, the facial nerve gives off two main trunks. These are the superior temporofacial and inferior cervicofacial trunks. These two trunks give rise to the parotid plexus, and from this plexus, five branches emerge. These are known as the temporal (or frontal), zygomatic, buccal, mandibular, and cervical branches, which carry motor fibers to the facial muscles.