**Preparation at recipient site [Figure 1]**

**Basic Principle -**Recipient-site preparation is an essential step of any skin grafting procedure, and is performed to facilitate the access of the donor material to the sub-epidermal structures of the recipient site. The procedure entails removal of the epidermis from the underlying dermis at the dermo-epidermal junction (DEJ) or the upper papillary dermis; necessary for the adherence and nutrition of melanocytes and other supportive cells contained in the donor material. Grafting of the donor material at a adequately prepared recipient site of the necessary for melanocyte adherence and nutrition. After proper bandaging, plasmatic imbibition of the grafted material begins and continues for the first 24 to 48 hours, followed by neoangiogenesis that subsequently maintains the cellular nutrition.

- This area should be prepared first so that the donor material can be promptly overlayed and dressed.

- **Local Anesthesia**- After taking all aseptic precautions, the area gets anesthetized by infiltrating it with 2% to 4% lignocaine (plain, without adrenaline). It is important to note that adrenaline SHOULD NOT BE USED since the next step of dermabrasion of the skin is dependent on the end-point of pin-point bleeding. Since adrenaline is a vasoconstrictor, it would mask this end-point, leading to deeper dermabrasion leading to graft failure and/or scarring.

- **Dermabrasion**- The anesthetized recipient area is then dermabraded using either Manekshaw's manual dermabraders, or preferably a motorized dermabrader with diamond fraise until reaching the end-point, which is uniform pin-point bleeding. This end-point indicates that we have reached the papillary dermis indicating that the recipient area is now ready to accept the graft. The use of motorized dermabrader is preferable as it provides more uniform abrasion compared to manual dermabraders. The surgeon may also use superficial radiofrequency ablation, pulsed erbium-YAG laser, or even ultra pulse CO2 laser to prepare the recipient site.

- **Hydration**- After this, the recipient area is kept hydrated with gauze pieces soaked in sterile normal saline placed over it till the donor graft material is ready to be overlayed.

**Alternative methods for recipient site preparation:**

In the classical Jodhpur technique, dermabrasion remains the preferred way of recipient site preparation owing to its simplicity, easy and cheap availability of both manual and motorized dermabraders, and well-defined endpoint of pinpoint bleeding. One must be aware of other approaches and may use them if machine availability and cost to the patient does not impede the very purpose of preferring the Jodhpur technique.

Various methods exist for recipient-site preparation in skin grafting for vitiligo. These include the cryogenic blister formation with liquid nitrogen, radiofrequency (RF) ablation with the ball probe, creating suction blisters by negative pressure technique, phototoxic ablation with psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA), and ablative lasers such as the erbium: YAG and CO2 lasers.

- **Liquid Nitrogen**- Although it is efficacious, the delayed formation of blisters (usually after 24 hours of liquid nitrogen spray), and the possibility of peripheral dyschromia (both hypo as well as hyperpigmentation), and reports exisst of hypertrophic scarring  when recipient site preparation used cryotherapy.

- **Mechanical Suction blister induction**- Inducing blisters using a negative pressure system with a set of syringes and three-way cannulas is considered to be superior to most of the methods in terms of creating the near-ideal recipient site since the separation occurs precisely at the DEJ, and the approach provides a more favorable microenvironment by ensuring adequate serous drainage in the prepared areas.

- **PUVA**- The use of PUVA for phototoxic blister formation at the recipient site is a time-efficient method for the preparation of large areas, with the additional advantage of minimal to no risk of scarring. However, the concern regarding PUVA triggered carcinogenesis makes it a non-preferred approach, especially in lighter skin types.

- **CO2 laser**-  has been used both in the ablative mode (with intermittent instead of continuous beams) as well as in the fractional mode. The use of pulsed, ultra pulsed, or fractional CO2 laser offers the advantages of high speed (rapid coverage of large areas), uniformity of epidermal ablation, and precise depth control over sites with delicate and irregularly shaped skin such as the perioral, periocular, and perinasal areas.

- **Erbium: YAG laser**-  In contrast to the CO2 laser, the Erbium: YAG laser ablation attained through 3 to 6 passes provides all the benefits of the former such as efficient and controlled tissue ablation, and time-efficiency in preparing skin over large areas and irregularly-contoured regions. Since the depth of penetration with the 2940 mm erbium: YAG laser is only one-sixth that of CO2 lasers, its use preempts the possibility of thermal necrosis and allows for more precise tissue ablation.

- **Radiofrequency ablation combined with mechanical dermabrasion**- This approach involves the application of the ball-shaped loop of an RF device, set on low power cut/coagulation mode. The resulting superficial blistering is followed by using gauze to wipe off the ablated epidermis. The preparation then completes by using a manual dermabrader to induce pinpoint bleeding. The advantage of combining RF with manual dermabrasion is a reduction in preparation time, and efficacy similar to that attained with CO2 laser, albeit without the substantial cost incurred when the later is used.