The etiology of vertigo is typically due to a disturbance of the vestibular system, semicircular canals, or cranial nerve VIII. This disturbance could be related to damage to one of these organs or simply confused neuronal input. It is important to remember that the central nervous system receives inputs bilaterally from these structures/systems, assembles the input and then, forms a response. The central nervous system (CNS) also coordinates these bilateral inputs with our visual and sensory inputs creating an overall picture of whether we are moving in space/time or if the environment around us is moving. Suffice it to say that conflicting inputs from these various symptoms overwhelm the central nervous system causing "dizziness," nausea, and the perception of movement.

The following are the various causes of vertigo:

**Peripheral Vertigo**

- Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV)

- Meniere disease

- Vestibular neuritis

- Labyrinthitis

- Herpes zoster

- Acoustic neuroma

- Otitis media

- Perilymphatic fistula

- Aminoglycoside toxicity

- Viral infections

- Cogan syndrome

**Central Vertigo**

- Brainstem ischemia/infarction

- Vertebrobasilar insufficiency

- Space-occupying lesions

- Demyelination syndromes

- Vestibular migraine

- Chiari malformation

**Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo**

Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo is classically described as a sudden onset of spinning brought on by a rapid head movement or a quick turn in bed before getting up. There is no associated ear pain, tinnitus, or hearing loss. The pathophysiology behind this is usually the displacement of otolith or calcium debris located in the posterior semicircle canal. This type of vertigo classically can be made worse with the Dix Hallpike maneuver and subsequently fixed with the Epley maneuver by relocating these otoliths. Other less commonly used maneuvers include Semont, Lempert, and Hamid.

**Peripheral Vertigo Causes**

- Vestibular neuritis is usually a post-viral inflammatory syndrome. Patients typically develop rapid, severe nausea, vomiting, vertigo, and gait instability. Despite gait instability, patients are still able to ambulate. They display the typical peripheral vertigo physical findings discussed below. If there is an associated unilateral hearing loss, it is then called labyrinthitis. Often, due to the severity of the symptoms, this can be confused with a central process. Consequently, magnetic resonance imaging is performed if clinician suspicion is high to aid in the diagnosis.

- Meniere's disease: Excess endolymphatic fluid causes Meniere's disease. The excess pressure causes inner ear dysfunction. Patients present with episodic unilateral tinnitus, hearing loss, nausea, vomiting, gate instability, and vertigo. Audiometry testing demonstrating a low sensorineural hearing loss can aid in diagnosis.

- Cogan syndrome is an autoimmune process that presents with symptoms similar to those of Meniere disease, so it seems relevant to mention (even though not one of the more common causes). Caloric testing usually demonstrates absent vestibular function.