**Preventive Care**

- Patients diagnosed with BSS should be educated extensively about the risks of bleeding. They should carry 'alert cards' or wear 'alert bracelets' clearly identifying the diagnosis of BSS. They should be registered with a center that can provide emergent treatment 24 hours a day should they present with a bleeding episode. The patients should also be educated on maintaining dental hygiene, avoiding high-risk sports (especially contact sports), and applying pressure for epistaxis.

- Patients, their family members, and their providers should be advised extensively over which medications can increase the risk of bleeding (anti-histamines, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and certain antibiotics). Similarly, foods, beverages, and herbal medicines that can affect the platelet function or number must be avoided.

- All patients with BSS, especially women, can suffer from iron deficiency due to excessive bleeding and should be monitored closely for the same and supplemented with iron if needed.

- HLA-typing should be done for each patient at the time of diagnosis. All attempts should be made to procure HLA-matched platelets before transfusion.

**Treatment Directed Towards Bleeding Episodes**

- Platelet transfusions - These are the first line of treatment in patients with BSS, who present with acute hemorrhage or are preparing for elective surgery. However, with each transfusion comes the risk of alloantibody formation and a minuscule risk of transmission of pathogens.

- Transmission of bacteria - As platelets are stored at a higher temperature (20 to 24 degrees Celcius), there is always a risk of bacterial growth and transmission. The risk is much higher with whole-blood-derived platelets compared to apheresis-derived platelets.
- Alloimmunization - HLA-matched platelets are ideal for transfusion; however, they may not be available in emergent conditions.
- Antibodies against glycoproteins - Although this is a more common phenomenon in patients with Glanzman thrombocytopenia (GT); patients with BSS can also develop antibodies against glycoproteins that they lack.

- Antifibrinolytic therapy - Tranexamic acid has been used successfully in the management of mucocutaneous bleeding, menorrhagia, in conjunction with local efforts like nasal packing, compression sponges, hormonal treatment, etc. However, the use of antifibrinolytics should be avoided in patients with pulmonary hemorrhage or those with active hematuria due to the risk of formation of intraluminal clots leading to respiratory failure and renal failure, respectively.

- Desmopressin (DDAVP) - Releases vWF from the platelets. Due to a defective GPIB-IX-V complex, the utility of DDAVP in the management of BSS is severely limited. Only anecdotal reports suggest the use of DDAVP.

Potentially beneficial strategies not approved for patients with BSS:

- In a small phase II clinical trial, the thrombopoietin receptor agonist, Eltrombopag, was successfully used in increasing the platelet count in patients diagnosed with inherited thrombocytopenias. One of the five patients had monoallelic BSS. Eltrombopag is not approved for treating thrombocytopenia secondary to BSS.

- Recombinant factor VII (rfVII) has been approved for use in patients with Glanzmann's thrombasthenia (GT), but not in patients with BSS. There are reports of successful use of rfVII in patients with BSS. The United Kingdom Haemophilia Centre Doctors' Organisation (UKHCDO) 2006 guidelines and the British Society of Haematology (BSH) platelet transfusion guidelines both recommend the use of recombinant factor VII (rfVII) in patients with GT or BSS in the event of severe bleeding.

- Allogeneic stem cell transplant has been used in patients with BSS. However, there is scarce data.

Pregnancy in patients with BSS requires special consideration.

- Counseling prospective parents: Identify potential risk factors (consanguineous marriage, parents are carriers, etc.) for the fetus to develop BSS. In women with BSS, the potential risk of hemorrhage should be discussed. Neonates will not develop homozygous BSS unless both parents are carriers.

- Antenatal: Manage specialized units in consultation with high-risk obstetrics and hematology. The mother should be checked for HLA type, anti-platelet antibodies, and assessed for the risk of developing neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia (FNAIT).

- Labour: Neuraxial anesthesia is contraindicated as hemostasis cannot be guaranteed. The use of uterotonics is encouraged in the second stage of labor. HLA-matched platelets and tranexamic acid should be used if needed. The rfVII can be used in severe bleeding.

- Post-partum: All patients must be monitored for eight weeks, at least for bleeding symptoms.

- Neonates: The risk of FNAIT is high, especially in mothers diagnosed with BSS requiring multiple platelet transfusions throughout their lives. Such patients have anti-GPI antibodies that can cross the placenta and affect the normal platelets of the neonate. Monitor the blood count of neonate very closely.