Open-angle glaucoma can be clinically evaluated using a variety of diagnostic tools but the following triad has been the cornerstone of diagnosis:

- Optic disc changes

- Visual field changes

- Elevated intraocular pressure

**Optic Nerve**

The optic nerve should ideally be evaluated using a slit lamp and 90D or 78D lens so that the 3-dimensional features of the optic nerve is better appreciated. Normally, the inferior neuroretinal rim (NRR) is the thickest, followed by superior, nasal, and temporal NRR. This is called ISNT rule. In OAG, this rule is not followed, as superior and inferior NRR gets thinned in the disease. The optic cup should be determined by its contour and not its color. A recent JAMA Rational Clinical Examination systematic review of primary open-angle glaucoma diagnosis found that the risk of glaucoma was highest when an examination revealed an increased cup-disk ratio (CDR), CDR asymmetry, disc hemorrhage, or elevated intraocular pressure.

Typical optic nerve head changes in OAG include:

- Diffuse or focal narrowing (notching/shelving) of the neuroretinal rim (NRR) specifically at the superior or inferior part of the optic disc

- Symmetrically enlarged cup-to-disc ratio greater than 0.5

- Increased vertical cup to disc ratio (CDR) and thinning of NRR

- Asymmetry of CDR of 0.2 or more

- Hemorrhage at or around the optic disc

- Peripapillary atrophy

- Baring of circumlinear vessels (gap between the superficial vessels and disc margin)

- Bayonetting of vessels- The vessel first goes back and then climbs along the wall of the deep cup and then angles again on the disc margin

- Very deep (excavated) cup with bean-pot cupping and laminar dot sign

- Nasalization of optic disc vessels, and

- Diffuse or focal (arcuate) thinning/defect of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) contiguous with an area of NRR-notch

- The NRR is typically pink and not pale in OAG. Pallor of the NRR usually denotes an atrophic optic nerve as seen in primary angle closure glaucoma.

**Visual Field**

Perimetry, also known as visual field testing, is an important diagnostic tool that maps out the patient's visual field on a printout, making it a helpful and necessary tool in diagnosing and managing OAG. It is often helpful to get a baseline visual field for glaucoma suspects and confirmed OAG patients alike so that physicians can track the progression of the disease. To make a diagnosis of acquired glaucomatous visual field defect Hoddap–Parrish–Anderson criteria is used:

- Glaucoma hemifield test outside normal limits on at least 2 fields.

- A cluster of three or more non-edge points in a location typical for glaucoma, all of which are depressed on the pattern deviation plot at a P <5% and one of which is depressed at a P <1% on 2 consecutive fields.

- A corrected pattern standard deviation that occurs in less than 5% of normal fields on 2 consecutive fields.

Static automated threshold perimetry is used with white stimulus on a white background. Most studies used the Humphrey Field Analyzer, but other perimeters like Octopus have also been used successfully. SWAP (short-wavelength automated perimetry using blue stimulus on yellow background) and frequency doubling perimetry may pick up early visual field defects. The visual field must be reliable and field defects should be repeatable on at least 2 fields. The same machine, the same degree of field and protocol (eg, 24-2, 30-3, or 10-2) should be used to compare the fields to note for progression or stability. It has been estimated that at least 40%-50% ganglion cell loss is needed to reliably show visual field defects in threshold perimetry.

Typical visual field changes in OAG include.

- Increased variability of responses in an area which later developed field defects

- Asymmetry of the visual field between the eyes

- Paracentral scotoma- commonly superonasal

- Roenne's nasal step- an area of depression above or below the horizontal meridian in the nasal side

- Temporal wedge

- Sickle-shaped (Seidel's) scotoma

- Bjerrum's scotoma or arcuate scotoma

- Annular/ring scotoma when arcuate scotoma is present on both above and below the horizontal meridian

- General constriction of peripheral field

- A temporal island of the visual field

**Intraocular Pressure**

When determining the IOP of a patient using tonometry, certain variables must be taken into consideration. Tonometry measurements can, for example, vary between examiners differing by approximately 10% per individual, which can translate to a difference in IOP measurement of 1 mmHg to 2 mmHg. An individual’s corneal thickness or diurnal variations of IOP (e.g., higher IOP in early morning hours or other time of the day, or variability in the time of day of maximal IOP between patients) can also have a tremendous effect on the accuracy of IOP measurements.  For this reason, multiple measurements should be taken in any patient suspected of having an elevated IOP, while also correlating measurements with both optic nerve and visual field examinations.  If there are previous tonometry measurements available, they should be reviewed and compared to those that are most recent. Also, the IOP may be different at the same time of the day on different days. Different instruments may capture different values of IOP.

If a difference of 3 mmHg or more is noted between the two eyes, there should be an increased suspicion for the presence of glaucoma. Physicians should expect approximately 10% variation between individual measurements, and thus should repeat measurements over at least two to three occasions before deciding on the plan for treatment. Goldmann applanation tonometry (GAT) is thought as the gold standard for measuring IOP but is affected by corneal thickness. Higher corneal thickness gives falsely high values of IOP whereas low corneal thickness leads to a falsely low measurement of IOP.

Elevated intraocular pressure is an important and modifiable risk factor, however, it is not a diagnostic factor for OAG. An ophthalmologist should check the patient's intraocular pressure using applanation tonometry while remaining conscious of the fact that the nature of the applanation tonometry test causes patients to squeeze their eyes and artificially elevate their own pressure readings. Normal intraocular pressure should range between 12-21 mm Hg, however, approximately 2/3rds of patients with elevated intraocular pressure never develop glaucomatous optic nerve atrophy or visual field deficits. Once a patient has recorded a reliably high intraocular pressure reading above 21 mm Hg, they are deemed "glaucoma suspects."

**Gonioscopy**

Open-angle glaucoma is a diagnosis of exclusion and other ocular emergencies such as closed-angle glaucoma must be ruled out immediately. Gonioscopy will essentially determine whether the diagnosis is considered "open" or "closed" angle glaucoma. Gonioscopy is an acquired skill that allows the ophthalmologist to visualize the angle between the cornea and iris and determine whether it is open. The angle between the iris and cornea should be 20-45 degrees to be considered "open" so that aqueous humor can circumvent from the posterior chamber to the anterior chamber.****

**Optical Coherence Tomography**

OCT is a diagnostic imaging modality that provides high-resolution cross-sectional imaging of the retina, optic nerve, and anterior segment. Low coherence infrared light is directed toward the back fo the eye and the path of scattered photons help recreate an image of the retina. OCT is highly reproducible and is thus widely used as an adjunct in routine glaucoma patient management. Peripapillary RNFL analysis would show thinning in this layer and is the most commonly used scanning protocol for glaucoma diagnosis because it samples RGCs from the entire retina. Some of the drawbacks included variability in ONH morphology from patient to patient. To overcome some of these disadvantages, the macular thickness has been proposed as a means of glaucoma detection given that50% of RGCs are found in the macula, and RGC bodies are thicker than their axons, thus are potentially easier to detect.

**Corneal Photokeratoscopy**

Corneal photokeratoscopy, also known as corneal topography, has been shown to conIn patients with primary open-angle glaucoma, there is a forward shifting of the posterior and anterior corneal surfaces. This appears to be correlated with more advanced stages of functional damage, pointing to a possible link between corneal structural changes and duration and intensity of elevated intraocular pressure. Further studies are needed for this marker to be used in monitoring primary open-angle glaucoma patients.