**Types of equipment needed for Gram staining include:**

- Bunsen burner

- Alcohol-cleaned microscope slide

- Slide rack

- Microscope

**Reagents needed for Gram staining include:**

- Crystal violet (primary stain)

- Gram's iodine solution (the mordant)

- Acetone/ethanol (50:50 v:v) (the decolorizer)

- 0.1% basic fuchsin solution (the counterstain)

- Water

**Procedure**

**1. Preparation of a slide smear:**

- Inoculation loop is used to transfer a drop of suspended culture to the microscope slide.

- If a Petri dish or a slant culture tube has the colony, a drop or a few loopful of water is added to facilitate a minimal amount of colony transfer to the examination slide.

- A minimal amount of culture is required. If culture can be detected visually on an inoculation loop, it indicates the collection of too much culture.

- Culture is spread with an inoculation loop to an even thin film over a circle of 15mm in diameter. A typical slide can contain up to 4 small smears if examining more than one culture.

- The slide can be either air-dried or dried with the help of heat over a gentle flame. The slide should be moved circularly over the flame to prevent overheating or forming of ring patterns in the slide. The heat helps the cell adhesion to the glass slide and prevents the significant loss of culture during rinsing.

**2. Gram staining:**

- Crystal violet stain is added over the fixed culture.

- After 10 to 60 seconds, the stain is poured off, and the excess stain is rinsed with water. The goal is to wash off the stain without losing the fixed culture.

- Iodine solution is used to cover the smear for 10 to 60 seconds. This step is known as "fixing the dye." Iodine solution is poured off, and the slide is rinsed with running water. Excess water from the surface is shaken off.

- A few drops of decolorizer is added to the slide. Decolorizers are often the mixed solvent of ethanol and acetone. This step is known as "solvent treatment." The slide is rinsed with water in 5 seconds. To prevent excess decolorization in the gram-positive cells, stop adding decolorizer as soon as the solvent is not colored as it flows over the slide.

- The smear is counterstained with basic fuchsin solution for 40 to 60 seconds. The fuchsin solution is washed off with water, and excess water is blotted with the bibulous paper. The slide can also be air-dried after shaking off excess water.

**3. Microscopic examination of slide:**

- The slide should undergo an examination under a microscope under oil immersion.

- The initial slide examination should use the X40 objective to evaluate the smear distribution, and then they should be examined using the X100 oil immersion objective.

- All areas of the slide require an initial examination. Areas that are only one cell thick should be examined. Thick areas in slides often give variable and incorrect results.

- White blood cells and macrophages stain Gram-negative.

- Squamous epithelial cells stain Gram-positive.

Various modifications of gram staining are used, such as Atkin gram stain, and Burke gram stain, etc.