Between 2000 to 2010, US residents in the age group of 50 to 54 experienced the highest population growth. With this increasing shift towards more elderly Americans, it is logical to expect increased use of cardiovascular medication and unintended or intended drug toxicities. While home monitoring of asymptomatic patients in the setting of mild calcium channel blocker overdose may be safe, patients or caregivers need education with relevant knowledge about the drugs as well as resources for poison control center helplines. Likewise, any evidence of symptoms even early should not be neglected and promptly evaluated in the emergency room setting. The presence of certain risk factors even in asymptomatic individuals should prompt an aggressive approach to care. That includes:

- Pediatric or geriatric age groups

- Poor cardiac health

- A suspected overdose of multiple medications, particularly another cardio depressant drug

- Large dose

- Diabetes

- Ingestion of sustained-release tablets

The management of CCB toxicity is with an interprofessional team that includes an emergency department physician, cardiologist, toxicologist, nurse practitioner, pharmacologist, internist, and specialty-trained emergency and trauma nurses. Pharmacists should evaluate medications prescribed, drug-drug interactions, and patient compliance and communicate with the team. Specialty trained nurses assist with monitoring the patient and report issues to the team. This approach will lead to improved patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Finally, beyond the period of acute stabilization and management, the establishment of home safety parameters, social work support, and psychiatry consultation and support for intentional suicidal overdoses are critical determinants for an optimum outcome.