The treatment of NTM requires a holistic and patient-centered approach based on the quality of life and patient benefits, instead of expecting mycobacteria eradication. An NTM lung infection differs from a TB lung infection in that it does not require immediate initiation of treatment upon diagnosis. The treatment of NTM lung infection includes an interprofessional approach and a discussion of risk and benefits. The therapy should remain in place until 12 months of negative cultures have been obtained. Bimonthly sputum cultures should also get collected until 12 months of negative cultures have been achieved. During the treatment, the patient requires close monitoring for drug side effects and medication compliance and adherence.

**Treating Mycobacterial Avium Intracellularly Complex (MAC) Lung Disease**

The treatment of mycobacterial avium intracellularly complex (MAC) lung disease depends on clinical presentation, including nodular or bronchiectasis disease, cavitary diseases, and advanced (severe) or previously treated disease.

**Treatment for Bronchiectasis or Cavitary Disease**

The first regimen for the treatment of bronchiectasis disease includes clarithromycin [1000 mg three times per week] or azithromycin [500 to 600 mg three times per week] together with rifampin [600 mg three times per week]. The primary treatment regimen for cavitary disease is clarithromycin [500 to 1000 mg per day] or azithromycin [500 to 600 mg three times per week] together with ethambutol [15 mg per kilogram per day] and rifampin [450–600 mg per day]. Furthermore, streptomycin or amikacin [10 mg per kilogram three times per week] can be an added therapy.

**The Treatment of Advanced Disease**

The treatment of advanced (severe) or previously treated disease includes clarithromycin [500 to 1000 mg/day] or azithromycin [250 mg/day] together with rifabutin [150 to 300 mg] or rifampin [450 to 600 mg once daily], ethambutol [15 mg per kilogram], and streptomycin or amikacin [10 mg per kilogram intramuscular or intravenous three times/week; maximum dose 500 mg for age over 50 years for the first 2 to 3 months]. The addition of moxifloxacin [400 mg orally once/daily] to the previous combination regimen may improve outcomes in refractory diseases or treatment failure.

**Treatment for Refractory Disease**

Refractory pulmonary infection is a failure to achieve negative cultures for more than six months. The regimen of treatment is the administration of amikacin liposome inhalation suspension once daily at a dose of 590 mg/8.4 milliliters (one vial) with a specialized nebulizer system only, along with an optimized multi-drug background regimen.

**Duration of Therapy**

Those achieving three consecutive monthly negative sputum cultures 12 months after the last positive cultures for six months should continue for an additional 12 months. The benefit of extended therapy in those not achieving three consecutive monthly negative sputum cultures by six months remains unestablished, although it is the subject of an ongoing clinical trial.

**Treatment of Mycobacterium Kansasii lung disease**

Mycobacteria kansasii lung disease remains a relatively easy treatable pathogen among NTM lung infection diseases. Usually, the bacteria are sensitive to the tuberculosis regimen, with a high curative rate. The recommended primary regimens are: Isoniazid [300 mg], Pyridoxine [50 mg], rifampin [600 mg], and ethambutol [15 mg/kg] for 12 months of culture-negative sputum. Recently it has been demonstrated that adding to the previous treatment an aminoglycoside such as Streptomycin during the first 2 to 3 months has high effectiveness with a low relapse rate.

**Treatment for**Mycobacterium **abscessus complex lung disease**

The treatment of Mycobacterium abscessus complex (MABC) lung infection remains complicated because of the high treatment failure rate. Therefore, more clinical trials are needed to establish a successful treatment that results in the eradication and cure of the disease. In general, the primary regimen consists of a macrolide with two parenteral agents for an extended period. Also, the treatment divides between the intensive phase that uses imipenem [1000 mg IV/12 hrs] or cefoxitin [IV, 8 to 12 gm/day, divided into 2 or 3 doses], azithromycin [250 to 500 mg orally once/daily] along with amikacin [IV, 15 mg/kg/once/daily] with adjustable doses until obtaining peak serum concentration of 20 to 30 ug/ml. This proposed treatment should last 2 or 3 months, depending on the severity of infection, clinical response, tolerability, and toxicity. Finally, the continuation phase uses azithromycin [250 to 500 mg].

**The role for surgery**

NTM lung infection can be challenging to manage with antibiotic therapy. In these cases, adjuvant surgical therapy to remove the most severely destroyed lung can promote treatment success. In the cases of massive hemoptysis, surgery may be the best choice. Recent studies have reported successful treatment, with sputum conversion of 80 to 100% in patients after adjuvant surgical reception

**Medication side effects**

One essential piece of information that is important to include when discussing the medication regimen with patients has to do with medication side effects, reactions, and interactions. Physicians and pharmacists must always keep in mind that patients deserve to know as much information as possible about any new treatment. In the case of treatment with NTM, the most used medications are macrolides, antituberculosis medications.

In the case of macrolides like azithromycin or erythromycin, the most common side effects are gastrointestinal symptoms, including nausea, heartburn, etc. Another side effect of this type of medication is the prolongation of QT, leading to cardiac arrhythmias. It is always essential to have a baseline EKG when using this medication. Cholestatic hepatitis has been often reported in patients using this medication. Finally, transient reversible tinnitus or deafness with over 4 gm/day of erythromycin IV has occurred in a patient with renal impairment.

Rifampin is potentially hepatotoxic. It requires caution in a patient with ongoing liver impairment or excessive use of alcohol. If elevated bilirubin and/or a substantive increase in liver-associated enzymes occurs, discontinue Rifampin therapy. One of the most known side effects of rifampin is red-orange discoloration of urine, feces, and saliva. It can stain contact lenses permanently. There are reports of thrombocytopenia and vasculitis.

Ethambutol is another medication used in the treatment of NTM. One of the most serious adverse reactions is optic neuritis with decreased visual acuity, central scotoma, loss of ability to see green, and perception problems; peripheral neuropathy and headache are the most common side effects reported.