The transvaginal transducer is inserted, with special attention being made to the orientation of the image. A marker on the screen may be used to indicate cephalad from caudad on sagittal imaging or right from left on transverse imaging, though various protocols are institution-specific.

The probe is placed in the distal vagina or against the external cervical os. Changing the depth of the ultrasound probe will create a different focal point and thus bring different areas within view.

The cervix is normally 2.5 to 3 cm and may be measured if there is an indication for it, such as recurrent second-trimester miscarriages in the setting of an incompetent cervix.

The endometrium, also referred to as the endometrial stripe, is delineated by its normal echogenic nature, surrounded by the hypoechoic uterine myometrium. The thickest portion on true sagittal imaging should be measured. If the endometrial cavity has contents such as fluid or an intrauterine device, then it should be documented.

Ultrasonography is the best way to identify the location of early pregnancy in the setting of an elevated beta-hCG; however, a very early intrauterine pregnancy may be missed.

The bilateral ovaries should be measured in three dimensions with the calculation of the volumes. Any masses or prominent cysts should be measured as well. Physiologic follicles in a reproductive-aged woman may be seen. Masses, dilated tubular structures, and other abnormalities should be evaluated in the adnexal regions.

Dynamic imaging may be performed by a sonographer via placing a hand over the lower abdomen, palpating, and observing the mobility of the internal organs in real time. “Slide sign” is when the organs move relatively freely against one another. When they are more fixed during palpation, this is indicative of adhesions.

Once the examination is complete, the probe cover is removed, and running water and soap are used to remove any gel. After drying the probe, the utilization of a high-level disinfectant is recommended.