# Continuing Education Activity

Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) is for those who want to quit smoking, as abruptly stopping can cause withdrawals and cravings. Nicotine withdrawal occurs after person smoking cigarettes discontinues the use of cigarettes suddenly. Using NRT helps reduce the motivation to smoke cigarettes because the body still gets nicotine from another safer method. Nicotine comes in a patch, lozenge, inhalers, spray, and gum forms and can provide the body the dose of nicotine that it previously got from cigarettes. This activity outlines the indications, mechanism of action, methods of administration, significant adverse effects, contraindications, monitoring, and toxicity of NRT, so providers can direct patient therapy to help them in smoking cessation.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for using nicotine replacement therapy.
- Summarize nicotine's physiological/therapeutic effects and how it assists in smoking cessation.
- Review the possible adverse effects of nicotine replacement therapy.
- Outline the importance of collaboration and communication among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes and treatment efficacy for patients who might benefit from therapy with nicotine replacement therapy for smoking cessation.

# Indications

Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) is for those who want to quit smoking, as abruptly quitting can cause withdrawals and cravings. Nicotine withdrawal occurs after suddenly discontinuing smoking cigarettes. Typical withdrawal symptoms include mood changes, diaphoresis, headaches, insomnia, and poor cognition. These symptoms usually peak two to three days after quitting smoking. Using NRT helps reduce the motivation to smoke cigarettes because the body still gets nicotine from another safer method. Evidence has shown that using NRT helps increase the chances of quitting by about 50% to 70%. Withdrawals include restlessness, more than usual hunger, feeling depressed or irritable, and craving another cigarette.

- Nicotine comes in a patch, lozenge, inhalers, spray, and gum forms and can provide the body the dose of nicotine that it previously got from cigarettes. Using these forms of NRT increases the chances of success of quitting smoking and is FDA-approved.

- NRT contains less nicotine than the average cigarette and has a slower effect on the body. In addition, it does not contain the harmful chemicals of cigarettes, such as tar.

- It is a strong recommendation to start using an NRT either 1 to 2 weeks before quitting or right after quitting cigarettes.

- Bupropion is also an antidepressant with smoking cessation effects and can be combined with the nicotine patch for a higher chance of success.

- According to the American College of Cardiology guidelines, clinicians can use NRT plus varenicline for smokers who do not succeed with NRT or varenicline alone.

# Mechanism of Action

Nicotine is an alkaloid and is only produced in tobacco. It is a tertiary amine that has pyrrolidine and pyridine rings. It binds selectively to nicotinic-cholinergic receptors in multiple locations. The brain, neuromuscular junctions, adrenal medulla, and ganglia have these receptors. When a person inhales nicotine by smoking cigarettes, it diffuses through the lungs into the circulation, eventually going to the brain. It affects the reward center in the limbic system and has a stimulating effect on the cortex. Dopamine in the frontal cortex, mesolimbic area, and corpus striatum is released - dopamine helps deliver the pleasurable experience. A recent study also suggested that MAO-A and B enzymes are modulated by nicotine. This enzyme helps to degrade dopamine, which is primarily responsible for dependence.

# Administration

Forms of NRT do not need to be prescribed by a doctor; most are available over the counter. Patients should follow directions for each form of NRT. Even though there are different brands and forms, evidence shows no more significant effect of one type of NRT over another. Although some studies show no benefit to using NRT for longer than eight weeks, others have found that a longer duration of treatment with nicotine patches may be associated with an improved smoking cessation rate. The initial dosing usually depends on the number of cigarettes smoked daily, and heavier smokers should use increased strength/dose of nicotine therapy. Clinicians can prescribe various forms of nicotine replacement therapy for smoking cessation.

**Nicotine Transdermal Patches**

It comes in different brands; some patches are designed for 24 hours at 5-mg to 52.5-mg dosages, while the higher doses are for heavier smokers. Other patches are designed to be only worn 16 hours a day and come in 5-mg to 25-mg doses. Patches require an application to a non-hairy, dry, clean area of the arm or upper body. Press onto skin for 10 seconds. Then, apply to a different area each time. Treatment is for about 8 to 10 weeks. The highest dose is started for patients over 45 kg who smoke more than ten cigarettes daily. The nicotine patch is the easiest NRT (patient compliance is better) and provides continuous nicotine delivery, among other NRT products. Generally used patch strengths are 21 mg, 14 mg, and 7 mg. If the patient smokes more than ten cigarettes per day, it is advisable to start with a 21 mg patch daily and gradually taper down to 14 mg and then 7 mg. If the patient smokes less than ten cigarettes daily, a 14 mg patch per day is usually prescribed and then tapered down to a 7 mg patch.

**Nicotine Gum**

It is available in different doses, at 2 mg and 4 mg. It is commonly used as a short-acting NRT. The patient chews the gum slowly until it tingles and chews until the itch disappears. Chew when the urge to smoke strikes. Recommended is 8 to 12 pieces of gum. To improve absorption, smokers should avoid acidic beverages such as coffee or carbonated drinks.

**Nicotine Lozenges**

These are available in 1-mg, 1.5-mg, 2-mg, and 4-mg doses. Users should allow 20 to 30 minutes to dissolve slowly and should not chew or swallow. Recommended is 8 to 12 lozenges daily.

**Nicotine Inhalation Cartridge**

It comes in 10 mg. The cartridge should be inserted into the inhaler and then popped into place. Inhale deeply or puff consecutively in short breaths. This type of NRT addresses both the physical and behavioral aspects of dependence. Recommended is 6 to 16 cartridges per day.

**Nicotine Nasal Spray**

It comes in 0.5 mg per spray. The patient should blow their nose before use. Then, tilt the head back, insert the bottle's tip, and spray once in each nostril.

**Nicotine Sublingual Tablet**

It comes in a 2 mg dose and is unavailable in the United States. Patients should understand not to use two doses back to back. If the patient misses a dose, they should take it as soon as possible. However, if it is close to the time of the next dose, they can skip the missed dose.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Hepatic Impairment:**In smokers with moderately impaired liver function (Child-Pugh score 7), total clearance is decreased by 40–50%. There is no data about nicotine's pharmacokinetics in smokers with a Child-Pugh score>7. However, these patients are anticipated to show more significant effects on the clearance of nicotine than patients with moderately impaired liver function. Therefore, clinicians should consider dose reduction.

**Renal Impairment:**Nicotine clearance is decreased by approximately 30%  in patients with moderate renal impairment and approximately 50% in subjects with severe renal impairment. Clinicians should consider dose reduction.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Tobacco smoke contains nicotine, hydrogen cyanide, and carbon monoxide, which are hazardous to the fetus. The NRT does not deliver hydrogen cyanide and carbon monoxide. However, preclinical studies have indicated that nicotine can cause fetal harm. Therefore, clinicians should motivate pregnant women to discontinue smoking using comprehensive behavioral interventions. In addition, if NRT is used during pregnancy or if the patient becomes pregnant while using NRT, clinicians should counsel the patient on the hazard to the fetus. (according to manufacturer's labeling). Evidence of pharmacotherapy interventions in pregnancy (including NRT) is limited and inadequate to make explicit recommendations. According to the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), comprehensive behavioral interventions are efficacious and are therefore suggested.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Professional consensus is to avoid smoking and use short-acting NRT immediately after breastfeeding.

# Adverse Effects

The known adverse effects of nicotine include:

- Gastrointestinal Symptoms: abdominal pain, dyspepsia, hiccups, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting

- Central Nervous System: headache

- Cardiovascular System: palpitations, hypertension

- Neuropsychiatric: depression, back pain, dizziness, nervousness, drooling, shakiness, cold sweats, hypertension, increased heart rate, and vivid dreams

- Oral/nasal mucosa absorbing NRTs, nose and mouth ulcers, and irritation have been reported. Other side effects include excess salivation and swelling of the lips, throat, and tongue.

- Transdermal patches have caused some people skin rash or irritation. Topical hydrocortisone 1% cream or ointment is indicated for some patients to relieve skin irritation.

- Nicotine gums-associated hiccoughs, gastrointestinal disturbances, and jaw pain have been reported.

- Sore throat, coughing, dry lips, and mouth ulcers are adverse drug reactions associated with sublingual tablets. The nasal spray has adverse drug reactions such as a runny nose and nasal irritation.

Patients should inform their clinician immediately if any of the above side effects occur. In addition, the clinician should counsel the patient that any form of nicotine is addictive and that there is a potential for psychological and physical dependence on NRT (although far less than smoking tobacco). Hence patients should adhere strictly to the regimen prescribed by the clinician.

**Drug Interactions:**Nicotine also has drug interactions with adenosine, cimetidine, and varenicline. Adenosine may increase the chronotropic effect of nicotine. Cimetidine may cause an increase in the serum concentration of nicotine and cause toxicity. Varenicline coadministered with NRT can increase the risk of sleep disturbances, nausea, and cutaneous adverse drug reactions such as localized erythema, itching, and worsening of preexisting acne.

# Contraindications

- Hypersensitivity to nicotine.

- People allergic to soy should not use the nicotine lozenge.

- Some experts recommend against using NRT for lactating women to minimize the risk of nicotine exposure to breastfed infants.

# Monitoring

The clinicians should follow up with the patient after initiation of NRT to monitor for adverse drug reactions, reinforce adherence to NRT, and provide comprehensive behavioral support.

# Toxicity

The liver metabolizes nicotine. Therefore, swallowing pills through the gastrointestinal (GI) system will be subject to first-pass metabolism by the liver, and bioavailability would only be about 20%. This process will reduce the bioavailability of nicotine in the system and possibly cause GI side effects. Hence, the only available methods for nicotine are in a non-pill form, such as a lozenge, sublingual tablets, transdermal patches, gum, inhaler, and sprays. These dose forms let the nicotine enter the oral or nasal mucosa or skin and bypass the GI system for more extended bioavailability. The route of absorption is pH-dependent. Acidic foods and drinks can lower the absorption of nicotine. The skin patch releases nicotine at a slower rate. This controlled delivery makes toxicity from nicotine much less likely and prevents any GI side effects. Symptoms in the rare event that the patient overdoses on nicotine include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dizziness, difficulty breathing, tachycardia, weakness, or rash.

In patients who have poisoning from nicotine cartridge, repeated doses of activated charcoal should be given till the nicotine cartridge remains in the gastrointestinal tract since it will continue to release nicotine for a long time. Healthcare professionals must stop nicotine immediately and secure and maintain airways. The clinician should provide hemodynamic support for hypotension and cardiovascular collapse. Administer benzodiazepines for seizures and atropine for bronchial secretions and diarrhea.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

All interprofessional healthcare team members are responsible for educating patients on the harms of smoking. This includes physicians (MDs and DOs), mid-level practitioners (NPs and PAs), nurses, pharmacists, and mental health professionals. The patient should be told about the available nicotine replacement therapies, and the nurse, pharmacist, and clinician should counsel the patient on optimal usage to enhance the odds of successful treatment. Evidence has shown that using NRT helps increase the chances of quitting by about 50% to 70%. Withdrawals include restlessness, more than usual hunger, feeling depressed or irritable, and craving another cigarette.

Bupropion is also an antidepressant with smoking cessation effects, and clinicians can combine it with the nicotine patch for a higher chance of success. These patients need continual support and positive reinforcement, and it is incumbent on all interprofessional team members to participate in this support and to alert other team members of any changes in the patient's status, including relapse, adverse events, or lack of compliance. Unfortunately, with all therapies, relapse rates are high. Using an interprofessional team approach and Ottawa Model for Smoking Cessation (OMSC) is associated with increased rates of smoking cessation in primary care settings.