BCG vaccination after infancy has a substantial effect on tuberculin skin test (TST) reactivity.  BCG trial in the United States showed that individuals who received BCG after infancy had tuberculin skin test reactions ≥10 mm up to 55 years post-immunization.

Prior BCG vaccination should not affect the interpretation of TST results in individuals vaccinated at birth more than ten years earlier given that most individuals who receive the BCG vaccine come from areas where there is a high incidence of TB.  Interferon-gamma release assays (IGRAs) should be used to interpret positive TSTs in persons with a history of BCG immunization since this test is not affected by BCG administration.  In individuals exposed to serial tuberculin testing, previous BCG vaccination may be increased, leading to a positive skin test in an individual with a prior negative skin test. Greater than 50 percent of patients that received intravesical BCG for bladder cancer have been reported to result in conversion to a positive tuberculin skin test. This exposure to intravesical BCG should not result in a positive IGRA result.

The rationale for the development of a booster vaccine is due to decreasing immunity about 15-20 years after the initial immunization at infancy

Studies have shown that the BCG vaccine decreases the risk of disease due to Mycobacterium leprae by 50 to 80 percent and this effect is increased with booster doses of BCG.M. ulcerans, but a more recent retrospective study failed to show evidence that BCG protected against Buruli ulcer disease.

BCG vaccination also protects against childhood lymphadenitis due to M. avium complex

Tuberculin skin test (TST) reaction of 3 to 19 mm in size is expected in most individuals that received BCG immunization two to three months after vaccination.  In a study of 5952 individuals who had BCG vaccination and subsequently underwent tuberculin skin testing 10 to 25 years later, only 8 percent had positive skin test results.