This entity is mostly an incidental finding since the majority of the patients have no symptoms. As the name implies, labial adhesion is a fusion of the labia minora or majora. The exact cause of labial fusion remains unknown. However, it is believed to occur in a low estrogen state. It is rare in the reproductive age group due to the sufficient levels of estrogen found in this population.

For those who do develop labial adhesions during the reproductive age, there is usually a history of some sort of genital trauma or irritation to the genitalia. Examples of genital trauma may include childbirth, sexual abuse, and genitourinary surgery. Management for these patients tends to consist of lysis of the adhesion as well as applying topical estrogen cream. There have been cases of labial adhesion in the postpartum period. It is believed that a possibility may be due to breastfeeding along with the irritation and trauma that occurs during vaginal delivery. The reasoning behind breastfeeding as a cause is that when a mother breastfeeds her baby, prolactin is increased prolactin, leading to a decrease in estrogen and resulting in a hypoestrogenic state. Management remains the same. For preventive measures, it is recommended for minimization of vulvar irritation accompanied by adequate hygiene to the perineal area. Another recommendation may be for the resumption of sexual activity.

Labial adhesions also may be found during another low estrogen stage, the postmenopausal stage. In this stage, due to the low estrogen, the genital area is susceptible to irritation and inflammation, which may lead to adhesion. In this age group, the risk of fusion increases when the patient has a history of diabetes mellitus, lichen sclerosis, or diminished sex.