A comprehensive history and physical exam should be conducted in suspected cases of dermatomyositis, keeping in mind the following objectives:

- Identify the typical muscular and cutaneous signs and symptoms of dermatomyositis

- Exclude other causes of muscle weakness e.g., inherited, infectious or endocrine myopathy

- Conduct a detailed review of systems to determine if other organ systems are involved (respiratory, cardiac, esophageal)

- Evaluate for signs and symptoms of a possible underlying malignancy and perform age-appropriate cancer screening when indicated

Muscle weakness and skin findings comprise the main presenting symptoms in dermatomyositis. The onset of the disease may be insidious or acute with a waxing and a waning course.

**Muscular**

Muscle weakness is the most common presenting symptom in dermatomyositis. The weakness usually has a subacute onset with the development of gradually progressive symmetric proximal muscle weakness. Patients may report difficulty in carrying out activities such as climbing stairs, getting up from a seated position, lifting objects, combing hair, and raising their head from a pillow. Distal muscle weakness, muscle pain, and stiffness are uncommon in dermatomyositis. In severe cases, dysphagia, or dysphonia may be present. The examination may reveal reduced muscle strength of proximal muscles, such as the deltoids, hip flexors, and neck flexors. Usually, muscle tenderness is mild, and distal muscle strength is preserved. Depressed deep tendon reflexes and muscle atrophy are not seen unless the disease is severe and long-standing.

**Cutaneous**

Skin changes may precede or may coincide with the onset of muscular symptoms. Patients can present with several types of skin rashes, photosensitivity, changes in pigmentation, and pruritis. Dermatomyositis can also cause nail changes and alopecia.

Pathognomonic findings of dermatomyositis include the following:

- **Gottron papules:** dorsal metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints may show the presence of overlying erythematous or violaceous papules with or without scaling or ulceration.

- **Heliotrope rash:** This is a characteristic skin finding of dermatomyositis and presents with a violaceous, or an erythematous rash affecting the upper eyelids with or without periorbital edema. This finding may not be apparent in patients with dark skin patients.

Other skin findings that may help differentiate dermatomyositis from other conditions include the following:

- **Gottron sign:** erythematous macules or patches over the elbows or knees

- **Facial erythema**: erythema over the cheeks and nasal bridge involving the nasolabial folds. The rash may extend up to the forehead and laterally up to the ears.

- **Shawl sign**: erythema over the posterior aspect of the neck, upper back, and shoulders at times, extending to the upper arms.

- **V sign**: ill-defined erythematous macules involving the anterior aspect of the neck and the upper chest.

- **Poikiloderma**: atrophic skin with changes in pigmentation and telangiectasia in photo-exposed or non-exposed areas.

- **Holster sign**: poikiloderma involving the lateral aspects of the thighs.

- **Periungual involvement**: telangiectasias and cuticular overgrowth

- **Mechanic's hands**: hyperkeratotic, cracked horizontal lines on the palmar and lateral aspects of the fingers.

- **Scalp involvement**: diffuse poikiloderma, with scaling and pruritis.

- **Calcinosis cutis**: calcium deposits in the skin

**Joints**

Dermatomyositis can cause non-erosive polyarthritis or arthralgia of the small joints of the hands. Patients may present with joint pain or swelling.

**Respiratory**

Patients may present with exertional dyspnea, exercise intolerance, and non-productive cough due to underlying interstitial lung disease (ILD). Auscultation of the chest may reveal the presence of bilateral dry crackles. Reduced chest movement may be seen due to respiratory muscle weakness.

**Esophageal**

Patients may report difficulty swallowing solids and liquids due to the weakness of the muscles of the oropharynx and upper esophagus. They may also have symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux.

**Other findings**

Other findings that may present in dermatomyositis include Raynaud's phenomenon, gastrointestinal ulcers, and cardiac symptoms. Systemic symptoms such as fever, malaise, and weight loss may be present, which may indicate an occult malignancy. The following factors may predict malignancy; male gender, older age at onset, the presence of dysphagia, and the absence of interstitial lung disease.

Patients should be inquired about the intake of any drugs and their family history. Patients should also undergo age-appropriate cancer screening exams such as pelvic exams, breast exams, testicular exams, and rectal exams