**Hematological**

Bleeding is the most common complication, occurring in both the perioperative period as well as later due to the need for anticoagulation with warfarin

Bleeding may occur due to a leak at the pump site from polyester grafts in the conduits, the gastrointestinal mucosal surfaces, and intracranial vessels. The target INR in outpatients is usually 1.5 to 2.5

Thrombosis is another significant hematological complication Patients may develop pump thrombosis, embolic events, or stroke. It is usually due to subtherapeutic anticoagulation, atrial fibrillation, or infection that predisposes to a hypercoagulative state.

Hemolysis is another possibility due to technical complications involving the design of the pump, malpositioned cannulae, or the development of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and pump thrombosis

**Right Heart Failure**

Anatomic changes following LVAD placement cause right ventricular geometric alterations. With left ventricular (LV) unloading, the septum shifts to the left. The increased cardiac output from the LVAD results in an increased venous return to the right ventricle, which now has improved compliance. However, in patients with chronic heart failure, there is pre-existing pulmonary hypertension. This can result in right ventricular (RV) failure

This may necessitate the use of milrinone to reduce pulmonary vascular resistance or epoprostenol as a selective pulmonary vasodilator

**Infection**

The International Society of Heart and Lung Transplantation has classified infections based on their relationship to LVAD

Most commonly, the gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus is isolated, but Enterococcus and other Staphylococcal species may be present. The most common gram-negative organism is Pseudomonas aeruginosa

**Neurological**

Stroke is one of the most dreaded complications of LVAD placement. Both ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes are known to occur, either immediately postoperatively or after several months

**Arrhythmias**

Ventricular arrhythmias are common after the procedure. Placement of the cannula can cause reentrant circuits