The temporal bone is the thickest bone in the body and requires great force to fracture (1875 pounds or 850 kg of lateral force in one study). The temporal bone houses portions of the internal carotid artery and internal jugular vein, cranial nerves (CN) VII-XI, the middle and inner ear structures, and forms a portion of the middle cranial fossa. Such high-velocity injury to these crucial structures carries the risk of significant morbidity and mortality.

The temporal bone is a paired component of the skull base, articulating posteriorly with the occipital bone, superiorly with the parietal bones, and anteriorly with the sphenoid bone creating the occipitomastoid, squamous, and sphenosquamosal sutures, respectively. The temporal bone has complex anatomy including four geographic parts (squamous, mastoid, petrous, tympanic) and numerous named foramen/canals (foramen lacerum, carotid canal, internal acoustic meatus, jugular foramen).

- Foramen lacerum: greater petrosal nerve

- Carotid canal: internal carotid artery

- Internal acoustic meatus: CN VII, CN VIII

- Jugular foramen: internal jugular vein, posterior meningeal artery, CN IX, CN X, CN XI

Additionally, there are 3 bony processes (zygomatic, mastoid, styloid).

The otic capsule, or bony labyrinth, is the dense portion of the petrous temporal bone that surrounds the membranous labyrinth of the inner ear. This is, in turn, surrounded by the less dense and variably pneumatized petrous apex and the mastoid segment of the temporal bone. From anterior to posterior the otic capsule contains the cochlea, vestibule, and three semicircular canals.