**Anatomy**

The sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM) divides the neck into anterior and posterior triangles. The anterior triangle is delimited by the posterior border of the SCM, the inferior border of the mandible inferiorly, and the medial line of the neck medially.

The muscle originates from the upper edge of the sternal manubrium and the medial quarter of the upper face of the clavicle; the two muscle heads merge into a single muscle belly that is directed upwards and laterally. Insertions arrive at the mastoid process of the temporal bone and on the anterior portion of the superior nuchal line.

The SCM can be divided into four portions, owing to its two sites of origin (clavicle and sternum) and two sites of attachment (occiput and mastoid process): sternomastoid, sterno-occipital, cleidomastoid, and cleido-occipital.

The sternomastoid portion of the SCM is the muscle area that can develop a more significant percentage of contractile strength than the other portions during muscle action. In contrast, the cleido-occipital portion is the muscular area where the least force develops.

**Function**

The unilateral contraction of the SCM determines a triple movement, associating the rotation of the head on the side opposite to that of its contraction, the inclination from the side of its contraction, and extension.

The effects of the simultaneous contraction of the two muscles depend on the state of contraction of the other muscles of the cervical spine:

- If the cervical spine is not fixed, this bilateral contraction causes a hyperlordosis of the cervical spine with an extension of the head and a bending of the cervical spine dorsally.

- If the cervical spine is rigid and rectilinear due to the contraction of the paravertebral muscles, the simultaneous contraction of the SCM determines the flexion of the cervical spine on the dorsal spine and flexion of the head forward.

The SCM can also have inspiratory muscle action by taking a fixed point on the temporal bone and then lifting the sternum and the clavicles.

The SCM plays an important role in the posture of the neck and the body. It has been shown that vestibular stimulation electrically activates the sternocleidomastoid, with evidence of a close connection between the vestibular area and the motoneurons of the SCM.

Another important function of SCM is allowing the correct temporomandibular joint (TMJ) function. During mastication, a trigeminal-cervical reflex stimulates the activity of SCM; there is evidence that SCM innervation is fundamental for optimal TMJ occlusion.