**Strategies to Lower Risk of Bleeding**

- If a patient has atrial fibrillation and is at high risk for bleeding or has suffered a previous stroke, considering should be given to atrial arrhythmia ablation. Evidence today reveals that even though continued anticoagulation is required in patients undergoing catheter ablation and device implantation, they do have a slightly lower risk of bleeding than those being treated with dabigatran or warfarin.

- Patients undergoing elective surgery are always at risk for bleeding if they are on an oral anticoagulant. Hence, the current recommendations are to cease warfarin therapy for 5-6 days prior to the procedure and bridge the patient to heparin or low molecular weight heparin. Once the surgery is over, and if there is no more bleeding, the patient can resume writing therapy 12-24 hours later.

- In surgery cases where the risk of bleeding risk of high such as spinal surgery or a craniotomy, the anticoagulation medications should be placed on hold until the risk is low or zero.

- If the patient is at risk for venous thrombosis, the use of heparin or low molecular weight heparin and sequential compression stocking is an option.

- An important consideration in patients with warfarin therapy is what to do if the patient is on antiplatelet therapy at the same time. Indications for concomitant antiplatelet agent use include prevention of coronary disease and maintaining patency of stent or prevention of stroke. This combination is often associated with increased intracranial bleed in elderly patients who are taking warfarin at the same time. Even mild head trauma increases the risk of bleeding.

- Medical alert bracelets are recommended