**Structural Overview 
**

The sinoatrial nodal artery can be derived from the right coronary artery (most common), left coronary artery, or the left circumflex artery. If it originates from the right coronary artery, it is typically more proximal and located only 1.2cm on average from the origination of the right coronary artery at the ostia. If the sinoatrial nodal artery originates from the left circumflex, its locations can be either distally or proximally. The diameter of the artery can range from 1.7 to 2.2 mm depending on the artery from which it originates. The sinoatrial artery typically takes a retrocaval approach to reach the sinoatrial nodal tissue, but in 30% of cases, the sinoatrial nodal branches have been noted to form a ring around the superior vena cava.

**Histology
**

The sinoatrial nodal artery consists of three layers - adventitia, media, and intima. The outermost layer is the adventitia and consists of collagen and elastic tissue which provides the artery with pliability and strength. Furthermore, the adventitia contains the artery’s blood supply, also known as the vasa vasorum, nerves, and lymphatic vessels. Lying inside the adventitia is the media layer of the artery which contains multiple layers of smooth muscle. This smooth muscle allows for vasoconstriction or vasodilation of the artery to allow the tissue to meet its metabolic requirements. Additionally, the medial layer contains connective tissue consisting of elastic fibers, collagen, and proteoglycans, which provides for the further structural integrity of the artery. The intimal layer lines the inside of the artery and consists of endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and a subendothelial layer with associated connective tissue. The endothelial cells are aligned longitudinally and allow the artery to have a selective barrier to diffusion for the other layers. The endothelial cells also produce prostacyclin, PGI, which acts as an antithrombotic agent and they also produce von Willebrand factor which acts as a prothrombotic agent. Also, the endothelial cells release growth factors, lipoprotein receptors, and some inflammatory mediators.

**Function
**

The sinoatrial nodal artery functions to provide oxygen and nutrients predominantly to the sinoatrial nodal tissue; however, it has been known to supply collateral branches to the atrium and auricles of the same side as its origin and in some cases to the opposing side. Oxygen is a crucial component to allow for the normal function of tissue, and without it, viability would not be possible. As the artery approaches the capillary bed of the tissue, it thins out, and the endothelial cells allow the selective permeability of nutrients necessary for viability.