The differential diagnosis of LN includes iris mammillations, multiple iris nevi, Cogan-Reese syndrome, granulomatous iritis (Busacca, Koeppe, and Berlin nodules), iris cysts, Brushfield spots, iris melanoma, leiomyoma, xanthogranuloma, and rarely secondary metastatic nodules.

Iris mammillations are frequently confused with LN and are characterized by regularly spaced, deep brown, and smooth conical iris elevations.

Iris nevi manifest as flat or minimally elevated, densely pigmented lesions with blurred margins.

Cogan-Reese syndrome is a subtype of ICE (iridocorneal endothelial syndrome) syndrome characterized by pedunculated nodules or pigmented diffuse lesions at the anterior surface of the iris.

Koeppe's nodules are seen near the pupillary area, and Busacca's nodules are seen over the iris surface in granulomatous uveitis.

Iris pigment epithelial cysts can be seen on the anterior or posterior surface of the iris. They have a brownish-black velvety appearance, whereas the iris stromal cysts appear as clear masses on the anterior surface of the iris.

Brushfield spots characteristic of Down syndrome, appear as small white grayish spots on the iris periphery.

In juvenile xanthogranuloma, the iris lesions appear as localized, yellowish, vascularised elevated masses on the iris surface. These patients are prone to develop spontaneous hyphema and secondary glaucoma.

Iris melanomas clinically appear as densely pigmented lesions over the iris with ectropion uveae, hyphema, trans-scleral involvement, angle involvement, and secondary glaucoma.

Metastatic tumors of the iris from systemic malignancies like breast carcinoma, lung carcinoma, skin carcinoma, oesophageal carcinoma, and renal carcinoma are relatively uncommon, and they appear as stromal nodules or ill-defined iris thickening.