Although ALHE is a benign disease, its management is particularly challenging considering the frequency of recurrences and the absence of randomized controlled clinical trials. In fact, most of the available treatment evidence exists from case reports and retrospective analyses. There are reports of multiple therapeutic options but none with consistent results.

Surgical excision is considered the treatment of choice in ALHE. It is the most commonly used therapeutic intervention and has the lowest failure rate of 44.2%. Given this high recurrence rate, Mohs micrographic surgery was suggested as a treatment option for lesions with ill-defined margins and when tissue sparing is desirable. Lesions with large cutaneous vessels may respond better if a preoperative embolization is performed.

Laser therapies are promising alternatives for surgery in patients with multiple lesions, in cosmetic sensitive sites and poor surgical candidates. Argon, Nd: YAG, pulsed dye and carbon-dioxide lasers were previous choices. But the recurrence rate remains high over 50%. Combination of pulsed dye laser and carbon-dioxide lasers also had consideration. The recurrence can be prevented by maintenance treatment.

Other interventional treatment options include photodynamic therapy, cryotherapy, electrodesiccation, and radiotherapy.

Systemic treatments with systemic corticosteroids, oral isotretinoin, oral dapsone, and oral pentoxifylline were previously used but with high failure rates (80% to 100%).

Recent data suggested oral propranolol alone or before surgery to reduce the size or number of lesions.

Topical timolol also showed some success in the management of ALHE.