Treatment of FAI consists of both non-operative and surgical options. Non-operative measures should be initiated before consideration of surgery. Such treatment options include physical therapy, activity modification, and pain medication (primarily with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs). There is also a consideration for intraarticular injection with a combination of local anesthetic and steroid. This can be helpful for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes as successful pain relief from the injection would confirm the diagnosis and etiology of pain. If the patient has failed conservative treatment and the pain is affecting their quality of life, then surgical treatment should be considered.

Surgical management consists of resecting the bony causes of impingement and repairing soft tissue structures as needed. Surgery can be performed arthroscopically or using an open technique. In the presence of a cam lesion involving the femoral head-neck junction, a cam resection or femoral osteoplasty is performed by using a high-speed burr to shave down the excess bone. When a pincer lesion is present on the acetabulum, an acetabular osteoplasty is performed. By removing the excess bone causing impingement, the patient can have an improved range of motion without pain. It is not uncommon for the labrum to be torn as well as a result of impingement.

If hip arthritis is present on imaging, then these procedures should not be performed as they do not address pain from arthritis, and the patient will continue to have hip pain after surgery. Thus, patients with hip arthritis and FAI should be treated for hip arthritis. If severe arthritis is present, then the patient may be considered for hip replacement after conservative treatment is exhausted. Occasionally, patients may present with hip dysplasia and FAI (cam lesions), and both pathologies should be addressed for optimal outcomes. Hip dysplasia is addressed surgically with a pelvic osteotomy to improve femoral head coverage with the acetabulum.

Traditionally, osteoplasty of the femur and pelvis has been performed by open surgical dislocation of the hip. However, hip arthroscopy is becoming a more common avenue for achieving the desired outcome, with arguably decreased surgical risks and complications. Open surgical dislocation provides better visualization, and allows more exposure to perform the osteoplasty; however, recovery is longer because of more extensive soft tissue dissection. Hip arthroscopy is a growing surgical technique in orthopedics that minimizes soft tissue disruption, but it is much more technically challenging. Arthroscopic outcomes are similar to open techniques for FAI.