The pathophysiologic evidence indicates the primary mechanism of tissue damage in slow onset frostbite is due to a multifactorial vascular response. The final stage of intracellular ice crystal formation may seal the necrotic fate of the tissue, at that point preventing a chance for tissue regeneration. There is a recoverable phase if rewarming occurs before the final tissue destruction, but endothelial reperfusion injury can occur again within 4 to 8 hours post-rewarming. All treatment options are focused at restoration and maintenance of microvascular flow post-rewarming and reduction of inflammation, specifically aimed at endovascular inflammatory effects and prevention of reperfusion injury. Treatment options are then divided into three phases: (1) prethaw field care, (2) immediate rewarming phase, which is preferable in the hospital, and (3) postthaw phase, which may continue for several weeks to months.

In the majority of cases, however, the postthaw phase treatment is delayed until the physical evidence of tissue damage is manifest when the wounds are staged and assessed, typically more than 24 to 48 hours post-rewarming. This is due to a lack of early recognition protocols and inability to identify true frostbite in the earliest stages.

Current treatment options are plagued by lack of high-level evidence provided by well-designed randomized control trials (RCTs), but all therapeutic strategies are aimed at inhibition of endovascular inflammation and early reperfusion. Vasodilators such as nitroglycerine or papaverine have been useful, but studies are not graded with use alone but when combined with thrombolytic agents such as tissue plasminogen activator (rTPA) or streptokinase in a stepwise approach it receives a 1B-C recommendation by ACCP classification criteria.  Iloprost, a prostacyclin analogue with vasodilatory properties, also has received a 1B recommendation, but currently, the drug is not available in the United States.

Hyperbaric oxygen sustains the metabolic needs for injured tissue with the immediate reversal of hypoxia and reduces the endothelial inflammation and inhibition of reperfusion injury by reducing leukocyte adhesion. No randomized control trials have been performed to assess this theory, and it has not received an ACCP recommendation, but multiple case series have been presented with hyperbaric oxygen treatment initiated during various time intervals following rewarming. All conclude that some level of tissue recovery occurred with decreased levels of amputation, but these results have not been matched to controls. Cases that initiate hyperbaric oxygen treatment earlier tend to have better results than delayed treatment, most likely from sustaining penumbral areas of injury. Several studies have combined hyperbaric treatment with vasodilating, anticoagulation or hemorrheologic agents such as pentoxifylline with reported success.