Many congenital anomalies of the female reproductive system can go unnoticed until the child-bearing years when infertility or amenorrhea becomes an issue.

Gonadal dysgenesis, the presence of streak gonads instead of functional gonads, can be seen in individuals with Turner syndrome (45, XO) and will likely go unnoticed until reproductive age, as will uterine malformations.

An undescended testis may be found at any point along the normal path of descent from the abdomen or ectopically.

The presence of a cloaca or other anorectal malformation should prompt a more thorough exam, as it is one component of the VACTERL association (vertebral anomalies, cardiovascular anomalies, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal anomalies, and limb defects).

The most typical presentation of a Wilms tumor is an asymptomatic child younger than five years of age with an abdominal mass, which would prompt an initial evaluation with an ultrasound, CT, or MRI.

Horseshoe kidney is an anomaly that predisposes the individual to ureteropelvic junction obstruction, hydronephrosis, urinary tract infections, and tumors; one-third of these cases are found incidentally.

Complications stemming from urachal anomalies include urinary stasis, infection, stone formation, and, although rare, malignancy, necessitating a prompt diagnosis and surgical correction.

The clinical implications of all urogenital anomalies are too numerous for the scope of this discussion. With that said, the patient and family's emotional well-being and support system should always be addressed when discussing these diagnoses, as many of these conditions can carry severe emotional distress as well as physical morbidity and mortality.