**Interferon-alpha**

For chronic viral hepatitis treatment, administer 10 MIU of interferon-alpha is administered three times a week subcutaneously for 24 weeks in combination with ribavirin. For non-Hodgkin lymphoma, hairy cell leukemia, and multiple myeloma, 3 MIU of interferon-alpha is administered subcutaneously until tumor progression stops. In treating renal cell carcinoma, administer 10 MIU of interferon-alpha until the cessation of tumor progression. For chronic myeloid leukemia, 10 MIU of interferon-alpha is administered three to five times a week subcutaneously in combination with cytarabine until tumor progression stops. For melanoma treatment, give 3 to 10 MIU of interferon-alpha three times a week subcutaneously as adjuvant therapy. Interferon-alpha is also used to treat condylomata acuminata, Behcet disease, and Kaposi sarcoma with varying schedules.

**Interferon-beta**

Interferon-beta 1a and 1b are used to treat multiple sclerosis. Interferon-beta 1b is administered subcutaneously in a 250 ug dose every other day. Interferon-beta 1a is administered intramuscularly once per week at a dose of 30 mcg and subcutaneously three times a week at a dose of 22 to 42 mcg.

**Interferon-gamma**

Interferon-gamma is used to treat chronic granulomatous disease. It is administered subcutaneously three times per week into the deltoid or anterior thigh. The dosage is 50 JLg/m for those with a body surface area greater than 0.5 m. For those with a body surface area less than or equal to 0.5 m, the dosage calculation formula is 1.5 JLg/kg.