Virchow’s triad can explain the pathophysiology leading to IVC thrombosis. This triad has three components: stasis in blood flow, endothelial injury, and hypercoagulability.  There are two main subgroups used to describe the causes of IVC thrombosis:

- IVC Thrombosis in Congenitally Normal Inferior Vena Cava

When the IVC is developmentally normal, thrombosis formation most commonly occurs from compression from adjacent structures. Examples of compressive structures can include renal cell tumors, pancreatic carcinoma, large uterine fibroid, Budd-Chiari Syndrome, liver abscess, retroperitoneal masses, abdominal aortic aneurysm, and others. These are all examples in which the IVC has normal function, and external structures are causing compressive forces that result in stasis of blood flow. Additionally, certain populations of patients are predisposed to develop thrombi because of a hypercoagulable state. Examples include thrombophilia or factor V Leiden mutation. Modifiable factors such as oral contraceptives, smoking, obesity, pregnancy, and hormonal replacement therapy also place patients at increased risk for the development of a thrombus.  A significant cause of IVC thrombosis is occlusion of an IVC filter which is becoming more prevalent due to the increased placement of these devices. Trauma is also a cause of inferior vena cava thrombosis. The injury can occur during percutaneous cannulation of the femoral vein or during cardiopulmonary bypass. Insertion of dialysis catheters, femoral venous catheters, pacemaker wires, and vena cava filters are all potential causes of inferior vena cava thrombosis.

- IVC Thrombosis in Congenitally Abnormal Inferior Vena Cava

A congenitally abnormal IVC leads to turbulent blood flow, which can ultimately lead to the development of a thrombus. Congenital IVC anomalies occur in approximately 1% of the population, and within that 1%, about 60 to 80% develop IVC thrombosis. The location of the thrombus depends on the congenital abnormality, which can range from infrarenal to suprarenal. Examples include a duplicate inferior vena cava, absence of infrarenal IVC, and even an accessory left renal vein leading to thrombus formation.