**Pharmacological Treatment**

**Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)**are considered to be the first line of treatment for dysmenorrhea. NSAIDs are very effective in the treatment of dysmenorrhea in comparison to placebo or other therapy.

**Oral contraceptive pills (OCPs)**are reported effective in reducing the dysmenorrheic pain compared to placebo among adolescents.

**Progestin-only pills (POPs)**are suitable more for patients with secondary dysmenorrhea related to endometriosis, whereas their effectiveness as a treatment for primary dysmenorrhea is not evident.

**Non-pharmacological Treatment**

Maintaining an active lifestyle and a balanced diet that is rich in vitamins and minerals are generally recommended for better health outcomes. In particular, such diet and lifestyle are useful to reduce the intensity of the dysmenorrhea.

Though different types of exercise are generally recommended due to several health benefits and low or no risk, it also helps reduce the intensity of dysmenorrhea. No clear evidence about certain exercise activity or specific duration but moderate exercise is recommended, especially in obese women.

Heat is effective compared to NSAIDs and seems to be preferred easy therapy option by many patients with no side effects. Still, high-quality studies needed.

Food supplements, complementary or alternative medicine such as plant-based therapy, Chinese medicine, and supplements are being used for dysmenorrhea. Further, they are not regulated by the FDA. Overall there is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of any of the other herbal and dietary therapies.