Low-carb approaches stem primarily from the hypothesis that lowering insulin, a critical hormone that produces an anabolic, fat-storing state, improves cardiometabolic function and induces weight loss.

One hypothesis of why low-carb approaches produce rapid weight loss compared to other diets is that fats and protein increase satiety and produce less concomitant hypoglycemia. This increase in satiety and less rebound hypoglycemia reduces hunger and overall food intake and produces a caloric deficit. Another hypothesis contends that low-carb diets can produce a higher metabolic burn than high-carb diets. In recent studies, there appears to be a metabolic advantage of approximately 200 to 300 more calories burned compared to an iso-caloric high-carb diet.

The ketogenic (keto) diet, a specific low-carb version, deserves mention. Keto diets restrict carbohydrates to induce nutritional ketosis and typically limit carbs to 20 to 50 grams daily. Restricting carbs to under 50 gms induces glycogen depletion and ketone production from the mobilization of fat stored in adipose tissue. Nutritional ketosis produces ketone bodies (acetoacetate, acetone, and beta-hydroxybutyrate) and is measurable as serum or urinary ketones. Nutritional ketosis generally increases serum ketones from 1 mmol/L to 7 mmol/L but does not produce metabolic acidosis. Diabetic ketoacidosis, by definition, includes metabolic acidosis, hyperglycemia, and serum ketones (generally over 20 mmol/L).

The term net carbs refer to the total amount of fully digestible carbohydrates contained in a meal. This can be calculated carbs by subtracting the whole amount of fiber and half the amount of sugar alcohols from the amount of total carbs. The only nutritional impact of using net carbs is it may help the patient to choose foods that are higher in fiber.

Despite the debate, it is clear from numerous systematic reviews that low-carb diets are as effective, if not more effective, for weight loss compared to other diets. The evidence for benefits and concerns for low-carb will be further delineated below.