Following surgical stabilization procedures, the patient is kept immobilized in a sling for the initial 4- to 6-week postoperative period, depending on the surgeon's preference and the degree/complexity of the shoulder instability pattern. Following arthroscopic procedures, it is worth mentioning that the subscapularis repair (from an open stabilization procedure) is avoided.

During sling use, patients should be encouraged to perform elbow/wrist/finger ROM to avoid stiffness. An ideal time to incorporate these movements is while the patient is showering and/or before bed.

Following the initial period of shoulder immobilization, passive and active ROM exercises are initialized based on surgeon preference. Extreme provocative positions are typically avoided (i.e., shoulder abduction and external rotation) until about eight weeks following surgery. A goal of full active ROM by the 8-week postop mark is reasonable in most clinical cases.

Progressive resistance and gradual strengthening often begin during the 10- to 12-week postoperative period.

**Return to Sport**

Return to sport-specific drills and return to practice and/or competition will vary based on position, sport, level of performance, and the complexity of the injury. Generally, a return to sport no earlier than three months has been advocated in the literature, with a return to high-impact collision sports (e.g., rugby, football) around the 6-month postoperative mark.

**Return to Work**

All patients should understand that the return to work timeline will vary depending on the occupational demands of each individual. A heavy physical workload is a known risk factor for prolonged time lost to return to work. A 2017 study reported a mean time to return to work following arthroscopic Bankart repair of 2 months, with return times as early as 1 to 4 weeks following surgery ranging up to 10 months following surgery.