Ketamine (ketamine hydrochloride) has been approved for general anesthesia either alone or in combination with other medications. It is a superb drug for use in short-term medical procedures that do not require skeletal muscle relaxation. It has approval for the induction of general anesthesia as a pre-anesthetic to other general anesthetic agents.

It also has indications for supplementing low-potency agents such as nitrous oxide. Ketamine is used for short-term procedural sedation and rapid sequence intubation and is very useful in the emergency department setting for these conditions. It is the medication of choice for patients with bronchospasm because of its bronchodilatory properties. It can be utilized for procedures requiring short-term sedation/anesthesia, such as the reduction of fractures and dislocations, as well as in wound repair in uncooperative patients, especially children. It can be safely used in a wide age range, beginning at three months. Because children metabolize ketamine faster than adults, higher dosing is required than in the adult population. Elderly patients, on the other hand, need lower dosing since they are slow metabolizers of this agent.

There is a wealth of evidence indicating the value of ketamine in treating severe pain, including conditions such as trauma, fractures, abdominal and flank pain, low back pain, and extremity pain. When used for pain management, sub-dissociative dosing, otherwise known as low-dose ketamine (LDK), is used, either alone or as an adjunct to other pain relief medications. It is safe and effective to use in combination with injectable nonsteroidal pain medications as well as opioids. It has gained greater acceptance as concern has grown regarding opioid use. Clinicians are also using ketamine to treat patients with depression and suicidal ideation successfully. It has been used recreationally as a drug of abuse. The street name for ketamine is "K" or "Special K."

Ketamine is FDA approved for use in anesthesia and procedural sedation. It has been used "off-label" and shown in numerous studies to be safe when used for pain management, as discussed above. Ketamine is not FDA approved for treating depression and suicidal ideation, and such use is off-label. The FDA has recently approved the esketamine (the S enantiomer) form for treatment-resistant depression in conjunction with another oral antidepressant. Recreational use of ketamine is not FDA-approved.

At doses below a certain threshold, ketamine produces analgesia and sedation. However, once the critical dosage threshold of roughly 1 to 1.5 mg/kg when given intravenously (IV) or 3 to 4 mg/kg when given intramuscularly (IM) is reached, the characteristic dissociative state abruptly appears. Because of this, the dissociative state is not consistent with the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) definitions of moderate sedation or deep sedation; therefore, ketamine must be considered from a different perspective than drugs with the classical sedation continuum.