Patients with nfvPPA will often present with a gradual worsening of speech disturbances over the years. These aphasia symptoms should be the primary and initial presenting symptoms without significant cognitive, physical, or behavioral deficits. Specific speech disturbances can include worsening grammar, improper use of conjunctions, poor syntax, the omission of verbs, and reversal of binary terms such as "yes" and "no," with some attempts to correct themselves.

Patients may complain of dropping words, or family members may be concerned about the patient using words out of order. Grammar is likewise affected in the written form. When analyzing the patient's emails or hand-written letters, it can often be found alongside choppy writing and misuse of functional morphemes (the plural -s, verb endings like -ing, -ed, and conjunctions).

Patients will often express frustration and sometimes depression due to their retained insight into their condition. This can lead to family members expressing concern about the patient becoming less talkative and may even be the initial chief complaint that brings the patient for evaluation.

Physical examination, including the neurological exam, is usually normal. However, there have been reports of rare possible findings of mild ideomotor apraxia, parkinsonism, and increased reflexes.

**Nonfluent/Agrammatic Variant of PPA (nvfPPA)**

The hallmark clinical features of nfvPPA are effortful speech and agrammatism. Effortful speech is characterized by slow, labored speech production, mainly due to a speech motor planning deficit, i.e., apraxia of speech (AOS).

in nfvPPA patients have been reported. With the progression of the disease, other cognitive deficits may emerge, including a decline in attentional resources and verbal working memory, as well as executive functions, episodic memory, praxis, and behavioral symptoms.

The current clinical criteria for nfvPPA include at least one of the following core features: (1) Agrammatism in language production; (2) Effortful, halting speech with inconsistent speech sound errors and distortions (AOS); and at least 2 of 3 of the following other features: (1) Impaired comprehension of syntactically complex sentences; (2) Spared single-word comprehension; (3) Spared object knowledge.

**Semantic Variant PPA**

Patients with the svPPA progressively lose the meaning of words and usually present with severe, progressive anomia and impaired comprehension of single words.

In the early stages, the inability to comprehend low-familiarity words can be the only symptom accompanying anomia, and patients frequently ask for the meaning of words. The progression of semantic deficits leads to impaired object recognition affecting all sensory modalities, including vision, touch, olfaction, and gustation. The ability to correctly identify objects is strongly influenced by familiarity with the object (e.g., "fork" is more familiar than "compass"). Additionally, individuals with svPPA appear to have disproportionate difficulty understanding concrete concepts relative to abstract concepts.

Episodic memory is relatively preserved in svPPA, especially when tasks with minimal conceptual loading are used.

The current diagnostic guidelines

**Lopogenic Variant PPA**

Patients with lvPPA typically present with word-finding difficulty, along with sentence repetition deficits and, as the disease progresses, impaired sentence comprehension. Phonological impairments and, specifically, a phonological short-term memory deficit have been suggested to be the core of the syndrome.

Criteria for lvPPA require that both of the following core features must be present: impaired single-word retrieval in spontaneous speech and naming, along with the impaired repetition of sentences and phrases. At least 3 of the following other features must be present: (1) phonological errors in spontaneous speech and naming; (2) spared single-word comprehension and object knowledge; (3) spared motor speech; and (4) absence of frank agrammatism.