**Interview Preparation**

Prior to the interview, all patients need to be searched and disarmed.

**Recognition of Violence Escalation**

Violence history remains the best predictor for future violence. The classic escalation of patient violence progresses from anger, resistance, and finally to confrontation. Signs of impending violent behavior include provocative behavior, posturing, pacing, angry demeanor, and aggressive acts.

- Coburn and Mycyk describe three phases of violence escalation: (1) anxiety, (2) defensiveness, (3) physical aggression. As individuals move through these stages, they typically get closer to violence. It is a useful tool for clinicians to initiate de-escalation techniques at earlier phases to prevent progression quickly.

- The STAMP (Staring, Tone, and volume of voice, Anxiety, Mumbling, and Pacing) tool for use in ED details behavior that can be observed in patients, family, and friends that can be indicative of impending violence.

- The Overt Aggression Scale (OAS) is a rating scale to measure the aggressive behavior of inpatient children and adults. It is divided into four sections, including verbal aggression and physical aggression against objects, self, and others.

**De-escalation Techniques**

Once an agitated patient has been identified, staff must give the patient the opportunity to calm down before physical intervention. Often, agitated but cooperative patients will be amenable to verbal de-escalation. Guidelines recommend an honest and straightforward approach with the implementation of friendly gestures proves most beneficial in the setting of an agitated patient. 10 key features for verbal de-escalation as provided by the American Association for Emergency Psychiatry De-escalation Workgroup include:

- Maintain a distance of two arm's lengths

- Maintain a relaxed and non-confrontational posture

- Establish verbal contact

- Use simple and concise language.

- Identify requests and feelings.

- Actively listen to what the patient is saying.

- Do not be afraid to agree to disagree.

- Set clear boundaries

- Attempt to offer choices

- Debrief the staff and patient

**Indication for Emergency Seclusion and Restraint**

Following fruitless de-escalation techniques, emergency seclusion and restraint can be indicated. The following list suggests incidences when such measures should be administered.

- Imminent danger to others

- Imminent danger to the patient

- Profound disruption of treatment or damage

**Types of Restraints**

Always, the least restrictive method necessary to correct the issue should be used.

Physical restraints encompass hand mitts, soft cloth limb restraints, leather limb restraints, enclosed beds, belts, and vests. Ideally, a restraint team should include at least five people, including the team leader. If the patient is female, at least one member should be female to minimize the potential of sexual assault allegations.

Chemical restraint (sedatives/hypnotics/neuroleptics/dissociatives) can be administered alone or with physical restraints. The medication used must have a rapid onset with minimal side effects. The three primary drug classes used are benzodiazepines, first-generation antipsychotics, and second-generation antipsychotics. If the patient is only minimally responsive following the administration of the chemical restraint, it may be fruitful to administer a subsequent psychotropic from an alternate class. The pharmacological agent administered can vary upon the scenario:

Severely violent (rapid tranquilization)

- First-generation or second-generation antipsychotics (e.g., haloperidol [2.5 to 10 mg IM], olanzapine [5-10 mg IM])

- Benzodiazepines (e.g., lorazepam [0.5 to 2 mg IV/IM], midazolam [2.5 to 5 mg IV/IM])

- Combination of first-generation antipsychotics and a benzodiazepines

Agitation from drug intoxication or withdrawal

- Benzodiazepines (contraindicated in the setting of intoxication with CNS depressant)

Agitation due to an unknown cause

- Benzodiazepines (preferred) or

- First-generation antipsychotics

Agitation in a patient with a psychiatric condition

- First-generation antipsychotics or

- Second-generation antipsychotics

Lorazepam can be given in doses of 0.5 to 2mg IV or IM every 10 to 30 minutes, depending on the severity of agitation. The half-life is 10 to 20 hours. Midazolam works more rapidly than lorazepam; however, it lasts a shorter time period (one to two hours). The dose for midazolam is 2.5 to 5 mg IV or IM and can be given every three to five minutes, depending on severity. The dose for haloperidol is 2.5 to 10 mg IM or IV (although the FDA does not approve IV administration) every 15 to 30 minutes as needed. Haloperidol has an onset of action of about 28 minutes IM and 3 to 20 minutes IV. Olanzapine can be given in a dose of 5 to 10 mg IM with an onset of action of 15 to 45 minutes and a half-life of two to four hours.

Take caution when giving a patient first-generation antipsychotics as they have a propensity to induce extrapyramidal side effects, as well as QT prolongation, which can potentially lead to dysrhythmias like torsades de pointes.

Generally, heuristic models suggest that the provider moves to an alternate class when the initial attempt is ineffective. An alternative to benzodiazepines and antipsychotics is ketamine. Ketamine is a dissociative anesthetic with minimal adverse effects. Off label uses include management in the setting of excited delirium, acute-on-chronic substance abuse, and when first-line measures have been ineffective.

**Active Restraint Monitoring**

Document appropriate clinical indication and have a standardized checklist prepared for staff to monitor and supply patient needs effectively. Numerous deaths and adverse patient outcomes have been reported due to inappropriate restraint placement and negligent monitoring. After restraint placement, patients should be reevaluated every hour and moved at regular intervals to prevent sequelae such as pressure ulcers, rhabdomyolysis, and paresthesias.

Seclusion is also known as a type of environmental restraint that is used to prevent free movement of the patient and decrease environmental stimulation. It can be used involuntarily or voluntarily, depending on the indication.

There are circumstances when restraint and seclusion are contraindicated. Seclusion is inappropriate if a patient requires constant monitoring. Examples include patients presenting with suicidal ideation, self-injurious behavior, hemodynamic instability, or overdose. Restraint and seclusion should not be used as a means of punishment or convenience.

Generally, restraints and seclusion cannot be administered longer than 4 hours for adults (> 18 years), 2 hours for children and adolescents (9 - 17 years), or 1 hour for children (<9 years) unless state laws are more restrictive.

**Removal of Restraints**

When the patient is no longer a danger to themselves or others, the restraints should be removed immediately.