The decision to treat elevated LDL cholesterol levels depends on the determination of overall cardiovascular risk by the patient's primary physician, and this should be discussed in great detail with the patient. The absolute risk reduction affiliated with lipid-lowering therapy for hyperlipidemia is generally less than for patients with known underlying cardiovascular disease. To reduce risk in patients without a known diagnosis of cardiovascular disease, only treatments of elevated LDL cholesterol have proven to be of clinical benefit. There is no proven clinical benefit to the treatment of hypertriglyceridemia or low HDL cholesterol levels.

Initial treatment modalities are focused on diet and lifestyle modification, with the possible addition of lipid-lowering medications if needed. Patients with mild hyperlipidemia and low ASCVD risk (below 7.5% 10-year risk) should focus on a low fat, low carbohydrate diet, and moderate to high-intensity physical activity (recommended 30 minutes per day, 5 to 6 days per week). The AHA advises limiting saturated fat consumption to about 5% of your daily calories and restricting the total quantity of trans-saturated fat consumption as much as possible. Quitting smoking, lowering blood pressure, and losing weight have all proven to be very advantageous in regards to lowering vascular disease risk. For patients at moderate to high ASCVD risk (over 7.5% 10-year risk), the addition of lipid-lowering "statin" medications should be added.

The most well rounded and complete meta-analysis investigating primary prevention trials in hyperlipidemia patients discovered an all-cause mortality benefit and that lowering LDL cholesterol is effective at decreasing cardiovascular events, in particular, reducing the risk of myocardial infarction. There is a clear and proven benefit to statin therapy for the vast majority of patients, from low risk to high risk, and if side effects and financial constraints did not exist, almost all patients would be prescribed statin therapy. Therefore, these medication's side effects and costs should be weighed against the individual patient's potential benefit from taking the drug.

Key Recommendations for Practice: SORT evidence rating system

- Patients with a high risk of ASCVD (>7.5% 10-year risk) should receive statin therapy for primary prevention: Rating B.

- Statin therapy should be initiated for secondary prevention in patients with known ASCVD, absent any contraindication: Rating A

- Niacin, fibrates, and omega-3 fatty acids should not be routinely given for primary or secondary prevention of ASCVD: Rating A

- A moderate-intensity statin plus ezetimibe should merit consideration as an alternative in patients with acute coronary syndrome who cannot tolerate high-intensity statin therapy: Rating B.

- Moderate-intensity statins include: lovastatin 40 mg, pravastatin 40 mg, simvastatin 40 mg, atorvastatin 10 to 20 mg, and rosuvastatin 5 to 10 mg

- High-intensity statins include: atorvastatin 40 to 80 mg, rosuvastatin 20 to 40 mg

If the provider and patient reach a mutual decision to initiate medical therapy with statins, the overall risk reduction in cardiovascular events is customarily around 20 to 30% in most clinical trials. The commonly referred to trials of which the majority of guidelines are based, included pravastatin 40 mg, lovastatin 20 to 40 mg, atorvastatin 10 mg, and rosuvastatin 10 mg, so general recommendations are to choose one of these statins listed.

If a patient encounters an allergy or intolerance to a statin medication, the suggestion is to reduce the original or to transition to a different lipid-lowering medication altogether. Among patients that have reported muscle-related statin intolerances, according to one 24 week trial, evolocumab (PCSK9 inhibitor) reduced LDL cholesterol levels significantly more when compared to ezetimibe.