Management largely depends on underlying etiology as follows:

Epidemic Keratoconjunctivitis – viral infection is extremely contagious, and a focus should be on preventing spread to others. Spread occurs through direct contact of contaminated fingers, household objects, or medical instruments. Diligent hand washing and cleansing of household and/or medical office equipment are paramount in preventing transmission. Estimates of incubation and contagious periods are 5 to 12 days and 10 to 14 days, respectively. This prolonged recovery period should also be emphasized with patients and parents of patients to prevent concern over persistent symptoms and prevent unnecessary return healthcare visits.

Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis – Often, a multi-disciplinary approach is required, including referral to ophthalmology. Treatment should focus on a balance of relieving symptoms and avoiding medication/treatment side effects. First-line treatment options are lubricating treatments for the ocular surface, e.g., preservative-free artificial tears, gels, or ointments. These are often inadequate in isolation but have an essentially non-existent side effect profile. Additionally, cool compresses and lid scrubs should be prescribed to attempt removal of any possible allergens. Subsequent treatment with topical antihistamines may be adequate in mild cases. Topical mast cell stabilizers are often added to topical antihistamines and can control symptoms in moderate cases. It is worth noting that mast-cell stabilizers (cromolyn sodium nedocromil sodium, and lodoxamide) have loading periods to reach a therapeutic effect. If a seasonal variation is noted, mast cell stabilizers can be initiated before symptoms in anticipation of the seasonal recurrence. Combination antihistamines/mast cell stabilizers are available such as olopatadine, azelastine, and ketotifen. Systemic antihistamines can be used; however, there is little evidence for their use in keratoconjunctivitis and side-effect profiles must be considered before initiation. Topical non-steroidals can be trialed, though are often found to be poorly effective. Topical corticosteroids are typically the most effective in a high initial dose with a quick tapering method. Though topical corticosteroids carry a low systemic side-effect profile, it is imperative to monitor for ocular side-effects including elevation of intraocular pressure. With severe, persistent cases, long-term immunomodulation with steroid-sparing agents, such as cyclosporine and tacrolimus, has been shown to be helpful.

Keratoconjunctivitis sicca – Initial management is typically conservative, including preservative-free artificial tears, gels, and ointments. Warm compresses and lid scrubs can be utilized to increase oil production/release from meibomian glands, which help to stabilize the tear film. Oral flaxseed oil and fish oil supplements have been shown to be useful in alleviating symptoms and decreasing dependence on topical treatments. Procedural treatment by way of insertion of punctal plugs to prevent lacrimal drainage of the tear film is available. More permanent punctal treatment by cautery is also sometimes performed. Topical cyclosporine A, tacrolimus, and lifitegrast are available by prescription and work as steroid-sparing inflammatory dampening agents. Topical steroids are also useful, though preferably in short courses, and monitoring of intraocular pressure is mandatory. Oral doxycycline in low doses has been shown to have a benefit via its unique anti-inflammatory properties. More recently, topical autologous serum drops have increased in popularity. Serum drops contain anti-inflammatory factors that inhibit mediators of the dry eye inflammatory cascade. These serum drops can be prohibitively expensive. Typically, a combination of the above treatment options is needed to provide adequate symptomatic relief.

Superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis – First-line treatment is conservative with preservative-free artificial tears, gels, and ointments. Other topical treatments utilized with varying degrees of success include mast-cell stabilizers, anti-histamines, vitamin A, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatories. Punctal occlusion techniques can also help to increase ocular surface lubrication. Topical autologous serum eye drops have also been found to be effective, though long-term treatment is often necessary and cost of medication is commonly a barrier. Chemocautery of affected conjunctiva by silver nitrate often results in symptomatic relief for 1 to 2 months, but generally requires re-treatment. Surgical conjunctival resection of the affected/redundant conjunctiva is thought to be a highly effective treatment. Alternatively, liquid nitrogen cryotherapy can be used to treat affected conjunctiva and generally results in long-term symptomatic relief, though repeat treatments may be necessary.