Patients with spinal cord injury are usually managed by an interprofessional team that includes the trauma surgeon, internist, neurologist, urologist, and emergency department physician. Autonomic dysreflexia should be strongly suspected in any spinal cord injured patient with a lesion above T6 who complains of a headache. A blood pressure reading should be taken immediately, and corrective treatment started if the patient's blood pressure is significantly elevated as most spinal cord injured patients have low blood pressure. Bladder distension from urinary retention or a blocked Foley is the single most common cause of this disorder, and irrigating or changing the catheter is often immediately curative. Quick recognition and rapid alleviation of the underlying stimulus may be life-saving.

Nurses play a key role in the monitoring of patients with autonomic dysreflexia, and they are often the first healthcare personnel to identify the problem. These patients are best managed in the ICU with 24/7 monitoring.

Autonomic dysreflexia patients are also prone to deep vein thrombosis and pressure sores; hence appropriate prophylactic measures should be undertaken.

**Additional Resources**

An excellent free informational website devoted to patient and professional education about spinal cord injuries can be found at the International Spinal Cord Society (ISCoS) website. It provides educational modules designed for all stages and levels of spinal cord injury for both laypersons and healthcare personnel.

Other recommended resources are the recent Guidelines on Adult Neurogenic Lower Urinary Tract Dysfunction: Diagnosis and Evaluation (Part 1) and Treatment and Follow-up (Part 2) published in November 2021 jointly by the American Urological Association (AUA) and the Society of Urodynamics, Female Pelvic Medicine and Urogenital Reconstruction (SUFU).