Much of the current discussion regarding AO focuses on treatment strategies, but no consensus protocols have been developed. One systematic review concluded there was insufficient evidence to support any management strategies for established AO.

The initial management strategy for alveolar osteitis with the most support is intra-alveolar irrigation, which removes necrotic tissue and clot debris and reduces the bacterial load. Intra-alveolar irrigation alone may not relieve pain but should complement the other outlined strategies. It is commonly included in studies as an early measure, and curettage of the dry socket is not recommended as it will expose the bone further.

Topical local anesthetic gels can relieve pain shortly after irrigation, and long-acting local anesthetics can provide immediate symptom relief. Local anesthetics can be supplemented with oral analgesics, primarily non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).

Multiple interventions include placing a medicated dressing into the extraction socket at the time of surgery or post-operatively. Some common options are zinc oxide eugenol or other obtundent dressings that include compounds with analgesic or antibacterial action.

Multiple studies support the success of these interventions, but many dressings have to be removed from the alveolus to prevent foreign body reactions. They also slow the healing process.

Rinsing with chlorhexidine mouthwashes and placing chlorhexidine gels into the extraction socket have also shown treatment success. Many studies explore chlorhexidine as a preventive measure, but resolution after AO development has also been investigated.

Although some studies show AO can be successfully managed by chlorhexidine, there is not as much support for treatment as there is for prevention. There is still insufficient evidence to recommend chlorhexidine as a treatment to relieve established AO.

Platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) has also been investigated. One study found that pain reduction was similar to irrigation alone, but the soft tissue healing was improved. PRF is more commonly used as a preventive measure, and the efficacy of using it as a treatment is debatable.

Recent evidence suggests that phototherapy, specifically low-level laser therapy (LLLT), has a role in symptom management. It is easy to use, quick, relatively safe, and financially advantageous. The results are comparable to all the alternative management strategies above, and many studies find the results superior. Photobiomodulation therapy has been shown to have a higher ability to decrease pain and is considered by some to be the most effective intervention available.

Low-level laser therapy (LLLT) is a newer technology, and further evaluation is needed, but it could become a mainstay of treatment in the future.