An interprofessional team approach to treatment based on a bio-psychosocial view can significantly reduce the postoperative chronic bowel problems of the majority of children with operated HD. The central aim is learning self-control: the more the child can evacuate adequate amounts of feces regularly and voluntarily, the less medication he will need, and the more independent he is of the clinician and his parents. Solving defecation issues at an early age prevents invasive procedures from the start of treatment, which is of importance considering the harmfulness of such procedures in a sensitive region, especially in the child's early development.

Depending on the length of the intestine needed to be removed, children with HD may have varying levels of long-term care needs. Temporary or intermittent problems may include frequent and loose stools, difficulty sensing the need to have a bowel movement, and problems with peristalsis because the anal opening is tight. From a nutrition perspective, removing a large length of the intestine might prevent a child from getting adequate nutrients and fluids.

Children might suffer from improper digestion, slow growth, and infection. Nutritionists will work to achieve nutrition goals and offer suggestions on how to achieve nutrition requirements to ensure the child grows and develops normally. While the pediatric surgeon is almost always involved in the management of patients with HD, it is important to approach with an interprofessional team of sub-specialists that includes a pediatric gastroenterologist, pediatric radiologists, and a specialist in bowel management protocols. Experienced nurses are also crucial members of the group as they will not only monitor the patient's vital signs and danger signs of possible devastating complications, including HAEC but also assist in educating the patient and family. In the postoperative period, the pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the correct analgesics, antiemetics, and appropriate antibiotics.