Amsler sign (aka Amsler-Verrey sign) is present in Fuchs heterochromic uveitis (FHU). It is characterized by hemorrhage in the anterior chamber (hyphema) after anterior chamber paracentesis or entry with the microvitreoretinal blade during anterior segment surgeries, including cataract surgery or minor trauma. This hemorrhage is due to the presence of fine, fragile vessels in the angle of the anterior chamber. The sign got its name from Dr. Marc Amsler and Dr. Florian Verrey, who described it in 1946.

Dr. Marc Amsler (1891-1968) was a Swiss ophthalmologist and a great teacher.  He was a student of Jules Gonin (1870-1935) at the University of Lausanne. He was a strong supporter of Gonin's ideas on the repair of rhegmatogenous retinal detachments. Dr. Amsler was known as "Le marcheur de l'operation de Gonin" (The seller of Gonin's surgical procedure).****Dr. Amsler became the chief of the Zurich Eye Clinic. His contribution to ophthalmology includes the Amsler grid and the Amsler- Dubois chart. Amsler grid is a 10 cm X 10 cm square-shaped chart that has seven different variants. The chart is a useful and inexpensive tool to monitor metamorphopsia and scotoma in various macular diseases, most commonly wet age-related macular degeneration. The Amsler-Dubois chart is an important chart to document posterior segment lesions, including retinal detachment. Dr. Amsler's research interests included the study of the macular function, the study of aqueous humor in uveitis, and keratoconus. He invented a mirror for retinal examination using a monocular indirect ophthalmoscope.

Dr. Florian Verrey (1911-1976) was a Swiss ophthalmologist who worked with Dr. Amsler at the University of Lausanne and later at Zurich Eye Clinic. His research focused on uveitis and aqueous humor.

FHU gets its name from Ernst Fuchs (1851-1930), an Austrian ophthalmologist. He was the clinical director of the Second Vienna Eye Hospital.

FHU is characterized by unilateral heterochromia, cataract, glaucoma, with no posterior synechia. Typically FHU has fine stellate keratic precipitates that are present over the endothelium in a diffuse manner involving both the superior and inferior cornea. The iris usually loses detail on the surface (featureless iris) due to atrophy compared to the other eye, and iris nodules at the pupillary margin (Koeppe nodules) may be noted. However, frank heterochromia may not be present, especially in patients with heavily pigmented iris. Typically, anterior chamber reaction, if present, is mild. Vitreous may show some debris, and retrolental cells may be noted on slit-lamp examination.