- Cerebral edema: Encephalopathy: Is usually classified based on severity from grade 1 to grade 4. 

- Grade 1: change of mood, inappropriate behavior, attention deficit, difficulty in elaborating ideas, irritability, sleep disordered.
- Grade 2: temporary disorientation, lethargy or asterixis.
- Grade 3: marked confusion, unintelligible speech, somnolence.
- Grade 4: coma, unresponsive to verbal or pain stimulus.

- Intracranial pressure above 20 mm Hg usually correlates with cerebral edema. It can progress to intracranial hypertension. It is present in 75% to 80% of patients with ALF and grade 4 hepatic encephalopathy. The first signs suggestive of intracranial hypertension are systolic hypertension and bradycardia.

- Coagulopathy: The most common site of bleeding is from the upper gastrointestinal tract.

- Hematologic manifestations: Hepatitis-associated aplastic anemia (HAA) is a rare but life-threatening condition.

- Infection: Due to a decrease in immunity, ALF patients predispose to multiple infections, which is the leading cause of mortality. Bacterial infections are responsible for 80%, and about 20 to 30% are fungal infections. When ascites is present, unexplained fever and leukocytosis are indications for a diagnostic paracentesis. Prophylactic antibiotics are not a current recommendation.

- Renal failure: Acute renal failure is frequently a complication and is usually the result of hemodynamic alterations. It represents a poor prognosis. The most critical associated entities are hypovolemia, low systemic vascular resistance, acute tubular necrosis, gastrointestinal blood loss, and hepatorenal syndrome.

- Nutritional and metabolic: Due to the high catabolic state of ALF, maintaining adequate nutrition is vital. Early enteral or parenteral feeds should be initiated. Electrolyte abnormalities such as hyponatremia, hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, hypomagnesemia and acid-base imbalances such as respiratory acidosis are frequent. Hyponatremia is an indicator of poor prognosis.

- Pulmonary complications: Pulmonary edema, pneumonia, and tracheobronchitis are the main complications.