The identification of a definite cause of esophageal ulcer is of crucial importance as the management is based on treating the underlying etiology.

Treatment of esophageal ulcers secondary to GERD is aimed at acid suppression, controlling acid secretion, promoting peristalsis and mucosal wall healing. H2 blockers are commonly used but provide temporary relief. It acts by neutralizing gastric acid and reduce acid delivery to the duodenum. The commonly used H2 receptor blockers are cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine, and nizatidine. The effectiveness of proton pump inhibitors has been studied, and results have demonstrated its superior long-term effect of accelerated ulcer healing compared with the H2 antagonist.

In the presence of coinfection with H. pylori, the standard treatment is a triple-therapy with clarithromycin-based therapy (PPI, clarithromycin, amoxicillin for 14 days); quadruple-therapy with (bismuth subsalicylate, metronidazole, and tetracycline for 14 days); or triple-therapy with (lansoprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin for 10 to 14 days).

Treatment of drug-induced esophageal ulcer includes discontinuation of the offending medications and administering proton pump inhibitors. Antituberculous medications with Isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide for 6 to 9 months can be used for esophageal ulcers caused by tuberculosis.

Antimicrobial agents are used for treating mucosal damage caused by infectious esophagitis. Infection caused by cytomegalovirus is treated with ganciclovir whereas fluconazole is the preferred choice in the treatment of esophageal candidiasis.

Finally, Severe cases of esophageal injury are managed by intubation with a nasogastric tube, administration of intravenous fluids, chemoprophylaxis with antibiotics, pain relief with analgesics and treating the ulcer with H2 receptor antagonists and PPIs.