Although not fully understood, pathogenesis involves multiple components of both the peripheral and central nervous systems. Some of the most understood concepts are described in this section.

According to the older vascular theory of migraine, headache is produced by vasodilation and aura by vasoconstriction, but this theory is no longer viable.

There is activation of trigeminal afferents by neuronal pannexin-1 mega channel opening and subsequent activation of caspase-1, followed by the release of proinflammatory mediators, activation of NF-kB (nuclear factor kappa-B), and spreading of this inflammatory signal to trigeminal nerve fibers around vessels of the pia mater.

The cortical spreading depression of Leão, a propagating wave of neuronal and glial depolarization that initiates a cascade, is hypothesized to cause the aura, activate trigeminal afferents, and alter the hematoencephalic barrier permeability by activating brain matrix metalloproteinases.

The anterior structures are most innervated by the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve, which could explain the pain in the anterior region of the head. There is a convergence of fibers from the upper cervical roots, which originate from trigeminal nerve neurons along with the trigeminal ganglion and the trigeminal nerve at the trigeminal nucleus caudalis, which can explain the anterior to the posterior distribution of pain, from where the fibers ascend to the thalamus and the sensory cortex.

Based on vasodilation, edema, and plasma protein extravasation, neurogenic inflammation results from nociceptor activation, in this case, the trigeminal system. It is associated with the release of substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide, and neurokinin a, all vasoactive neuropeptides liberated by trigeminal ganglion stimulation.

Following neuropeptides are believed to play a role in pathogenesis:

- **Serotonin**, released from the brainstem serotonergic nuclei, may play a role in migraine; however, the exact role of its mechanisms remains a matter of controversy. Most likely, serotonin levels are low between attacks because it may cause a deficiency in the serotonin pain inhibition system, therefore helping the activation of the trigeminal system. It could mediate by acting directly over the cranial vessels, in central pain control pathways, or by cortical projections of brainstem serotonergic nuclei.

- **Calcitonin gene-related peptide****(CGRP)**is abundant in trigeminal ganglion neurons. It is released from the peripheral and central nerve terminals and secreted within the trigeminal ganglion. When released from the peripheral terminals, it initiates an increased synthesis of nitric oxide and later sensitization of trigeminal nerves.

- **Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP)**may also play an important role in mediating migraine attacks as its concentration is elevated during the attacks, and its infusion may trigger migraine in susceptible patients.