# Continuing Education Activity

Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy is a genetically acquired disease that leads to progressive muscle weakness and severely decreased functional capacity in affected individuals—the understanding of how the interplay of epigenetic factors has evolved substantially in recent years. This activity reviews the current knowledge of the etiology and epidemiology of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy. This activity outlines the evaluation and treatment of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy and explains the role of the interprofessional team in improving the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy medical conditions and emergencies.
- Review the evaluation of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy.
- Outline the management options available for facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy.
- Describe some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is a genetic illness inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion that affects skeletal muscle tissue in affected individuals. Muscle groups involved include those of the face, shoulder girdle, and lower extremity affected asymmetrically.

# Etiology

The pathology of FSHD is a result of an intricate interaction of genetics involving the protein product of the DUX4 gene and the chromosomal location and number of repeats of the D4Z4 macrosatellite. The result of this interaction is the inappropriate expression of the DUX4 protein product.

FSHD further classifies into two subtypes, based on the route in which decreased methylation and a failure of epigenetic repression takes place. About 95% of cases of FSHD are type 1, in which D4Z4 repeats become lost. The remaining 5% of FSHD cases classify as type 2, in which methylation and epigenetics are affected in a deletion-independent manner.

# Epidemiology

Due to the decreased severity and increased lifespan of affected patients, FSHD is one of the most prevalent types of muscular dystrophy currently known. FSHD carries a prevalence of approximately 3.2 to 4.6 per 100,000 and does not seem to affect any racial group more or less than others.

# History and Physical

The onset of physical exam findings in FSHD can occur across an individual's entire lifespan but most frequently occur in the second decade of life.

The most common initial physical exam finding seen in FSHD is difficulty in the abduction of the arms over the glenohumeral joint with asymmetric muscle involvement.

In the upper extremities, muscle wasting of the shoulder girdle muscles with an anterior rounding pattern presents. The deltoid muscle is frequently spared in FSHD. As a result, the trapezius muscles appear tightly bound up. The combination of the deltoid and trapezius involvement often manifests as a poly hill sign, in which musculature gives the appearance of consecutive peaks and valleys.

# Evaluation

The diagnostic criteria of FSHD have evolved from a cluster of clinical symptoms and laboratory findings to genetic analysis of suspected cases. While genetic testing is the current gold standard in evaluating patients, equivocal presentations are aided by electromyography (EMG) studies, Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), laboratory tests, and muscle biopsies.

EMG studies are generally characterized by low amplitude, polyphasic potentials present for brief time intervals.

Before the presence of fatty, fibrous replacement, T2 MRI images demonstrate increased water content of affected muscles.

# Treatment / Management

There are currently no disease-modifying treatments for FSHD. To this end, the mainstay of management of FSHD is supportive care. This care primarily occurs in the context of physical therapy and rehabilitation exercises. A 2016 clinical trial of home exercise therapy investigated the utility of combined aerobic and strength training programs in FSHD patients. The results demonstrated that individuals engaged in a 6-month program lead to statistically significant improvements in muscle function without further damaging diseased tissue.

Severe scapular winging can be corrected through scapular fixation via orthopedic surgery. While no randomized clinical trials have taken place examining the efficacy of this intervention, case reports have demonstrated both an improvement in shoulder abduction, pain, and activities of daily living. A more thorough investigation is therefore required to elucidate the utility of scapular fixation in the routine management of FSHD.

# Differential Diagnosis

FSHD can mimic many other genetic myopathies: particularly limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy, acid maltase deficiency, myotonic dystrophy, and polymyositis. In cases of significant symptom overlap between myopathies, genetic testing remains the standard in distinguishing between disease pathology.

# Prognosis

The prognosis in FSHD revolves around the quality of life in an affected individual. While the overall lifespan in these patients is not affected, roughly 20 percent of affected individuals will experience disability significant enough to require wheelchair use during the course of the disease.

# Complications

The major complications seen in FSHD are chronic pain and impaired daily functioning, which negatively impacts psychological functioning.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Research has shown that chronic pain present in FSHD patients can be modulated by a network of coping strategies, the interpretation of pain, and catastrophizing.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The optimal approach to caring for patients with FSHD involves coordination across multiple specialties tailored to the unique needs of each individual. FSHD often presents with significant mobility limitations. Recent systematic reviews have highlighted the utility of telemedicine in reaching both patients in remote, underserved communities. Also, the value of including social workers in the primary care setting has proven integral to providing additional care benefits to patients.