# Continuing Education Activity

Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) is the presence of excess colonic bacteria in the small intestine. In contrast to the large intestine, the concentration of the bacteria in the small intestine rarely exceeds 1000 organisms/mL. Gastric acid secretion and intestinal motility limit the overgrowth of bacteria in the small intestine. When these protective mechanisms against excessive bacterial growth fail, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) can manifest. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of SIBO and explains the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the risk factors and etiology of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
- Review the appropriate steps to evaluate a patient with suspected small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO).
- Outline the management options available for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
- Discuss interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to improve outcomes in patients who present with small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.

# Introduction

Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) is the presence of excess colonic bacteria in the small intestine. These excess organisms result in multiple intestinal symptoms like abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea, and rarely malabsorption.

# Etiology

The etiology of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth is complex. It can be from motility, anatomic, immune, gastric hypochlorhydria and metalobic and other systemic disorders.

Important host defense mechanisms against bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine are gastric acid and bile, peristalsis, proteolytic digestive enzymes, intact ileocecal valve, and secretory IgA. When these protective barriers fail, SIBO occurs. Gastric acids and bile destroy and prevent bacteria from passing through the intestines after ingesting food. So SIBO is associated with achlorhydria.

An intact ileocecal valve and antegrade motility of the ileum prevent retrograde translocation of colonic bacteria.

# Epidemiology

The actual prevalence of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth is vastly unknown. Irritable bowel syndrome, intestinal motility disorders, and chronic pancreatitis are the most predominant cause of SIBO and account for 80-90% of cases.

# Pathophysiology

An abnormally high number of bacteria is identified in SIBO. Overabundant bacteria in the small intestines do not always correlate with disease activity. Clinical manifestations only occur when inflammation from invasive strains of bacteria is present. Escherichia coli, Aeromonas, and Klebsiella species.

In SIBO, the endoscopic and histopathological appearance of the mucosa is usually healthy. Nonspecific endoscopic changes may include mucosal edema, loss of vascularity, patchy erythema, or rarely ulceration.

# Histopathology

The endoscopic findings and histopathologic examination of the small intestine and colon mucosa are normal in most cases. Nonspecific endoscopic findings include mucosal edema, erythema, easy friability from abnormal vascular patterns, and rarely ulcerations.

# Toxicokinetics

Improper digestion and malabsorption result in small intestinal bowel obstruction symptoms. Fat malabsorption from bacterial deconjugation of bile can lead to weight loss, diarrhea, and vitamin A, D & K deficiencies.

# History and Physical

The clinical manifestations of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth classically include a combination of abdominal discomfort with bloating, flatulence, or chronic watery diarrhea. Steatorrhea and weight loss from fat malabsorption may also manifest, especially with altered gut anatomy (blind loop syndrome).

D-lactic acidosis is a rare neurological syndrome that can present with altered mental status, slurred speech, seizures, and ataxia. This syndrome results from bacterial fermentation of unabsorbed carbohydrates. Patients with SIBO associated with short bowel syndrome or a jejunoileal bypass can develop this syndrome.

# Evaluation

There is no validated gold standard diagnostic test for SIBO.

A bacterial concentration of > 10 is diagnostic of SIBO, but it is invasive, time-consuming, and expensive, as it is obtained during an upper endoscopy. The results are also poorly reproducible and can lead to false results from either patchy bacterial overgrowth or contamination with oropharyngeal flora.

In patients without specific risk factors for SIBO, upper and lower endoscopies are generally performed to rule out other causes like atrophic gastritis and Crohn's disease. If endoscopies are normal, imaging studies are done to rule out partial obstruction, diverticula, fistula, or other inflammatory findings. Magnetic enterography increases the sensitivity of diagnosing small intestinal bowel strictures, but it is costly.

A thorough evaluation of the cause of SIBO should be worked up as SIBO is associated with cirrhosis, kidney disease, chronic pancreatitis, and immunodeficiency disorders.

# Treatment / Management

The initial mainstay of treatment is antibiotics to eradicate bacterial overgrowth and repletion of any nutritional deficiencies. Metronidazole, ciprofloxacin, tetracycline, amoxicillin-clavulanate, neomycin, and rifaximin are antibiotics used in the treatment, with rifaximin being the most investigated.

Approximately 45 percent of patients will have recurrent SIBO following completion of antibiotic therapy, with recurrence rates higher in older adults, post-appendectomy, and chronic use of proton pump inhibitors.

An elemental diet can be used in cases where patients cannot tolerate antibiotics or fail to respond to antibiotic treatment (after two times). Limited observational studies suggest remission induction of SIBO symptoms, but poor palatability and high cost limit their use. In an observational study, 80% of patients attained remission (normalization of breath tests and resolution of symptoms) within two weeks.

Treating the underlying cause will help in the prevention of recurrent symptoms. Antibiotic prophylaxis (5-10 days every two weeks or monthly) should be reserved for patients with>4 episodes in a year. Antibiotics are generally rotated over two to three months. SIBO-associated colitis and ileitis usually should resolve with SIBO treatment. If severe symptoms persist, they should be evaluated for IBD. If symptoms are not improved following two courses of treatment, the clinician should consider alternative diagnoses.

Probiotics, low fermentable oligo, di, and monosaccharide (FODMAP) diet, and statins have no apparent role in the management of SIBO.

# Differential Diagnosis

Diagnoses that produce chronic diarrhea should be in the differential and investigated while evaluating small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), celiac disease (CD), and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) all have considerable overlap with SIBO. Irritable bowel syndrome has recurrent abdominal pain related to bowel movements and is associated with a change in stool frequency or appearance.

# Prognosis

The prognosis depends on the etiology of the underlying condition, which is causing small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.

# Complications

Severe chronic small intestinal bacterial overgrowth can result in significant weight loss and severe malnutrition, leading to substantial morbidity and mortality. Early recognition of SIBO can treat the maldigestion of nutrients and prevent malnourishment. If left untreated, SIBO can lead to intestinal failure.

In patients with underlying liver disease, SIBO is associated with excess ammonia production and precipitate hepatic encephalopathy. SIBO from short bowel syndrome or jejunal bypass can present with D-lactic acidosis (confusion and ataxia from bacterial fermentation of unabsorbed carbohydrates).

# Consultations

Patients with unexplained chronic diarrhea or signs and symptoms of significant malnutrition should be referred to a gastroenterologist for further evaluation.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Any patients diagnosed with small intestinal bacterial overgrowth should have additional testing to determine etiology and treatment against the underlying condition to prevent recurrent SIBO. Treatment of disorders associated with abnormal intestinal motility, including Crohn's disease, irritable bowel syndrome, post-radiation enteropathy, diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and scleroderma, should be better optimized and well-controlled. Prokinetics can be useful as adjunctive therapy for these patients.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth is an under-recognized condition with significant morbidity and mortality. Optimal management of SIBO is by an interprofessional team of primary care physicians, gastroenterologists, surgeons, dieticians, pharmacists, and nurses. Early recognition leads to more favorable outcomes and can prevent severe malnutrition. Once SIBO is diagnosed and the patient is on antibiotics, further management should be directed at treating the underlying etiology to prevent further recurrences.

During initial treatment, nursing should monitor treatment effectiveness and progress and verify patient compliance. The patient’s calorie intake and weight assessments should be frequently monitored during and after treatment to ensure adequate recovery from their illness. Nursing should follow all these areas and report any concerns to the treating clinician. The pharmacist can assist with agent selection, verifying dosing parameters, and performing medication reconciliation. The pharmacist should also work directly with the clinician and nurse regarding potential drug-condition interactions (e.g., opioids, PPIs). SIBO management requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5] The overall outcome depends on the underlying condition's management. If the etiology is not well managed, the overall prognosis is grave.