The administration of PCA requires the selection of route, medication, and type of pump to in use.

Routes:

The route for PCA administration can be through an intravenous catheter, epidural catheter, indwelling nerve catheter, or an iontophoretic transdermal system. The equipment and procedure for the placement of these devices appear in the articles for those specific modalities.

Pumps:

There are a variety of PCA pumps on the market, and all contain the essential components of a locking device, medication chamber, programming screen, and patient button. A provider will insert a syringe of medication into the pump and program the pump to the prescribed initial loading dose, PCA dose, lockout interval, continuous infusion rate, and one and four-hour limits. For intravenous PCA, the medication line then gets connected to a fluid infusion line. It is best to familiarize yourself with your specific institution's pump and protocols for PCA administration.

Medications:

Medications commonly used are opioids and local anesthetics. Opioids are either used alone for intravenous PCA or in conjunction with local anesthetics for epidural catheter PCA.

Opioid medications include pure Mu opioid receptor agonists (morphine, fentanyl, hydromorphone, meperidine, sufentanil, alfentanil, and remifentanil) Mu opioid receptor agonist-antagonists (butorphanol, nalbuphine, pentazocine) and partial Mu opioid receptor agonists (buprenorphine, dezocine). Despite a variety of medication options, morphine remains the gold standard medication for intravenous PCA.

Local anesthetics are primarily used for epidural catheter and indwelling nerve catheter PCA. They include the sodium channel blockers (bupivacaine, levobupivacaine, and ropivacaine).

Other medications can be added to intravenous PCA in an attempt to reduce side effects and improve pain control. They include ketamine, naloxone, clonidine, magnesium, ketorolac, lidocaine, and droperidol. Experiments with these additional medications have had a variety of efficacy, but the mainstay of PCA remains opioids and local anesthetics.