**Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)**

In patients with COPD, the diaphragm muscle is weakened, flattened, and during the inhalation position, it forces the accessory respiratory muscles to intervene with greater emphasis. What happens to the scalene muscles? An inverse relationship between the thickness of the diaphragm muscle and the thickness of the scalene muscles has been demonstrated: the decreased thickness of the diaphragm and increased hypertrophy of the scalene muscles. Generally, the latter is rich in red or aerobic fibers, but if subjected to constant work, bearing a greater load, the red fibers increase their mass, both as proteins and as quantities of mitochondria and enzymes, capillaries. COPD is an aggravating disease, and the scalene muscles increase the tone and volume not only for hypertrophy but the chronic shortening of the muscles themselves. The first ribs are in an inspiratory attitude, with the pulmonary dome in constant tension. During inspiration, the dome will have difficulty moving downward, further complicating the respiratory act by decreasing the pulmonary vital capacity.

It has been shown that a postural attitude of the neck, where the head is held forward, reduces lung vital capacity for the same mechanisms described above of the scalene muscles: shortening and increased tone. This happens independent of the presence of respiratory diseases.

A valid approach to reducing non-physiological adaptation of the lung due to scalene muscles in shortening is stretching, as shown by clinical research.

**Myofascial Pain**

Scalene muscles can be a source of pain. On the one side, muscle mass can present trigger points and painful differences. On the other side, the same connective tissue that covers and connects the muscle, the fascia that connects the muscle with other muscles, viscera, and joints, can present as painful anomalies. The scalene muscles can cause a sore cervical tract. Pain can easily be located or cause more distant symptoms, such as migraines.

These fascial anomalies or alterations of the contractile tissue can occur in the absence of traumas, such as erroneous daily attitudes, or traumas such as whiplash, or due to the presence of diseases that alter the thoracic conformation such as scoliosis, which can cause a non-physiological cervical biomechanical environment.

This constant pain can reduce lung vital capacity. Studies show that an approach with breathing exercises that re-educate the scalene muscles helps decrease or eliminate the pain experienced by the patient.

Another approach to reducing myofascial pain is osteopathy, with indirect or fascial techniques. Several studies show how these gentle techniques can reduce local pain with systemic involvement. The blood values of the inflammatory indices are lowered, and the activity of the sympathetic system is lowered.

Other more recent approaches demonstrated in the literature are dry needle therapy or taping by physiotherapists. The mechanisms of action of these last two therapeutic approaches are not well understood, despite the positive results.

Anti-inflammatory drugs do not solve the structural abnormalities but only treat the symptoms. Once the analgesic effect ends, there is a high chance that the pain will return.

In subjects exhibiting a posture with a forward head position, they demonstrate a greater pain sensitivity, particularly for the trapezius and the scalenus medius; these muscles also demonstrate less range of motion in such cases.