**Inherited PRCA**

Untreated inherited PRCA results in severe anemia, which leads to congestive heart failure and death. Glucocorticoid use, blood transfusion, and allogeneic stem cell transplant (ASCT) are the mainstay of treatment in children.

- **Glucocorticoids:**
- Corticosteroids were the first drugs proved to be efficacious in children with DBA.
- Various patterns are possible, ranging from patients having a prompt recovery and apparent cure to treatment-refractoriness long after an initial response to being completely unresponsive to steroids. Those who do not respond to steroids should restart on chronic transfusions. A second attempt at steroids can be made 12 to 18 months after initial unresponsiveness.
- Long-term use of steroids is associated with toxicity, which includes growth retardation, cushingoid facies, hypertension, diabetes, and cataract. Patients treated with high-dose steroids must receive prophylaxis for Pneumocystis jirovecii. All attempts should be made to give live vaccines before starting steroid therapy; however, once the therapy starts, live vaccines should not be administered.

- **Red cell transfusions:**
- This is mostly used in acutely symptomatic patients and in those who are refractory to steroids. Chronic red cell transfusion is preferable to long-term use of high-dose steroids. On the other hand, frequent transfusions not only result in hemosiderosis but also leads to alloimmunization and antibody formation.

- **Stem cell transplant (SCT):**
- Transfusion dependence remains the number one indication for pursuing stem cell transplant in patients with DBA.

- **Other therapies:**
- Treatment with interleukin-3, high-dose methylprednisolone, cyclosporine, and other immunosuppressive agents, prolactin induction by metoclopramide have not gained much success.RSP19 has shown promise but remains in the experimental stage.

**Transient PRCA**

- **Parvovirus B19**
- The effect of the viral infection cedes with the development of humoral immunity, which happens within a couple of weeks. This is a lifelong immunity that prevents re-infection. In patients with persistent parvovirus infection, a course of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (2 g/kg divided over five days) corrects parvovirus induced PRCA in 93% of patients, but up to 50% relapse within 4 to 5 months.

- **Transient erythroblastopenia of infancy (TEBI):**
- TEBI resolves within a few weeks, but anemia may persist for months. Any drug suspected of causing TEBI should be withdrawn. Transfusion support may be necessary for a brief period.

**Acquired PRCA**

- **Immune-mediated PRCA in adults**
- Cyclosporine has emerged as the first choice of treatment with a response rate as high as 75%.
- Corticosteroids were the therapy in an era before the discovery of cyclosporine. The first series of patients with PRCA who received treatment with steroids reported a response rate of 37% with a median duration of response at 2.5 weeks. Since then, other reports have recorded a response rate between 30 to 60%. The rate of relapse was as high as 80% in patients who were being tapered off steroids.
- Cytotoxic agents have been used primarily in patients who are refractory to cyclosporine. Cyclophosphamide has been the most researched cytotoxic agent compared to other drugs.
- Tacrolimus provides effective immunosuppression, which can be useful in the management of PRCA; however, few reports have identified tacrolimus as the drug causing PRCA.
- Antithymocyte globulin, used in the same dose as aplastic anemia, has a 50% response rate in PRCA.
- Rituximab (anti-CD20) and alemtuzumab (anti-CD52) have demonstrated efficacy in patients with PRCA.
- Daclizumab, a monoclonal antibody against the IL-2 receptor is effective in approximately 40 percent of patients.
- Intravenous immunoglobulins, plasma exchange, and allogeneic stem cell transplant are some other modalities of treatments for immune-mediated PRCA in adults.
- Despite a few case reports describing success with splenectomy, androgens, and the use of erythropoietin, these modalities are not recommended.

- ******Thymoma associated PRCA:**
- Although resection of thymoma is mandatory in patients with thymoma-associated PRCA, the utility of this is not clear. Only a third of patients experience remission after surgery, and most of them would continue to have some degree of anemia throughout their lives. Many patients develop PRCA after resection of the thymoma, which raises questions regarding the utility of resecting the gland. Cyclosporine is the treatment of choice in patients with thymoma-associated PRCA.

- **PRCA associated with incompatible stem cell transplants.**
- The persistence of anti-donor isohemagglutinins directed against donor RBC and erythroid precursors beyond two months is an ominous sign. The likelihood of spontaneous remission decreases beyond this period.

- **PRCA due to rhEPO antibodies**
- It is rare to develop PRCA due to antibodies against rhEPO; however, a few cases remain. A few reports have suggested rechallenging with rhEPO (subcutaneous or intravenous) once no antibodies are detectable in the blood. However, this approach should be considered high risk and has resulted in the recurrence of PRCA.

**Iron overload from chronic transfusions**

- Deferoxamine: Used at a dose of 40 to 60 mg/kg/day subcutaneously over 8 to 12 hours/night and 4 to 7 nights/week. This is not as frequent an option due to the availability of oral formulations. It can still be used IV over 24 hours in patients with severe cardiac iron overload and cardiomyopathy.

- Deferasirox: Dosed at 20 to 30 mg/kg/day orally.

- Deferiprone: 80 to 100 mg/kg/day orally. Agranulocytosis is a major adverse effect. This treatment is very effective for patients with cardiac iron deposition.