PCA and other posterior circulation strokes are more difficult to diagnose because of nonspecific and fluctuating symptoms at presentation. Time of onset it essential for further evaluation with tests. In the acute setting, management should begin after obtaining the following:

- Vitals

- Finger-stick blood glucose

- Initial non-contrast head computerized tomography (CT)

The Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score (ASPECTS) system is a simple and reliable 10-point scale for evaluating early ischemic changes in acute middle cerebral artery stroke. ASPECTS is modified to pc-ASPECTS for the posterior circulation strokes.

**Blood Workup**

Tests should include a complete blood count (CBC), prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), international normalized ratio (INR), electrolytes, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), troponin, lipid panel, and A1c. Additional tests can be ordered such as ANA with titers, ESR, CRP, ANCA for vasculitis, hypercoagulable panel for coagulopathy, and genetics tests for an unknown cause of stroke after the first workup.

**Imaging**

In many cases, noninvasive imaging may be enough for diagnosis and management. Stroke imaging includes CT, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), CT angiogram (CTA), MRA, doppler ultrasound, PET, and SPECT. A four-vessel angiogram can be ordered when unclear findings or more information is needed.

**Cardiovascular Test**

In most cases, cardiac pathology should be ruled out with the following test: electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, transthoracic echocardiogram, transesophageal echocardiogram, Holter monitoring, and extensive cardiac monitoring.