Furosemide is available in oral and intravenous formulations. The administration of oral furosemide can be in the form of tablets or an oral solution. Intravenous furosemide is twice as potent as oral furosemide.

In patients with normal renal function, the oral dose equivalence of furosemide relative to other oral diuretics is as follows

- 40 mg of furosemide = 20 mg of torsemide = 1 mg of bumetanide

- Furosemide oral tablet formulations are available in 20 mg, 40 mg, and 80 mg.

- Furosemide oral solution is available as 10 mg/ml or 8 mg/ml, i.e., 40 mg furosemide/5 ml of solution.

**Breaking phenomenon and ceiling effect**: Normally, when an individual receives furosemide either orally or intravenously, it increases sodium excretion in urine. In a patient with extracellular volume expansion who has never had exposure to furosemide, the first dose of the drug causes significant sodium excretion and diuresis within the first 3 to 6 hours. After that effect of furosemide weans off, the kidney starts retaining sodium and chloride; this is called "post-diuretic sodium retention." Therefore, it is imperative to repeat the furosemide dose at 6 to 8-hour intervals to avoid post diuretic sodium retention and achieve significant diuresis. When furosemide is prescribed chronically, the patient's weight loss correlates with urine volume. A discrepancy in weight loss and diuresis indicates excessive sodium intake by the patient, which can be detected by 24-hour urine sodium collection.

In a normal person and patient with extracellular fluid (ECF) expansion, there is a linear relationship between ECF expansion and natriuresis when receiving furosemide; this means that the patient will have higher natriuresis and urine output if ECF volume expands as compared to a person with normal ECF volume. As furosemide use becomes chronic in a patient, ECF volume shrinks, and the level of natriuresis also goes down. At that point, the amount of natriuresis equals sodium intake; this is called the "breaking phenomenon." This phenomenon is adaptive when it occurs at low ECF volume. But in chronic heart failure patients with persistent ECF volume expansion, this phenomenon is maladaptive. Natriuresis is lower even when ECF volume becomes expanded. The reason for these maladaptive changes is remodeling in the distal nephron. There are hypertrophy and hyperplasia of distal segments of the nephron. These results from increased salt delivery, increased aldosterone, angiotensin II, and a change in potassium concentration; as a result of distal segment hypertrophy, sodium transport capacity increases which rivals furosemide's sodium absorption inhibiting capacity at the level of the thick ascending loop of henley. Clinicians can overcome this phenomenon by adding thiazide diuretics which block sodium absorption in distal segments of the nephron.

**Use in Specific Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**In patients with hepatic cirrhosis and ascites, furosemide therapy should be initiated in the hospital. In hepatic coma and states of electrolyte depletion, therapy should not be started until the underlying condition is improved. Sudden fluid and electrolyte balance alterations in patients with cirrhosis may precipitate hepatic encephalopathy; therefore, stringent observation is necessary during diuresis.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**GFR ≤30 mL/min; increased doses are required to achieve desired diuretic response. If increasing azotemia and oliguria occur during severe progressive renal disease treatment, furosemide should be discontinued.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Furosemide was a pregnancy category C drug under the old FDA categories, and clinicians should use caution in pregnant women after discussion with the patient about risks and benefits.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Because little information is available on using furosemide during breastfeeding and because intense diuresis might decrease lactation, an alternate drug may be preferred, especially while nursing a newborn or preterm infant. Low doses of furosemide may not suppress lactation.