The old paradigm of medicine included bringing the medical providers to the sick and wounded rather than bringing patients to providers. This made the most sense in small, close-knit communities where the risk of communicable diseases was higher if patients were clustered, even if it was not cognitively recognized as such. Transportation and infrastructure were also generally limited; therefore, moving one person around made more sense than the intricate networks established in most modern systems. Furthermore, medicine was not logistically intensive, requiring simple, often unclean, tools, and ingredients for the remedies of the day. Interestingly, there is an increasing movement toward home delivery of care in modern healthcare delivery models, with advanced EMS systems leading this charge.

In those instances where home care was not possible, or patients remained at risk if they stayed in place, such as a battlefield, casualty evacuation remained the only means of evacuation for patients until very recently in medical history. The Crimean and American Civil wars brought out radical advancements, including organizing the first ambulance corps, dedicated litter-bearer teams during battles, and educated nursing care for those brought to casualty collection points and field hospitals.

Many do not recognize that casualty evacuation is still present and often plays a vital role for patients in medical systems. Every time someone drives their loved one to the emergency department while they have a heart attack, they are technically performing casualty evacuation. Historically, the patient did not receive intravenous (IV) fluids, an electrocardiogram, or other standard treatments such as aspirin and nitroglycerin – all typical in modern medical evacuation. What they did presumably get was timely transportation to a higher level of care.

Any means of conveyance can be utilized for casualty evacuation –  dragging patients out of a danger zone, personal vehicles, watercraft, city buses, and attack helicopters that pick up the wounded on their way out of an engagement area.

Recent mass casualty events have demonstrated the resourcefulness of the public and first responders when trying to remove patients from the scene of an incident. During the Las Vegas mass shooting of 2017, more patients were brought to emergency departments by crowdsourced ride services similar to taxis than by ambulance. There were known pickup locations near the event with cars and drivers waiting. This occurred not because the system failed but because patients and the public were trying to do everything to get away from a horrific scene as quickly as possible. Even with mutual aid assistance and activation of emergency protocols, there were simply not enough ambulances to handle an event of that scale. One can imagine several scenarios in which local resources are exhausted, and the systemic use of casualty evacuation is not only possible but preferred and necessary.