Although the advent of antiepileptic medications has improved the quality of life of patients with epilepsy by reducing seizure frequency, many of the patients with MTLE have a greater tendency to become pharmacoresistant over time. Studies have shown that less than 25% of patients with MTLE remained seizure-free for greater than one year.

The basis of presurgical evaluation for epilepsy is to identify the epileptogenic zone, which is defined as the minimum amount of cortex that needs to be inactivated/resected/disconnected to render the patient seizure-free.

High-resolution 3T/7T MRI of the brain with thin cuts obtained through the temporal lobes is a powerful tool to assess subtle structural abnormalities involving the mesial temporal structures. Additional information regarding hippocampal pathology is obtainable with the use of multiple MR modalities such as volumetry, spectroscopy, and Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI).

The goal of presurgical evaluation for epilepsy surgery is to lateralize and localize the seizure focus accurately; this includes phase I and phase II evaluation:

Phase I evaluation includes the use of non-invasive modalities to determine where the seizure starts; this includes techniques such as video-EEG, MEG, MRI, interictal PET, ictal SPECT/ SISCOM, and neuropsychological assessment. Patients with temporal lobe epilepsy involving the dominant temporal lobe also need functional MRI and/or intracarotid amobarbital/methohexital (Wada) test for language and memory lateralization.

Phase II evaluation includes the use of surgically placed electrodes directly over the brain parenchyma to determine where exactly the seizure is originating. This phase involves the use of invasive techniques such as placement of subdural grids/strips and/or depth electrode placement for electrocorticography (ECoG) and stereo-electroencephalography (SEEG).

**Scalp Electroencephalogram******

The EEG background in patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy is usually normal. There may be periods of intermittent slowing noted in the anterior temporal EEG derivations that become prominent during sleep and hyperventilation and are suggestive of focal cerebral dysfunction. Sometimes the focal slowing can be more robust and manifests as temporal intermittent rhythmic delta activity (TIRDA).

In addition to slowing, the classic interictal EEG abnormality in MTLE are spikes or sharp waves which phase reverse over the anterior temporal regions. The dipole orientation of these sharp waves seems to have maximum electronegativity and voltage in the basal temporal derivations (T8/T9; FT8/FT9), and electropositivity distributed widely in the contralateral centro-parietal derivations (C3/C4; P3/P4).

Ictal EEG findings in patients with MTLE are unique when compared to neocortical epilepsy because of its gradual, rhythmic build-up and delayed spread to neighboring brain regions. The seizures that arise from the hippocampus usually spread to the basal temporal regions. Therefore, the use of sphenoidal electrodes can be very useful in picking up the ictal onset in many of the cases with this seizure type. The characteristic pattern seen at the onset of an MTL seizure is a rhythmic theta activity starting in the anterior/anterior-inferior temporal or sphenoidal electrode contacts with gradual spread to the lateral temporal, insular, and frontal regions.

In contrast, an ictal onset with unilateral delta slowing and repetitive interictal spiking is less likely to be arising from the mesial temporal region.

**Invasive Electroencephalogram**

The use of invasive intracranial recordings using subdural grids or intracerebral depth electrodes has improved our diagnostic precision in the identification of the seizure focus. Although MTLE primarily involves the temporal lobes, the abnormal network is known to have widespread extra-temporal connectivity. It is essential to rule out other potential nodes in the network that can be independently epileptogenic. Stereo-electroencephalography (SEEG) is an important tool that registers electrical activity from very confined deep-seated brain regions that usually escape detection by usual surface recording modalities.

Unlike in scalp recording, the ictal activity recorded from intracranial electrodes detects a largely focal or regional fast beta or gamma rhythm. The focality of the rhythm on depth recording is directly proportional to the degree of hippocampal pathology.