Innervation of the female pelvis is accomplished by visceral/autonomic and somatic nerve fibers. Sacral 2-4 roots provide parasympathetic fibers (pelvic splanchnic nerves) to the inferior hypogastric plexuses.

The lumbar-sacral plexus is formed by nerves originating from L 4-5 and S 1-4 roots and lies, as a flat sheet, between the piriformis muscles and piriformis fascia bilaterally. The lumbar-sacral plexus innervates muscles of the pelvic walls, floor, external anal sphincter, and gluteal muscles and provides preganglionic fibers to pelvic splanchnic nerves. There are also some cutaneous branches supplying the back of the thigh and the gluteal region. The superior gluteal nerve (L4, L5, S1) leaves the pelvic via the greater sciatic foramen superior to the piriformis and innervates gluteus minimus, medius, and tensor fascia lata.

The inferior gluteal nerve (L4, L5, S1) leaves the pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen inferior to the piriformis and innervates the gluteus maximus. The posterior cutaneous nerve of the thigh (S1-3) runs deep below the gluteus maximus and down the back of the tight, providing innervation to the skin of the thigh, leg, and perineum. The pudendal nerve (S2-4) exits the pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen. It re-enters it via the lesser sciatic foramen, dividing into several branches: inferior rectal, perineal, and the dorsal nerve of the clitoris. These branches supply innervation to perineal skin, muscles, external anal sphincter, external urethral sphincter, the clitoris, and labia majora. The sciatic nerve (L4-5, S1-3) leaves the pelvic via the greater sciatic foramen and innervates muscles of the posterior thigh, entire leg, and foot and provides sensory innervation to the leg via its terminal branches.