EN is characterized in a rather stereotyped way, whatever its cause, by the following evolutionary aspects:

**Prodromal Phase**

- Nonspecific from 3 to 6 days

- Marked by fever, joint, and sometimes abdominal pain.

- Often a picture of infection nasopharyngeal, with a slight alteration of the general condition.

**Stade Phase**

- Settles quickly in 1 to 2 days.

- The general syndrome occurs with fever, and arthralgia of the prodromal phase persists or increases.

- Nodules appear on the extensor surfaces of the legs and knees, and sometimes thighs and forearms.

- Nodules are small, 3 to 6, sometimes more, bilateral, roughly symmetrical, and spontaneously painful.

- The clinical examination allows specifying the characters of the knots: 10 to 40 mm diameter; warm and firm on palpation, which accentuates their painful character; mobile in relation to the deep planes.

- The pain of the lesions is exacerbated by orthostatism, which leads the patient to seek the lying position with raised legs spontaneously.

- Edema of the ankles is often present.

- Hilar adenopathy may also occur and be confused with sarcoidosis

**Regressive Phase**

- Evolution is spontaneous but may be accelerated by rest or treatment symptomatic.

- Each nodule evolves in ten days, taking blue and yellowish contusiform aspects towards complete disappearance without sequelae.

EN never involves necrosis, ulceration, or scarring. It often evolves in several outbreaks, favored by orthostatism and spreading out, at worst, over 4 to 8 weeks. The succession of outbreaks confers on the eruption of a polymorphic appearance with knots of different ages, featuring the various shades of local biligenia.

Besides the skin lesion, more than 50% of patients will also complain of joint and muscle pain. Sometimes joint swelling and morning stiffness may be present. The swelling may resolve in a few days, but the pain may last for a few months. There is usually no joint destruction, and the synovial fluid is sterile.