Arytenoid dislocation is not an uncommon complication of orotracheal intubation, and when the diagnosed is missed or delayed, it carries high morbidity. Thus, an interprofessional team should participate in diagnosis and management.

The anesthesiologist and anesthesia nurse have to communicate with an otolaryngologist if they believe the patient has suffered arytenoid dislocation during intubation.  Clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) need to all consider this in their differential in intubated patients, as well as those who present with sudden unexplained hoarseness, dysphagia, and anterior neck pain. In the event of confirmed arytenoid dislocation, the entire team (clinicians, nursing, and afterward, voice therapists) need to communicate both during and following the corrective procedures.

It is crucial during the transfer of care for anesthesiologists to communicate any difficulties encountered during intubation with an emphasis on direct trauma during laryngoscopy. The diagnosis is not straightforward and may require several imaging studies. Acute dislocations are reducible during surgery, but chronic cases may require botulinum toxin and gel foam injection. A speech therapist must be involved in the care as the outcomes appear to be much better when combining the above treatments with voice therapy. Perianesthesia and critical care nurses can monitor post-procedure, and report to the clinician or even the voice therapist any findings of note.

The entire interprofessional team, including the clinicians, nursing, and therapists need to work collaboratively to manage the case through to a successful outcome. [Level V]

**Outcomes**

Early treatment is associated with better outcomes, with almost all patients regaining normal voice and vocal fold mobility immediately after closed reduction.