Cholesterol synthesis is regulated by modulating HMG-CoA reductase by different mechanisms. These include covalent modification of enzymes, allosteric feedback inhibition affecting the reaction rate, hormonal control, and transcriptional control of gene expression.

HMG CoA reductase is regulated covalently through the actions of adenosine monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and a phosphoprotein phosphatase which switch the enzyme between dephosphorylated (active) and phosphorylated (inactive) state. When plenty of cholesterol is available, high levels cause feedback inhibition to decrease the HMG-CoA reductase activity. In a well-fed state, with plenty of substrate availability, insulin and thyroxine cause upregulation of the enzyme. The counterregulatory hormone for cortisol, glucocorticoids, and insulin is glucagon, which has an inhibitory effect.

Transcriptional control of gene expression is another important mechanism that regulates HMG-CoA reductase. This involves the special transcription factors, known as sterol regulatory binding proteins, to be present in the membranes of ER. In cholesterol-depleted cells, the SREBPs are transported to the Golgi complex, where they are processed to release an active fragment that enters the nucleus to bind the SRE (sterol regulatory element) and activate the transcription of the genes encoding HMG-CoA reductase and other enzymes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis. When cholesterol levels are high in the cells, the transport of SREBPs to the Golgi complex is blocked as the enzyme binds to another set of proteins that retain to the ER called ‘insigs’ (insulin signaling proteins). This prevents the proteolytic release of the active fragment of SREBPs from ER membranes. Since the fragment is not available to bind the SRE in the nucleus, the transcription of the target genes no longer occurs, and HMG-CoA reductase is not activated.