Other causes of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia differ from Crigler-Najjar syndrome based on the bilirubin levels and the duration of hyperbilirubinemia.

**Increased Production**

- Hemolysis: Hemolysis can occur in sickle cell disease, hereditary spherocytosis, and Rh isoimmunization. The bilirubin level usually does not rise beyond 6 to 8 mg/dL in cases of exclusive hemolysis in newborns. Rh isoimmunization is the condition where fetal red cells are not compatible with the mother's red blood cells. It can also cause pronounced jaundice but is always associated with signs of active hemolysis.

- Ineffective erythropoiesis: A marked increase in bilirubin level can occur in diseases associated with ineffective erythropoiesis such as thalassemia, pernicious anemia, iron deficiency anemia, lead poisoning, etc.

- Gastrointestinal bleeding and hematoma: Gastrointestinal tract (GIT) bleeding is associated with a wide range of GI tract pathologies. One case report with hematochezia and jaundice reported polyp formation was responsible for rectal bleeding related to biliary abnormalities.

**Decreased Clearance**

- Liver diseases: Since the liver is involved in conjugation of bilirubin for efficient excretion, liver dysfunction in any disease process can lead to jaundice.

- Drug-induced: Various drugs can cause liver injury that impairs the conjugating capacity of the liver. Drugs such as amoxicillin, cefazolin, nitrofurantoin, chloramphenicol, isoniazid, etc.

- Gilbert syndrome: It is the most common form of inherited hyperbilirubinemia affecting the UGT1A1 gene. Gilbert syndrome results from the defect in the promoter region, rather than the UGT1A1 gene itself; hence leading to a reduced amount of normal protein production. Therefore, the deficiency of enzyme UDP-glucuronosyltransferase is not severe. It can be differentiated from Crigler-Najjar type I by its benign manifestations.

- Lucey-Driscoll syndrome:****It is also known as transient familial hyperbilirubinemia. It appears to result from due to compounds in the mother's and baby's blood that block the breakdown of bilirubin.

- Neonatal jaundice and prematurity: In many cases, it is physiologic, but can also result from liver dysfunction, infection, hypothyroidism, metabolic disorders, etc. Physiologic jaundice resolves within the first ten days of life. Higher bilirubin levels present in premature infants due to liver function immaturity.

- Breast milk jaundice: In some breastfeeding neonates with elevated bilirubin within two weeks of birth, levels come down to a reasonable level over 3 to 12 weeks. It usually lasts longer than physiologic jaundice.

Rotor syndrome and Dubin-Johnson syndrome are two rare inherited disorders causing jaundice, but both entities have high levels of conjugated bilirubin. Rotor syndrome results from alterations in two genes, SLCO1B1 and SLCO1B3, while Dubin-Johnson syndrome results from mutations of the ABCC2 gene.