# Continuing Education Activity

Granular parakeratosis is a benign condition that is best categorized as a reaction pattern rather than a distinct cutaneous disease. It presents typically as red-brown scaly to hyperkeratotic papules and plaques in intertriginous areas. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of granular parakeratosis and explains the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the clinical presentations of granular parakeratosis.
- Describe the dermatopathologic findings of granular parakeratosis.
- Review the management options available for granular parakeratosis.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients affected by granular parakeratosis.

# Introduction

Granular parakeratosis is a rare, benign, idiopathic condition that is best categorized as a reaction pattern rather than a distinct disease. The condition presents as red-to-brown scaly-to-hyperkeratotic papules or plaques typically in intertriginous areas. The condition has been reported in patients of all ages and is more commonly seen in women than in men.

# Etiology

Granular parakeratosis was first described in the axillae and subsequently described to involve other intertriginous areas.

# Epidemiology

Granular parakeratosis has been reported in all ages but is most commonly seen in adults. The condition has a higher prevalence amongst women than men. Granular parakeratosis does not appear to have a geographical or racial predilection. The condition is rare with one study reporting granular parakeratosis being present in only 18 specimens among 363,343 specimens examined.

# Histopathology

Granular parakeratosis is a rare, benign, idiopathic condition that is best categorized as a reaction pattern rather than a distinct disease. The diagnosis of granular parakeratosis is made by histopathologic evaluation. A punch or shave biopsy should be completed for diagnosis. The confirmation of granular parakeratosis on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining is adequate to confirm the diagnosis. On biopsy, a thickened stratum corneum is noted with abnormal retention of keratohyalin granules as well as an intact stratum granulosum.

# History and Physical

Patients with granular parakeratosis typically present with asymptomatic to pruritic papules or plaques in intertriginous areas. Granular parakeratosis can arise over several days to months and presents in areas of previously normal skin.

# Evaluation

Granular parakeratosis clinically may be confused with several other conditions such as Hailey-Hailey disease, verruca, contact dermatitis, acanthosis nigricans, erythrasma, confluent and reticulated papillomatosis, extramammary Paget disease, amongst others. Granular parakeratosis has also been found to be present concomitantly with other conditions such as tinea corporis. Thus, a punch or shave biopsy should be completed for histopathologic evaluation. The confirmation of granular parakeratosis on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining is adequate to confirm the diagnosis. On biopsy, a thickened stratum corneum is noted with abnormal retention of keratohyalin granules as well as an intact stratum granulosum.

# Treatment / Management

Multiple treatments have been attempted for granular parakeratosis; however, responses to these treatments have been inconsistent amongst reported cases. Given previous thoughts that granular parakeratosis may be an abnormal reaction to personal hygiene products or other topical preparations, discontinuing these topicals as well as prescribing a topical steroid is typically the first attempted management strategy. Topical steroids may decrease pruritus in symptomatic patients; however, reported cases have rarely resolved with topical steroids as monotherapy.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Hailey-Hailey disease

- Verruca

- Contact dermatitis

- Acanthosis nigricans

- Erythrasma

- Confluent and reticulated papillomatosis

- Extramammary Paget disease

- Inverse psoriasis

- Pemphigus veterans

- Bowen disease

# Prognosis

Granular parakeratosis most often is self-limiting and will resolve in a period of one month to one year.

# Complications

There have been no reported cases of malignant transformation of granular parakeratosis. Patients with granular parakeratosis may develop secondary overlying bacterial infections, especially in patients with symptomatic pruritic lesions that become impetiginized with scratching. Granular parakeratosis has been found to be concomitantly present with other common skin conditions such as tinea corporis.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients should be educated that granular parakeratosis is benign and often self-resolves. Patients should also be instructed that granular parakeratosis is inconsistently responsive to various treatments, and there is no cure for granular parakeratosis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Granular parakeratosis is a benign and often self-limiting reaction pattern. Patients can be managed by a dermatologist or dermatology physician assistant or nurse practitioner. Interprofessional communication between providers and pharmacists may improve patient compliance with various treatments for granular parakeratosis. [Level 5]