Patients with polydactyly may present in infancy or later and may appear in isolation or with other birth defects. Polydactyly of hand and foot can be classified into 3 main categories: preaxial, central, and postaxial. In 1995, the congenital hand committee of the International Federation of Societies for Surgery of the Hand decided to change the terms preaxial and postaxial polydactyly to radial and ulnar polydactyly. Radial polydactyly involves the thumbs, and ulnar polydactyly involves little fingers. Central polydactyly includes the ring, middle, and index fingers, and is often associated with syndactyly and cleft hand.

The most common form of polydactyly of hand is radial polydactyly, and the prevalence rate is higher in Whites compared to other ethnic populations. Most cases are sporadic and unilateral without any associated systemic problems. In these cases, the extra digits are seen anterior to the thumb. Radial polydactyly was further classified by Wassel in 1969 into seven subtypes, serially from type I to type VII, and it is used by hand surgeons very effectively during the management of the patients.

In contrast, the terms tibial, central, and fibular are used to describe polydactyly of the lower limb. Polydactyly of the lower limb was classified by Swanson based on the presentation of the extra digit on the foot. If extra digit affects the great toe, it is called tibial polydactyly, and when it affects the little toe, it is called fibular polydactyly. When the central three digits are affected, then it is called central polydactyly.