Intralenticular or lens abscess is an uncommon ocular entity resulting from post-trauma, surgery, or metastatic spread.

Slit lamp examination usually reveals a heterogenous lens opacity or pus-filled lenticular cavity. Fundus examination is extremely vital to rule out vitritis and endophthalmitis. Documentation of visual acuity, intraocular pressure, and seidel's test is also essential to assess the treatment response in each case. The other critical investigation of interest which can delineate a lens abscess well are ultrasound B scan, anterior segment optical coherence tomography (ASOCT), and ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM).

It is also essential to assess the integrity of the posterior capsule as the risk of endophthalmitis is increased manifold when the posterior capsule is ruptured. It is vital to differentiate lens abscesses from traumatic cataracts, as IOL implantation in primary sitting is contraindicated. Diagnosing lens abscess requires clinician expertise, experience, and a high index of suspicion.

Prompt diagnosis, targeted intervention, elimination of microbial load, and regular and meticulous follow-up are the key elements for treatment success. It is also important to take a culture from the lens aspirate to pinpoint the microorganism. In cases with fungal lens abscesses, intravitreal steroids should be avoided. A detailed examination and high clinical suspicion are required to look for complications like secondary glaucoma, cystoid macular edema, and endophthalmitis.