**Lower Eyelid Laxity**

When it comes to evaluating lower eyelids, there are many factors that need to be taken into consideration. One of the most important tests for this evaluation is called the snap-back test. This test is performed by pulling the lower eyelid away from the eye and assessing how quickly and easily the eyelid returns to its normal position. During this test, if the patient needs to blink for the eyelid to return to its original position, then laxity of the lower eyelid or canthal tendon is present. Moreover, the ability to pull the lower eyelid from the globe more than 5mm is another indication that lower eyelid laxity is present.

Through careful evaluation of the lower eyelid position, we can determine if lateral canthal tendon laxity is present.  As we age, the collagen fibers in our eyelids become laxer and the eyelid will sag more. Therefore, the position of the lower eyelid can be lower than usual. This condition is termed inferior scleral show and can be measured in millimeters. The physician should measure the position of the lower eyelid in relation to the inferior corneal limbus.

The normal anatomical position of the lateral canthal tendon is higher than that of the medial canthal tendon. A change in the relationship where the lateral canthal tendon position falls lower than the medial canthal tendon would indicate that lateral canthal tendon laxity is present. In contrast, medial canthal tendon laxity would manifest clinically with either punctal eversion or increase in distance between the lower punctum and lacrimal caruncle.

Lateral canthal laxity can be addressed during a lower eyelid blepharoplasty procedure. The treatment of lower eyelid lateral canthal laxity is either through lateral canthopexy or canthoplasty. In cases of any medial canthal tendon laxity, a medial canthoplasty can be performed to address it.

The skin laxity of the lower eyelid is called dermatochalasis. As we age, the upper and lower eyelids’ skin can become redundant. The skin appears very loose with many deep and superficial rhytids. There is a condition called blepharochalasis, which causes severe laxity of the eyelid skin during younger ages. These patients often report intermittent edema of the tissues around the eyes, including the eyelids. This condition is usually genetic and is autosomal dominant.

To correct lower eyelid skin laxity, surgeons use a method called the pinch technique. This procedure treats moderate to severe forms of skin laxity of the lower eyelid.

Laser skin resurfacing, either with CO2 or Erbium Yag laser, can also be used to treat skin laxity, but are typically resolved for milder cases. These types of laser treatments are not suitable for all skin types. The CO2 laser resurfacing is only suitable for Fitzpatrick skin types 1 to 3, while Erbium Yag laser can be used conservatively on darker skin types.

**The Pinch Technique**

This method is suitable for patients with severe laxity of the lower eyelid skin. The physician should ask the patient to look up while opening his/her mouth. The physician should pinch the skin of the lower eyelid below the lashes using a smooth forceps and mark the area with a marking pen. It is recommended to repeat this step to ensure that the marking is correct. This area can then be injected with local anesthetic placed in the subcutaneous plane. The skin can be excised and then closed with a running 6-0 plain gut suture. The video below demonstrates the pinch technique.