Management of subphrenic abscess includes antibiotics, drainage of the abscess, and general care of the patient.

Broad-spectrum parenteral antibiotics should be initiated empirically at the time of diagnosis, which should cover both aerobes and anaerobes. Later, the antibiotics can be modified as per culture and sensitivity. Early initiation of antibiotics improves outcomes. Combination therapy or a single broad-spectrum antibiotic can be initiated. Cephalosporins with metronidazole can be considered as the initial choice. In immunosuppressed patients, antifungals covering candida may be indicated. The antifungal of choice depends on the patient's general condition. Azoles are preferred if the patient is stable and if cultures show sensitivity to azoles. In critically ill patients and non-albicans candida, echinocandins like anidulafungin are the drug of choice.

The duration of antibiotics depends on the etiology and extent of the source control. The Surgical Infection Society guidelines suggest 96 hours for well-controlled intrabdominal sepsis and 5-7 days for those in whom definitive source control procedure is not performed.

As with most abscesses and contained infected spaces, drainage is the definitive treatment of a subdiaphragmatic abscess. It prevents progressive sepsis. It can be accomplished either by percutaneous or surgical drainage. Percutaneous drainage is least invasive and just as effective as surgical drainage and is currently the standard of care. CT guided drainage with interventional radiology is highly effective and can prevent the morbidity and mortality associated with surgical drainage.

Percutaneous computed tomography (CT)-guided drainage is considered the gold standard in management and has a very high success rate. The advantages include that it avoids general anesthesia, especially in the elderly with multiple comorbidities, prevents complications of the surgical wound, and reduces the length of hospitalization. Percutaneous drainage can be used as both diagnostic and therapeutic modality. Especially in critically ill patients, it can be used to control sepsis and improve the general condition of the patient before definitive surgical treatment. Persistent drainage usually suggests the presence of an enteric fistula, which can be diagnosed with a contrast CT. Complications include bleeding, injury to nearby visceral organs, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, and mediastinitis. Hence, transmural drainage has been developed using endoscopic ultrasound (EUS-TD). It has been shown to be beneficial due to real-time visualization of the abscess cavity, the use of doppler to avoid major vessels, and high success rate.

If percutaneous or endoscopic drainage fails, then surgical drainage either by an open or laparoscopic method is indicated. Laparoscopic drainage is minimally invasive and permits exploration of the abdominal cavity without the use of wide incision, and hence purulent exudate can be aspirated under direct vision. If the patient does not improve with the laparoscopic technique, then an open surgical technique should be considered. The open approach may be difficult due to adhered bowel, loss of anatomic delineation, and fragile viscera. Of late, there has been increased use of open abdomen therapy (OAT), mainly in the management of abdominal compartment syndrome and trauma patients. The concept of damage control surgery is being used. The use of a vacuum dressing to close the abdomen is preferred.

The majority of the patients with a timely intervention will recover with supportive care like intravenous hydration. Patients who worsen and develop septic shock will need admission to the intensive care unit. Need for multiorgan support like mechanical ventilation, vasopressors, and dialysis will be needed in patients with significant organ failures.