This disease spectrum usually presents late and in aggressive stages because the initial symptoms or signs almost always have benign conditions as the top differentials.

CTCL, like their name suggests, presents as skin lesions. MF is usually restricted to the skin in the early stages, as macules and patches. But when the disease progresses, skin lesions become plaques, tumors, or nodules with associated adenopathy and other organ infiltration. Usually seen in the sun-protected area. But in the advanced stage, this can  SS can arise de-novo or from MF, is characterized by erythroderma, lymphadenopathy, and Sezary cells seen in peripheral blood, skin, and lymph nodes. SS is more aggressive, symptomatic, and with lower remission rates. Some of the precursor lesions associated with or which evolves into MF are clonal dermatitis/cutaneous lymphoid dyscrasias, follicular mucinosis,  lymphoid papulosis, pagetoid reticulosis, and granulomatous slack skin.

PTCL, as mentioned earlier, presents with the nodal, extranodal involving liver, spleen, leukemic and cutaneous involvement. Extranodal is a common presentation. Sometimes patients exhibit B symptoms( fever, night sweats, weight loss). Paraneoplastic syndromes associated with PTCL include eosinophilia, hemophagocytic syndrome, and autoimmune phenomenon. AITL has associated underlying immune deficiency, leading to opportunistic infections. Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma, which is very rare, can present as painless nodules or plaques, easily confused for infectious/inflammatory process. Extra-nodal NK/T-cell lymphoma is characterized by the involvement of the aero-digestive tract, especially the nasal region, leading to nasal obstruction, epistaxis, and bony destruction. Adult T-cell lymphoma can have cutaneous and extracutaneous manifestation, with the acute phase of the disease having hypercalcemia and lytic bone lesions. As its name suggests, hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma involves the bone marrow and is associated with marked hepatosplenomegaly.