Recognizing the symptoms of angina is critical to making a diagnosis of CAD, but similar symptoms can present in many other conditions. The interprofessional team must recognize signs of cardiac vs. non-cardiac chest pain and understand that the etiology may not be clear based solely on the quality of pain. In specific patient populations, such as patients with diabetes, the presentation may be more inconspicuous. Understanding the patient's medical history and family history is critical to making the diagnosis. In the presence of cardiac risk factors, the clinician must have a high index of suspicion for a cardiac etiology and conduct further workup, versus when risk factors are absent.

While the cardiologist is the team leader in the treatment and management of these patients, it is the primary care physician who usually completes the initial workup and makes the diagnosis in many cases. It is vital to obtain an accurate history and physical and have an open line of communication between physicians, or else the clinician may miss the diagnosis. A missed diagnosis increases morbidity and mortality for these patients as it may delay their treatment.

As the management of the condition progresses, cardiology nurses play an essential role in monitoring, assessing patient compliance with treatment regimens, and encouraging lifestyle changes. The pharmacist will weigh in on the patient's medication regimen by evaluating the effectiveness of chosen agents, checking for drug-drug interactions, and verifying dosing. With this type of interprofessional collaboration, patients with angina can experience increased quality of life and avoid future morbidity. [Level 5]