Inferior vena cava syndrome (IVCS) is not a primary diagnosis but is a consequence of any underlying pathology. As described in the pathophysiology section, the presentation of IVCS is dependent on the patient’s comorbidities and underlying diseases. Accurate diagnosis is based on a thorough history taking and physical examination.

The symptoms which a patient shows are in accordance with the pathophysiology of IVCS. It is important to inquire about other signs and symptoms, such as fatigue, dizziness, weight loss, abdominal pain, night sweats, anorexia, palpitations, diaphoresis, dizziness, shortness of breath on exertion. In addition, the history taking also has to get deep into previous illness history, including the history of abdominal surgeries, organ transplantation, lower extremity swelling and pain, family and past medical history of coagulopathy, prior deep venous thrombosis (DVT), as well as occupation and lifestyle.

A thorough physical examination will assist in the accurate diagnosis of IVCS. The vital signs will usually reveal hypotension, tachycardia, and possibly tachypnea with hypoxia. Signs of anemia, such as pallor or pale conjunctiva, might be the earlier sign of malignant disease, and with additional constitutional symptoms of malignancy can lead to the diagnosis of IVCS.

While there are no specific tests with pathognomonic findings of IVCS, certain findings such as lower extremity edema, signs of DVT and pulmonary embolism (PE), cold and clammy extremities, abnormal neurological exam, hepatomegaly, and abdominal distention, lead to the decrease of venous return which then impair the perfusion of end organs.