Treatment of atrial arrhythmias is thus essential to prevent a potentially life-threatening episode. Arrhythmias can be managed pharmacologically by two mechanisms, rate control or rhythm control. Rate control focuses on reducing rapid ventricular responses, while rhythm control attempts to restore sinus rhythm and synchronous atrial contraction.

Anticoagulation is a necessary consideration in atrial fibrillation due to an increased risk of clot formation.

Through these treatments, the length of ventricular diastole is improved by decreasing the ventricular rate, which either reduces dependence on an atrial kick or converts an arrhythmia to restore the synchronized atrial contraction.

**Scenarios with Increased Dependence on Atrial Kick**

**Mitral Stenosis**

A stenotic mitral valve decreases the cross-sectional area available for blood flow. This impedance of flow reduces the quantity of blood that can flow from the atrium to the ventricle. As a result, excess residual blood remains in the left atrium after passive flow, increasing the dependence on the atrial kick to fill the left ventricle. Increased pressures exerted by the atrium to overcome increases in resistance causes atrial remodeling and eventual dilation. Separately, mitral stenosis can also lead to atrial fibrillation.

Additionally, as a consequence of mild to moderate mitral stenosis and in the setting of shortened diastole, flash pulmonary edema can occur. This edema may present as exertional dyspnea with limited exercise tolerance.

**Aortic Stenosis**

Aortic stenosis can increase the dependence on atrial kick due to upstream sequelae of impaired ventricular systolic function. Similar to mitral stenosis, aortic stenosis impairs outflow. Due to reduced outflow, diastolic filling pressure increases in the left ventricle, which forces the atrium to work harder in transferring blood. In patients with aortic stenosis, the atrial kick can be responsible for up to 40% of the LV end-diastolic volume.

**Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction**

Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is caused by impaired relaxation of the left ventricle, inducing left ventricular diastolic stiffness. Loss of compliance of the left ventricle reduces the volume available for blood pooling. Decreased compliance increases dependence on the atrial kick to overcome the stiffness and preserve end-diastolic volume.

Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction is especially harmful in patients with concurrent atrial arrhythmias, as there is no ability to overcome the loss of compliance in the left ventricle. Loss of atrial systole has been shown to decrease cardiac output by up to 20% to 30% and is of significance, particularly in diastolic dysfunction. Forward flow and contractility improve with the restoration of sinus rhythm, as evidenced by hemodynamic improvement in heart failure patients with rhythm control.

**Restoration of Atrial Systole and Atrial Kick**

Pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic methods can help overcome signs and symptoms associated with the loss of a patient's atrial kick. The two approaches focus on the restoration of a synchronized atrial contraction and reducing the dependence of the atrial kick.

**Pharmacological Rate Control**

Medical Management: Beta-blockers and non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers.

Beta-blockers and non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers regulate the heart rate, increasing the duration of diastole. The left ventricle can receive more blood during the passive early diastolic filling through increases in filling time. Consequently, this decreases the dependence on the left atrial kick for proper end-diastolic volume and cardiac output. Typically, this is the first-line treatment in patients with heart failure.

**AV Nodal Ablation with Permanent Pacemaker Placement**

Atrioventricular node ablation with concurrent pacemaker placement is useful for patients with ventricular responses refractory to medical management. This method controls the ventricular rate but is of limited use due to non-superiority.

**Pharmacological Rhythm Control**

**Medical Management: Class III Antiarrhythmic: Amiodarone, Dofetilide, and Sotalol**

Class III antiarrhythmic medications may convert atrial fibrillation into normal sinus rhythms, thus restoring atrial systole. The use of antiarrhythmic medications should be cautionary as the agents inherently cause arrhythmias, can prolong the QT interval, and have significant drug-drug interactions. Amiodarone, in particular, is well known for its complex side-effect profile and long half-life.

**Direct Cardioversion**

Direct cardioversion is useful in patients with atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter who failed medical management and are experience ongoing myocardial ischemia, hemodynamic instability, and heart failure. Non-acute cases can be potentially dangerous, as clots may form in the atrium and possibly dislodge after cardioversion.

**Catheter Ablation**

In young patients without structural heart disease, catheter ablation can be useful in overcoming arrhythmias. Using radiofrequency ablation techniques, an operator can destroy non-sinus junctions that are responsible for the abnormal rhythm. This procedure intends to leave a single pacemaker node intact for synchronization.

**Surgical Maze Procedures**

A surgical maze procedure may be beneficial to patients undergoing heart surgery for coexisting cardiac problems. Using various techniques, a surgeon creates scar tissue in the atria. Since scar tissue cannot conduct electricity, a stray current is halted, which reduces non-sinus induced arrhythmias.