Upon clinical presentation, acute diverticulitis can be managed with either outpatient or inpatient care. According to American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons, a patient who cannot tolerate oral intake, is excessively vomiting, shows signs of peritonitis, is immunocompromised, or at an advanced age should be hospitalized. In the absence of these conditions, and if appropriate prompt follow-up can be established, acute diverticulitis can be managed on an outpatient basis. It is reported that success rate of outpatient management is about 94% to 97%. The standard of outpatient care includes bowel rest, increase fluid intake, and oral antibiotic therapy (single or multiple drug regimen) that covers gram-negative rods and anaerobic bacteria. The most common regimen used in the United States consists of quinolones (ciprofloxacin) or sulfa drugs (trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole) in combination with metronidazole  (or clindamycin, if the patient is intolerant to metronidazole) or single agent amoxicillin-clavulanate for 7 to 10 days.

Inpatient management of diverticulitis requires intravenous antibiotics, intravenous fluids, and pain management. Again, antibiotics should cover gram-negative rods and anaerobes and be given for three to 5 days before switching to oral antibiotics for a ten to 14-day course. Bowel rest is preferred in patients requiring inpatient admission. Typically, defervescence and improvement in leukocytosis should be observed for two to four days of hospitalization, if not an alternative diagnosis or complications should be suspected. Prompt surgical evaluation should be considered.

About 15% patients with acute diverticulitis develop an abscess, specifically pericolonic and intra-mesenteric. Clinically, abscess formation should be suspected if fever and leukocytosis do not subside despite adequate intravenous (IV) antibiotics. On physical exam, a tender abdomen and tender mass suggest possible abscess formation. Abscesses that are less than 2 cm to 3 cm can be treated conservatively with IV antibiotics. Large abscesses should be drained percutaneously with CT guidance.

Fistula formation is another complication of acute diverticulitis. It is reported that less than 5% develops fistula; however, it has been found in about 20% of patients who undergo surgery for diverticulitis. The most common fistula is colovesicular fistula which occurs in about 65% of cases. Fecaluria is pathognomonic for colovesicular fistula. Surgical repair of the fistula with primary anastomosis is the treatment of choice. Colovaginal, coloenteric, colouterine, colourethral, and colocutaneous are other possible fistulae seen in acute complicated diverticulitis.

Partial bowel obstruction or pseudo-obstruction due to colonic ileus can occur as well, which can be managed conservatively. Complete bowel obstruction is rare in acute diverticulitis. Free perforation, if it occurs, should be managed surgically.