Olecranon bursa aspiration will almost always be for diagnostic purposes.  The tests ordered depends on the etiology suspected.  If there is a question of cystic versus solid, point-of-care ultrasound is a mandatory procedure.

The primary or common diagnoses are trauma, infection, and degenerative.

Rare causes are neoplastic, foreign body, primary and inflammatory disease (rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, spondylitis). If the cause of the olecranon bursal effusion is uncertain, proper laboratory analysis is imperative.

Tests to consider:

- Cell count with differential

- Gram stain

- Viscosity assessment

- Culture, aerobic (Staphylococcus is most common; anaerobic infections are fulminant and extremely rare)

- Culture, tubercular (depend on setting and chronicity)

- Culture, fungal (depending on presentation and immune status)

- Crystal analysis (consider in the setting of gout, pseudogout)

- Inflammatory causes: antinuclear antibody (ANA), rheumatoid factor (RF), anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP)

Findings by etiology:

- Infectious: (+) Gram stain, WBC/RBC ratio greater than peripheral (often greater than 50 k/mm3)

- Trauma: elevated RBC with an RBC to WBC ratio consistent with peripheral blood

- Degenerative: may have an elevated BBC without infectious etiology.

- Crystal arthropathy: crystal microscopy will be positive for crystals specific for the disease.

- Rare infection (TB, fungal): may require special culture media with a high index of suspicion.

- Autoimmune/inflammatory diseases: frequently elevated WBC with positive testing specific for the disease state.

Inflammatory and infectious etiologies will frequently cause a decrease in bursa fluid viscosity and an increase in turbidity.  The fluid will go from being clear and fairly viscous, with a customary "string sign" to cloudy with a thin, watery consistency on bedside evaluation.  This can be assessed by observing the movement of the aspirate in the barrel of the syringe with a small amount of air.  It can also be observed by pressing a small amount of fluid out of the end of the syringe and observing a drop of fluid dripping toward the surface below.  Normal fluid is viscous and has a tenuous strain that appears to be mucoid.  The abnormal fluid will be thin, dripping like water