The relatively late appearance of the distinguishing self-injurious behavior can result in delayed diagnosis if other features are overlooked. Developmental delay in a patient with hyperuricemia should raise suspicion for the diagnosis and should be accordingly evaluated.

Increased serum uric acid (>8 mg/dl) and increased urine uric acid (urinary uric acid: creatinine ratio of ≥3-4: 1) is suggestive but is neither sensitive nor specific to the diagnosis. Neuroimaging is a low yield, as most studies showed no specific structural brain abnormalities. Some have reported the decreased volume of the basal ganglia. Functional abnormality from defective neurotransmitter metabolism is not completely known.

Although these investigations support the diagnosis, the definitive diagnosis is either enzymatic assay or molecular testing. Enzymatic diagnosis is an estimate of HPRT enzyme activity in erythrocyte lysate. Other cells like lymphocytes, cultured fibroblasts can also be used.

Recently six metabolites have been documented to serve as biomarkers for HPRT deficiency when present in abnormal quantities (excessive increase in either of AICAR, ZTP, vitamin B3 in the form of niacin or niacinamide, S-AMP, or severe depletion of ATP) by biochemical analysis of red blood cell extracts.

Other investigations like CBC to check for megaloblastic anemia, EEG to rule out seizures as the cause for inattention may be considered.

Prenatal testing can be done using either chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis in male infants with a family history of Lesch Nyhan syndrome.