# Introduction

The heart muscle is the myocardium or middle layer of the heart walls. The myocardium is responsible for the contractile function of the cardiac pump. Composed of cardiomyocytes, the heart muscle has distinctive cellular and physiological features allowing it to generate force to maintain adequate tissue and organ perfusion throughout the entire body. Heart muscle makes up one of the earliest functioning embryonic organs that continues to contract and beat from development throughout a lifetime. Supplied by a complex system of coronary vasculature, cardiac lymphatics, and autonomic innervation, cardiomyocytes line the thickest layer of every chamber of the heart. Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of mortality worldwide. A vast number of these diseases involve the heart muscles with diverse mechanisms of pathophysiology, leading to contractile dysfunction, cell damage and death, and cardiac pump failure. However, numerous interventions, treatment options, and therapies are aimed at minimizing damage, restoring functionality, preventing the occurrence, and reducing the risk of cardiovascular disease.

# Structure and Function

Three distinct layers comprise the heart walls, from inner to outer:

- Endocardium

- Myocardium

- Epicardium (inner layer of the pericardium)

The muscles of the heart, termed the myocardium, make up the middle and thickest layer of the heart wall. This layer lies between the single-cell endocardium layer, which lines the inner chambers, and the outer epicardium, which makes up part of the pericardium that surrounds and protects the heart. Histologically, heart muscles are composed of cells called cardiomyocytes that have unique structures and properties correlating to their contractile function.

The sinus node, located within the right atrial myocardium, spontaneously depolarizes and thus determines the heart rate. These depolarizations are currents of ion influx that are carried from the sinus node to the heart muscle via conducting cells. When the depolarization reaches the heart muscle, voltage-gated sodium channels open, allowing a rapid influx of sodium ions into the cardiomyocytes, depolarizing the cells. The positive membrane potential triggers voltage-gated potassium and then calcium channels to open, allowing potassium to rush out and calcium to rush in. The initial influx of calcium is necessary for the second release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum found within the heart muscle cells. The accumulation of intracellular calcium ions binds to troponin C, moving tropomyosin aside to allow actin-myosin binding and cross-bridge cycling responsible for muscle contraction.

# Embryology

The heart muscle originates from the mesoderm layer and begins forming during the third week of embryonic development. The mesoderm serves as the primary source for myocardial precursor cells, which make up the cardiogenic or primary heart field during early development. A primitive, horseshoe-shaped endothelial heart tube is formed and begins contracting to facilitate the embryo’s early circulation system. Within the next several weeks, the proliferation of cardiomyocytes is necessary for expanding the myocardial layer and generating the multichambered system of the mature heart.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The heart muscles’ blood supply comes directly from the system of coronary arteries that runs within the epicardial layer. Two main coronary arteries, the left coronary artery (LCA) and the right coronary artery (RCA), branch directly off the aorta via the coronary Ostia. These arteries and their branches supply tributary arteries that run perpendicular to the heart surface and transverse from the epicardium, through the myocardium, and down to the endocardium.

The venous system of the heart muscles runs parallel to the coronary arteries. Venous drainage of the left ventricular myocardium is completed by the interventricular vein and the great cardiac vein, which drains into the coronary sinus, found in the posterior right atrioventricular groove, which then drains into the right atrium.

The cardiac lymphatic drainage system is comprised of lymphatic capillaries and pre-collector vessels organized in plexuses within each of the heart wall layers.

# Nerves

Heart muscles are innervated primarily by two nerves, the accelerans nerve and the vagus nerve, which provide sympathetic and parasympathetic stimulation from the autonomic nervous system, respectively. Intrinsic ganglia for the myocardium are present in the epicardium, which receives signals from post-ganglionic sympathetic connections coming from the accelerans nerve and pre-ganglionic parasympathetic connections from the vagus nerve.

# Muscles

The muscle layer of the heart is termed the myocardium and is made up of cardiomyocytes. The myocardium is found in the walls of all four chambers of the heart, though it is thicker in the ventricles and thinner in the atria. This disparity is due to the difference in the generation of the force of contraction needed for propelling blood between the atria and the ventricles, with ventricles requiring much more power.

# Physiologic Variants

Chronic primary hypertension is a common and prevalent disease affecting a large percentage of the United States population. Over long periods, chronic systemic hypertension can result in structural and functional changes to the heart muscle wall. Due to chronic increases in afterload, the pressure in which the left ventricular muscle must contract against increased mean arterial pressure, and the heart muscle responds with compensatory cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. The ventricular muscle wall thickens to reduce wall stress with resulting increase in the wall thickness to the chamber diameter ratio.

Normal aging processes alter heart muscle structurally and physiologically. Arteries become less compliant and stiffen over time, and in older years, this results in an increase in afterload due to greater pressure against which the heart muscle must contract. As a compensatory response, left ventricular thickness increases from cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Over time, cardiomyocytes diminish with age from apoptosis, necrosis, or autophagy leading to an overall decrease in cardiomyocyte number in aged heart muscle.

# Surgical Considerations

A significant yet underrecognized heart muscle complication after non-cardiac surgery is perioperative myocardial injury (PMI), which is distinct from myocardial infarction. Risk factors for PMI before and after surgery include an age greater than or equal to 65 years and a preexisting history of atherosclerotic disease. PMI is an acute increase in high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (hs-cTn) plasma concentrations.

# Clinical Significance

Coronary artery disease (CAD), also termed ischemic heart disease, is the most prevalent cardiovascular disease and the leading cause of global mortality, with significant implications and consequences for heart muscle functionality. CAD is characterized by the formation of atherosclerotic plaques within the coronary arteries resulting in a decrease in blood flow and oxygen and nutrient delivery to the myocardium. Manifestations of CAD are termed acute coronary syndromes (ACS) and include stable angina, unstable angina, and others from the supply-demand mismatch of insufficient oxygen perfusion from at least 70% occlusion of the myocardial vascular supply. The most severe manifestations of CAD are myocardial infarctions, colloquially termed “heart attacks.” Myocardial infarctions (MIs) divide into ST-segment elevation myocardial infarctions (STEMI) and non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), depending on total or near-total coronary vascular occlusions, respectively, and subsequent findings on electrocardiogram (EKG).

The location of myocardial infarctions within the heart can be generally localized via which specific leads are affected with abnormal ST-segment and/or T-wave morphologies on an EKG. MIs demonstrate cardiomyocyte necrosis, and diagnostic findings include positive cardiac troponin (cTn) tests and creatinine kinase myocardial band (CK-MB) tests.

Cardiomyopathies are inherited or acquired diseases of the heart muscle that affect structure and functionality in the absence of other cardiovascular disease processes, such as CAD. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common genetically inherited heart disease and follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. The pathophysiology of HCM comes from mutations in myocardial sarcomere genes leading to myofibrillar disarray, severe thickening, hypertrophy of the heart muscle wall, and diastolic dysfunction. Manifestations of HCM include dyspnea, syncope, palpitations, and sudden death, and most commonly presents in adolescence. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is characterized by eccentric hypertrophy, dilation of the cardiac muscle wall, and systolic dysfunction.

Myocarditis is the term for inflammation of the heart muscle and has several etiologies. The most common etiology in the Western world is viral infections (infectious myocarditis), but other causes include toxic reactions or allergies to drugs, autoimmune diseases, or other infections (bacterial, fungal, parasitic). Myocarditis involves damage and loss of both cardiomyocytes and cardiac vascular endothelial cells, both of which are common targets of infection from inflammatory processes and white blood cell (often lymphocytic) infiltration into the heart muscle wall.

Heart failure (HF) is the common end-stage pathway and clinical manifestation of cardiac pump dysfunction from a variety of etiologies, including many diseases affecting the heart muscle. HF can be categorized into different groups, such as acute vs. chronic, right heart vs. left heart, and systolic (reduced ejection fraction) vs. diastolic (preserved ejection fraction), each presenting with distinct clinical characteristics. HF is essentially defined as the inability of the heart to pump adequately, leading to congestion, reduced organ perfusion, and functional impairment.