The impaired metabolization of uroporphyrinogen III is the cause of two known porphyrias: congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) and porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT).

**Congenital Erythropoietic Porphyria:**Also known as Gunther disease, this porphyria is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by an inherited deficiency of the enzyme uroporphyrinogen III synthase (UROS). In the presence of insufficient UROS activity, hydroxymethylbilane spontaneously closes and forms the non-physiological compound uroporphyrinogen I, which is then acted upon by uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase to form coproporphyrinogen I. Coproporphyrinogen I then oxidizes spontaneously to form the porphyrins coproporphyrin I and uroporphyrin I. In CEP, these toxic porphyrins mostly accumulate in RBC precursors in the bone marrow, as well as the teeth, bones, urine, and feces. They are not significantly elevated in the liver. This leads to disease characterized by severe cutaneous photosensitivity and hemolysis.

- Cutaneous Photosensitivity - As the toxic porphyrins mentioned above accumulate in the bone marrow, they may be released into circulation and subsequently found in the plasma and mature erythrocytes. They then may travel to the skin, and upon exposure to light, generate free radicals that can damage cells and tissues. This results in skin friability and blistering in sun-exposed areas like the face, ears, neck, forearms, and hands. The bullae and vesicles that form may rupture, scar, and become infected. In severe instances, this can lead to skin mutilation and deformities.

- Hemolysis - Due to the accumulation of porphyrins within erythrocytes, intravascular hemolysis is a major feature of CEP. In an effort to compensate, the bone marrow and spleen actually increase the production of heme and hemoglobin synthesis, although it is usually not enough to counter the amount of hemolysis/ineffective erythropoiesis. This leads to typical findings of hemolytic anemia with splenomegaly(extramedullary erythropoiesis), increased reticulocyte count, increased indirect bilirubin, and decreased haptoglobin. Blood smear typically reveals nucleated RBCs, basophilic stippling, anisocytosis, poikilocytosis, and polychromasia. In severe cases, the hemolysis may cause hydrops fetalis in utero or jaundice in the neonatal period.

The extent of enzyme deficiency caused by the UROS mutation in each case is the major determinant of the age of onset and severity of symptoms seen in the disease. Treatment involves avoidance of exposure to sunlight, prompt treatment of skin infections, possible RBC transfusions with iron chelation, and in severe cases allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation.

**Porphyria Cutanea Tarda:**PCT is the most common type of porphyria. It is due to a deficiency or decreased activity in the enzyme uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (UROD) within the liver, and UROD activity less than 20% is usually required for the clinical manifestations of PCT to appear. A genetic mutation in the UROD gene can predispose one to the disease, as it will cause a decrease in UROD activity to 50%, but other various acquired factors are also needed. Therefore, penetrance is usually low in familial PCT, and there may not be an apparent family history of the disease. Most cases of PCT (~80%) in fact occur in the absence of a UROD mutation and are due exclusively to acquired factors causing a deficiency in UROD activity- these cases are referred to as "sporadic."

Decreased activity of UROD in the liver that is acquired environmentally or behaviorally is usually due to resultant iron accumulation or oxidative damage in hepatocytes. Thus, risk factors for iron accumulation in the liver such as inherited HFE mutations, or factors for liver damage such as alcohol abuse, smoking, and HCV infection are all implicated in the pathogenesis of PCT. Determining the presence or absence of these factors in a patient with suspected PCT is crucial as it can affect the management of the disease.

PCT generally presents in an adult with chronic blistering, hyper or hypopigmentation, and scarring in sun-exposed areas of the body. The blistering after sun exposure is usually delayed, and therefore, many patients may not be aware that sunlight is causing their skin manifestations. Hepatic transaminase elevations and hepatomegaly are also characteristic in patients with PCT, reflecting the liver damage present in the disease. Treatment involves low-dose hydroxychloroquine and phlebotomy to decrease the iron deposition in the liver, and the elimination of susceptibility factors is also essential in the treatment of PCT.