Language or communication barriers between patients and health professionals may negatively impact medical care. It has been reported that up to a quarter of all interpretation from family members or untrained personnel is incorrectly translated. This is due to the precision of the vocabulary used in the interpretation. Studies show trained personal demonstrated increased precision and decreased errors.

There are several concerns when family members perform the initial interpretation, and there can be cumulative issues that may have a detrimental effect on patient care. First, there is a lack of confidentiality. Typically, family members have not had HIPPA training and may unintentionally discover information regarding the patient that may not be beneficial to the treatment plan and detrimental to their relationship with the patient. The depth of information may be limited due to the sensitive nature of several subjects, including sexual activity and substance use. Another concern includes the lack of medical knowledge required to interpret medical information correctly; this may lead to misunderstandings and errors in the translation, which is also the primary reason a patient’s child should be used as an interpreter only in medical emergencies. Finally, untrained interpreters and family members may have their own notions regarding medicine, evaluation, and treatment. These thoughts may be conveyed during translation, possibly causing an error and medical information to be skewed.

Some see the lack of adequate interpretation during medical care as discrimination. Federally funded programs are required to provide adequate interpretation for patients with limited English skills in Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, except if they are Medicare Part B. In fact, several past legal decisions considered lack of appropriate interpretation as negligence. One such case involved the incorrect interpretation of the word “intoxicado” by office staff to mean “intoxicated.” The misinterpretation resulted in a fruitless dialog of drug and alcohol use. In reality, the meaning of the word in this situation was meant to be translated as “inadvertent toxicity,” and an intracranial hemorrhage was overlooked, resulting in a 71 million dollar lawsuit. Due to this case, as well as other rulings, some states in the United States instituted laws requiring adequate interpretation for medical encounters. Currently, adequate interpretation is not funded in all states, and the exact meaning of adequate interpretation is unclear.

Patients with a language barrier are more likely to receive larger workups, including labs, intravenous fluids, longer emergency department stays, more hospital admissions, and increased medical charges. Poor interpretation may lead to negative relationships with providers and interpreters as well as decreased compliance with treatment. Thus, patients who require medical interpretation are typically less likely to be satisfied with their care from medical providers. The lack of appropriate medical interpretation has been a cause of increased anxiety for patients. Patients with a language barrier spend less time in an INR therapeutic window at Coumadin clinics, have more vision impairment with type II diabetes, and have increased medical errors. Patients with language barriers and cultural differences are also less likely to seek mental health care. These are just a few of the many problems that may be avoided with appropriate medical interpretation.