Cutaneous reactions are related to different types of allergens, such as drug therapy or sutures exposure. These reactions are immune-mediated. They can be divided into two categories: immediate-type reaction and delayed-type reaction. Immunoglobulin E (IgE) or T-cell delayed-type hypersensitivity mediates these reactions. The mechanism of IgE-mediated reactions is well studied and understood. Meanwhile, the process in which delayed-type reactions occur in the skin is less well understood.

Allergic contact dermatitis is the most considered form of delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction, where sensitization to an allergen occurs. This condition is characterized by its acute phase in which erythema, vesiculation, and pruritus occur. The response is elicited by a hapten capable of interacting with cutaneous protein, which can be a chemical such as pharmaceuticals, sutures, and metallic compounds. Haptens are weak allergens requiring sensitization. Studies of the immune system reveal that a complex sequential series of events starts as soon the skin is in contact with the sensitizing agents.

These molecules aren't in direct contact with antigens. Instead, they bind with cellular or extracellular proteins, before the immune molecules are aware. As soon as the hapten is in contact with the skin, they are taken via pinocytosis or endocytosis by the antigen-presenting cells in the skin. These antigen-presenting cells upregulate the expressions of surface molecules and cytokines. The major histocompatibility complex (MHC), and CD80, a costimulatory molecule, are good examples of such surface molecules. In the dermis and epidermis, the primary antigen-presenting cells are the Langerhans cells. These cells are activated and migrate to the lymph nodes, where they continue to carry the hapten and present the antigen-MHC complex to a T-cell.

The activation of a T-cell requires two signals. The first signal is the contact of the peptide/MCH complex expressed on the antigen-presenting cell with their respective T-cell receptor. The second signal comes when the costimulatory molecules on the antigen-presenting cell interact with their respective T-cell receptors. Once the antigen is presented and the T cells activated, a transition from a naive T-cell to a memory T-cell or effector T-cell occurs. The population of T-cells with a skin-homing receptor could be created if the clonal expansion of suture-specific T-cells occurs. The second interaction of the suture with a T-cell receptor will trigger a cascade reaction of cytokine secretion, cytotoxicity, or proliferation in reactive T-cell clones.

Keratinocytes are essential players in the immune responses in the skin, especially in the activation and prolongation of such a response. They can present antigens when inflammatory stimuli are present. Cytokines play an essential role in the cutaneous immune response. They are secreted by the skin cells after being activated by an allergen playing a crucial role in regulating cell killing. Cytokines, in combination with nitric oxide, secreted from keratinocytes and Langerhans cells, after exposure to allergens, have been considered to direct effector cells to the inflammation site. Examples of such effectors cells are T-cells, macrophages, and neutrophils. Once the inflammatory insult occurs, tissue damage is caused. This tissue damage is believed to release pro-oxidants species, and these reactive oxygen species have been demonstrated to cause necrosis at a high level. On the contrary, low levels of reactive oxygen species induce apoptosis.