In general, there are no disease-modifying treatments for PPS conditions. Treatment is focused on symptom management and improving quality of life. A minority of patients may show some relief of parkinsonism symptoms with levodopa. Alternative agents with limited benefit for parkinsonism include monoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) inhibitor selegiline, the dopamine-releasing agent amantadine, and dopamine receptor agonists.

Managing tremors includes using propranolol, clonazepam, topiramate, and gabapentin. Anticholinergics and baclofen may be helpful. Physical therapy helps prevent falls, reduces contractures, and promotes mobility. Physical therapists****can also help with movement problems through cardiovascular, strengthening, flexibility exercises, gait training, and general fitness programs.

Occupational therapy can assist in promoting independence for activities of daily living. Speech therapy is important in evaluating dysphagia, while dieticians can assist in proper nutrition planning. Palliative and safety measures are important for end-of-life care and limiting stress for the patient and caregivers.

Music or expressive arts therapists may provide meaningful activities that can reduce anxiety and improve well-being. There are also various other treatments and therapies which are specific for individual PPS diseases.

**Lewy Body Dementia**

In LBD, cholinesterase inhibitors or memantine can be used to treat cognitive or behavioral symptoms. Antipsychotic medications are used when behavioral symptoms are severe. Disabling parkinsonism can be treated with levodopa, although effects are limited.

**Multiple System Atrophy**

Botulinum toxin injections may alleviate focal dystonias in MSA. Chronic orthostatic hypotension resulting from autonomic dysfunction can be improved with fludrocortisone acetate or midodrine. REM sleep behavior disorder can be treated with melatonin or clonazepam if necessary.

**Corticobasal Degeneration**

In CBD, dystonia can be treated with botulinum toxin to improve function in the affected limb.

**Progressive Supranuclear Palsy**

There are a variety of therapeutic options to address the ophthalmological symptoms of PSP. Patients with limited extraocular movements can use mirror-prism lenses to read and perform activities of daily living with more independence. Eyelid opening apraxia and blepharospasm can be relieved with eyelid crutches and botulinum toxin.