The Manougian procedure has allowed for operative intervention in patients with small aortic outflow tracts and has helped to decrease patient-prosthesis-mismatch. All patients undergoing aortic valve replacement with the need for a possible root enlargement procedure should undergo preoperative discussion at interprofessional meetings to discuss complex cases.

Preoperative imaging with reviewing the patient's aortic root dimensions along with their body surface area will allow the team to prepare for the possible need for aortic root enlargement and valve sizing. While a successful aortic root enlargement may decrease the overall morbidity and mortality of the patient long term, it may increase the cross-clamp and bypass times, thereby potentially increasing the perioperative morbidity and mortality of the patient. For this reason, all healthcare team members must be in constant communication and efficient in their practice to enhance better outcomes. As with any other procedure, effective preparation will enhance the healthcare team outcomes.

Having a detailed plan in place, along with a preoperative discussion, will help to prevent any poor intraoperative decision making. The perfusionist and anesthesia team must be informed if longer cross-clamp times are needed to ensure adequate cardioplegia and hypothermia for the best myocardial protection. Postoperative management requires a team monitoring for many things such as post-op bleeding, arrhythmias, or other conduction issues, and pain control.