In general, puberty follows a predictable pattern of onset and sequence. However, due to differences in each individual, including environment and genetics, puberty may proceed in a less-than-predictable way. Issues of concern related to puberty include, but are not limited to delayed puberty, precocious (early) puberty, contrasexual pubertal development, premature adrenarche (androgens causing early pubertal changes), premature thelarche in girls, and premature or delayed menarche.

Of specific concern to adolescent males is the appearance of enlarged breasts during puberty. Gynecomastia of puberty is a benign condition in males, characterized by the proliferation of glandular elements, which results in the enlargement of one or both breasts. During male puberty, there is often a short-lived imbalance between estrogen and testosterone, leading to gynecomastia. If the history and physical examination fall within normal limits, the gynecomastia usually resolves on its own by the age of 18, and only reassurance and monitoring are necessary.

Puberty can also bring about emotional changes and stress to individuals as they come to terms with their changing bodies. Voice changes, wet dreams, involuntary erections, and noticeable physical changes such as breast enlargement, acne, widened hips, and growth spurts can cause adolescents to become worried and concerned about being different from their peers. While it is important to recognize the physiologic changes in puberty, it is also important to acknowledge the psychosocial and emotional changes that may occur at this time.