A basic understanding of statistical concepts is necessary to effectively evaluate existing literature. Statistical results do not, however, allow one to determine the clinical applicability of published findings. Statistical results can be used to make inferences about the probability of an event among a given population. Careful interpretation by the clinician is required to determine the value of the data as it applies to an individual patient or group of patients.

Good research studies will provide a clear, testable hypothesis, or prediction, about what they expect to find in the relationships being tested.

Statistics are used to test a study’s alternative or experimental hypothesis. Statistical models are fitted based on the nature, type, and other characteristics of the dataset. Data typically involves levels of measurement, and these determine the type of statistical models that can be applied to test a hypothesis.

It is up to the researcher to appropriately apply statistical models when testing hypotheses. Several approaches can be used to analyze the same dataset, and how this is accomplished depends heavily on the nature of the wording in a researcher’s hypothesis.

It is strongly recommended that unfamiliar users consult with a statistical analyst when designing and running statistical models. Biostatistician consultations can occur at any time during a study, but earlier consultations are wise to prevent the introduction of accidental bias into study data and to help ensure accuracy and collection methods that will be adequate to allow for tests of hypotheses.