There are four ways to perform a liver biopsy.

**Percutaneous**

This can be done using three different techniques:

- Palpation/percussion  method

- Imaging-guided

- Real-time image-guided

Technique: The patients are made to lie in a comfortable supine position. The right hand is placed under the head in a neutral position.  By percussion, the area of maximum dullness is identified over the right hemithorax. This is typically between the 6 and 9 intercostals spaces between the anterior and the midclavicular line. Dullness is confirmed on both inspiration and expiration to avoid inadvertent pneumothorax. The location of the biopsy is clearly marked.

Image-guided biopsy using ultrasound potentially increases the safety of the procedure and minimizes the likelihood of obtaining inadequate specimens, but this has not been shown to reduce the risk of major complications conclusively. All patients who need liver biopsy should ideally have had an ultrasound before the biopsy to evaluate for the presence of Chilaiditi syndrome (presence of small bowel between the liver and the abdominal wall), intrahepatic gallbladder and focal vascular lesions such as hemangioma. It is also helpful in targeted biopsy, e.g., for diagnosis of lesions identified in imaging studies.

The skin is prepped and draped in a sterile fashion. The overlying skin is anesthetized using 1% lidocaine. The peritoneum is also anesthetized by inserting the needle along the upper border of the rib avoiding vascular structures.

**Transvenous**

This can be done either transjugular or transfemoral. This type of biopsy is very useful in patients that are at high risk for complications from percutaneous biopsy, such as those with ascites, obesity coagulopathy, sickle hepatopathy, suspected hepatic amyloidosis, and chronic kidney disease. Also, the free and wedged hepatic venous pressures can be measured at the same time, besides being able to opacify the hepatic vein, which makes this procedure very useful to diagnose and grade the severity of sinusoidal and post-sinusoidal portal hypertension and is also helpful in post-transplant settings.

Technique: Interventional radiologists do this procedure under fluoroscopic guidance. The skin is anesthetized with 1% lidocaine over the puncture site, mostly right internal jugular.  The internal jugular vein is accessed, a sheath introducer is placed into the vein, and under fluoroscopic guidance, a catheter is advanced to the level of the right hepatic vein. Once the hepatic vein has been adequately visualized, a biopsy needle is threaded down the catheter and advanced into the liver parenchyma. Either of the above-described needles can be used. Biopsies obtained via this technique are often thinner than with the intercostal technique. If three to four passes are obtained, biopsies often provide adequate tissue.

**Laparoscopic**

This method is very safe in patients with chronic liver disease. It can be done during surgery for different indications when the liver is found to be abnormal or in a planned manner. It allows visual inspection of the liver. It is most useful in targeted biopsies of liver masses, staging tumors, and in patients found to have inconclusive results using percutaneous and transvenous methods. Peritoneal biopsies can also be taken during laparoscopy in patients with unexplained ascites. This is most useful in the diagnosis of malignancy and infectious diseases like tuberculosis.

Devices: Both cutting and aspiration type needles can be used. Also, wedge biopsies can also be taken.

Technique: Most centers perform the procedure in the operating room. However, diagnostic laparoscopy with moderate sedation can be done as an outpatient procedure now. The patient is monitored closely during the procedure, and having anesthesia assistance is very helpful. A Veress needle is most commonly used.  The use of nitrous oxide as compared to carbon dioxide has improved the tolerability of the procedure.

Newer techniques extending from natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) could be used to perform a liver biopsy.

**Plugged Biopsy**

This is a modification of the percutaneous approach that can be used in patients who are at high risk for bleeding (coagulopathy or thrombocytopenia). Although a transvenous biopsy can be obtained in this subset of patients, the plugged approach is used when a larger specimen size is desirable.

Technique: The technique is similar to the percutaneous approach, except the biopsy tract is plugged with gel foam, collagen, or thrombin while the sheath is being removed.