Anxiety disorders are very common and can have a diverse presentation of signs and symptoms. The condition has very high morbidity and mortality and is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a mental health nurse, pharmacist, psychologist, psychiatrist, and primary care provider. Many patients have moderate to severe symptoms, which lead to poor quality of life. Most have no idea that the condition can be treated. Thus, the key to improving outcomes is patient education. The nurse practitioner, pharmacist, and primary care provider should urge the patient to stop tobacco, alcohol, and caffeinated beverages. Also, relief of stress is vital, and thus a referral for cognitive behavior therapy may help.

Many drugs can be used to treat anxiety, but they all have side effects, which is a common reason for non-compliance. The pharmacist should emphasize the benefits of these medications and urge compliance to improve the symptoms. At the same time, the primary care provider should monitor for hyperlipidemia, diabetes, and weight gain due to the medications.

Overall, anxiety disorders are underdiagnosed and undertreated. When left untreated, anxiety disorders often lead to severe depression and abuse of drugs and alcohol. Additionally, there is a high rate of suicide among these patients. Many patients with chronic anxiety have a poor quality of life. The education of both the patient and family by the pharmacist, nurse, and provider as a team is important to reduce the high morbidity and addiction problems with treatment medications. Family members should help ensure medication compliance and provide a supportive environment. Unfortunately, despite optimal treatment, relapse rates are high.