Osgood Schlatter disease, also known as osteochondrosis, tibial tubercle apophysitis, or traction apophysitis of the tibial tubercle, is a common cause of anterior knee pain in the skeletally immature athletic population. Clinical presentation classically associates atraumatic, insidious onset of anterior knee pain, with tenderness at the patellar tendon insertion site at the tibial tuberosity. The condition is self-limited and occurs secondary to repetitive extensor mechanism stress activities such as jumping and sprinting. Pain level dictates overall treatment, and management includes symptomatic treatment with ice and NSAIDs, as well as activity modification and relative rest from inciting activities in association with lower extremities stretching regimen to correct underlying predisposing biomechanical factors. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of tibial tuberosity apophysitis and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the mechanism of injury of tibial tubercle apophysitis
- Review the components of a proper evaluation and assessment of a patient presenting with tibial tuberosity apophysitis, including any indicated diagnostic imaging studies.
- Summarize the appropriate management options available for a patient who has Osgood Schlatter.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients presenting with Osgood Schlatter disease.