Diagnosis of JNA is not a difficult one to make but is best done as part of an interprofessional team consisting of the primary care provider (pediatrician, family medicine physician, internist, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner), radiologist, otolaryngologist (ENT), neurosurgeon, interventional radiologist, radiation oncologist, anesthesiologist, pathologist, and oncology-trained nurses.

Patients, and more importantly, family members, should receive education on the classic signs and symptoms of nasopharyngeal angiofibroma. If an adolescent male friend or family member is having recurrent unprovoked nosebleeds or chronic nasal congestion/obstruction that doesn't improve with allergy medication, then it is recommended to be evaluated by their primary care provider.  Patients should be made aware of the treatment options and complications, especially the bleeding risk associated with surgery. There should be an emphasis on the fact that this is not a malignant lesion and has high cure rates and long-term survival if treated appropriately. Nursing staff with appropriate training can be excellent resources in providing information and education to patients and their families as well as coordinating follow-up.

The primary method of treatment is surgical resection, and depending on the stage and characteristics may require preoperative embolization or adjuvant radiotherapy.

Treatment failure is determined by recurrence, occurring in up to 37% of patients. Recurrence most commonly occurs within the first three years following surgery, requiring annual or biannual clinical and imaging surveillance for at least four years following surgery.

Nasopharyngeal angiofibroma requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, and specialty-trained nurses, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]