Evaluation of a patient with the adult tapeworm infection relies mostly on microscopic fecal examination searching for the presence of eggs in stool. Although this allows for the diagnosis of the genus of the parasite, it often does not distinguish between species. Serum and fecal molecular testing can aid in the diagnosis and species differentiation. NCC requires a combination of molecular tests and imaging. Eosinophilia is often present but rarely will rise more than 50%. An increase in 1% to 15% is more likely, and serum IgE levels may be increased as well.

T. saginata and T. solium eggs can be identified but not differentiated by microscopic fecal examination.T. saginata since gravid proglottids often emerge spontaneously through the anus, depositing eggs on the perianal and perineal regions.Taenia diagnosis relies on direct microscopy of expelled eggs in feces despite the low sensitivity given the intermittent nature of eggs shedding (sensitivity ranges from 3.9% to 52.5%).Ascaris, Trichuris, Hymenoplepis nana, and protozoa.T. solium achieves 100% specificity and 97% to 100% sensitivity. Serum testing includes an immunoblot assay for antibody detection for T. solium excretory-secretory (TSES) antigen has 95% sensitivity and 100% specificity.

Diphyllobothriasis also relies on stool examination for distinct eggs, which can classify the genus but not the species.Diphyllobothrium and Taenia, there is no clinical reason to distinguish between species since treatment is the same; however, identifying the distinct species will aid in the epidemiologic picture of transmission and imported cases.

Since cysts in most tissues are asymptomatic or destroyed, they are rarely noticed or diagnosed. However, NCC leads to visible cystic lesions in the CNS and significant and variable symptomatology. A large part of NCC pathology is due to the host immune response to the T. solium larval cyst.

Serology for NCC includes antibody and antigen detection through serum and CSF samples, respectively. Although antigen detection is possible with serum and urine, it was found to be higher in CSF.T. solium cysts has a 98% to 100% specificity in patients with more than one viable brain cyst; however, EITB has poor sensitivity for only one brain lesion.

In general, positive antibody and antigen testing for NCC suggests a viable infection. A single lesion on imaging (or low infection burden) may test negative for both. Patients with only calcified lesions will typically be negative for antigens but may be negative or positive for antibodies. If imaging shows only calcified lesions and the patient has a positive antigen test, one should suspect a viable lesion that has been missed. Subarachnoid NCC is associated with high levels of antibody and antigen. Therefore, positive imaging with negative or weakly positive results should raise questions about the diagnosis.