Ventricular catheters represent a “global” ICP with minimal chances of drift and influence from pressure gradients between the parenchyma and ventricular system.

It is the most reliable method of achieving maximum accuracy at minimal expense. There are added therapeutic benefits of CSF drainage, instilling medications like antibiotics and thrombolytic agents.

The advantage of the ventricular monitoring device is the facility for egress of CSF in cases of a sustained rise in ICP (greater than or equal to 20 mm Hg for 5 minutes or longer), but the disadvantage is that simultaneous monitoring, as well as CSF drainage, is not possible. The amount of CSF to be drained can be guided as per the recommended target ICP (commonly set as 10 mm Hg) or can be aided with the visual guidance in improving the ICP waveform analysis obtained from the concurrent application of intraparenchymal monitors or through clinical neurological examination. Care always needs to be taken in preventing paradoxical upward transtentorial herniation due to overzealous drainage of CSF.

EVD can be removed once the ICP is normalized with sustained or improved clinical neurology (motor score at least 5) for at least 48 to 72 hours without the use of any interventions by clamping or, more ideally, gradual increment in its height (training of the EVD) is attained to watch for any clinical deterioration in the patient for at least 48 hours.

Strict aseptic precautions and care also need to be implemented during its removal as well. The head end should be lowered to prevent the risk of pneumocephalus and pneumoventriculi. The tip of the catheter can be sent for bacteriological analysis in cases of persisting fever with features of meningitis. The wound is closed in layers to minimize the risk of CSF leak and infection. The patient should receive close monitoring for any signs of clinical deterioration for at least 24 hours with all preparations made for the emergency placement of a new EVD set.