The majority of patients with CMV colitis who are immunocompetent may need no treatment with antiviral medications; because of the severity of side-effects of antiviral drugs such as ganciclovir, there is no evidence that treatment with antiviral medications in these patients will make significant differences in patient outcomes. The side effects of ganciclovir include myelosuppression, hepatotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, and central nervous system disorders. However, antiviral treatment in immunocompetent patients with CMV colitis could be limited to males over the age of 55 who suffer from severe disease and have co-morbidities affecting the immune system such as diabetes mellitus or chronic renal failure. The drug of choice is oral or intravenous ganciclovir.

Patients with CMV reactivation, which frequently occur in severe or corticosteroid-resistant inflammatory bowel disease, do not necessarily need antiviral treatment. This is because, in most cases, the virus is not pathogenic, and antiviral treatment may not be helpful. The indications for antiviral therapy in these patients include:

- When CMV reactivation results in the development of CMV colitis and histological examination of mucosal tissue reveals high-grade CMV density

- Patients with low-grade CMV density who have corticosteroid-refractory disease or are corticosteroid dependent

- An endoscopically large ulcer may indicate that antiviral therapy is required

It is important to note that there are insufficient publications with poor quality data regarding the treatment of CMV colitis with antiviral agents and whether it improves colectomy and mortality outcomes. Further research is necessary with large randomized trials to define subgroups that can benefit from treatment. Concomitant use of anti-TNF therapy with antiviral therapy may be considered to treat CMV reactivation in ulcerative colitis patients. Ganciclovir is effective in treating and preventing CMV disease in bone marrow transplantation patients.