Indications for preoperative imaging and biopsy consider the extent of the mass on physical examination and the anticipated neurovascular involvement. The clinician also has to consider the likelihood of nodal involvement or distant metastases as well as the relative resectability and potential postoperative functional deficits as seen with STS of the extremities.

Regarding imaging, MRI is generally considered the most informative for trunk and extremity STS. Chest CT with contrast is considered in cases with high metastatic potential, as the lungs are often involved. The use of PET/CT in the workup of sarcomas has not yet become the standard of care. It has not shown value in distinguishing benign versus malignant disease. It has shown some promise in gauging response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. However, further studies will be required to determine its role.

If a biopsy is recommended, then the choice is a core-needle biopsy, and if this is nondiagnostic, then an incisional biopsy may need to take place. The core-needle biopsy should be approached such that the entire needle trajectory can be incorporated into the forthcoming surgical resection volume to maximize diagnostic potential. It has been determined that approximately 74% of patients who undergo an unplanned trunk or extremity sarcoma resection have residual disease at the time of the following resection.

The high risk of recurrence warrants close postoperative surveillance with a physical exam every 3 to 6 months for 2 to 3 years and, after that, every six months for the next two years and finally annually. Radiographic surveillance of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis and indications for follow-up MRI is based on the individual patient and tumor characteristics.