When patients present with under 24 hours of neurological symptoms, such as weakness, dizziness, numbness, issues with speech, or visual changes, they are managed in the form of a stroke alert or a code stroke. This is done because there is a specific protocol that has to be followed to quickly obtain the most important components of the history, perform the pertinent parts of the physical exam, and get the emergent laboratory studies and relevant imaging. The most important component to obtain in the history of these patients is their last known normal, which is when they were last seen or last felt that they were at their baseline. The reason this is so important is that it determines what options are available for their management. If their last known normal is within 4.5 hours of presentation, they are within the window for receiving IV tissue plasminogen activator (TPA); if it is within 24 hours, they are within the window for neurosurgical intervention. Other additional important components of the history include when the symptoms started, what they were, and if they have changed, improved, or worsened since their onset. Whether or not the patient has any contraindications to TPA also needs to be obtained quickly. This includes any history of intracranial hemorrhage, ischemic stroke within the past 3 months, any recent invasive surgical procedures or recent neurosurgical or spinal surgeries, a recent history of any kind of internal bleeding, use of anticoagulant medications if they have had recent blood draws or IV lines at noncompressible sites, and recent trauma or myocardial infarction. Other components of history that are useful to know are the patient's medical problems, as issues such as diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia all increase the risk of stroke.

The most important part of the physical exam to perform in an emergent fashion when there is a concern for a stroke is the National Institute of Health Stroke Scale. This scale is a standardized way of assessing stroke patients to remove subjectivity during their examination. This scale is particularly useful for identifying and localizing strokes involving the anterior circulation, such as the middle cerebral artery, based on the functions they assess. The components include sensation, strength, and coordination in all 4 extremities; production and comprehension of speech, including naming and repetition; visual fields; orientation to self and time; and symmetry and sensation of the face. Large MCA strokes are usually the easiest to recognize of all strokes, as they tend to present with the major deficits that one thinks of when thinking of a stroke, such as unilateral flaccidity, forced gaze deviation, visual field cuts, and, if in the dominant hemisphere, speech deficits. This scale is useful in predicting whether there will be findings on the diffusion-weighted MRI. When performing this exam, it is also important to note whether any abnormalities appreciated are chronic, such as residual deficits from previous strokes. In addition, it is necessary to check vital signs, particularly the patient's blood pressure as hypertension and hypotension can both be associated with neurological symptoms, and blood pressure must be under 180/110 prior to administration of IV TPA.