In patients with a history of prior CABG, revascularization with either redo CABG or PCI may be indicated to either improve the symptoms or mortality, and indications are generally similar to that in patients with coronary artery disease.

Indications differ by the stage at which the patient presents with symptoms, and this can be split into early and late presentation following the initial procedure.

Early graft failure is one of the known complications of coronary artery bypass grafting. It has been reported to be up to 12% in some series.

Although early postoperative graft problems are overlooked due to non-specific changes in ECG and echocardiographic findings, patients who clinically exhibit signs and symptoms of ischemia receive PCI with an effort to limit the extension of infarction. Stenting may be considered for native coronaries as well as LIMA grafts; however, redo CABG should be considered in case of anastomotic site stenosis or vein graft thrombosis.

Per the American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association, the indications for primary CABG include the following: greater than 50% stenosis of the left main coronary artery, greater than 70% stenosis of the left anterior descending or the proximal circumflex arteries, patients that are asymptomatic or have mild, stable angina with the three-vessel disease, patients that have proximal left anterior descending stenosis with poor left ventricular function and three-vessel disease, a high-risk patient with stable angina that has one or two-vessel disease in an area of viable myocardium, a patient with a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 50% and inducible ischemia seen on non-invasive testing with greater than 70% stenosis in the left anterior descending artery.

Redo CABG may be considered appropriate for similar indications as primary CABG in late presentation; however, due to increased surgical complexity and surgical mortality risk of redo CABG (generally three to four-fold higher than primary CABG) and with the improvement of percutaneous interventions, redo CABG procedures are becoming less frequent.

In CABG patients presenting with stable angina, elective PCI is generally preferred over redo CABG in patients who have preserved LIMA graft to the LAD, have relatively limited or small areas of myocardial ischemia with suitable PCI targets and in those who have poor CABG targets. In patients who have extensive medical comorbidities with overall limited life expectancy, redo CABG is generally discouraged due to a relatively higher risk/benefit ratio and generally non-significant mortality benefit.

Redo CABG should be generally considered for patients who cannot undergo PCI due to technical reasons and in those patients who may potentially have a survival benefit with the placement of arterial conduit to LAD, such as in patients with new significant LAD stenosis. If redo surgical revascularization is felt to be high risk, PCI would be considered reasonable.

In general, the preferable approach is a heart team, an interprofessional approach comprising of general cardiology, cardiac surgery, and interventional cardiology team members. This discussion helps in reviewing various treatment options with regards to accounting medical comorbidities and ischemic areas involved and thus allows to best determine the feasibility and correctness of the revascularization procedure.