Healthcare providers who often prescribe sertraline include primary care physicians, psychiatrists, nurse practitioners, and others, functioning as an interprofessional team. All healthcare team members must follow the patient regularly to monitor the reduction of symptoms or any adverse effects. All providers should know the medication's contraindications, adverse effects, and interactions with other drugs. It is also essential to educate all patients who are prescribed sertraline on the possible adverse effects and the prevention and recognition of toxicity due to sertraline (in combination with other serotonergic drugs). Patient education regarding medication use and compliance will improve outcomes and ensure patient safety.

Patient safety can also be improved when dosing adjustments are considered by health care professionals who are a part of a patient's care team. For example, elderly patients may need dosing adjustments, as they may tolerate lower doses better. In addition, patients with medical conditions affecting their liver may need decreased doses for better tolerability.

Clinicians require vigilance regarding the toxic effects of serotonergic medications and ensure not to prescribe multiple medications that can cause serotonin syndrome, which is possible by preventing polypharmacy and minimizing unnecessary use of these drugs; this is one of the areas where the pharmacist can provide valuable input to the team as they monitor and verify the patient's medication regimen as well as monitor dosing of sertraline and other drugs. Furthermore, should a patient need to be switched to a different serotonergic medication, clinicians and other healthcare team members must ensure that no new medication starts until at least two weeks after the discontinuation of sertraline.