The cutaneous manifestations of leukocytoclastic vasculitis usually appear about 1-3 weeks after the triggering event. Leukocytoclastic vasculitis presents as erythematous macules with palpable purpura bilaterally on dependent areas of the body like the lower extremities and buttocks. Unilateral presentations and localized lesions are rare. Hemorrhagic vesicles and bulla, pustules, nodules, crusted ulcers, or livedo reticularis may also be present on physical exam. The lesions can range in size from 1 mm to 1 cm in diameter. The lesions can appear at once in crops, or various crops may cycle and produce lesions with different stages of evolution. Koebnerization, the appearance of lesions at areas of trauma, is uncommon with this vasculitis. In fact, reverse koebnerization has been described with the disappearance of the lesions with pressure bandage application after the biopsy. The lesions are asymptomatic but may itch, burn, or sting.

Extracutaneous manifestations with leukocytoclastic vasculitis are less common. Systemic symptoms noted with leukocytoclastic vasculitis may include low-grade fevers, malaise, weight loss, myalgias, and arthralgias. These findings have been noted in approximately 30% of affected patients, with arthralgias compromising the most common manifestation. Other less common manifestations include renal, gastrointestinal, pulmonary, or neurological symptoms, and these entities may be better classified as microscopic polyangiitis/polyarteritis.  Other features of the underlying disease associated with leukocytoclastic vasculitis can give a clue to the underlying diagnosis.  Leukocytoclastic vasculitis in children along with symptoms of inflammatory arthritis, abdominal pain, edema and hematuria/renal disease is characteristic of Henoch-Schoenlein purpura.  Leukocytoclastic vasculitis is unlikely to be the presenting complaint in rheumatoid arthritis and Sjogren syndrome and usually, these patients already have a well-established diagnosis for several years before they developed leukocytoclastic vasculitis.  In systemic lupus erythematosus, leukocytoclastic vasculitis is less likely to be the presenting initial complaint but it can be seen as the initial complaint.  These patients will likely have other associated features of systemic lupus erythematosus as well.