The untreated rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis progress to rapid loss of renal function over weeks to months. It is very crucial to start treatment as soon as possible.

Empiric treatment is proposed to start before the definitive diagnosis is made, especially in the case where serology and kidney biopsy are delayed due to any reason.

This empiric therapy includes pulse IV dose of methylprednisolone, either 500 mg or 1 gm, for a minimum of 3 doses. Plasmapheresis may be considered specifically if the patient has hemoptysis raising concern for the severe form of Goodpasture disease until one has the definitive diagnosis.

Later more specific treatment is considered once the definitive diagnosis is made.

**I Anti-GBM Disease**

- An intravenous dose of methylprednisolone followed by oral prednisone

- PO cyclophosphamide

- Plasmapheresis

The choice of treatment is plasmapheresis in combination with the immunosuppressive agents.

The initiation of treatment as early as possible is the key to the prevention of progressive renal failure.

There is no evidence of the benefit of plasmapheresis so far, but still, it is considered the choice by the majority of nephrologists due to the fact that most of the data from the era from the plasmapheresis have shown improved morbidity and mortality than the earlier studies. The other possible reason is also that with plasmapheresis, there is a rapid removal of the harmful antibodies as compared to the immunosuppressive therapy alone.

The dose of plasmapheresis is 4 L of an exchange over 2 to 4 weeks. Usually, albumin is considered as a replacement fluid, but a portion of fresh frozen plasma should be considered in the case of a recent kidney biopsy and when there is pulmonary hemorrhage. After 2 to 4 weeks, the patient should be reevaluated whether further treatment is needed or not. Treatment may be considered for an extended period if there is still active pulmonary disease or the antibody level is not declined as expected.

Plasmapheresis is always followed by immunosuppressive therapy, glucocorticoid, and cyclophosphamide.

Usually, a methylprednisone pulse dose is given as described above, followed by oral prednisone. Very rarely, only oral prednisone is considered. The dose of cyclophosphamide is 2 mg/kg/day orally. It is recommended that the dose should not be more than 100 mg/day for patients with an age of more than 60 years to avoid toxicity.

Patients having side effects from cyclophosphamide or, due to any other reason, not able to tolerate cyclophosphamide, rituximab, or mycophenolate mofetil is recommended.

The optimal duration of treatment is not clear. Anti-GBM antibody levels should be measured for 1 to 2 weeks after initiation of the treatment until 2 consecutive negative levels a week apart. After this remission phase, an agent with lesser side effects like low-dose prednisone or azathioprine should be considered for the maintenance treatment.

There are recent studies showing the benefit of the use of immunoadsorption agents in the treatment of Anti- GBM disease.

**II ANCA Positive Pauci-immune Crescentic Glomerulonephritis (GPA & MPA)**

- An IV dose of methylprednisolone followed by oral prednisone

- IV or PO cyclophosphamide and/or rituximab

- Plasmapheresis

- Duration of therapy for 3 to 4 month

- Maintenance of therapy is mandatory

The recommended initial treatment is with glucocorticoids with either cyclophosphamide or rituximab with or without plasmapheresis. Plasmapheresis is indicated if there is a rapid deterioration of renal function or severe renal involvement at the time of presentation. Serum creatinine of more than 4 mg/ml or need for dialysis, or there is pulmonary hemorrhage, or if the disease is coexisting anti-GBM antibodies.

**III Immune Complex Glomerulonephritis**

The treatment depends on the etiology of the associated condition and should be treated accordingly (IgA GN, lupus nephritis, cryoglobulinemia, etc.)

The post-streptococcal GN is usually recovering spontaneously. Very rarely, glucocorticoids are indicated for severely crescentic RPGN.

**IV Drug Associated GN**

Usually recovers spontaneously after stopping the offending agent and sometimes need treatment as pauci-immune GN as above.

**V Double Positive Antibody**

This is the same as pauci immune GN, but plasmapheresis should be included.