Though traditional parathyroid surgery has an already low complication rate, a minimally invasive approach further decreases the risk of complications. Compared to conventional open exploration, it has a lower complication rate (1.2 vs. 3.1%), enhanced cure rates (99.4 versus. 97.1%), an approximate 50% reduction in operating time (1.3 versus 2.4 hours), a sevenfold reduction in length of hospital stay (0.24 versus 1.64 days), and a mean savings of $2700 per procedure.

However, complications are still present. Injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve is a serious complication of endocrine surgery and has consequences of hoarseness (unilateral damage) or airway occlusion (bilateral damage). Damage can occur as a result of direct trauma to the nerve, such as clipping, grasping, stretching. Indirect deleterious effects on the nerve include skeletonization, thermal injury, or compression. The damage may be transient in cases of compression or stretching and may resolve in 4 to 6 weeks. However, if improvement in function is not seen after 6 to 12 months, the damage should be presumed to be permanent. If the damage is recognized intra-operatively, immediate primary repair or grafting should be performed.

Another serious is permanent hypoparathyroidism. While transient hypocalcemia may result in up to 50% of patients undergoing parathyroidectomy, permanent hypoparathyroidism is quite rare and is found in less than 1% of cases. Additionally, this is more commonly seen in cases of hyperplasia where all four parathyroid glands are removed. As MIP techniques are generally utilized in cases of single adenoma removal, this complication is much less of a concern.