Tuberculous meningitis assessment is done by obtaining cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for analysis. Typically, the CSF reveals low glucose, elevated protein, and modestly elevated WBC count with a lymphocytic predominance. The CSF analysis most closely resembles the CSF analysis of viral meningitis.

Confirming the diagnosis of TB is a difficult diagnostic dilemma; this is especially true in resource-poor areas. Definitive diagnosis results from the identification of MTB in the CSF. Standard Ziehl-Neelsen acid-fast bacilli (AFB) identification smears from CSF are highly unreliable. The positive yield of the AFB smear is broad, with results ranging from 0% to 87%.

Various new sophisticated modalities for testing for antigens and antibodies specific for TB exist using PCR, but they have not won wide acceptance or utilization; this is due to a lack of access to the testing and high variability in the specificity of the results of the tests. The choice of diagnosis in most cases is going to depend on the resources available. Despite advances in developing improved and accurate diagnostic modalities MTB, confirmation by culture in the CSF remains the gold standard globally.

Other tests that can be utilized are antigen testing in the urine and adenosine deaminase.

These diagnostic difficulties lead to decreased recognition of tuberculous meningitis. They have led to the development of clinical algorithms to help diagnose TBM and differentiate it from other forms of meningitis. The diagnostic algorithm bases its results on CSF values and patient clinical presentation. The criteria consist of the duration of symptoms greater than or equal to 5 days, neurologic impairment, CSF to serum blood glucose level ratio less than 0.5, and CSF protein level greater than 100 mg/dl. These algorithms have been tested in several trials; however, these have been retrospective trials and have not received validation through prospective trials. Therefore, high clinical suspicion must remain based on patient risk factors to diagnose TBM.

Neuroimaging can further aid in the diagnosis of TBM. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has demonstrated superiority to computed tomography (CT), as it is of higher quality for assessing the brainstem and spine in detecting TBM. Imaging can assess cerebral infarcts, cerebral edema, and meningeal enhancement. CT imaging is best used to rule out the emergent complication of TBM-related hydrocephalus that could result in the need for immediate neurosurgical intervention. T imaging can also show basal exudates.