Clinical manifestation can be divided into local and systemic. Local sign occurs at the site of colonization, where there is the production of greyish/whitish black colored necrotic membranes, which oozes on removal. The most common location is usually in the tonsillar and the posterior pharyngeal wall. The extent of the layer can be co-related with morbidity and mortality as extensive membrane formation can compromise the airway leading to asphyxia and death.

Systemic manifestations can range from fever, malaise, shortness of breath, cough, cardiac and neurological complications resulting from circulating toxins released into the bloodstream. Cardiac manifestation can present as myocarditis, conduction defect leading to complete heart block, and severe heart failure cases. It can also lead to demyelination of nerves and the resulting neuropathy, ranging from mild weakness to complete paralysis. Some Guillain Barre syndrome-like presentation has also been reported in the past.

Cutaneous manifestation can cause cutaneous diphtheria. It has an appearance of chronic nonhealing ulcers in the exposed part of the body, usually the hands, legs, and feet. It is clinically indistinguishable from an ulcer due to other organisms and often coexists with Staphylococcus and Streptococcal infection.

Apart from toxigenic strains of Corynebacterium diphtheria, the nontoxigenic strains though previously considered as nonvirulent, has now been reported to cause infection such as pharyngitis, sepsis, endocarditis, and osteomyelitis.