This section will cover the most commonly encountered clinical issues that involve the cranial foramina.

**Anterior cranial fossa**

Trauma to the anterior cranial fossa, most specifically fracture of the cribriform plate, can result in a patient having rhinorrhea or more commonly known as a runny nose. This rhinorrhea is very important compared to the run of the mill runny nose because after sustaining a fracture of the cribriform plate, the osseous fracture allows cerebrospinal fluid can extravasate into the nasal passages. The appearance of cerebrospinal fluid is normally clear; however, trauma can shear vasculature and cause mixing to occur. Filter paper may be used to detect if the cerebrospinal fluid is present. Blood moves less, and cerebrospinal fluid moves more, producing two concentric rings resembling a halo or target sign.

**Middle cranial fossa**

Continuing with traumatic injury to the cranium, specifically damage to the middle meningeal artery can result in epidural bleeds. The middle meningeal artery branches from the maxillary artery in the middle cranial fossa with the assistance of the foramen spinosum guiding its passage as it until it splits to its respective anterior and posterior divisions.

A unique and distinctive condition known as crocodile tears syndrome is a unique condition that affects the greater petrosal nerve within the foramen lacerum. Iatrogenic injury from surgery or conditions like Bell palsy can allow the nerve to incorrectly innervate the lacrimal gland instead of the submandibular gland during recovery. When exposed to gustatory or olfactory stimuli, unilateral tearing will occur on the side of injury instead of increased salivation.

**Posterior cranial fossa**

The most commonly encountered anatomic irregularities of the posterior cranial fossa involve the brainstem and the inferior portion of the cerebellum. The German pathologist, Hans Chiari described these brainstem and cerebellar malformations. He documented and named two specific anatomic variants; Chiari malformation type I and II. Chiari malformation type I is the result of abnormally small or misshapen cranium during fetal development. As a result, the brain parenchyma most notably the cerebellar tonsils herniate through the foramen magnum. Chiari malformation type II also includes the herniation of the cerebellum as well as the medulla and fourth ventricle, and this is characteristically due to a smaller than average posterior fossa. In addition type II is almost always associated with myelomeningocele.

The second clinical correlation of noteworthy importance is Vernet syndrome. Also known as jugular foramen syndrome, this disorder involves cranial nerve palsies of cranial nerves IX-XI. Occasionally, CN XII will be affected as well. These cranial nerve palsies are usually caused by direct compression from masses of the jugular foramen such as acoustic neuromas, meningiomas, or glomus tumors.

- Hoarseness

- Difficulty swallowing

- Partial or complete paralysis of neck muscles

- Decreased salivary output

- Sagging of the soft palate

- Partial or complete paralysis of tongue muscles