The hypothenar eminence is on the medial side of the hand. This group of muscles is considered intrinsic muscles of the hand. The mound-like structure formed from the abductor digiti minimi muscle, the flexor digiti minimi brevis muscle, the opponens digiti minimi muscle, and the palmaris brevis muscle will go on to serve many functions other than moving the little finger. The abductor digiti minimi muscle causes the little finger to abduct away from the hand (moves the little finger medially) when it contracts. The opponens digiti minimi muscle moves the little finger to allow the opposition of the hand. The motion created by the opponens digiti minimi muscles is a combination of palmar rotation, flexion, and abduction of the little finger. The flexor digiti minimi brevis muscle will flex the little finger at the metacarpophalangeal joint. The palmaris brevis muscle serves a minor function within the hypothenar eminence. The palmaris brevis muscle increases grip strength and protects the ulnar nerve as it enters the hand.

The origins and attachments of the hypothenar muscles vary slightly, but they have one thing in common. They manifest motions in the little finger. The abductor digiti minimi muscle derives its origin from the pisiform carpal bone, dorsal aponeurosis, and the tendon of the flexor carpal ulnaris muscle. The abductor digiti minimi muscles will attach to the little finger at the base of the proximal phalanx. The origin of the flexor digiti minimi brevis muscle is from the hamate carpal bone and the transverse carpal ligament (flexor retinaculum). The flexor digiti minimi brevis muscle also attaches at the proximal phalanx of the little finger. The opponens digiti minimi muscle also originates from the hamate carpal bone and the transverse carpal ligament similar to the flexor digiti minimi brevis muscle. But the opponens digiti minimi muscle attaches to the medial side of the proximal phalanx. The palmaris brevis muscle originates from the transverse carpal ligament and inserts into the skin on the ulnar side of the palm.