# Continuing Education Activity

Tracheostomy is a procedure where an artificial airway is established surgically or percutaneously in the cervical trachea. This activity describes the basic anatomy relevant to tracheostomy, discusses the principles behind tracheostomy care, and outlines the steps and techniques in tracheostomy tube change. This activity also describes the role of an interprofessional team approach in tracheostomy care.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the contraindications of tracheostomy tube change.
- Describe the technique of tracheostomy tube change.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of the potential complications tracheostomy tube change.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance tracheostomy care and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Tracheostomy is a procedure where an artificial airway is established surgically or percutaneously in the cervical trachea. The term “tracheostomy” has evolved to refer to both the procedure as well as the clinical condition of having a tracheostomy tube. The first documented tracheostomy (or tracheotomy) was performed in the 15th century.

In 1976, Dr. Frost wrote an interesting historical account on the development of tracheostomy through the ages, covering five main stages filled with drama and fear that eventually culminated in a routinely performed procedure in modern medicine.

Over 83,000 tracheostomies were placed in the United States in 1999.

With the increasing number of patients with tracheostomy, safe caring requires knowledge and competencies in dealing with routine care, weaning, decannulation, as well as tracheostomy-related emergencies. Tracheostomy tube change is part of routine care, but complications may occur more frequently in the absence of competence and a robust system of tracheostomy care.

This article aims to provide a basic understanding of the tracheostomy procedure and its relevant anatomy, thereby explaining the principles behind tracheostomy care with a primary focus on changing the tracheostomy tube.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Tracheostomy can be done via open surgery or percutaneously. Understanding anatomy is essential as it provides the basis for tracheostomy tube insertion, change, and removal. It would be good to imagine the path into the trachea as a tract beginning from the skin to the inner lining of the trachea.

**Surgical Tracheostomy**

A  transverse skin incision ( avoiding anterior jugular venous ) is preferred for cosmetic reasons,  is made between the cricoid cartilage and suprasternal notch ( approximately over the second or third tracheal rings). In gaining access to the tracheal lumen, the clinician exposes the following anatomical structures in layers: (I) skin, (II) subcutaneous fat, (III) platysma, (IV) superficial or investing layer of deep cervical fascia, (V) midline raphe of strap muscles( the sternohyoid and sternothyroid ), (VI) pre-tracheal fascial, (VII) thyroid isthmus, and finally, (VIII) trachea. An incision into the tracheal lumen between the second and third tracheal cartilage rings. There are several variations on the tracheal incision itself; some surgeons advocate for a longitudinal “horizontal H” incision spanning the first through third rings, whereas an alternative approach involves three careful incisions to raise a flap.

Bedside percutaneous tracheostomy (ultrasound or fiberoptic) has become an alternative to operative (open) tracheostomy performed either at the bedside or in the operating room, a technique introduced in the 1980s that has gained popularity as it is seen to be an effective alternative with comparable outcomes to surgical dissection while avoiding transfer to the operating theatre.

In the pediatric population, the tract is significantly smaller, thereby requiring short tubes and posing a risk of puncturing the tracheoesophageal wall if tube change is not performed carefully. Watters found that more than ninety percent of complications occurred more than one week after surgery, with 15% to 19% experiencing a tracheostomy-related complication.

# Indications

The first recorded tracheostomies were performed for upper airway obstruction. In modern practice, the indications for tracheostomy are (1) obstruction in the upper airway; (2) establishing and maintaining a secure airway when the upper airway is unsafe, such as in the face, head and neck injuries; (3) bronchial toilet and secretion removal; (4) airway protection e.g., neuromuscular disorders; (5) prolonged mechanical ventilation and facilitate weaning. The most common indication is to assist in facilitating weaning off ventilation in intensive care patients. In children, common indications for tracheostomy include congenital and acquired airway stenosis, neurologic conditions requiring long-term ventilation or pulmonary toilet, bilateral vocal fold insufficiency, and infectious compromise of the upper airway.

Currently, there is no convincing data to indicate the best timing for performing tracheostomy on patients ventilated via endotracheal tubes. However, in non-acute settings, tracheostomy should be considered after ten days. Nevertheless, the physiological changes associated with tracheostomy, benefits, and potential risks are issues that need to be considered, and in all cases, be discussed with patients and family members.

Postoperative complications vary and depend on the timing and insertion technique. Early postoperative complications tend to arise in the first few days to weeks that include hemorrhage, postoperative tube dislodgement or obstruction, subcutaneous emphysema, soft tissue infection, pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum. Late complications that occur more than three weeks post tracheostomy include tracheal stenosis or tracheal malacia (granulation tissue), tube dislodgement or obstruction, equipment failure, tracheoinnominate artery fistula, tracheoesophageal fistula, and infections such as aspiration pneumonia.

Routine tracheostomy maintenance involves (1) regular cleaning of the tube, (2) frequent stomal care, and (3) periodic monitoring of cuff pressure. Adequate air humidification must be provided to patients with a tracheostomy. Inadequate humidification can result in obstruction of the tube from thick secretions, sputum retention, keratinization or ulceration of the tracheal mucosa, and impaired gas exchange as a result of lung atelectasis.

There are many different types of tracheostomy tubes. They are divided based on the material used in construction PVC, silicone, or metal. Tracheostomy tubes can be cuffed or uncuffed. Cuffed tracheostomy tubes are used for patients on long-term mechanical ventilation and those at risk for aspiration. Cuffed tubes also prevent loss of volume during positive pressure ventilation while preventing air leaks across the vocal cords. Uncuffed and metal tubes are used in patients with adequate ventilatory effort who are alert and at low risk for aspiration. Uncuffed and metal tubes are used in patients with adequate ventilatory effort who are alert and at low risk for aspiration.

Lack of cleaning and maintenance of the inner cannula is the primary cause of tube obstruction. The primary indications for tracheal suctioning are to remove secretions, enhance oxygenation, or obtain samples of lower respiratory tract secretions for diagnostic tests. It is important to understand that tracheal suctioning should be performed only when it is clinically indicated; frequent, routine suctioning is not recommended.

There are no absolute contraindications to tracheal suctioning. Relative contraindications include severe bronchospasm, which may worsen with suctioning, and persistently elevated intracranial pressure (ICP), which is exacerbated by suctioning.

The indications for a tracheostomy tube change are (I) minimizing the risk of infection and granulation tissue formation

# Contraindications

There are no absolute contraindications to exchanging a tracheostomy tube in the emergency department as long as the stomal tract has matured. Before undertaking the exchange, consider whether further tissue trauma or hemorrhage might occur as a result of it.

On the other hand, tracheostomy tube change may not be suitable if the patient is in an unstable condition, requires high levels of ventilatory support with oxygen, or at high risk of losing the airway, such as when the tract is not yet mature.

# Equipment

There are many pieces of equipment required for the procedure, but they can be divided into several categories for ease of memory. The authors prefer to categorize according to specific steps or parts of the procedure: (I) tube, (II) procedure, (III) safety, (IV) monitoring prior and after the procedure, (V) emergency equipment, and (VI) documentation.

The equipment required for (I) tube change are:

- Two tracheostomy tubes of appropriate make or type, where one is the same size, and the other is smaller, which can be used when stomal obstruction or collapse is encountered.

- 10 ml syringe for suction through a subglottic port if present, cuff deflation, and inflation

- Cuff pressure manometer if the tube has a cuff

- Dressing pack containing gauzes and tracheostomy stoma dressing

- Sodium chloride (0.9%) for cleaning

- Tracheostomy tube tapes, ties or dedicated holder

Next, the equipment required for (II) procedure are:

- Shoulder roll or pillow for patient positioning

- Pre-oxygenation with an oxygen mask or Ambu bag

- Suture removal kit

- Flashlight

- Water-based lubricating gel

- Suction equipment and suction catheters

For patient and personnel safety:

- Patient consent, if appropriate

- Mask, gown, protective eyewear, and gloves

For monitoring prior to and after the procedure:

- Pressure manometer

- Waveform capnography or carbon dioxide detector

- Oxygen saturation probe and machine

- Fibreoptic scope

- Stethoscope

Equipment that must be present during tube change for emergency or to assist in difficult situations are:

- Tracheal dilators

- Crash trolley containing an array of airway devices

- Airway exchange device or catheter

- Resuscitation equipment

Other types of equipment that may be useful during tracheostomy tube change are microbial swab if an infection is suspected, and silver nitrate cautery sticks for superficial granulation tissue.

# Personnel

An initial tube change in general wards is associated with a higher risk of airway loss in comparison to the intensive care unit or step-down unit (96.1% vs. 63.6%).

While routine changes on general wards are typically safe provided there are adequately trained staff, equipment, and support, first tube changes may require higher levels of nursing and ancillary support not found on general wards.

Various guidelines and local protocols exist for required personnel and practices in tracheostomy changes. Typically, the first tube change is performed or supervised by at least a senior resident and not during nights or weekends.

# Preparation

It is essential to ensure that all airway equipment is at the patient's bedside before performing the tube exchange.

In addition to having airway equipment ready, place the patient on continuous pulse oximetry, cardiac monitoring, and capnography, if available, to confirm tube placement.

Identify the tracheostomy tube model and determine its size. Most tracheostomy tubes have three standard components: an outer cannula, an obturator, and an inner cannula

Inspect all equipment for proper function, including the replacement tube cuff for leaks and the obturator for ease of insertion and removal

Anesthesia is generally not required for tube exchange.

Inspect all equipment for proper function, including the replacement tube cuff for leaks and the obturator for ease of insertion and removal. Coat the replacement tracheostomy tube with a water-based lubricant

It is important to ensure that consent is appropriately obtained from the patient prior to the procedure.

The key to preparation is the positioning of the patient.

The bed should be adjusted to an adequate height without any obstruction in the way of the practitioner, such as bed rails or tables. The patient should be supine with the neck in hyperextension over a shoulder roll or pillow so that the tracheal orifice is closer to the surface with the neck structures stretched adequately.

A right-hand dominant practitioner should stand to the right of the patient, and the reverse is recommended for a left-hand dominant person. An assistant should stand on the opposite side, ready to assist before tube change occurs. Usually, the assistant provides suction and helps with securing the tube.

It is good practice for practitioners to rehearse or verbally go through the steps with their assistant prior to the procedure, as this makes sure that they are familiar with the steps and are able to coordinate accordingly with each other.

# Technique or Treatment

- Tracheostomy tube exchange is swift to minimize changes of stoma collapse and patient discomfort, or time when the patient is left hypoxic.

- Once the patient is prepared, and the necessary equipment is available and checked for functionality, the procedure may commence. Pre-oxygenation may be required in those who may not tolerate the procedure well physiologically.

- If there is an inflated cuff on the indwelling tracheostomy tube with a subglottic suction port, first use a syringe to aspirate any secretions that may be sitting above, prior to cuff deflation. In any tube, it is also important to perform gentle suction in the lower airway. Note the amount, color, and consistency of secretions suctioned.

- Remove any sutures or ties attached to the tracheostomy tube and patient. When doing this, the assistant must stabilize the flange at all times to prevent premature removal. Next, the cuff may be deflated. It is also useful to note the amount of air aspirated from the cuff until a ‘vacuum’ resistance is felt. The tube is now ready to be removed.

- In a smooth semi-circular fashion mimicking the curvature of the tracheostomy tube, remove the tube. “out-then-down”  movement

- Inspect the stoma for signs of infection, presence of granulation tissue, bleeding, wound breakdown, and adequacy of a tract. Clean the area with moist gauze (with normal saline or hydrogen peroxide) followed by dry gauze while ensuring no foreign body enters the airway. Stay sutures, if present, may be used gently to pull up the trachea to provide exposure.

- Apply the new, lubricated tracheostomy tube with an obturator in situ. First, the tube with its obturator is rotated 90 degrees from its correct position (at a right angle to the long axis of the neck) to engage the stoma, then turned 90 degrees back to its correct position to be inserted through the tract into the tracheal lumen.

- A common error is making this caudal turn pre-maturely, thereby risking false passage creation or airway occlusion.

- As soon as the tube is in place, remove the obturator and replace it with an inner cannula as appropriate. In a mechanically ventilated patient, reconnect the ventilator tubing and watch for carbon dioxide detection or capnography.

- Confirm proper placement of the tube within the trachea with one of many possible techniques. Traditionally, the patient is ventilated and correct tube placement confirmed by observation of equal chest rise and auscultation of bilateral breath sounds

- If necessary, a flexible fibreoptic endoscope may be used or may use a suction catheter.

- Once correct tube placement is confirmed, the tube is secured with hook-and-loop fastener ties and stoma dressing applied and fill the cuff if necessary.

- Make sure the trach ties are not too tight and should be able to pass an index finger in between the trach ties and neck

- Remove the shoulder roll and reposition the patient.

# Complications

Studies have compared the complication rates between surgically and percutaneously performed a tracheostomy. Oliver et al. in 2007 found that percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy was significantly quicker than surgically created tracheostomy, but there were more early complications associated with the percutaneous technique.

In general, minor complications associated with tracheostomy are (I) minor bleeding, (II) infection, (III) temporary oxygen desaturation, (IV) tube occlusion, (V) false passage, (VI) tracheocutaneous fistula, (VII) poor cosmetic scar, and (VIII) infection. The major or serious complications are (I) hemorrhage requiring transfusion or due to tracheo-innominate artery fistula, (II) trachea-oesophageal fistula, (III) subglottic stenosis, (IV) tracheal stenosis, (V) tracheomalacia, and (VI) death.

Although routinely performed, tracheostomy tube change is not without complications or potential pitfalls; thus, it is imperative to understand the procedure in addition to anticipating potential problems. Certain institutions may have established protocols or guidelines in place to facilitate an uneventful tracheostomy tube change, whereas continuous education and quality improvement projects certainly aim to improve competence and reduce complications.

The commonly encountered complication, if at all, of tracheostomy tube change is displacement or creation of a false passage.

When this rare complication occurs, it is important to follow the basic life support or advance life support algorithms, and help must be called so that experienced personnel, typically anesthetists or otolaryngologists may help to re-establish an airway. The usual practice in this instance is to reinsert the tracheostomy tube with the use of an obturator or tracheal dilator. Oral or nasal intubation may be attempted to establish a definitive airway, especially in cases of respiratory arrest.

# Clinical Significance

Tracheostomy tube change is probably the single most critical procedure after tracheostomy is made. It is important in the continuous care of patients with tracheostomy, and regular changes are associated with reduced risk of granulation and infection. However, competence and experience in tube exchange are necessary to ensure that the procedure remains uneventful with minimal discomfort to patients, morbidities, and complications.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Although there are currently no published recommendations for the standards in tracheostomy tube change, many institutions and hospitals have a local protocol or guideline in place to facilitate uneventful tube changes and improve outcomes.

The Global Tracheostomy Collaborative was formed in 2012 by Dr. David Robertson, an otolaryngologist from Harvard. Five ‘key drivers’ are identified to be critical in bringing about improvements in tracheostomy care: (I) multi-disciplinary care, (II) standardization of care, (III) broad staff education, (IV) patient and family involvement, and (V) entering and tracking data. Indeed, evidence shows that collaborative and coordinated tracheostomy care is achievable, implementable, and improves care.

On the other hand, it is recognized that tracheostomy care outcomes are better where there is a concerted effort between various parties, including patient, surgeon, primary physician, otolaryngologist, and interdisciplinary teams such as nurses and speech and language therapists.

In the U.K., the National Tracheostomy Safety Project is a nationwide initiative aimed at improving the care of patients with tracheostomy. Similar to their North American counterparts, the team dedicated to looking after patients with tracheostomy tubes comprise of otolaryngologists, anesthetists, chest physicians, specialist nurses, speech and language therapists, and respiratory therapists. There is increasing evidence that coordinated interprofessional teams influence the safety and quality of care delivered to patients with tracheostomy and their families.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Studies have described deficits in knowledge and comfort with tracheostomy care among health care providers.

The main roles of the interprofessional team members are described here.

Other allied health members involved in the care of tracheostomized patients are dietitians, psychologists. Outside the remit of healthcare, patients’ friends and families are perhaps the next most important aspect of care, especially in the pediatric population.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

Evidence shows that tracheostomy-related complications are minimized, and outcomes are improved when there is a multidisciplinary, ward-based approach to tracheostomy care.

Weekly tracheostomy ward rounds should be the ideal practice, with the team comprising of a physician (commonly an intensivist, respiratory physician or otolaryngologist), chest physiotherapist, speech and language therapist, and specialist nurse. The team ensures standards of routine tracheostomy care are achieved, provides a weaning or decannulation plan, and troubleshoots potential issues surrounding tracheostomy care, such as competencies, logistics, and shortfalls.

The care of tracheostomy requires both competencies and experience. The latter is especially true when ‘troubleshooting’ issues or potential problems that may arise. The most important aim of caring for patients with a tracheostomy is to prevent tube blockage. As the native upper airway is bypassed, numerous physiological changes occur, therefore care that mimics the normal functions of the upper airway should be undertaken e.g., humidification, secretion clearance, stoma or wound care, native speech, airway protection, and safe swallowing.

The commonest measures or elements of care that are carried out and monitored regularly are: (I) going through daily tracheostomy care checklist, (II) humidification, (III) suction clearance, (IV) stoma care, (V) inner cannula care, (VI) oral care and swallowing, and (VII) cuff management.

Monitoring of these elements by the various team members is paramount in ensuring the safety and quality of tracheostomy care. Especially after tracheostomy tube change, monitoring of respiratory function (such as respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, work of breathing, waveform capnography) and secretions management are critical as this is when any complications, such as tube dislodgement or false passage creation, may be detected promptly.