Systemic therapy aims to control symptoms caused by hormonal secretion and decrease tumor proliferation and progression.

**Somatostatin Analogs (SSAs)**

Due to the short half-life of somatostatin, synthetic analogs to somatostatin with much longer half-lives have been approved for the treatment of NETs, which are octreotide (sandostatin) and lanreotide (somatuline depot). Clinical trials PROMID, using octreotide and CLARINET trial, using lanreotide, have shown improved progression-free survival in patients with metastatic small bowel NETs.

**Interferon-alpha (IFN-a)**

Combination therapy of IFN-a and SSAs has been studied against SSAs alone. Although the 5-year survival rate improved in the combination group, the difference between both groups was not statistically significant.****Its use is limited due to the potential side effects, including fever, myalgia, depression, and bone marrow depression.

**mTOR Inhibitors**

Everolimus is an oral mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor, which was approved for the management of non-functioning lung and gastrointestinal tumors as well as advanced pNETs based on multiple studies.

**Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors**

Sunitinib acts by inhibiting angiogenesis by affecting the PDGF receptor and VEGF receptor types 1,2 and 3 expressed by the tumor cells. It is approved for the management of progressive pNETs. It improves progression-free survival compared to placebo.

**Monoclonal Antibodies**

Bevacizumab is a monoclonal antibody targeting VEGF receptors. The potential benefit of bevacizumab was shown in a phase II clinical trial, which compared bevacizumab combined with octreotide versus octreotide plus interferon alfa-2b.