Argatroban is available as an intravenous solution of 1 mg/ml.

**Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia**: Discontinue heparin and obtain baseline PTT. For adult patients, the recommended dose is 2 mcg/kg/min administered as a continuous intravenous infusion. Lower doses are used in critically ill patients, e.g., patients with multiorgan failure or severe anasarca. In a study by Beiderlinden M., et al. performed in 24 critically ill patients with multiorgan dysfunction syndrome (MODS) and HIT, argatroban infusion 2 mcg/kg/min for 4 hours resulted in excessive anticoagulation and even resulted in bleeding complications in three patients but with infusion at starting dose of 0.2 mcg/kg/min, sufficient anticoagulation was achieved with no bleeding complications.

Monitoring: Monitor PTT (target range of 1.5 to 3 times of initial baseline, not to exceed 100 seconds).

Dosage adjustment: Adjust the dose (not to exceed 10 mcg/kg/min) to maintain PTT in the target range.

**Percutaneous coronary intervention:**Administer a bolus of 350 mcg/kg over 3 to 5 minutes and start an infusion at the rate of 25 mcg/kg/min.

Check an activated clotting time (ACT) 5 to 10 minutes after completing the bolus dose.

If the ACT > 300 seconds: Proceed with the PCI.

If the ACT < 300 seconds: Administer an additional intravenous bolus dose of 150 mcg/kg, increase the infusion dose to 30 mcg/kg/min, and check the ACT 5 to 10 minutes later.

If the ACT> 450 seconds: Decrease the infusion rate to 15 mcg/kg/min and check the ACT 5 to 10 minutes later.

Titration of the dose should continue until ACT is in the therapeutic range (between 300 and 450 seconds).

Argatroban use requires caution in patients with hepatic dysfunction, especially in patients with total serum bilirubin >1.5 mg/dl. In such patients, a lower dose should be used (starting infusion rate from 0.5 mcg/kg/min).