The spinal cord is a cylindrical well-organized structure. It begins at the foramen magnum as a continuation of the medulla oblongata at the base of the skull. It is located within the vertebral or spinal canal. In men, it extends up to 45 cm and in women up to 43 cm.

The spinal cord divides into 31 segments: cervical 8, thoracic 12, lumbar 5, sacral 5, and coccygeal 1. These segments consist of 31 pairs of spinal nerves with their respective spinal root ganglia. Spinal nerves contain the motor, sensory, and autonomic fibers. These nerves exit through the intervertebral foramen.

The vertebral column consists of seven cervical, twelve thoracic, and five lumbar segments. In adults, the cord terminates at the level of L1-L2. Thus the cord spans within 20 bony vertebrae. In a child, it terminates at the upper border of L3. Each of these segments innervates a dermatome. The spinal cord consists of both white matter and gray matter. The amount of white matter becomes sparse towards the end, and the gray matter converges to form the conus medullaris. The cord is anchored at the caudal end to the coccyx by the filum terminal, which is an extension of the pia mater. The spinal nerves L2 to S1 makes up the cauda equina present within the subarachnoid space called the lumbar cistern.

The spinal cord has two significant enlargements at the cervical and lumbar regions for brachial and lumbosacral plexus. In the thoracic region, the width of the spinal cord ranges between 0.64 to 0.83 cm, and in the cervical and lumbar regions, it ranges between 1.27 to 1.33 cm. The segment at C5 has the largest transverse diameter with 13.3 +/- 2.2 mm this decreases to 8.3 +/- 2.1 mm at T8, and it increases to 9.4 +/- 1.5 mm at L3. There is less variation in the anteroposterior diameter.