Back pain is one of the most common causes for patients to seek medical care in both primary care and emergency setting. An estimated 200 billion dollars are spent annually on the management of back pain

Inflammatory disorders, malignancy, pregnancy, trauma, osteoporosis, nerve root compression, radiculopathy, plexopathy, degenerative disc disease, disc herniation, spinal stenosis, sacroiliac joint dysfunction, facet joint injury, and infection are all part of the differential. Distinguishing the signs and symptoms of nociceptive pain (mechanical) from neuropathic pain (radiculopathy) is an essential first step in the diagnosis of back pain. Special tests such as the straight leg raise or Patrick's test can be used to help differentiate the origin of the patient's back pain. Back pain causes significant rates of disability and can be a problem that persists from childhood into adulthood. Back pain is a significant contributor to morbidity and mortality. Chronic back pain is also the most common cause of chronic pain in general.

The two most important aspects in the management of back pain are the identification of red flags that could be alarming for diagnoses such as malignancy or neurological conditions such as cauda equina syndrome

Conservative management often includes over-the-counter pain medications such as acetaminophen or NSAIDs. Muscle relaxants, gabapentin, topical analgesics, and opioids all play a role in the management of back pain, on a case-by-case basis

Furthermore, corticosteroid injections, radiofrequency ablative therapy, spinal cord stimulators, kyphoplasty, TENS units, and surgeries such as laminectomy, spinal fusion, or discectomy are possible treatments options as well for refractory cases. Comorbid conditions such as major depressive disorder or opioid use disorder must be addressed and treated to their fullest extent to help minimize the long-term effects of back pain. Separately, obesity plays a critical role in the development of back pain Integrative treatment modalities such as acupuncture, tai chi, and yoga have also been shown to have a moderate effect on the improvement of back pain

Back pain is and likely will continue to be the focus of many providers because of the profound effect it has on patients' well-being. Function becomes impaired, activities of daily living are changed to accommodate back pain, and quality of life suffers. Unlike injuries to almost everywhere else in the body, back pain (and axial skeletal injuries) affects almost every aspect of life. For example, sleeping is disrupted, it is difficult to bend, reach or turn, it is hard to drive or go to work, lifting and exercise become strenuous, anxiety-provoking activity, walking to the bathroom becomes a difficult task, and so on. This article address how to diagnosis back pain through a careful history and physical exam, evaluate back pain with various diagnostic tests, and treat back pain via pharmacological, interventional, surgical, non-pharmacological, and/or alternative treatment modalities.