**Sonic Hedgehog**

- This sonic hedgehog signal transduction pathway is associated with the development of the gastrointestinal tract. The thought is that the development of the concentric layers of the gut tube, including the mucosa, submucosa, and muscularis propria are due to the expression of sonic hedgehog proteins in the endoderm.

- The sonic hedgehog gene also has a role in inducing other gene expressions such as Bmp4 (bone morphogenetic protein) and Hoxdl3 in the hindgut. These genes seem to play an important role in the morphology of the hindgut, as well.

**Homeobox Gene**

- The HOX genes are expressed along the lateral plate mesoderm of the GI tract during development and might play a role in the growth and differentiation of the epithelium. Some mice studies have shown that misaligning sequences of these genes or ectopic expression of hox genes have resulted in the development of hamartomas in the gastric mucosa. Inactivation of some hox genes has correlated with absence anal sphincters, lumen blockage, and disruption of GI musculature, which demonstrates the importance of these genes in the development of the GI tract.

- The cranio-caudal development of the gut and differentiation into various organs depends on the expression of many genes, including the hox genes. The expression of these genes appears to be highly regulated by the concentration gradient of retinoic acid.

**Para-Hox Cluster**

- Cdx1 and Cdx2 gene expression is upregulated during gut maturation and gets transcribed in the endoderm of the hindgut. A relationship exists between the expression of these genes and the development, differentiation, and maintenance of the intestinal epithelium. Disruption in the Cdx2 gene has links to various hindgut abnormalities such as failure of colon development, terminal blockage, colonic polyps, and intestinal metaplasia in mice.

**Sox Family**

- There is evidence showing that the Sox genes play a critical role in the development of the intestines and its stem cell function. These DNA-sequence specific transcription factors, specifically Sox9, Sox2, and Sox17, get expressed in the intestinal epithelium. These genes also get expressed in Paneth cells, enteroendocrine cells, and intestinal crypts, all of which contribute to the development of stem cells.

- The Sox genes also seem to play a role in cancer. Some Sox genes, including Sox7 and Sox 9, have tumor suppressive functions and are sometimes down-regulated in colorectal cancer.

**GDNF**

- The enteric nervous system is a system of neurons embedded in the lining of the GI tract and derive from neural crest cells. It has a significant role in the regulation of GI motility (peristalsis) and secretion of enzymes through an autonomous operation.

**Endothelin**

- Endothelin also contributes to the development of the enteric neural crest cells. Endothelin has associated with the prevention of premature neuronal differentiation. ETB receptors seem to play a role in smooth muscle development, and it works together with endothelin to regulate the development and differentiation of the enteric nervous system.