Once a gastric MALT lymphoma diagnosis is made, the patient should be treated with H. pylori eradication therapy according to current guidelines, the patient’s prior antibiotic exposure, and local antibiograms. Non-invasive testing for H. pylori should be performed to confirm eradication with either a urea breath test or stool antigen test 6 weeks after therapy is complete.  It is important to understand that even if a patient is confirmed H. pylori-negative with two different forms of testing before eradication therapy, they should still be treated with two weeks of antibiotics and proton pump inhibitors according to H. pylori treatment guidelines. Prior personal exposure to macrolide therapy imparts resistance to H. pylori, thus leading to reduced eradication rates with an antibiotic regimen containing a macrolide. Gastric MALT lymphomas have been shown to respond to H. pylori eradication therapy regardless of bacterial presence at the time of lymphoma diagnosis in >75% of cases.

In patients with low-grade gastric MALT lymphomas (Laguna Stage I-IIE), an upper endoscopy should be performed 3 to 6 months after H. pylori eradication. During this endoscopy, the gastric mapping should be performed with a histologic evaluation of each specimen using Sydney protocol. Complete remission or complete histological response is determined if there is the total resolution of diffuse lymphoid infiltrates and lymphoepithelial lesions of the biopsy specimens on two consecutive endoscopies. Of note, evidence of histologic remission may take 1 to 14 months post-H. pylori eradication to become apparent.  If an experienced pathologist determines complete remission, complete histologic response, or probable minimal residual disease, the patient should undergo upper endoscopies with biopsies every 6 months for the first 2 years. After 2 years, the patient can be extended to one upper endoscopy with gastric mapping biopsies every 12 to 18 months.

If a patient has evidence of partial response or responding residual disease of low-grade gastric MALT lymphoma after H. pylori eradication therapy, the patient should have an upper endoscopy with gastric mapping biopsies every 3 to 6 months with an expected observation approach. If a patient has no change in low-grade gastric MALT lymphoma after H. pylori eradication therapy, they can be given the option to perform upper endoscopies every 3-6 months with gastric mapping biopsies with the intent of expected observation, or they can choose to be treated with localized radiation or chemotherapy and/or rituximab.

Patients with high-grade gastric MALT lymphoma (Laguna Stage IV) who are asymptomatic can choose expected observation or a more aggressive strategy pending patient preference.  Expected observation is performed with upper endoscopies and abdominal imaging (ultrasound or computed tomography) every 6 months after H. pylori eradication. H.pylori treatment alone may lead to remission of high-grade gastric MALT lymphoma in a minority of patients.

A patient with high-grade gastric MALT lymphoma who is symptomatic, has overt progression, bulky disease, or chooses a more aggressive approach can begin radiation, chemotherapy, and/or immunotherapy with rituximab, but only after H. pylori eradication therapy.

Surgery should be reserved for acute bleeding patients not amenable to endoscopic therapy, perforation, or obstruction.  Practitioners should inform patients that radiation remission rates are higher than chemotherapy and/or immunotherapy in gastric MALT lymphoma, with some studies reporting >95% complete histologic remission rates.  Immunotherapy with rituximab increases the risk of hepatitis B reactivation and should be discussed with patients before choosing treatment options. Screening for HIV, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C should be completed before starting rituximab.