The critical conceptual foundation for facial anatomy is that of tissue planes; understanding the relationships among fascial planes within the face will permit the surgeon to operate effectively while minimizing the risk of complications (see image). Perfusion of the facial skin is supplied by the subdermal vascular plexus, under which is a fatty layer of subcutaneous tissue. Beneath the subcutaneous tissue lies the SMAS layer.

The SMAS sits just superficial to the parotidomasseteric fascia; anteriorly, the SMAS is contiguous with the mimetic muscles, and inferiorly, the SMAS merges with the platysma superior to the body of the mandible. Superiorly, the SMAS adheres to the periosteum of the zygomatic arch but is contiguous above that with the temporoparietal fascia (TPF). The TPF, in turn, adheres to the temporal bone of the skull at the conjoint tendon, located along the temporal line at the superior edge of the temporalis muscle. Superior to that, the TPF becomes the galea aponeurotica and the frontalis muscle. Although this plane adheres to bone at the zygomatic arch and the temporal line where the fascial layers condense, it is important to regard it as a single fascial structure to remain cognizant of the location of facial nerve branches. As a general rule, facial nerve branches run deep to this layer.

The facial nerve lies deep to the SMAS while it courses through the parotid gland and then remains deep to the SMAS, running along the fascia of the masseter muscle, where it can be encountered during more aggressive facelifting techniques, such as deep plane rhytidectomy. Facial nerve branches then innervate the mimetic muscles from their deep surfaces, except for the levator anguli oris, mentalis, and buccinator muscles, which are innervated from their superficial surfaces because of their deeper location within the face.

The facial nerve is commonly thought of as possessing five main extratemporal branches that separate from the main nerve trunk at the pes anserinus, located within the parotid gland. The most superior branch, the frontal branch, runs along the deep surface of the TPF on its way to innervate the frontalis and corrugator supercilii muscles, with a course approximated by a line between a point 5 mm below the tragus and a point 15 mm above the lateral brow (Pitanguy's line, see image).

The zygomatic and buccal branches of the facial nerve innervate the midfacial muscles and run in the same plane with the parotid duct and transverse facial vessels. The zygomatic branch is primarily responsible for eye closure via the orbicularis oculi muscle, and the buccal branch controls the majority of the midface muscles. The buccal branch most responsible for controlling the smile is located at Zuker's point, roughly halfway along a line between the root of the helix and the oral commissure (see image).

Veins frequently run in close proximity to nerves, and the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve frequently wraps around the facial vein, which lies just posterior to the facial artery. In the vast majority of patients, the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve courses superior to the inferior margin of the mandible anterior to the gonial notch, but there is increasing evidence that injury to the cervical branch of the facial nerve is commonly responsible for postoperative lower lip asymmetry.

Beyond the neurovascular anatomy, it is important to understand how soft tissue attachments to the underlying bone affect facial aging and, therefore, surgical correction of the aging face. With respect to SMAS plication face lifting, the mandibular retaining ligaments are most significant, as they are located at the pre-jowl sulci and are responsible for causing the formation of jowls due to the way that they tether the skin to the bone.