A variety of clinical conditions benefit from neurological assessments with a PET scan. We will summarize them into the following categories:

**Neurodegenerative Disorders**

Dementias are considered a significant cause of morbidity in geriatric patients and significantly impact medical and socioeconomic outcomes.

Disease-modifying therapies are currently in clinical trials. FDG PET shows early on in AD a pattern of decreased glucose metabolism in the precuneus, posterior cingulate, and temporoparietal regions translating to underlying neuronal dysfunction.

On the other hand, frontotemporal dementias will show a pattern of decreased FDG uptake in the anterior cerebral hemisphere and frontotemporal lobes.

In a large multicenter study, the original IDEAS (Imaging Dementia - Evidence for Amyloid Screening) study enrolled 11050 patients and showed that the use of amyloid scans changed management in 60.2% of MCI and 63.5% of dementia patients. Medication use was the most affected by the change. Amyloid scans changed the diagnosis in 35.6% of patients.

**Movements Disorders**

Clinicians are frequently faced with patients presenting with parkinsonian-like syndromes. These patients have symptoms similar to Parkinson disease (PD) patients; however, they may not have the disease. Management of the different parkinsonian syndromes are different as well. FDOPA PET scans will be positive in parkinsonian syndromes. Decreased radiotracer uptake will be seen in the basal ganglia in patients with PD, corticobasal degeneration, multiple system atrophy, and progressive supranuclear palsy. However, patients with non-parkinsonian syndromes such as essential tremors, myoclonus, or other dystonia will have preserved FDOPA uptake.

**Neurooncological Disorders**

FDG PET is no longer routinely used in assessing brain tumors and is on occasion used to evaluate brain tumor recurrence versus post-radiation necrosis changes when MRI results are equivocal. On the other hand, amino acid PET has taken a larger role in the clinical management of neurooncology patients. FDOPA can be used clinically in a variety of scenarios:

- Differentiation of grade III and IV tumors from non-neoplastic lesions or grade I and II gliomas

- Prognostication of gliomas

- Guidance of an optimal biopsy site (e.g., site of maximum tracer uptake)

- Delineation of tumor extent for surgery and radiotherapy planning

- Differentiation of glioma recurrence from treatment-induced changes, e.g., pseudoprogression, radionecrosis

- Detection of malignant transformation in grade I and II gliomas

- Response assessment during and after radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy

- Differentiation of tumor response from pseudo-response during antiangiogenic therapy

- Intraoperative navigation

However, FDG PET still offers high clinical accuracy in primary brain lymphoma and is of great value in the initial diagnosis, follow-up, and treatment response assessments.

**Epilepsy**

FDG PET plays a major role in the presurgical workup of medically refractory epilepsy patients. One-third of epilepsy patients are medically refractory, and their seizures are not controlled with antiepileptic drugs. FDG PET will show decreased glucose metabolism in the seizure onset zone (SOZ) and sometimes along the epilepsy network. It allows accurate localization or at least lateralization of the SOZ that needs to be resected for seizure freedom or improved seizure control.

**Encephalitis**

In encephalitis, FDG PET is the most sensitive imaging technique available.