Dietary iron requirements are estimated using multifactorial modeling. Factors that affect iron needs include the basal physiologic iron loss, periodic loss of iron in females with menstruation, fetal requirements in pregnancy, elevated requirements during growth stages of life, iron storage, etc.

**Types of Dietary Iron**

Dietary iron has two primary forms: **heme and nonheme.**

All plant-derived and animal-derived foods contain nonheme iron, while heme iron is found only in the foods derived from animals, mainly meat, fish, poultry, and eggs. Heme iron has a higher bioavailability and is absorbed easier without the need for absorption-enhancing cofactors. Nonheme iron, which is the most important dietary source in vegetarians, shows lower bioavailability; its absorption depends on the balance between dietary enhancers and inhibitors and body iron stores.

About 25% of dietary heme iron gets absorbed, while 17% of dietary nonheme iron gets absorbed. Based on the studies, iron bioavailability is estimated to be 14 to 18% for mixed diet consumers and 5 to 12% for vegetarian diet consumers.

**Factors influencing Dietary Iron Intake**

**Dietary factors:**

Many different dietary components either enhance or inhibit dietary iron absorption when they are simultaneously present in the diet.

**Enhancers:**

- **MFP Factor**: It is a peptide present in meat, fish, and poultry. It enhances the absorption of nonheme iron present in the same meal. Studies consistently showed an enhanced effect on vegetarian iron absorption by animal proteins.

- **Ascorbic Acid**(Vit C): Studies have convincingly shown the dose-dependent enhancing effect of natively present or added vitamin C on iron absorption. This effect is mainly due to its iron-chelating and reducing abilities, converting ferric iron to ferrous iron, which has higher solubility.

**Inhibitors:**

- **Phytates**: They are known inhibitors of nonheme iron absorption.

- **Polyphenols**: They inhibit nonheme iron by binding with it in the intestine. They are commonly found in tea as tannic acid and also in red wine and oregano.

- **Ca in milk**: Calcium has been found to have an inhibitory effect on both heme and nonheme iron absorption. Its exact mechanism is unclear.

**Person-related Factors**

- **Vegetarians**: Since heme iron is more bioavailable than non-heme iron, the estimated bioavailability of iron from a vegetarian diet is 10% instead of 18% from meat containing a mixed diet. Thus, vegetarians need 1.8 times higher dietary intake of iron than meat-consuming individuals.

- **Menstruating females**: Extra iron loss occurs through menstrual blood loss, placing higher body demands for dietary iron. In South Asian populations where the diet is predominately plant-based, adolescent girls and premenopausal women are advised to supplement iron.

- I**nfants and children**: Cow’s milk does not contain iron; it is also not recommended for infants below 1 year of age because of the risk of enteropathy. Even during the preadolescent growth spurt period, both boys and girls are advised to take extra dietary iron to meet the demand for iron by the newly developing tissue and the expanding blood volume.

- **Blood Donors**: 500 ml of blood donated just once a year translates to an additional iron loss of approximately 0.6 mg/day.

- **Ethnicity:**- based on variation in the USA.

- **People from****developing countries**: Poor socioeconomic status and access to food variety make people prone to dietary iron deficiency along with other malnutrition problems. People living in rural settings in developing parts of the world, in particular, are more prone to iron deficiency anemia. In these environments, there is also a higher prevalence of parasitic intestinal infections, which lead to GI blood loss and malabsorption. As such, local health care agencies and providers pay attention to the iron needs of these populations.

- **Drugs**: The use of oral contraceptives decreases blood loss in adolescents and women during their childbearing age, possibly contributing to lower oral iron requirements.

- **HRT**(Hormone replacement therapy) sometimes causes uterine bleeding. In such a situation, postmenopausal women who are taking HRT will need higher iron requirements than postmenopausal women who are not taking HRT.

**GI Disorders**

Any of the following medical problems could interfere with iron absorption and lead to a higher demand for iron through either dietary means or medical supplementation.

- Malabsorptive disorder

- History of gastric bypass surgery

- Celiac disease

- Crohn’s disease

**Recommended Dietary Allowance of Iron:**Illustrated in Table 1.

**Sources of Iron**

- **Food**: Table 2 illustrates the daily value (DV) of iron intake in certain foods based on the FDA-developed DVs to help compare the iron content in different foods. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing iron arranged by nutrient content and food name.

- **Iron Supplements**: Iron is available in many dietary supplements. Best supplements are those that contain easily absorbable iron that also causes minimal side effects. It is advisable to take iron under medical supervision. Multivitamin/multimineral supplements with iron, especially those designed for women, typically provide 18 mg of iron (100% of the DV for women in their reproductive years). Multivitamin/multimineral supplements for men or seniors frequently contain less or no iron. Iron-only supplements usually deliver more than the DV, with many providing 65 mg iron (360% of the DV). An iron-containing multivitamin is not sufficient to treat iron deficiency conditions, and medical supervision of iron replacement is recommended. Iron-containing supplements often include iron in either of its two forms: Ferrous or ferric salts. Examples include ferrous sulfate or gluconate and ferric citrate or sulfate.

- **Iron contamination**: For cooking, sometimes an iron skillet is a utensil used for cooking vegetables and other food to increase iron content in that food. Such a source of contaminated iron is sometimes practiced in some regions of the world.