If abscess formation has not yet occurred and the felon is in the cellulitis stage, it can be treated with anti-staphylococcal and anti-streptococcal antibiotics. Warm water or saline soaks, and elevation of the fingertip will also aid in recovery. If abscess formation has occurred, or if tension or fluctuance are present, incision and drainage must be performed to drain infected material and maintain venous blood flow to the finger. Due to the fibrous septae forming multiple compartments, it may be difficult to fully drain a felon and debridement in an operating room may be necessary.

A digital block should be performed prior to incision and drainage. Bupivacaine has the advantage of a longer lasting anesthetic effect than lidocaine. A finger tourniquet can be used to decrease bleeding and aid in visualization of structures.  The area of maximal swelling and tenderness should be located for optimal drainage. For deep felons, a single lateral incision should be made. The incision should be made at least 0.5 cm distal to the DIP in order to avoid injury to the flexor tendon sheath, digital neurovascular structures, nail matrix and to avoid contracture. The incision should extend parallel to the nail plate.  It is important to maintain a distance of 0.5 cm from the nail plate to avoid injury unless there is an obvious paronychia, which should also be drained. For complete drainage, it is often necessary to use blunt dissection to separate the finger septae with a small blunt hemostat. If there is necrotic tissue present, it should be excised, and the abscess should then be decompressed and irrigated.  The wound should be packed, and the finger should be splinted.

A volar longitudinal incision can be used for superficial felons. The same precautions as stated above should be followed.  It is not recommended to use the “fish-mouth” incision, the “hockey stick” or the transverse palmar incision, as these incisions have been associated with complications such as neurovascular damage and painful scarring.

Packing should be removed in 24 to 48 hours, and the finger should be re-examined by a physician. If there is an improvement and the wound appears to be healing, the packing should be removed, and the wound can be allowed to close by secondary intention.  If there is no improvement within 12-24 hours, or if the felon is extensive or recurrent, a surgical consult may be needed.

The patient should receive a tetanus shot if not up to date.  A first-generation cephalosporin or anti-staphylococcal penicillin to cover S aureus and streptococcal organisms should be prescribed for 7-10 days. Doxycycline, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, or clindamycin can be added if there is suspicion for MRSA. If the felon was a result of a bite wound, or if the patient is immunosuppressed, coverage for E corrodens may be indicated.  Gram stain should be used to guide therapy when available.