There are several ways to approach congenital torticollis, and there is no therapeutic standardization. Professionals in various fields, including physiotherapy and osteopathy, recommend techniques for the treatment of infant torticollis.

With proper treatment, 90% to 95%  of children improve before the first year of life, and 97% of patients improve if treatment starts before the first six months.

With congenital torticollis, a palpable sternocleidomastoid mass is an important indicator for the intervention to be started by the second month of life, as it influences the child's normal motor development.

The main goal is to achieve an age-appropriate active and passive range of motion of the neck and to prevent contractures and develop symmetry of face and head and neck.

Initial treatment focus on passive range stretching and close follow up. Parents are advised to perform positioning at schedules such as during feeds; this includes rotation of the chin towards the affected side shoulder. Infants can be placed on their stomach when awake and under supervision to develop motor skills in the prone position. Manual stretches such as flexion, extension, the lateral rotation should be done at least three times a week in a set of 15 stretches with each stretch for about a second with a 10 seconds pause in between. If there is a fibrous aspect, stretching techniques are the most essential and most evidence-based treatment.

Although there are a large number of protocol studies in the literature demonstrating the effectiveness of physical therapy, there is little reported data on the frequency and types of exercise. In many studies, the initial frequency was 2 times per week in the 1st month, progressing to once per week; some authors refer 3 times a week initially. The duration of congenital torticollis physiotherapy treatment depends on the date on which rehabilitation began, and studies have shown that the sooner it starts, the faster the normal cervical biomechanics become established, as well as achieving better results. The published studies mostly have a basis in stretching/myotensive techniques and other motor development exercises.

Collar: Tubular orthosis for torticollis:  It is used to support the impaired side of the neck in a neutral position. It is recommended for children more than four months of age, and the child can use it when they are awake during day time.

Physical therapy is not always effective for treatment, and other resources may be used, such as the adjunctive use of botulinum toxin injection in the sternocleidomastoid other muscles in the region.

Surgery: Surgical indications include cases where there is no improvement after six months of manual stretching if there are more than 15-degree defects in passive rotation and lateral bending, the presence of a tight muscular band, or a tumor in sternocleidomastoid. The procedure includes unipolar/ bipolar sternocleidomastoids muscle lengthening, "Z" lengthening, or radical resection of the sternocleidomastoid.