Acute presentation following trauma with a metallic foreign body mandates evaluating the patient’s vaccination status and administering the tetanus booster dose accordingly. Systemic and topical broad-spectrum antibiotics should be instituted against the commonest organisms, such as gram-positive cocci (streptococcus, coagulase-negative staphylococcus), anaerobic bacteria (clostridium species), and gram-negative bacilli (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae).

The indications for immediate removal include FB localized in the anterior chamber, vitreous cavity and a non-encapsulated FB in the retina.

Immediate wound closure must be performed in all cases of open-globe injuries. However, the surgical removal of IOFBs can be delayed due to the non-availability of the vitreoretinal setup or in cases where corneal edema precludes Pars Plana Vitrectomy (PPV).

In cases of delayed surgical intervention, it is critical to perform serial assessments with ERG testing every 2 to 3 months. If the ERG remains stable, the patient can be observed further with gradually increasing intervals between subsequent follow-ups. On every follow-up, evaluation of best-corrected visual acuity, ophthalmoscopy, appropriate imaging, along with serial ERG should be performed. If the patient appears non-compliant to follow-up or a diminishing response on ERG is noted, immediate removal is warranted.

**Surgical Management**

Posterior segment metallic IOFB may be removed via the traditional external approach using an external electromagnet (EEM) or an internal approach using forceps or intra-ocular magnets (IOMs).

In the internal approach, 23G or 25G (sutureless) PPV is done using forceps or an IOM.

A new surgical procedure, known as the ‘‘handshake technique’’ has been recently described wherein two IOMs are introduced through the PPV sclerotomies followed by safe delivery of the IOFB through the corneoscleral tunnel. This technique is especially preferred for large foreign bodies as it doesn’t require enlargement of the pre-existing sclerotomy.

For foreign bodies located in the anterior segment, removal is initiated through the limbal approach in cases of FBs larger than 6mm, or through the sclera for smaller FBs.

**Role of Deferoxamine**

Deferoxamine is a chelating agent with a high affinity for free iron ions. It is used in thalassaemic patients undergoing multiple blood transfusions to avoid siderosis due to iron overload.