Causes of Neutrophilia are classified into the following categories:

- Factitious neutrophilia; neutrophilia due to various artifacts encountered during blood sample handling in laboratory settings

- Primary Neutrophilia; neutrophilia due to abnormal increased neutrophils production by bone marrow due to impaired neutrophil production regulation.

- Secondary Neutrophilia; reactive neutrophilia can respond to a wide variety of stimuli mentioned in detail below.

**Factitious Neutrophilia**

Factitious neutrophilia can be seen in the blood samples that are either inadequately anticoagulated with citrate or heparin or are EDTA- based anticoagulated, causing platelet clumping in an automated cell counter leading to falsely elevated neutrophil count. A repeat blood sample with adequate anticoagulation (with heparin or citrate) and an examination of the peripheral blood smear (showing platelet clumping) can help resolve this problem.

**Primary Neutrophilia**

Chronic Idiopathic Leukocytosis: Given neutrophilia is defined as an ANC of at least two standard deviations above the mean, neutrophil counts can vary considerably among asymptomatic healthy individuals, and 2.5 percent of the population can be considered to have neutrophilia based on the definition mentioned above. Serial evaluations may be required in an average healthy individual with mild neutrophilia to rule out the absence of underlying pathology. Since neutrophil count regulation is also genetically controlled, evaluation of a sibling's or parent s blood count can be helpful in this situation.

Myeloproliferative Neoplasms (MPN): MPNs are characterized by excess and autonomous production of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets, thus can be a cause of primary neutrophilia. MPNs associated with neutrophilia include Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), essential thrombocythemia (ET), polycythemia vera (PV), chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, chronic neutrophilic leukemia, Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML).

Genetic/ Inherited neutrophilia: The subset of the population affected by this category is neonates and children, with some disorders being detected in adulthood. Leukocyte adhesion factor deficiency is a rare but life-threatening disorder characterized by a defect in leukocyte adhesion molecules, leading to marked leukocytosis, recurrent infections, and delayed umbilical cord separation.

**Secondary Neutrophilia**

****Infection/Inflammation; The most common cause of secondary neutrophilia is infection and inflammation. Bacterial infections are usually associated with left shift (i.e., an increase in the percentage of band forms of leukocytes), toxic granulations, and Döhle bodies on peripheral smear.

Nonhematological neoplasms: Neutrophilia can be seen in solid tumor malignancies. Mechanisms leading to increased neutrophil count can be a paraneoplastic leukemoid reaction, bone marrow metastasis, nonspecific tumor-related inflammation, infections, and high-dose corticosteroids for tumor therapy.

Medications: Many medications can cause neutrophilia by various mechanisms, some of which are listed below.

- Recombinant granulocyte and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factors (G-CSF or GM-CSF), All-trans retinoic acid; Increase neutrophil count via direct stimulation of bone marrow myelopoiesis.

- Glucocorticoids, Plerixafor; Increase neutrophil count by causing the release of granulocytes from the bone marrow into circulation.

- Other drugs include lithium and catecholamines.

Many medications can cause neutrophilia due to adverse drug reactions, i.e., allergic or inflammatory responses to a drug.

Others: secondary neutrophilia may also result from various stimuli. These stimuli may include physical or emotional stress, vigorous exercise, temperature changes, seizure activity, cigarette smoking, surgery, obesity, asplenia or hyposplenism, and generalized bone marrow stimulation, such as in hemolysis.