Although the data related to alkaloid-specific exposures are limited, those involving general plant exposures are well-documented. In the United States, plant-related toxic exposures exceed one-hundred-thousand cases annually and account for about 3 to 5% of human exposures described to poison control centers. The most common route of exposure is ingestion, with approximately 98% of these being unintentional. Nearly 80% of reported plant-related poisonings involve children under six years of age. Most of the plants responsible for these events have limited toxicity, and most exposures are benign. Moreover, pediatric ingestions tend to be benign owing to the small quantities consumed.

The more serious toxicities tend to involve adults who may mistake the plant in question as edible or intentionally ingest it for its homeopathic or toxic properties. Fortunately, only about 7% of individuals require medical evaluation, less than 20% report mild to moderate symptoms, and over 80% are asymptomatic. The fatality rate of such exposures in the United States, largely unintentional, is less than 0.001%. In other parts of the world where health care is less accessible, however, plant exposures pose a greater risk and public health burden. Between 1983 and 2009, only 45 fatalities were recorded, with Datura and Cicuta species accounting for 35.5% of these. Between 2000 and 2009, 52.2% of toxic plant ingestions involved males, and over 60% of such cases resulted in moderate to severe outcomes.