The most common disease that mimics the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is none other than degenerative spondylotic myeloradiculopathy in the cervical and/or lumbosacral spine, which may present with radicular pain. This may be characterized by progressive symptoms that plateau later with the progression of the disease. Although imaging has been advised to differentiate between the two entities, there may be the presence of co-existent degenerative illness in those with ALS.

Presentation with symmetrical findings, prominent extensor plantar responses (cervical myelopathy), presence of sensory deficit, presence of substantial weakness in the absence of wasting (multifocal motor neuropathy and myasthenia gravis) and disproportionate involvement of quadriceps (inclusion body myositis) should prompt further investigation for an alternative diagnosis.

An acute presentation of lower motor neuron syndrome should prompt consideration of immune, toxic, metabolic, and infective etiology. The major differentials include MND, multifocal motor neuropathy, and monomelic amyotrophy.

**Motor neuron disease mimics:**

**a. Presenting with progressive, painless weakness**

i) Genetic disorders – Spinal muscular atrophy, Kennedy’s disease, hexosaminidase deficiency, mitochondrial disease, triple-A (Allgrove syndrome), polyglucosan body disease, hereditary spastic paraparesis, and adrenoleukodystrophy.

ii) Toxicity or metabolic disorders – Radiation myelopathy, thyrotoxicosis, hyperparathyroidism, lead poisoning, mercury poisoning, and copper deficiency.

iii) Infectious diseases – Post-polio syndrome, Lyme disease, and HIV.

iv) Immunological or inflammatory syndromes – Paraproteinemic neuropathy, conduction block neuropathy, Sjogren’s syndrome, Inclusion body myositis, Gluten sensitivity, myasthenia gravis, and polymyositis.

v) Structural diseases – Spondylotic myelopathy, the base of skull lesions, foramen magnum lesions, intrinsic or extrinsic cord tumors, and lumbosacral radiculopathies.

vi) Miscellaneous condition – Cramp fasciculation syndromes, paraneoplastic disease, lymphoproliferative disease, and paraneoplastic neuromuscular disease.

**b. Presenting with a generalized or focal single (monomelic) limb onset lower motor neuron syndromes**

i) Brachial neuritis / Parsonage-Turner syndrome

Sudden onset typically idiopathic inflammatory condition affecting the brachial plexus, characterized by severe pain followed by weakness and wasting in the absence of trauma. Five percent of cases may be painless. History of preceding viral illness or vaccination may be present. In 10 percent of the cases, there may be a bilateral pathology. A history of bilateral phrenic nerve paralysis, producing diaphragmatic palsy leading to orthopnoea, may also be present.

ii) Hirayama’s disease

Benign juvenile-onset monomelic amyotrophy of the upper limb or focal segmental spinal muscular atrophy may be progressive for 1 to 3 years, and then remain stable, may not show progression or recovery. Sub-clinical involvement of another limb may be apparent on NCS/EMG. May present with cold paresis or oblique amyotrophy of the forearm, commonly seen in Japan and the Indian subcontinent.

iii) Kennedy’s syndrome

Spinobulbar muscular atrophy, trinucleotide repeat mutation in the first exon of the androgen receptor gene, develop symptoms in the 4th and 5th decade, LMN syndrome, slowly progressive, bulbar weakness, tongue wasting, disproportionate bulbar involvement, lower facial/chin (mentalis) fasciculation characteristic, sensory as well as motor neuropathy may be seen. Gynecomastia, partial feminization, small testes, may cause respiratory insufficiency, associated with average life expectancy.

iv) Inclusion body myositis

Slowly evolving painless symmetrical weakness, distal weakness, weakness distal or characteristic involvement of the quadriceps and long finger flexors (medial forearm), dysphagia,  creatine kinase modestly elevated to within 2-10 times the normal range (important diagnostic clue). Usually aged over 50 years, 3 to 1 female to male predilection, EMG may appear neurogenic with fibrillation potentials. Muscle biopsy may show rimmed vacuoles, with inflammatory changes, relentless progression over the years, significant disability, and impairment of quality of life. Rare hereditary forms of inclusion body myositis may be associated with MND and frontotemporal dementia, in which mutations in the gene encoding for valosin containing protein and muscle biopsies stain for the protein TDP-43. This is the characteristic protein that accumulates in the central nervous system in such patients.

**c. Upper motor neuron signs**

i) Hereditary spastic paraparesis

Younger onset, slowly progressive paraplegia, dorsal column involvement, sphincter dysfunction, may include symptoms of ataxia or dementia, especially with a positive family history (autosomal dominant). Forty percent have mutations in the SPAST gene; minimal upper limb involvement does not include severe corticobulbar involvement.

ii) Primary progressive multiple sclerosis

Slowly progressive, positive CSF findings (oligoclonal bands) and demyelination.

iii) Metabolic myelopathies

Vitamin B12 and copper associated myelopathies, slowly progressive myelopathy, typically associated with sensory neuropathy, and adult-onset slowly progressive myelopathy,

iv) X linked adrenoleucodystrophy

A peroxisomal disorder involving the ABCD1 transporter, long-chain fatty acid transporter, presents typically in the third to a fourth decade, confined to lower limbs, may present with sensory ataxia and bladder symptoms. Secondary Wallerian degeneration may result in hyperintensities in the associated cerebral corticospinal tracts.