**Mechanical Ventilation**

The indications of mechanical ventilation in severe COVID-19 are:

- Failure to oxygenate or rapidly to worsen hypoxemia despite maximal oxygen support through non-invasive oxygen devices like high flow nasal cannula (HFNC) or non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPV) like BiPAP or CPAP

- Inability to protect airway due to altered mental status and/or increased secretion burden

- Severe hemodynamic instability

- Failure to ventilate

- Cardiac arrest requiring advanced CPR

Figure 2 depicts the indications of invasive mechanical ventilation in patients with severe COVID-19.

HFNC is an oxygen delivery device that can deliver warm, humidified oxygen at higher flows (20-60 liters per minute) with a precise and high fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2). The HFNC device is capable of dead space washout in the upper respiratory reservoirs and allows for delivery of a higher flow of oxygen to meet the patient flow demand, thus assisting in reducing patient efforts and providing comfort. The higher flow is also associated with some positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) that allows alveolar recruitment and reduction in work of breathing. The FLORALI study had demonstrated a decreased 90-day mortality and decrease in the rate of intubation in the severe ARDS group compared to conventional oxygen therapy and the NIPV group.

The key to using HFNC lies in closer monitoring and interval clinical assessment for the resolution of work of breathing and hypoxemia. Persistent and strong inspiratory efforts despite HFNC may lead to significantly high transpulmonary pressures and patient self-inflicted lung injury (P-SILI), and worsening ARDS.

NIPV can be utilized on a case-by-case basis depending on the co-existence of hypercapnia or cardiogenic pulmonary edema. The LUNG SAFE study had demonstrated higher ICU mortality in severe ARDS in patients receiving NIPV. However, it must be noted that the NIPV group received lower PEEP, and hypoxemia was corrected mainly by increasing FiO2.

A HACOR score above 5 at 2, 6, 12, 24, and 48 hours can predict NIPV failure with a specificity above 90%. Ideally, an initial higher HACOR score that does not improve with NIPV should prompt early endotracheal intubation and IMV as it has been associated with lower mortality.

In patients failing HFNC or NIPV based on clinical risk assessment scores and parameters, endotracheal intubation should be promptly considered.

**Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation (ECMO)**

Extracorporeal life support (ECLS) is a modality of life support comprising venovenous (VV) and veno-arterial (VA) extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). VV ECMO primarily provides respiratory support, whereas VA ECMO provides both cardiac and respiratory support. VV-ECMO facilitates gas exchange in patients with respiratory failure experiencing refractory hypoxemia or severe hypercapnia while lowering the intensity of mechanical ventilation, minimizing barotrauma and atelectrauma.

ECMO evolved from cardiopulmonary bypass in the 1970s and intrigued the medicine world. However, interest was stymied after the two negative randomized controlled trials for the use of ECMO in respiratory failure.

The Conventional ventilatory support versus Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for Severe Acute Respiratory failure (CESAR) trial showed that patients who received ECMO had significantly higher survival at 6 months compared to the control arm (63% vs. 47%; p=0.03). The ECMO to rescue lung injury in severe ARDS (EOLIA) trial randomized 249 patients with severe ARDS (PF <50 mmHg >3 hours or PF <80 mmHg for >6 hours) to receive early ECMO or conventional low tidal-low pressure IMV. The mortality in the ECMO arm was lower. However, it did not reach statistical significance (35% vs. 46%, RR 0.76 95%CI 0.55 to 1.04; P=0.09). The trial was stopped early after an interim analysis did not show a significant improvement in mortality by day 60, which was widely criticized as there was a trend towards improved mortality.

A high percentage of crossover of sicker patients from the control to the treatment group could have swayed the outcomes as well. A systematic review and meta-analysis of two randomized controlled trials and three observational studies with matching techniques (N=773) showed that 60-day mortality was significantly lower in the VV-ECMO group than in the control group (34% vs. 47%; RR 0·73 [95% CI 0·58–0·92]; p=0·008). As authors of the above metanalysis point, the results of these studies should be interpreted keeping in mind the availability of ECMO and the expertise of a center in managing these patients.

With ever-growing support for ECMO in the pre-COVID era, one would have expected ECMO to be on the forefront as a rescue strategy for COVID-19 patients with refractory hypoxemia. However, the initial case series portrayed a bleak picture for the use of ECMO due to reportedly higher mortality.

The indications of ECMO are summarized in Figure 3.