**In facial palsy:**As the muscle receives nerve supply from the seventh cranial nerve, thus, injury to this nerve can result in paralysis of the muscle. In Bell palsy, sagging of the orbicularis oris results in drooling.

**Loss of tone:**Loss of tone of this muscle to the muscles leads to drooping of the commissure as it controls the oral sphincter, which can cause drooling and difficulty in eating.

**Clinical implication in prosthodontics:**The orbicularis oris muscle due to its fiber orientation has a positive action in maintaining the stability of the denture. Placing the artificial teeth so as not to interfere with muscle activity and to enable the retention and stability action of the musculature is a priority of the treatment in complete denture cases.

In the oral cavity, the peri-oral muscles, mainly the orbicularis oris and the buccinator, exert inward forces. Balancing these forces are the outward forces exerted by the tongue. The impression for complete denture must be molded by muscle function so that it is in harmony with these surrounding structures.

As orbicularis oris is the main muscle of the lip, its tone depends on the support it receives from labial flange that lies in the labial vestibule (extending from buccal frenum in the canine region on one side to the other side) and position of teeth.

If the teeth position is too far labially, the orbicularis oris gets stretched. This stretching effect of the lips against the teeth also tends to exert a dislodging force on the maxillary denture.

Orbicularis oris muscle along with the buccinator and pharyngeal constrictor form a functional unit, known as "buccinator mechanism" which has an important role in orofacial function (swallowing, sucking, whistling, chewing, vowel pronunciation, kissing).