Oxygen toxicity most commonly affects the lungs, central nervous system (CNS), and eyes. Pulmonary oxygen toxicity, formerly known as the Lorrain Smith effect, usually manifests as coughing progressing to chest pain, burning pain on inhalation, and dyspnea. Symptoms often resolve after cessation of the dive, and long-term complications are considered to be inconsequential, though special consideration should be given to current smokers or those with respiratory conditions.

CNS toxicity, formerly known as the Paul Bert effect, is a more severe complication and can result in the seizure. Luckily this is relatively uncommon with an incidence of between 0.2 to 3 in 10,000. Initial symptoms are nonspecific and may include vision changes, tinnitus, anxiety, or nausea, but can quickly progress to a tonic-clonic seizure. To date, no serious sequelae or increased risk of subsequent seizures have been found. Factors thought to lower the seizure threshold include the history of epilepsy, hypoglycemia, hyperthyroidism, current fever, and select drugs such as penicillin and disulfiram.

Ocular toxicity has been shown to affect both the retina and lens. The retinopathy is thought to be due to abnormal angiogenesis and fibroblast production, while myopia occurs due to a transient increase in the refractive power of the lens. Both of these conditions will usually reverse within days to weeks following cessation of HBOT, though there is a risk of premature cataract development.

Apart from oxygen toxicity, the most common side effects of concern are barotrauma from the pressures used, and confinement anxiety while in the chamber. Barotrauma of the tympanic membrane is most common with a reported incidence as high as 2%, though barotrauma of the sinuses can also occur. The potential for tympanic membrane barotrauma is usually ameliorated by auto-inflating the middle ear through the Valsalva maneuver or placement of tympanostomy tubes. Anyone with a significant history of middle or inner ear pathology should be carefully screened. Claustrophobia can also be overcome with the familiarity of the chamber and the use of anxiolytics during therapy.