C. pneumoniae is the most common intracellular bacterium, which is mainly involved in infections of the respiratory tract and sometimes manifests as extrapulmonary disease.

C. pneumoniae infection can be widespread in the form of an endemic or epidemic. It is known to be a cause of community-acquired pneumonia in up to 20% of the cases. In western countries, the age group of 5 to 15 years has the highest rate of new infections. C. pneumonia may sometimes present in a severe form in immunocompromised patients. C. pneumoniae is also attributed to the outbreaks in nursing home acquired pneumonia.C. pneumonia has a role in the pathogenesis of asthma in children and adults. Studies have shown that patients with chronic bronchitis show a strong immune response to this organism suggesting the prevalence of chronic C. pneumonia in patients with chronic bronchitis. Recent evidence has indicated the association of C. pneumonia with atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease as well.

Chlamydia psittaci is a less prevalent cause of pneumonia, contributing to only about 1% of the cases. Every year, in the United States, the number of cases reported is less than 50. Patients usually have a history of contact with birds. Although all kinds of birds are the main reservoir of this pathogen, usually, pet birds, including parrots and poultry, are the primary source of infection. Human to human transmission can also occur, although rarely.

C. trachomatis is known to cause pneumonia in infants. Infection is generally acquired perinatally from the birth canal of infected mothers, usually presenting at 3 to 12 weeks of life, sometimes even earlier.