Patients suffering from Bloom syndrome are distinguished by severe prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, and characteristic facies (keel-shaped, malar hypoplasia, nasal prominence, and protuberant ears). A high-pitched voice and absent upper lateral incisors are also frequently present. Parents of children with Bloom syndrome often seek medical attention because of the child's small stature with proportional body size. As such, these children are often misdiagnosed with dwarfism.

Cutaneous features include photosensitivity and a distinctive lupus-like malar rash. UV-induced erythematous lesions may similarly occur on other sun-exposed areas such as the forearms and dorsal hands. Telangiectasias and poikiloderma occur early in the first or second year of life in response to sun exposure. Small clusters of telangiectases often appear within the rash and the sclera of the eyes. Other skin findings include mouth fissures, café-au-lait spots, and well-demarcated patchy areas of dyschromia (hypo- and hyper-pigmentation).

Other abnormalities include hypogonadism, male infertility, premature menopause in women, intellectual disability, and late-onset, non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Patients have mild immunodeficiency leading to recurrent otitis media and sinopulmonary infections during infancy. This is due to reduced levels of plasma immunoglobulins, including IgA, IgM, and occasionally, IgG. Severe dehydration can occur in infancy from vomiting, diarrhea, and gastroesophageal reflux. Aspiration from reflux disease may contribute to the increased incidence of pneumonia and the development of chronic lung disease in these patients. Pulmonary failure is the second leading cause of death in this population.

Patients suffering from Bloom syndrome have a high predisposition for various malignancies. Up to 50% of these patients will be diagnosed with cancer at some point in their life. Tumor development occurs on average at an earlier age than the general population. Patients may have multiple independent primary cancers with a broad range of types and localization. The mean age of cancer diagnosis is 23 years and death typically occurs before 30 years of age. Leukemias (myeloid or lymphoid) and non-Hodkin lymphomas are the most common type of cancer in the first two decades of life (mean age is 20 years). Lymphomas occur 150 to 300 times more frequently than in the healthy population. Unfortunately, 10% of patients will develop a second malignancy. These may include carcinomas of the respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract (especially colorectal), breast, liver, skin (basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma), osteosarcoma, retinoblastoma, and brain tumors. The most common of these is colorectal carcinoma. Complications from malignancy are the main cause of death.