Demographic data is important to collect, including age, gender, ethnicity, and race. Systemic medical history is also vital to ascertain possible etiologies, specifically history of recent illness, history of autoimmune or inflammatory disease, history of cancer or chemotherapy and/or radiation, history of systemic immunosuppression, history of prior trauma or surgery. A comprehensive review of systems may reveal potential systemic autoimmune or inflammatory disease associations.

A thorough orbital and ophthalmologic history regarding blurry vision, double vision, change in outward appearance, or facial symmetry, pain, light sensitivity, pain with eye movement, eyelid swelling or redness, discharge, tenderness, tearing, and dryness should be obtained. Consider comparing old patient photographs to evaluate for changes in globe position (dystopia), eyelid position, or contour.

A complete, dilated ophthalmic examination by an ophthalmologist or oculoplastic and orbital surgeon should be performed. This includes checking visual acuity for decreased vision, pupillary light reflexes for adequate responses and the presence of a relative afferent pupillary defect (rAPD), and other signs of optic neuropathy, such as color vision deficits red light saturation, and visual field defects. Evaluating ocular motility can provide the degree of any limitations and the presence and pattern of diplopia. It is also prudent to evaluate any globe malposition, especially inferiorly and medially for lacrimal gland tumors, and to perform exophthalmometry to evaluate proptosis. Digital palpation of the eyelid/orbit and lacrimal gland may identify masses, and there may be resistance to retropulsion of the globe if a mass is present. Palpation of regional lymph nodes can reveal lymphadenopathy. Hypoesthesia of the first or second divisions of the trigeminal nerve should be checked to evaluate for orbital nerve compression or invasion. Clinically, there may be eyelid edema, erythema, or warmth and a directly visualized enlarged and tender lacrimal gland with secondary upper lid ptosis or S-shaped lid deformity. The conjunctiva may be injected, especially overlying the area of the lacrimal gland. An anterior and posterior segment exam is also needed to evaluate for signs of uveitis.