The macrolide antibiotic is the backbone of therapy for Mycobacterium avium complex infections. The Infectious Disease Society of America recommended triple antibiotic therapy for fibro cavitary and severe nodular bronchiectatic disease. For moderate to mild disease, dual antibiotic therapy is sufficient. Observation is reasonable but in general Mycobacterium avium complex pulmonary infections are progressive, and eventually, a patient will have indications for therapy. In this situation, expert opinion suggests, that sputum should be checked once in three months and radiological evaluation once in six months. A chest x-ray may be sufficient for the fibro-cavitary disease, but HRCT is needed to assess nodular bronchiectatic disease. Risk factors for progressive disease are cavitary disease, low body mass index, older age, and co-morbidities. The risk of progression must be weighed against the potential risk of treatment.

The medications used in the treatment of Mycobacterium avium complex infections are a macrolide, clofazimine, rifampin, rifabutin, ethambutol, fluoroquinolone, linezolid, and aminoglycosides. There is no proven correlation between in-vitro susceptibility and clinical response. The only susceptibility to macrolide and amikacin may be useful clinically. If the patient is intolerant to first-line drugs than susceptibility testing to secondary medications may be of some value. The goal of therapy is to have culture negativity for 12 months. Sputum conversion takes three to six months. Close monitoring for drug intolerance is required. At the initiation of therapy, baseline audiogram, electrocardiogram, an eye exam for visual acuity and color discrimination complete blood count and the comprehensive metabolic panel must be obtained.

For severe and fibrocavitary disease, a typical three-drug regimen consists of daily oral azithromycin, rifampin, and ethambutol; intermittent dosing is inadequate in this situation. For severe fibrocavitary disease, parenteral aminoglycoside can be used in the initial phase (first eight to 16 weeks of therapy) as a fourth agent, but there is no proven benefit. In patients who cannot tolerate parenteral aminoglycoside, inhaled amikacin can be used. For severe localized cavitary disease, surgical resection, after the sputum becomes negative, can be considered. Surgery is not without risk of formation of a bronchopleural fistula. For mild to moderate nodular bronchiectatic disease intermittent dosing of the three-drug regimen can be used.

No prospective studies evaluate the efficacy of the macrolide-containing three-drug or two-drug regimens. However long term sputum conversion rates of 86% have been documented. Small randomized controlled trials comparing three-drug and two-drug regimens showed higher treatment failure with two-drug therapy. Macrolide containing regime was not evaluated in this trial.

The key to successful therapy is close monitoring for disease worsening and drug-related toxicity. Patients should be followed once every two months while on therapy. Introduce one drug at a time and a lower dose and increase to a therapeutic dose over two to five days. Therapeutic drug monitoring is of no proven value. Azithromycin peak levels can be measured in the setting of malabsorption or treatment failure or if the dose is considered to be low. A peak level of greater than 0.4 mcg/mL was independently associated with the favorable microbiologic response. Rifampin can decrease macrolide levels. A study by Koh WJ et al. in 101 patients showed no correlation between clarithromycin level and favorable microbiologic response.