Paraneoplastic syndromes may involve multiple organ systems with heterogeneous and complex clinical manifestations in the setting of an occult malignancy.

Clinical presentations are categorized based on the organ system as follows.

**Neurological**

Paraneoplastic syndromes may affect the central nervous system, neuromuscular junction, or peripheral nervous system and present accordingly.

When the central nervous system is involved, patients may present with:

- Paraneoplastic Encephalitis/encephalomyelitis: This syndrome may include cerebellar encephalitis, brainstem encephalitis, limbic encephalitis, and myelitis. Patients may present with cognitive dysfunction, depression, personality changes, hallucinations, seizures, somnolence, autonomic dysfunction, and less common endocrine dysfunction if the hypothalamus is involved.

- Subacute cerebellar degeneration: It is commonly associated with breast cancer, small cell lung cancer, Hodgkin lymphoma, and ovarian cancer and clinically manifested as ataxia, dysarthria, dysphagia, diplopia, dizziness, nausea, and vomiting. It is caused by Anti-Hu antibodies or anti-voltage gated calcium channel (anti-VGCC) antibodies that cross-react with cerebellar antigens.

- Opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome: Clinically characterized by uncontrolled rapid eye movement, body jerks, ataxia, hypotonia, irritability, and commonly affects children less than four years. Opsoclonus is the common manifestation in children, whereas ataxia is more prominent in adults.

When the neuromuscular junction is involved, patients may present with:

- Myasthenia gravis: Most commonly seen in patients with thymoma and is clinically manifested as a weakness of voluntary muscles and diaphragmatic weakness. Anti-AchR (acetylcholine receptor) antibody is positive in those patients, and electromyography (EMG) shows a decremental response to repetitive nerve stimulation.

- Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS): It is caused due to impairment of voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCC) due to autoantibodies on the presynaptic membrane at the neuromuscular junction, which leads to decreased acetylcholine release.

When the peripheral nervous system is involved, patients may present with:

- Autonomic neuropathy: Frequently associated with SCLC and thymoma. Autonomic neuropathy affects parasympathetic, sympathetic, and enteric nervous systems. It is characterized by dry mouth, dry eyes, altered pupillary reflexes, bladder or bowel dysfunction, and orthostatic hypotension. A patient may also manifest as chronic gastrointestinal (GI) pseudo-obstruction leading to constipation, nausea, vomiting, dysphagia, and abdominal distension.

- Subacute sensory neuropathy: is characterized by paresthesias, neuropathic pain, decreased sensation, and diminished deep tendon reflexes. It affects both the upper and the lower extremities; distribution can be either multifocal, asymmetric, or symmetric.

**Endocrine**

Mainly involved due to ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), ectopic antidiuretic Hormone (ADH), and ectopic parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) secretion by the tumor cells.

- Cushing syndrome: caused by elevated ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) due to tumor cells. It is manifested as muscle weakness, weight gain, peripheral edema, centripetal fat distribution, and high blood pressure.

- Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone Secretion (SIADH): It is more frequently seen in SCLC patients and caused due to ectopic anti-diuretic hormone (ADH) by tumor cells.

- Hypercalcemia is frequently associated with lung cancer, multiple myeloma, and renal cell carcinoma. Hypercalcemia is mediated by different mechanisms, such as the ectopic production of the parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) by tumor cells. Due to excessive PTH-like activity, these patients also have co-existing hypophosphatemia. Patients present with generalized weakness, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, altered mental status, bradycardia, acute renal failure, hypertonia, and hypertension. They have diminished deep tendon reflexes and a short QT interval on an electrocardiogram.

- Non-islet tumor hypoglycemia: It is also called "Doege-Potter syndrome" caused due to secretion of insulin-like substance or big IGF-II in fibrosarcoma, other mesenchymal sarcomas, and hepatocellular carcinoma.

- Carcinoid syndrome: Carcinoid syndrome: is due to ectopic secretion of serotonin or bradykinin. It is mainly seen in carcinoid-type bronchial adenoma, pancreatic carcinoma, and gastric carcinoma.

- Hyperaldosteronism: It is caused due to excessive secretion of aldosterone, mainly in patients with adrenal adenoma, Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and ovarian carcinoma.

**Rheumatological**

- Paraneoplastic polyarthritis commonly involves large joints and is characterized by migratory, non-erosive, asymmetric polyarthritis.

- Polymyalgia rheumatica: Manifested as pain and stiffness in the shoulder girdle, neck, and hip girdle.

- Multicentric reticulohistiocytosis: Clinically characterized by papules, nodules, and destructive polyarthritis.

- Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy: Clinically manifested as digital clubbing, joint swelling, and pain.

**Hematological**

Patients may be asymptomatic but can present with pallor, fatigue, dyspnea, and venous thromboembolism. These patients may have thrombocytosis, granulocytosis, eosinophilia, pure red cell aplasia, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and leukemoid reactions.

- Polycythemia: It is caused due to excessive erythropoietin secretion in renal carcinoma, Cerebellar hemangioma, uterine myoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma.

**Dermatological**

- Acanthosis nigricans manifests as thickened hyperpigmented skin, usually in the axilla and neck region. Gastric adenocarcinoma is most commonly associated with acanthosis nigricans.

- Paraneoplastic pemphigus: it is characterized by blistering and erosion of the trunk, palms, and soles; it may involve mucous membranes causing pain due to mucosal erosions. It is commonly seen in patients with B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder.

- Sweet syndrome: is also known as acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis. It manifests as acute onset of painful, erythematous plaques, papules, and nodules accompanied by fever and neutrophilia.

- Leukocytoclastic vasculitis: it typically manifests as palpable purpura on the lower extremities, but a patient may also experience cyanosis, pruritus, pain, and ulceration of the affected skin.

- Dermatomyositis: it is characterized by a heliotrope rash on the upper eyelids, Gottron papules on phalangeal joints, and an erythematous rash on the face, neck, back, chest, and shoulders.

- Necrolytic migratory erythema: mainly seen in patients with glucagonoma.

- Trousseau syndrome presents as migratory thrombophlebitis, mainly seen in pancreatic and bronchogenic carcinoma. It is caused by excessive secretion of mucins that activate clotting factors.

**Renal**

- Patients may present with electrolyte imbalances (hypokalemia, hypo or hypernatremia, hyperphosphatemia), causing nephropathy and acid-base disturbance due to ectopic hormones produced by tumor cells such as ACTH and ADH.

- Nephrotic syndrome, membranous glomerulonephritis: patients can present with acute kidney injury, massive proteinuria, and fluid overload. It is caused due to tumor antigens and immune complexes.

**Miscellaneous**

Neoplastic****fever, cachexia, anorexia, dysgeusia