Lens-induced inflammation has to be recognized early and managed promptly. Intraocular pressure measurement by Goldmann applanation tonometer should be done. Gonioscopy (if the media allows) and ultrasound B-scan should be done.

In lens-induced uveitis after trauma, calculating the power of the intraocular lens (IOL) may be challenging. In an eye with a disfigured cornea, the keratometry of the other eye may have to be used for the calculation.

If needed, topical steroids may be given hourly. In cases of severe inflammation, systemic steroids may be necessary. Topical antibiotics are also started preoperatively. Cycloplegia is extremely important to break posterior synechiae, stabilize the blood-aqueous barrier, relieve ciliary spasms and decrease the pain.

Lens matter aspiration in a young patient may be done by manual techniques or by irrigation aspiration probe, depending on the facilities available. In older patients, phacoemulsification, manual small incision cataract surgery (MSICS), or extracapsular cataract extraction (ECCE) can be planned based on the surgeon's comfort. Special care should be taken in traumatic cases, as preexisting damage to the posterior capsule of the lens may be present. Adequate anterior vitrectomy should be performed in such cases before implanting the IOL if there is intraoperative vitreous prolapse. The wounds and anterior chamber should be free from vitreous after surgery.

In eyes with lens-induced inflammation associated with advanced cataracts, zonular compromise or poor pupil dilation may be encountered. Also, the corneal endothelium may be compromised in such cases resulting in delayed clearance of the postoperative corneal edema.

Intracameral triamcinolone may reduce postoperative inflammation and help identify vitreous in the anterior chamber in cases with posterior capsular rent.

In the scenario that the posterior capsule is ruptured, the pars plana route may be used by the vitreoretinal surgeon to remove the nucleus fragments and lens matter from the vitreous cavity. Small lens matters in the vitreous cavity can be observed, which are usually absorbed with time.