There are several gaps in our knowledge regarding the care of patients with IBD. Even though many advances have been made in treatment, a number of patients continue to miss out on these treatments. The best care for patients with IBD is from an interprofessional team that is dedicated to this pathology and is fully aware of the latest guidelines. Patients with IBD lead an unpredictable life with constant flare-ups and hence the interprofessional team should establish dedicated phone and support lines staffed by nurses and pharmacists. A network of healthcare providers should be easily accessible to deal with emergencies. Provider and allied healthcare collaboration are vital if one is to avoid delay in treatment. The goal is to halt the disease before widespread bowel damage and disability occurs. Furthermore, patient and healthcare communication should be improved and the patients should be supported during times of crises. Finally, evidence suggests that there is a great need to establish centers of excellence so that patients receive a consistent level of quality care across different healthcare settings.

**Outcomes**

The mortality of patients with IBD is about 1.5-5 times higher compared to the general population. Patients with Crohn disease suffer the highest morbidity and mortality. The major cause of death include infections, the progression of the disease, surgical complications, and multiorgan involvement. More important, patients with IBD also have a high rate of colorectal cancer. Patients who develop pancolitis have the highest risk of colon cancer within two decades. Hence screening colonoscopy is recommended at 1-2 year intervals.

In addition to the disease, these patients are also managed with potent medications like steroids and biological agents, which have a host of adverse effects. Thus, the pharmacist should be alert for any adverse reaction. Patients with IBD are also at risk for asthma or COPD.

Finally, IBD has enormous mental morbidity. Many patients develop depression, suicidal tendencies, and anxiety. Thus, at every visit, the nurse should monitor the patient's mental status and make appropriate referrals.

The quality of life for most patients is poor to okay.