**Botulinum Toxin**

Botulinum toxin has to be instilled into pericranial muscles at multiple sites according to pain. The safe and effective dose is 25 units in total after mixing with normal saline. This can be divided into 3 units for temporalis each side (total 6 units), 2.5 units at 4 frontalis sites (5 units unilaterally; 10 units for both sides), 3 units at corrugators on each side (total 6 units), and 3 units for procerus in the midline.

**Peripheral Neurolysis**

Frontal headache: An eyelid incision is used. The orbital septum is retracted caudally and the orbicularis retracted cranially. The corrugator supercilii and depressor supercilii are resected, and the nerves are freed. Both supraorbital and supratrochlear vessels are sacrificed, and the supraorbital foramen is unroofed. The space made is filled with the medial orbital fat and fixed with 6-0 polyglactin 910. The incisions are then closed with 6-0 nylon sutures. This can be done bilaterally.

Anterior Temporal headache: The procedure described is cutting of the zygomaticotemporal nerve. For a frontotemporal headache, it is combined with the procedure for frontal headaches by making 2 incisions, one in the upper tarsal crease and another at the superior temporal line.

Posterior temporal headache: For this, the auriculotemporal nerve is the culprit. The incision is made at the base of side burn of a size of 2 cm. The nerve along with the superficial temporal vessels are identified. The vessels are sacrificed. The nerve is isolated for about 1 to 2 cm, is cut, and then buried in the temporalis muscle. The incision is closed in layers.

Occipital headache: In case of an occipital migraine, occipital nerve neurolysis from semispinalis capitis muscle can be performed.

For lateral occipital headache lesser occipital neurolysis or neurectomy can be performed. A 2-cm incision is made about 2 cm medial to the mastoid in the hairline. The thick temporal fascia is incised. The lesser occipital nerve is dissected out along with the vessel. The artery is coagulated and cut. The nerve is dissected out for about 1 to 2 cm, is cut and buried in the muscle. The incision is closed with nylon 3-0.

Occipital neurolysis though has immediate relief but also has high chances of recurrence,

Rhinogenic headaches: If hypertrophied turbinates or deviated nasal septum is identified as the cause of headaches then turbinectomy or septoplasty is done in the standard manner. The branches of the maxillary nerve through sphenopalatine ganglion mediate this type of headaches and botulinum toxin treatment is not effective in such patients.

**Neuromodulation for Migraine**

Neuromodulation is done when there is a failure of medical management, peripheral neurolysis is not feasible or has failed. The foremost option is occipital nerve stimulation (ONS). It is done by placing electrodes around cervical dorsal nerves in the suboccipital region and connecting them first to a trial stimulator, and if successful to a permanently implantable pulse generator. Other options of neuromodulation include sphenopalatine ganglion stimulation,

**Nerve Decompression**

The decompression of the nerves in trigger site areas (frontal, temporal, occipital) by removing the surrounding tissues including muscles and blood vessels can be useful in patients with medically refractory chronic migraines.