The etiology of arthritis varies with the type of arthritis. In osteoarthritis, the major contributory factors include advancing age, female sex, joint trauma, and obesity. Some genetic factors have been described such as mutations in genes encoding types II, IV, V, and VI collagens.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), on the other hand, is an autoimmune systemic inflammatory disorder. An interplay between several genetic factors (HLADRB1 and others) and environmental factors (smoking) leads to activation and dysfunction of the immune system leading to inflammation in RA.

In Gout, prolonged hyperuricemia leads to uric acid deposition in joints, which then leads to joint inflammation. There are several genetic mutations that can cause hyperuricemia, although this accounts for less than 10% of gout. The majority of patients with gout are under-excretors ie. they are not able to get rid of all the uric acid that is produced in them as a result of endogenous or exogenous purine metabolism. Male sex, advancing age, chronic kidney disease, alcoholism, and certain drugs such as the diuretics are additional risk factors for hyperuricemia and gout.

Septic arthritis is acute arthritis that is rare in the general population, but patients with pre-existing risk factors such as immunodeficiency, advancing age, diabetes mellitus, prosthetic joints, rheumatoid arthritis, and intravenous drug abuse are at a higher risk.

Arthritis can frequently be seen in patients with other autoimmune diseases and is one of the most common clinical features in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).