Insulin acts by directly binding to its receptors on the plasma membranes of the cells. These receptors are present on all the cells, but their density depends on the type of cells, with the maximum density being on the hepatic cells and adipocytes.

The insulin receptor is a heterotetrameric glycoprotein consisting of two subunits, the alpha and the beta subunits. The extracellular alpha subunits have insulin binding sites. The beta subunits, which are transmembranous, have tyrosine kinase activity.

Insulin causes the following effects in the cells

- Hepatic cells: Promotes glycogenesis, inhibits gluconeogenesis

- Adipocytes: Promotes lipogenesis, inhibits lipolysis

- Muscle cells: Promotes glycogenesis and protein synthesis. Inhibits protein catabolism

- Pancreatic beta cells: Inhibits glucagon release

- Brain cells: Involved in appetite regulation

Depending on the duration of action, insulin categorizes as short-acting, intermediate-acting, and long-acting.

Rapid-acting insulins (lispro and aspart) start their action in 5 to 15 minutes and peak in 30 minutes. The duration of action is 3 to 5 hours. They are generally used before meals and always used along with short-acting or long-acting insulins to control sugar levels throughout the day.

Short-acting (regular insulin) starts the action in 30 to 40 minutes and peaks in 90 to 120 minutes. The duration of action is 6 to 8 hours. Patients take these agents before meals, and food is necessary within 30 minutes after its administration to avoid hypoglycemia.

Intermediate-acting insulins (NPH) start the action in 1 to 4 hours and peak in 4 to 8 hours. Dosing is usually twice a day and helps maintain the blood sugar levels throughout the day.

Long-acting insulins, such as glargine and detemir, start action in 1 to 2 hours. They provide a plateau effect over 12 to 24 hours. Dosing is usually during the night time after meals. Their long duration of action helps in reducing the frequency of dosing throughout the day.