Initial triage is performed using the primary ATLS survey, ensuring that the airway is secured, breathing and ventilation are adequate, and there is proper cardiovascular support. After this initial assessment, the secondary survey focused on the spine will consist of a motor and sensory examination to determine the SCI level. The rectal exam for evaluation of tone, voluntary contraction, and sensation should never be overlooked. If the patient is critically ill and on mechanical ventilation, with associated head injuries such as traumatic brain injury (TBI), the rectal tone may be the only objective finding of the neurological physical exam in patients with SCI. The international standards for neurological classification of spinal cord injury, commonly referred to as the ASIA exam, was developed as a universal classification tool for SCI based on a standardized sensory and motor assessment.

American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) impairment scale:

- A - Complete: No motor or sensory function is preserved below the neurological level

- B - Incomplete: Sensory function preserved but no motor function is preserved below the neurological level including the S4–S5 segments

- C - Incomplete: Motor function is preserved at the most caudal sacral segments for voluntary anal contraction. The motor function below the neurological level is preserved with less than half of key muscles that have a muscle grade ≥ 3

- D - Incomplete: Motor function is preserved below the neurological level with at least half of key muscles that have a muscle grade ≥ 3

- E - Normal: Motor and sensory function are normal

In the setting of a traumatic event suffered by the patient, especially a high-energy mechanism, it is imperative that full spinal imaging is performed as soon as the primary survey is completed. This should be performed once the patient is stabilized from acute life-threatening injuries (shock, TBI). Delaying time to image acquisition in an SCI setting with a neurological deficit may be detrimental to the patient by potentially decreasing the maximal benefit of early surgery. Delayed diagnosis of a thoracolumbar fracture or injury can occur in up to 5% of patients. In the case of unstable thoracolumbar fractures, it can result in neurologic deficits and pain.

Therefore, it is important for clinicians, including emergency department clinicians, traumatologists, neurosurgeons, paramedics, and other associated healthcare professionals, to have a high degree of suspicion when evaluating the patient. Regardless of whether the patient has a spine fracture or injury, a high suspicion makes the use of spine immobilization and precautions mandatory, until a spine fracture is ruled out. There are no validated algorithms to direct decision-making in terms of which patients benefit from thoracolumbar imaging studies and which do not.

Imaging of the spine can include simple spine x-ray films, CT scans, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Spine x-ray films usually do not provide the amount of detail to characterize the type of fracture and are not routinely used.

CT scan will give an adequate assessment of bony structures, including the vertebral bodies, pedicles, laminae, facets, and transverse and spinous processes. In contrast, MRI will provide a better assessment of the ligamentous and the neural structures, including the spinal cord, cauda equina, conus medullaris, and spinal nerve roots. Therefore, in the case of a patient presenting with neurological deficits, MRI will most likely be performed for a complete management algorithm. Neurosurgery or orthopedic spine surgery services should be consulted as soon as images are obtained for proper evaluation and recommendations. If there is a documented neurological deficit on the physical exam of the patient and initial CT scan images are negative for fractures or dislocations, it is essential to perform an MRI. The MRI can identify bone marrow edema associated with an occult fracture, soft tissue changes, annular disruption, disruption of the posterior ligamentous complex, hemorrhage, herniated disk material, and the status of the spinal cord.

Although plain simple radiographs are not routinely used in the initial diagnosis and management of thoracolumbar junction fractures, they remain useful in the operating room, serving to aid with a proper assessment of the sagittal alignment, fracture level localization, and graft-construct positioning. They also serve as an inexpensive alternative on long-term surveillance for the development of deformity or pseudoarthrosis with considerably less radiation exposure per study than the CT scan.

Different classification schemes have been proposed by committees of clinicians and spine surgeons, and unfortunately, many early classification systems relied primarily on imaging findings alone. More modern and recent classification algorithms have been developed. The paradigm has shifted to include aspects of the neurological physical examination, such as deficits. The Spine Trauma Study Group developed a comprehensive classification system with prognostic significance that helps guide treatment decisions for operative versus nonoperative management of thoracolumbar junction fractures, called the thoracolumbar injury classification and severity (TLICS) scale.

Criteria involved in the classification system include the integrity of the posterior ligamentous complex, the injury mechanism or morphology of the fracture, and the presence of neurological injury.

Thoracolumbar injury classification system (TLICS):

- Injury mechanism/fracture morphology (as evidenced by radiographs or CT scan)

- 
              
- Compression: 1 point
              
              
- Burst: 2 points
              
              
- Translation/rotation: 3 points
              
              
- Distraction: 4 points

-  The integrity of the posterior ligamentous complex (as evidenced by MRI)

- 
              
- Intact: 0 points
              
              
- Suspected/indeterminate: 2 points
              
              
- Injured: 3 points

-  Neurological status (as per the physical exam)

- 
              
- Intact: 0 points
              
              
- Nerve root: 2 points
              
              
- Complete cord: 2 points
              
              
- Incomplete cord: 3 points
              
              
- Cauda equina: 3 points

Compression fractures are the most common injuries and are usually stable injuries with intact posterior elements. Burst fractures have the anterior column and the posterior column involved and typically have retropulsed bone into the canal. Flexion-distraction injuries usually are one or two-level hyperflexion injuries through the soft-tissue ligaments or the bony structures. These involve the anterior and posterior columns and the posterior ligaments, including the ligamentum flavum, and represent an unstable injury as the fracture typically extends through the ligament and the anterior and posterior columns. Fracture dislocations are unstable and should be stabilized at the earliest possible opportunity.