# Introduction

The corrugator (or corrugator supercilii) muscles are a pair of muscles located at the medial end of the eyebrow. They have recognition as significant muscles in the glabellar and central forehead regions. The corrugator supercilii muscles (CSM) play a major role in elevating the medial segment of the eyebrow, depressing the lateral portion of the eyebrow and are responsible for producing vertical frown lines.

# Structure and Function

The corrugator supercilii muscles exist as a pair of small pyramidal muscles that lie deep to the frontal portion of the occipitofrontalis and the orbicularis oculi muscles. They arise from the medial supraorbital ridge of the frontal bone.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The corrugator supercilii muscles receive blood supply from the supraorbital and supratrochlear arteries of the ophthalmic artery, which is a branch of the internal carotid artery.

On the right side of the body, the common carotid arteries originate from the brachiocephalic trunk, and on the left side of the body, they come from the aortic arch. In the neck, at the upper margin of the thyroid cartilage, each common carotid artery runs within the carotid sheath and bifurcates into the internal and external carotid arteries.

In the temporal bone, the internal carotid artery enters the skull through the carotid canal and divides into the ophthalmic artery, which travels through the orbit through the optic canal. Inside the orbit, the ophthalmic artery divides into many branches, including the supraorbital artery, supratrochlear artery, lacrimal artery, central retinal artery, ethmoidal arteries, ciliary arteries, and inferior and superior muscular arteries. The supraorbital and supratrochlear arteries of the ophthalmic artery supply the corrugator supercilii muscles. The supratrochlear artery, which first traverses underneath the frontalis and corrugator supercilii muscles, gradually appears more superficial. The supratrochlear neuromuscular bundle passes through the corrugator supercilii muscles and provides sensation and vascularity to the forehead.

# Nerves

The corrugator supercilii muscles have a dual nerve supply from branches of the temporal, zygomatic, and buccal branches of the facial nerve. The motor nerve supply of the corrugator supercilii muscles originates from the frontal branch of the temporal division of the facial nerve while the zygomatic branch appears to innervate the oblique head. After receiving innervation from the zygomatic branch, the buccal branch forms the angular nerve to supply the corrugator supercilii muscles and procerus.

The supratrochlear nerve (STN) and supraorbital nerve (SON), which are some terminal branches of the frontal nerve, are also closely associated with the corrugator supercilii muscles. After traveling over the orbit anteromedially, the supratrochlear nerve and supraorbital nerve pass through the corrugator supercilii muscles and enter the occipitofrontalis muscle to receive sensation from the mucosa of the glabella, skin of the lower forehead, and upper portion of the eyelid. The supratrochlear nerve also exits lateral to the origin of the corrugator supercilii muscles, enters the corrugator supercilii muscles where it splits into three or four small branches, and then penetrates the frontalis muscle.

# Muscles

The corrugator supercilii muscles consist of two heads. The transverse head arises from the superomedial margin of the orbital rim and inserts into the dermis at the middle third of the brow and interdigitates with the orbicularis oculi and frontalis muscles. The smaller oblique head runs parallel to the depressor supercilii after inserting into the medial brow.

The corrugator supercilii muscles work with other muscles of the glabellar complex, including the procerus, depressor supercilii, and the orbicularis oculi muscles, to maintain a balanced brow position and shape.

# Physiologic Variants

The lateral margin of the corrugator supercilii muscles may differ among different individuals. In some cases, it may extend to the lateral third of the brow.

According to a review of the anatomy of the corrugator supercilii muscles, among the 30 articles included in the analysis, the corrugator supercilii muscles was found to arise mainly from the medial supraorbital rim and the medial frontal bone.

# Surgical Considerations

Complete comprehension of the anatomy of the corrugator supercilii muscles and its associated nerves and blood supply is essential for corrugator supercilii muscles resections during forehead rejuvenation and supraorbital nerve/supratrochlear nerve decompression in migraine headache treatment. With regards to forehead rejuvenation, cosmetic physicians may inject neurotoxins into the glabellar complex to maintain an aesthetically pleasing brow position and shape. Precise toxin injection is vital for retaining an aesthetically pleasing brow appearance. When treating the corrugator supercilii muscles near the origin, an injection with greater depth is necessary to grasp the depressor supercilii and the corrugator supercilii muscles fully. When treating the corrugator supercilii muscles more laterally, however, the injection should be more superficial because the corrugator supercilii muscles are at a more superficial surface. The glabellar complex needs 15 to 20 units of onabotulinum or incobotulinum or 38 to 50 units of abobotulinum at the procerus, which requires one location for injection, and the corrugator supercilii muscles, which require two locations for injection.

Details regarding the physiological variations of the corrugator supercilii muscles also deserve consideration to reduce the risk of undesirable postoperative outcomes, such as forehead irregularities, asymmetries, and unequal muscle reactivation. Further, discrepancies in the location of the corrugator supercilii muscles and supratrochlear nerve among patients from different cultural groups require investigation as previous studies have demonstrated the positions of the corrugator supercilii muscles, and supratrochlear nerve between people of White race and Asians are different.

# Clinical Significance

As a significant component of the glabellar complex, the corrugator supercilii muscles play an essential role in maintaining the position of the brow. Complete resection of the corrugator supercilii muscles has been a recommendation for forehead rejuvenation. Incomplete corrugator supercilii muscle resection can have harmful consequences, such as forehead asymmetries, skin dimpling, and recurrence of glabellar furrows and frown lines. One previous study suggested the amount of corrugator supercilii muscles resection can differ depending on the surgical technique used, with as much as one-third of the transverse corrugator supercilii muscles head remaining after the corrugator supercilii muscles are removed using transpalpebral methods.

Complete resection of the corrugator supercilii muscles has also been a recommended approach for the treatment of migraine headaches. There have been suggestions that migraine headaches are associated with peripheral nerve trigger points and the supraorbital nerve/supratrochlear nerve.

Patients with thyroid eye disease with upper eyelid retraction often have overactivity of the accessory muscles that play a role in eyelid closure and the glabellar muscles. They may have a staring facial expression with proptosis, upper lid retraction, and a glabellar frown.

Among patients with abnormal Parkinson disease, the “procerus sign” is a clinical sign that is often observed, particularly in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). PSP may suffer misdiagnosis as the more well-known Parkinson disease. The procerus sign involves having vertical wrinkles on the forehead and a staring, astonished look with eyelid retraction and infrequent blinking.