Initial laboratory testing may reveal a systemic inflammatory response to the presence of a biloma. Blood tests may demonstrate raised inflammatory markers such as leucocytosis, neutrophilia, and raised C-reactive protein (CRP). However, many patients with bilomas have no abnormalities in laboratory tests. Vazquez et al. demonstrated normal blood results in 40% of 21 patients presenting with bilomas.

Liver function tests may be deranged in cases with bile duct compression. In cases of infected biloma, blood cultures may reveal gram-negative bacteremia. Wurstle et al. showed positive blood cultures in 93% of 32 bilomas following iatrogenic injury to the biliary tree. The most common organisms found in a laboratory culture of biloma fluid were Enterobacteriaceae, followed by Enterococcus species. They demonstrated multi-drug resistant bacteria in 25% of biloma cultures.

The variable and often subtle presentation of bilomas make radiological investigation the mainstay of diagnosis. US, CT, MR imaging, and HIDA are the main radiological modalities used when investigating bilomas. US imaging of the abdomen is often the first investigation due to the frequency of presentation with right upper quadrant discomfort. US imaging can frequently identify a cystic lesion. It can also demonstrate debris or blood clots within the biloma. The US may reveal a wide range of findings from well-circumscribed collections in the liver parenchyma to large loculated fluid collections throughout the abdomen. Heavily loculated bilomas seen on US imaging have been associated with an infection. Although US imaging is effective for identifying a cystic mass, further imaging is usually required to make a diagnosis.

CT imaging typically shows bilomas as a well-circumscribed collection with clear margins. However, a well-defined capsule is not always present.

MR imaging, alongside MRCP in some cases, can further define the characteristics of a biloma. Biloma typically produces a low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images. While contrast rarely permeates into the biloma, rim-enhancement is sometimes present due to reactive inflammation. Enhancing septations are often observed in superimposed infection. MRCP, particularly thin slab sequences, may demonstrate the source of a biliary leak.

Hepatobiliary cholescintigraphy is an extremely effective non-invasive imaging modality when diagnosing and planning treatment for bilomas. Cholescintigraphy utilizes a radiotracer called Tc-99m iminodiacetic acid and therefore is known as hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) imaging. HIDA is very sensitive when looking for a bile leak. However, it does not provide detailed imaging of the surrounding anatomy. Single positron emission computed tomography (SPECT) can provide more detailed imaging of the location of possible leaks and can be more useful when planning percutaneous image-guided drains. Invasive imaging techniques such as ERCP and Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram (PTC) can provide further guidance on endoscopic, percutaneous, or surgical management.

US or CT-guided sampling of the biloma, followed by laboratory analysis, is sometimes required to confirm the diagnosis when prior imaging and clinical findings are not conclusive.