# Introduction

Lewy bodies (LB) are protein inclusions containing disaggregated oligomers of many cellular proteins. The German neurologist named Friederich Lewy

The disaggregation of alpha-synuclein, Ub, and LN are a pathognomonic neuropathological finding on autopsy in patients with PD, and DLB, found in many regions within the central nervous system including the cerebral cortex, limbic cortex, substantia nigra, hippocampus. Structurally, they are single, multiple, or polymorphic. It characterizes them into two major groups: classical or cortical LB. The classifications are based on morphology, cellular components, and location within the brain. Although Lewy Bodies are implicated in many of these disorders, it is debatable whether they are a consequence of cellular damage and dysfunction within the neuro integrity or a cause itself of the clinicopathological symptoms seen in patients. This article briefly covers the different anatomical, clinical and biochemical pathologies involved with Lewy body formation. The goal is not to provide an exhaustive description of LBs, rather a snapshot that can be useful for the everyday clinician interested in the topic.

# Anatomical Pathology

Based on a semi-quantitative assessment of LBs in a large autopsy series, the Braak staging was proposed in 2003

# Clinical Pathology

Some scholars and scientists are skeptical that the Braak staging system can accurately correlate neuroanatomical LB density/dissemination with predictable clinical symptoms. The staging is based on retrospective clinical pathologic studies in younger-onset PD patients with about 6% to 40% of the cases not following the proposed caudo-rostral progression pattern of pathology.

Beach and colleagues (2009)

The above-mentioned complexity is exemplified in patients with incidental Lewy body disease (ILBD), or LBs found in autopsy with no documented clinical parkinsonism.

# Biochemical and Genetic Pathology

The biochemical pathways involved in the formation of LB, specifically alpha-synuclein, are associated with protein misaggregation and impaired protein cleavage.

Classical and cortical LBs share immunochemical and biochemical characteristics. The major biochemical components include a-Syn, ubiquitin (Ub), and phosphorylated Ub associated with multiple other substances, including structural fibrillary elements, a-Syn-binding proteins, proteins implicated in the Ub-proteasome system, synphilin-1, aggresome- and mitochondria-related proteins, and cytoskeletal, cytosolic, and cellular response proteins, among others.

LBs have a distinct central Parkin-positive and Ub-positive domain with a-Syn in the periphery. Aggregation of a-Syn, synphilin and Parkin within LBs suggests that parkin plays a role in ubiquitination and modification of a-Syn. Tyrosine hydrolase (TH) and choline-acetyl transferase (ChAT) are co-localized in cortical LBs; brainstem LBs have TH and ChAT immunoreactivity in the core, surrounded by a peripheral rim of a-Syn, suggesting that they may disrupt cholinergic and catecholaminergic transmitter production.

In summary, the Ub-proteasome system and the autophagy pathway help our brain clear toxic forms of misaggregated proteins, including helping with a-Syn turnover. Dysfunctional proteolytic pathways may result in the accumulation of toxic forms of a-Syn. Ubiquitinated proteins in LBs may be a manifestation of attempts by the cellular machinery to eliminate damaged cellular components and delay the onset of neuronal degeneration. Some evidence showing this is the high incidence of mitochondrial DNA deletion in LB-positive neurons in PD brain compared to LB-negative neurons and controls, suggesting increased mitochondrial damage in LB-positive neurons.

# Morphology

The classical LB are spherical hyaline eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions (8 to 30 micrometer-diameter) comprising concentric lamellar bands surrounded by a pale-stained halo of 10 nm of wide radiating fibrils. Cortical LBs are difficult to find under the microscope, chemically eosinophilic, rounded, angular, without a halo. Additionally, cortical LBs are disorganized, granulofibrillary structures composed of 10- to 27-nm wide filaments, without a central core. They concentrate in lower cortical layers, with recorded accumulation in the hippocampus, insular cortex, amygdala, and sometimes cingulate gyrus. Similar lesions, rounded areas of granular, pale-staining eosinophilic material displacing neuromelanin (NM) in brainstem neurons are precursors of LBs.  As described, the alpha-synuclein is the best marker to detect LBs. Antibodies that recognize N-terminal epitopes (synucleins 505, 506, and 514) selectively detect a-Syn.

# Mechanisms

The etiology and pathogenesis of synucleinopathies are complex with proposed interactions between gene transcription and expression and environmental insults that lead to cellular dysfunction in vulnerable neurons in the central nervous system. Dysfunctional regulation, processing, cleavage, and degradation of abnormal cytoskeletal and endovesical (Golgi and endovascular reticulum) proteins within the cells are thought to interfere with mitochondrial dynamics, membrane integrity, proteosome, and lysosomal pathways. Genetic susceptibility may determine susceptibility, for example, free radicals generated through disruption of complex I activity, increasing the nuclear or mitochondrial genomic deficit. Environmental interactions factors such as the metabolism of exogenous drugs can generate endogenous neurotoxins that can also trigger the generation of reactive oxygen species that disrupt calcium homeostasis and trigger cell death.  Neuronal pathways are susceptible to oxidative processes, and therefore, become a prime target to these insults. Specifically, reactive oxygen species can trigger excitotoxicity by increasing glutamate in the synapses, triggering neuroinflammatory microglial processes, and most likely, a combination of all these complex processes. Interestingly, Lewy bodies are like other aggregated proteins such as neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) in AD and/or Pick bodies in terms of being present as markers of neurodegenerative processes. What exact analogous mechanism they have in common to disturb cellular activity is complex and is currently under investigation.

# Clinicopathologic Correlations

This section focuses on describing the clinical symptoms and pathophysiological findings that distinguish DLB with PD dementia, as those are the most common diseases associated with Lewy body deposition. The section also notes promising biomarkers for the early diagnosis of DLB or PD. DLB is the second most common type of progressive dementia after Alzheimer disease dementia. DLB predominantly shows greater cognitive, psychiatric, and autonomic deficits than PD, which includes severe and rapid fluctuations in verbal memory, frontal executive function deficits, attention, spontaneous visual hallucinations, delusions, orthostatic hypotension, prominent falls/gait disturbances, and more rapidly progressive cognitive decline compared to motor symptoms. Similarities with PD include the development of motor symptoms including rigidity, akinesia, mood disturbances, REM sleep behavior disorder, language, and visuospatial and constructive deficits, and cognitive impairment (develops later in PD patients). Resting tremors are more common with Parkinson disease than DLB. The typical rigidity, tremors, akinesia, and postural instability precede the cognitive deficits in PD dementia.

PET and postmortem studies have revealed more pronounced cortical atrophy, elevated cortical and limbic Lewy body pathologies, higher Abeta and tau loads in cortex and striatum in DLB compared to PD dementia. Specifically, gray matter cortical atrophy more frequent and more severe in DLB. White matter hyperintensities in the temporal lobe are more severe and more frequent in DLB. There is also a difference in functional connectivity and corticostriatal disruption with PD dementia being characterized by frontal cortical disruption and DLB with more parietal and occipital disruption. Additionally, amyloid and tau signal seems to be more prevalent in DLB on PET imaging and CSF profiles. Functional differences in advanced nuclear imaging are seen in DLB compared to PD dementia with decreased DAT binding in the caudate related to functional impairment. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) alpha-synuclein oligomers are increased in PD dementia in comparison to DLB. Overall, PET studies have failed to show any differences in cortical and striatal cholinergic and dopaminergic deficits.

Clinical management of both DLB and PD dementia includes cholinesterase inhibitors like rivastigmine. Atypical antipsychotic agents like quetiapine may improve psychosis in PDD/DLB, but the evidence for this is poor and adverse effects from such therapy are common and may be severe. Non-pharmacological interventions can also be effective but require further study. Currently, no disease-modifying therapies are available, although current efforts are on the way to find diagnostic markers that could identify these diseases sooner in hopes to start treatment sooner and prolong the disease progression. Many biomarkers including CSF oligomeric A-syn, DJ-1, lysosomal enzymes (e.g., glucocerebrosidase) show promise as a diagnostic biomarker of PD, but require the standardization of available assay, homogenous protocols, and surpass other methodological challenges to reach a large scale validation that can be reliable for clinical use.

# Clinical Significance

Although Lewy body pathologies are intriguing and may provide a clue of the pathophysiology of DLB, PD dementia, and other related neurodegenerative disorders, it is discovered on autopsy and therefore not useful for routine clinical diagnosis. DLB and PD are important dementia syndromes that overlap in many clinical features, genetics, neuropathology, and management. They are considered subtypes of an alpha-synuclein-associated disease spectrum (Lewy body diseases), from the incidental Lewy body disease and non-demented Parkinson disease to PDD, DLB, and DLB with Alzheimer disease at the most severe end. The clinical symptoms in relation to the different cognitive, psychiatric, and motor domains should be sufficient for the diagnosis. A rigorous history and physical exam, with ancillary testing including imaging and nuclear studies that like DAT, CSF profiles, and tau and amyloid pathology can be useful for diagnostic purposes but does not change medical management of these disorders. The interesting phenomenon of various biochemical markers that accumulate in DLB and PD dementia including alpha-synuclein, ubiquitin, tau, and amyloid provides evidence of the multi-factorial and complex processes that become dysfunctional in chronic and progressive neurodegenerative disease such as DLB and PD dementia. The pathophysiological threshold to develop clinical symptoms when these cellular and biochemical processes are disrupted is elusive. Although this anatomical neuropathological classification above mentioned is useful, it does not entirely predict the diagnosis, progression, and prognosis in all the synucleopathies. Further research is needed to develop relevant biomarkers and therapeutic targets that can delay the progression of diseases such as DLB and PD.