# Continuing Education Activity

Motivational interviewing (MI) is a process where medical professionals work together with their patients for a certain therapeutic outcome. A variety of skills and tools are utilized based on the stage of change the patient is at, working with the individual's internal motivations for behavioral change. Its ultimate goal is to solve a healthcare-related problem through patient introspection and empowerment. It combines technical aspects, such as open-ended questions and empathy, with a view toward a patient-centered approach. This activity discusses the different skills required for the successful utilization of MI on patient behavior as well as the current theories discussing how MI works to enact change.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the origins of motivational interviewing.
- Identify skills required for optimal motivational interviewing.
- Describe the theories behind how motivational interviewing works on behavioral change.
- Explain how motivational interviewing between the healthcare team enhances patient outcomes.

# Introduction

Motivational Interviewing (MI) is a conversational style that facilitates collaboration between the healthcare provider and their patients. Its ultimate goal is to solve a healthcare-related problem through patient introspection and empowerment. It combines technical aspects, such as open-ended questions and empathy, with a view toward a patient-centered approach.

Since the original description of MI in 1983 by William Miller, in the context of alcoholism, providers have expanded its use to a multitude of other mental and physical health conditions.

# Function

Motivational Interviewing (MI) utilizes the patient's intrinsic motivations for a positive change in their health status. MI combines social and cognitive psychology to determine a patient's level of readiness to change and to work through their ambivalence to enact behavioral modifications.

The overall process behind MI is more important than the discussion between providers and patients.

Patient ambivalence can be displayed in various ways, from disinterest to reluctance to hostility, when attempting to engage them in positive behavioral modification. A tenant of MI is recognizing that patients have autonomy in making their own decisions and understanding the underlying reasons for their actions. Providers should engage their patients in discussion to learn the underlying reasons for their ambivalence and to reinforce self-motivational statements.

An effective way to determine what stage a patient is at when attempting to make behavioral changes is to utilize the transtheoretical model (TTM). While the two models were developed independently of each other, MI and TTM work synergistically to determine what stage the patient is at when discussing change and to utilize the appropriate tools and skills to help the patient to the next stage.

**Precontemplation:**The patient is not interested in changing their behavior and may have subjective justification as to why they shouldn't change

**Contemplation:**The patient is considering change but may still cling to fears and reluctancy to start

**Preparation:**The patient is actively preparing to change their behavior, potentially by considering tools and strategies to utilize, though it may require assistance with planning

**Action:**The patient is working through their plan and using their tools to ensure success

**Maintenance:**The patient has changed their behavior and is working to maintain the changes and not slip back into previous behaviors.

# Issues of Concern

Despite MI's existence and extensive use over the past 40 years, researchers do not fully understand how it works to illicit changes in behavior. MI was developed using clinical experience and intuition in a bottom-up approach rather than top-down from the framework created by theory.

There are three predominant hypotheses regarding how MI creates behavioral changes; the Technical Hypothesis, the Relational Hypothesis, and the conflict resolution hypothesis.

The technical hypothesis is the most widely researched of the hypotheses. It predicts that the healthcare professional's proficiency in the technical skills of MI shapes the patient's behavior and allows them to talk themselves into behavioral changes.

The provider utilizes reinforcement and evocation to lead the patient towards change talk and to decrease sustain talk. Some studies estimate a 62 to 83% increased probability that the provider's questions will elicit change talk in their patients.

The Relational hypothesis predicts that the relationship between the healthcare provider and the patient will lead to positive behavioral changes as they collaborate and focus on the problem. Empathy and patient-centeredness are the key skills associated with this hypothesis and allow the provider to ensure the patient retains their autonomy in making their own healthcare decisions.

There has been significantly less research performed on this hypothesis than the technical one, likely due to the greater variability in how a provider displays empathy and the non-specific nature of the content. Additionally, early studies on the effects of relational factors on outcomes have been mixed.

The conflict resolution hypothesis prioritizes exploring and resolving patient ambivalence to change.

At least one study has been performed regarding addressing patient ambivalence and commitment to change in drinking habits. It concluded that focusing on ambivalence did not consistently predict positive outcomes, especially in those individuals who were at lower stages of change and did not resolve their internal conflicts regarding that change. Additionally, a focus on commitment to change did indicate positive results.

# Clinical Significance

MI utilizes several techniques and skills to encourage patients to discontinue harmful behaviors and transition to behaviors that improve their health. The spirit of MI is essential regardless of whether the patient is pre-contemplative or maintaining change. It is important always to implement a sense of partnership and empathy between the provider and patient. When providers offer open-ended questions regarding patient motivations, it creates a sense of compassion and interest, allowing patients to open up. It was discovered early on in MI that simply giving patients the facts and information on why change is beneficial, or warnings against their current behaviors tended to have the opposite response and caused more resistance.

Researchers determined that MI is appropriately utilized when at least 70% of questions are open-ended. Additionally, providers should practice active listening and reflection regarding their patients. Repeating the patient's words in a neutral way is the most straightforward strategy a healthcare professional can utilize to allow the patient to feel heard and can be expanded upon to allow patients to reflect on other perspectives as well as their own inconsistencies. Evocative open-ended questions help orient patients to a goal-oriented mindset and enable them to talk themselves into change.

Asking the patients their personal pros and cons to utilizing the intervention, as well as how important they think the intervention is, helps the provider to understand their internal values. Providers can then gently challenge these views by exploring the extremes if they do or do not utilize the behavioral change. Reflection can also assist the provider in shifting the focus away from barriers and reframing negative interpretations to positive ones. Throughout the process, it is important to emphasize that every patient has a personal choice and to listen to their wishes.

It is then possible to use the Elicit-Share-Elicit strategy to learn what information they obtained from the discussion, share pertinent facts, and reassess their knowledge and how they will utilize it.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Motivational interviewing is a skill that can benefit all members of the interprofessional healthcare team. Despite medical providers taking the bulk of interactions with patients, the MI spirit and skills can be utilized by everyone in the medical field to assist in tackling harmful patient behaviors. Nurses trained in MI techniques can utilize their skills to educate patients on their disease and work towards positive goals.

Pharmacists can tackle medication hesitance and non-compliance by investigating underlying reasons for these behaviors using MI skills. Even technicians and front desk staff, who tend to have the least amount of time to interact with patients, can utilize empathy and other aspects of the MI spirit to make the patient feel welcomed and able to open up while in the clinic.

By training everyone in the medical field in MI techniques, every individual can positively affect patients. Education in MI can be established during training programs for health professionals. Studies indicate that a 3-day seminar is sufficient in teaching MI skills and spirit to allied health professionals, giving them the confidence to utilize their skills effectively.