**Definitive Testing for VTE**

Individuals that have a low pretest probability for VTE may be ruled out using a high sensitivity D-dimer assay.

Pulmonary angiography has traditionally been the gold standard for the diagnosis of PE; however, due to its invasive nature, it is no longer used on a routine basis. An elevated D-dimer, in suspected cases of PE, needs to be followed by a ventilation-perfusion (VQ) scan or a computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) to confirm the diagnosis of PE. Individuals with a moderate or high Modified Well’s score should be evaluated directly using CTPA or a VQ scan if a CTPA is contraindicated.

In high pretest probability for DVT or an elevated D-dimer in cases suspected of having DVT, proximal or whole-leg ultrasonography should be used to confirm the diagnosis. Serial ultrasonography is an option if the initial ultrasonogram is negative and suspicion for DVT remains high.

It is important to note that high sensitivity D-dimer assay is a marker of fibrinolysis and can appear elevated in pneumonia, cancer, sepsis, and recent surgery. It can also be elevated in patients with poor renal function and varies considerably with advanced age as well. An age-adjusted D-dimer cutoff value can be useful in patients with advanced age.

The American College of Radiology considers CTPA as the standard of care for the detection of PE. The advantage of this imaging modality, in addition to the diagnosis of the disease, is that it provides important additional information. The spiral (helical) CT scan may suggest an alternative diagnosis if present; this is an advantage when compared to pulmonary angiography or scintigraphy.

**The PERC Rule**

This rule was established to avoid excessive testing and to avoid the high frequency of false-positive readings in low-risk patients. Kline et al. developed this clinical tool in 2004 which identified the presence of age below 50 years, pulse less than 100 beats per minute, arterial oxygen saturation (SpO2) greater than 94 %, no unilateral leg swelling, no hemoptysis, no recent trauma or surgery, no prior PE or deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and no exogenous estrogen use as low-risk factors for VTE, specifically PE. If a patient fulfills all these criteria, he is considered PERC-negative and is at low risk for PE. In this individual positive D-Dimer is likely to be a false-positive and should be avoided. Kline et al. reported that the prevalence of PE in these cases was 1.4%. Two meta-analyses confirmed the benefits and safety of the PERC rule, with less than 1 % PE in PERC-negative patients after one year of follow up.

**Additional Studies**

The use of other laboratory tests (such as arterial blood gas, troponin level, and serum brain-natriuretic peptide) or diagnostic studies (such as chest X-ray or electrocardiogram) is of low yield for the general population.

Arterial blood gas (ABG) may reveal hypoxemia, hypocapnia, and respiratory alkalosis, which has poor positive predictive value for the diagnosis of PE. In high-risk settings, however, such as a patient with post-operative respiratory distress, in whom other causes of dyspnea have been ruled out (such as infection and pulmonary edema), the low partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) may have significant predictive value for PE. In the general population, the ABG derived hypoxemia has little predictive value for PE because other conditions are more likely to lower PaO2 in these cases than PE.

Serum troponin levels may be elevated in patients with a moderate to large PE due to acute right ventricular myocardial stretch. However, troponin levels do not have a role in the diagnosis of PE and are not a recommended part of a routine diagnostic workup. In patients with established PE, however, elevated serum troponin levels may be associated with higher mortality.

Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level is neither sensitive nor specific for PE. However, an elevated level of BNP correlates with an increased risk of subsequent complications and increased mortality in patients with acute PE.

There is no specific role for electrocardiogram (ECG) in the evaluation of a patient with VTE/PE. The clinical utility of ECG lies in rule out acute myocardial infarction in a patient who presents with chest pain, dyspnea, and perhaps other signs of PE. The ECG in most PE cases is normal except for the presence of tachycardia and non-specific ST-T wave abnormalities. The classical findings of S1 Q3 T3 have poor specificity for PE. If significant right heart strain is present with acute cor pulmonale, the ECG may reveal tall, peaked P waves in lead II, a rightward axis deviation; right bundle-branch block; and an S1 Q3 T3 pattern; or atrial fibrillation.

Echocardiography is indicated in cases of massive PE to evaluate for signs of right-heart strain. It allows visualization and dynamic evaluation of the right ventricle and aid in the assessment of pulmonary arterial pressures. Echocardiography in these cases provides a prognostic assessment, as increased mortality is associated with the presence of right ventricular dysfunction on echocardiography in these cases. Findings of right heart strain on echocardiography include right ventricular enlargement, right ventricular hypokinesis, leftward septal shift, and evidence of pulmonary hypertension. If the right ventricular dysfunction appears on echocardiography, the diagnosis of acute submassive or massive pulmonary embolism is confirmed. Although it may also provide useful information in the identification of alternative diagnoses, it is not a recommended part of a routine workup for PE.

The American College of Radiology recommends chest radiography as a study for ruling out other causes of chest pain in patients with suspected pulmonary embolism. Chest radiographs, although abnormal in most cases, provide little diagnostic information for the disease. The classic findings of a wedge-shaped pulmonary infarct seen as a pleura-based triangular opacity pointing towards the hilus (also known as the Hampton hump) or decreased pulmonary vascularity (also known as the Westermark sign) seldom present.