The surgical approach to ductal carcinoma in situ is broadly categorized into two categories: 1) breast conservation and 2) mastectomy. In this section, we will discuss the surgical approach to both.

**Breast Conservation**

For breast conservation, the first step is pre-surgical localization of the lesion as many of these lesions are non-palpable and only seen on imaging. This can be done by wire localization immediately pre-procedure or wireless radioactive seed, which can be placed in the days prior to surgery. Both have comparable outcomes when it comes to localizing the lesion with negative margins.

Surgical planning should also involve reviewing pre-operative imaging to plan the depth and location of mass to make the appropriate incision and resection, taking into account safety, efficiency, and cosmesis.

The lesion should be excised without entering into the specimen or damaging it with excessive electrocautery or other undue force. A thin buffer of normal breast tissue should be left with the specimen to ensure a 2 mm negative margin on final pathology. Once removed, the specimen should be tagged and oriented in three-dimensional space using ink or marking suture. Intraoperative X-ray imaging should be performed of the specimen to confirm an intact wire, microclip, seed, and lesion (if the latter is visible on X-ray). After radiologic confirmation of satisfactory biopsy, the area of tissue resection should be inspected and palpated to ensure no other area of concerning tissue warrants resection. Data support a lower risk of positive margins, reoperation, and mastectomy when the surgeon takes additional margins during the index operation in the setting of suspected residual abnormal tissue.

Post-operatively, the patient will need to undergo radiation therapy. Before initiating radiation therapy, the patient will need pathologic and radiologic confirmation of negative margins from surgery, or a re-operation for additional tissue excision will need to take place. This requires negative margins of 2 mm.

After completing radiation therapy, the patient may consider referral to a plastic or breast oncologic surgeon for oncoplastic reconstruction options.

**Mastectomy**

For mastectomy, there is no pre-procedural need to localize the lesion. However, sentinel lymph node biopsy is recommended along with mastectomy due to the inability to perform sentinel lymph node biopsy after mastectomy should the lesion be upgraded on final pathology to invasive breast cancer. Surgical planning should consider post-mastectomy plans for reconstruction and cosmesis, particularly in terms of planning a skin-sparing mastectomy, a nipple-sparing mastectomy, the incision choice, and the possible placement of tissue expanders. Therefore, after surgical planning, the first pre-operative step is sentinel lymph node mapping with a radioisotope and/or blue dye (methylene blue, lymphazurin, etc.).

Simple mastectomy dissection should be made superiorly to the clavicle, medially to the sternum, inferiorly to the anterior rectus sheath, laterally to the latissimus dorsi, and posteriorly to the pectoralis muscle, making sure to include the pectoralis fascia in the specimen.

Ipsilateral sentinel lymph node biopsy should then be performed, ideally utilizing the same incision. Again, hemostasis should be obtained. A drain or two should be placed within the mastectomy site. Post-operatively, drains are removed once drain output is less than around 30mL in a 24 hour period.

Post-operatively, once the patient has healed from mastectomy and pathology results have been reviewed, the patient may plan for breast reconstruction surgery.

Although imaging of the removed breast is not needed for surveillance, the contralateral breast should undergo yearly mammograms. Biannual bilateral breast and lymph node exams are indicated for two years, and then annually thereafter.