Intestinal pseudo-obstruction is a disorder with unclear etiology and non-specific signs and symptoms, including abdominal distension, nausea, and vomiting. As this condition typically arises in patients who are critically ill or have had previous surgery, there may be a need for gastroenterologist or surgeon to be on the case. If abdominal imaging is obtained, the case should be discussed with a radiologist if bowel diameter or obstruction is not assessed. If patients fail to progress with supportive care, neostigmine may be used. The administration of neostigmine requires continuous cardiac telemetry, which may require admission to an intensive care unit or cardiac care unit.

Nurses play an important role in actively monitoring the vitals, specifically assessing for bradycardia. In these scenarios, specific instructions need to be relayed for atropine administration. The pharmacist can ensure that proper dosage is provided as well as ensure that there are no drug-drug interactions.  If neostigmine is unsuccessful, endoscopic decompression can be attempted by a gastroenterologist, general surgeon, or colorectal surgeon. If endoscopic decompression is still unsuccessful, then surgery is indicated either for colectomy or cecostomy. In specific situations for high-risk surgeries or those unfit for surgery, interventional radiology may be consulted for a percutaneous cecostomy.

The above practice guideline is consistent with the Clinical Practice Guideline from the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons and the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. [Level 2]