The plate culture technique is traditionally regarded as the gold standard for the detection of Acanthamoeba, though new developments support an increasing role of polymerase chain reaction (PCR), in vivo confocal microscopy (IVCM), and staining. Corneal scraping or biopsy is required to obtain a sample for culture. As Acanthamoeba trophozoites feed on bacteria, cultures will develop on 1.5% non-nutrient agar plates covered by E. Coli.Acanthamoeba in the setting of acanthamoeba keratitis is generally low, reported anywhere from 40 to 70%.

PCR has demonstrated significant improvement in the detection of Acanthamoeba over the past decade. The 18s rRNA region is most commonly employed to detect Acanthamoeba in clinical samples. Newer primer sets have demonstrated sensitivity and specificity of 100% and 96%, respectively.

Some authors recommend that clinicians retrieve patients’ most recent pair of contacts and lens case for culture and/or PCR.Acanthamoeba on PCR. The absence of Acanthamoeba on a culture of a contact lens case is highly suggestive of a diagnosis other than AK.

IVCM is also an extremely useful tool that allows for the non-invasive examination of individuals cells of the cornea in real-time. IVCM will only reliably detect cysts, which will appear as well-defined, round, double-walled, hyper-reflective bodies. The pooled sensitivity and specificity of IVCM in one study were found to be 85.3% and 100%, respectively. IVCM may also be used to monitor disease progression and response to treatment.

Cytology smears is a viable method to detect Acanthamoeba cysts on corneal scrapings or biopsied tissue. Cytology smears have the advantage of being fast, easily performed, and readily available in most facilities. Cytology smears additionally do not require live organisms as with culture or intact DNA as required for PCR.

Many newer diagnostic procedures have employed in diagnosing AK. Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) has been demonstrated to have a high sensitivity and specificity comparable to PCR for the diagnosis of AK. In contrast to PCR, the target sequence during LAMP is amplified at a constant temperature of 60 to 65 degrees Celsius, thereby eliminating the need for an expensive thermal cycler. Given its simplicity and low cost, LAMP could serve as an alternative to PCR for future diagnosis of AK.