# Introduction

Very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL), along with chylomicrons, low-density lipoproteins (LDL), intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDL), and high-density lipoproteins (HDL) are the five major types of lipoproteins. These lipoproteins are responsible for transporting hydrophobic lipids such as phospholipids, triglycerides, and cholesterol in the plasma and extracellular fluids. Lipids, proteins, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids are the main components of cellular life. Lipids are vital for synthesizing cell membranes, energy storage, intracellular messaging, and transporting other essential organic substances such as vitamins. Lipoproteins allow for the transport of hydrophobic lipids in the hydrophilic environment of the body’s systemic circulation.

The synthesis and secretion of VLDL into circulation by the liver is a highly complex and regulated process that plays a fundamental role in the overall homeostasis of lipids in the body. Recent evidence has shown that the enhanced production and secretion of VLDL or alterations in its regulatory system directly contribute to the development of multi-organ diseases such as atherosclerosis.

# Fundamentals

The composition of VLDL consists of approximately 90% lipids and 10% proteins. This proportion gives VLDL a very low density of 0.96 to 1.006 g/ml, hence its name. Of its total lipid component, triglycerides take up to 70% of VLDL’s mass, with cholesterol esters and fatty acids making up the rest.

# Molecular Level

The lipid transport pathway starts in the small intestine when the dietary lipids (mainly triglycerides) are packaged into chylomicrons utilizing Apo B-48 as its backbone structure. Chylomicrons are then secreted into the lymphatic system to later travel throughout the systemic circulation. As they travel throughout the body, chylomicrons obtain Apo C-II and Apo-E from circulating HDL. The recently acquired Apo C-II acts as an activating cofactor for lipoprotein lipase (LPL), which hydrolyzes the triglycerides found in the chylomicrons’ core and allows it to release free fatty acids to the peripheral tissues. As chylomicrons lose their triglycerides by the action of peripheral LPL, they transform into chylomicron remnants. These remnants use their Apo-E as high-affinity ligands to bind to hepatic receptors and internalize into the liver

In the hepatocytes, triglycerides and cholesterol esters are transferred to Apo B-100 by the action of the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTTP). This lipidated Apo B-100 is now called nascent VLDL and is secreted to the circulation.

The Apo C-II in mature VLDL activates LPL in the capillary endothelium of tissues to cleave their stored triglycerides into one monoglyceride and two free fatty acids, releasing them from the VLDL and allowing them to be delivered to the tissues to be used for storage or energy production.

The alteration or deficiency of the enzymes involved in this complex metabolic process may lead to lipid disorders known as hyperlipoproteinemia. Depending on the pathophysiology and clinical presentation, these diseases are divided into five subtypes. Type I hyperlipoproteinemia (familial hyperchylomicronemia) is caused by a deficiency in LPL or Apo C-II, resulting in a significant increase in triglyceride concentration. These patients present with eruptive xanthomas, steatosis, recurrent episodes of acute pancreatitis, and no increased risk of atherosclerosis.

# Function

LDL plays a key role in the formation of atherosclerotic plaques that leads to atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Directly measuring LDL and VLDL by ultracentrifugation is extremely expensive and time-consuming. For this reason, multiple time and money-saving equations have been developed throughout the years to estimate the LDL and VLDL cholesterol levels. Most famously known, the Friedewald equation subtracts HDL and VLDL from the total cholesterol level to estimate LDL concentration. In turn, VLDL levels are estimated by a fixed ratio of triglycerides/5.

Initially intended for research purposes only, this equation has been widely utilized over the last decades to clinically estimate LDL cholesterol levels.

# Pathophysiology

Diet, sex, and race are factors that significantly influence VLDL production and secretion. VLDL synthesis is mainly related to lipid intake, with secretion increasing in the postprandial state. High-fat diets have been associated with higher VLDL secretion, usually presenting as increased blood triglyceride levels.

# Clinical Significance

The impact of VLDL on cardiovascular diseases is mainly correlated to its role in atherosclerosis and coronary disease.

Beyond its direct relation with atherosclerosis, VLDL also plays an important role in metabolic syndrome and insulin resistance. In a normal physiologic state, insulin suppresses the production and secretion of VLDL. In subjects with insulin resistance, there is an enhanced synthesis, and reduced clearance of VLDL is often detected as increased plasma triglyceride levels.

VLDL cholesterol is also associated with hepatic disorders such as non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and hepatitis. Liver fat content has been previously associated with other features of chronic insulin resistance, such as glucose intolerance, increased insulin levels, and intra-abdominal fat.

VLDL levels are also affected by various hormones, with its metabolism being closely related to several endocrinological mechanisms. In Cushing syndrome, the increased concentration of cortisol increases the plasma levels of both VLDL and LDL cholesterol by reducing the degradation of Apo B and increasing the rate of adipose tissue lipolysis.

In conclusion, VLDL cholesterol is synthesized in the liver to transport endogenous lipids such as triglycerides and cholesterol esters to the peripheral (mainly adipose, skeletal, and cardiac) tissues. It has been strongly associated with developing several multi-organ diseases such as atherosclerosis, coronary artery disease, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, neurocognitive impairment, autoimmune disease, dermatological disorders, and cancer. It is crucial to study and understand the mechanisms behind VLDL’s biosynthesis, regulation, signaling, and secretion to comprehend its contribution to human health and to potentially develop targeted therapies that may lead directly to better patient care.