**Topical Tretinoin**

- Topical administration of tretinoin includes applying a thin layer once daily, before bedtime, to the skin where lesions are present. Patients need to keep the medication away from eyes, mouth, nasal creases, and mucous membranes.

- Dosages vary amongst different brands. A commonly used topical tretinoin consisting of 0.1%, 0.08%, and 0.04% dosages should be applied once daily, during the evening, to the skin where acne lesions appear to be present, with enough to cover the entire affected surface in a thin layer.

**Oral Tretinoin**

For the treatment of APL, the administration is typical with a meal; capsules are not to be opened or crushed.

- Tretinoin has also been sublingually administered by squeezing the contents from the capsule beneath the tongue as well as through enteric and nasogastric tubes.

- ATRA must be used in combination with other medications (i.e., arsenic compounds) since remissions induced by ATRA monotherapy are short-lived, lasting only about 3.5 months.

- Nursing mothers should discontinue nursing before starting oral tretinoin, as nursing infants have potentially serious adverse effects.

- Dose for systemic treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) -2 evenly divided doses of 45 mg/m2/day administered until complete remission.

- Patients should take a missed dose as soon as possible unless it is time for the next dose, at which point it's recommended to skip the missed dose and proceed with the regular schedule of medication; patients should not take a doubled dose.

**Acne Treatment**

- The recommendation is to take isotretinoin with food (especially with high-fat meals), as this will increase absorption.

- A lipid encapsulation of isotretinoin exists and demonstrates increased bioavailability even if the patient has fasted. This form of the medication can be dosed twice daily regardless if fasted or not.

- The treatment goal's cumulative dose is between 120 to 150 mg/kg and is achievable within 20 to 24 weeks.

- The initial dose is 0.5 mg/kg/day during the first month, followed by an increase to 1 mg/kg/day, and can be given once or divided twice daily.

**APL Treatment - Adult**

- APL, relapsed or refractory

- 22.5 mg/m2 PO bid

- For induction treatment; discontinue 30 days after transmission or give up to 90 days; concomitant differentiation syndrome prophylaxis is recommended for patients with WBC >10,000


- APL, newly diagnosed 

- Induction treatment

- 22.5 mg/m2 PO bid up to 60 days
- For low-risk disease
- Use with arsenic trioxide
- Concomitant differentiation syndrome prophylaxis is recommended for patients with WBC >10,000

- Consolidation treatment 

- 22.5 mg/m2 PO bid on days 1 to 14, and 29 to 42 of a 56-day cycle x 3 cycles, then on days 1 to 14 or 56-day cycle for cycle 4
- For low-risk disease
- Use with arsenic trioxide

**APL Treatment - Pediatric**

- APL, relapsed or refractory

- 1-year-old and older

- 22.5 mg/m2 PO bid
- For induction treatment
- Discontinue 30 days after transmission or give up to 90 days
- Concomitant differentiation syndrome prophylaxis is recommended for patients with WBC >10,000