Studies have shown good patient satisfaction and diagnostic concordance for teledermatology in comparison to face-to-face consultations. Teledermatology can be an effective triage tool, reducing referral times, even in cutaneous malignancies, especially in combination with teledermoscopy. While teledermatology classically involves outpatient dermatology, studies have shown that it can be an effective and useful tool in the setting of inpatient dermatology too. Teledermatology has also been found useful in the follow-up of chronic skin disease, including chronic ulcers.

The basic concepts of teledermatology have been used effectively in dermatology teaching and even in residency programs. Effective use of telemedicine can help get expert faculty involved in teaching programs in a cost-effective manner. Teledermatology by itself provides educational benefits to participants like primary care providers and dermatologists. Teledermatology has also shown to be effective in other procedures like reading of patch tests.

**Patient-Initiated Teledermatology**

At present, the four common types of business models used in teledermatology practice include (1) standard fee-for-service reimbursement from insurance, (2) capitated service contracts, (3) per-case service contracts, and (4) direct to consumer. Patient-initiated teledermatology, which provides direct consultation and the ability of physicians to follow up on dermatology patients, has become increasingly popular; however, research and evidence for the effectiveness of these are limited. Patient-initiated teledermatology also enables patients to get more involved, playing an active role in managing their health through direct communication with dermatologists. As the quality of image-capture devices, especially smartphones, increases, the effectiveness of patient-initiated teledermatology should improve. Recent studies have shown that patients themselves can take accurate, high-quality dermoscopic images at home, enabling them to combine skin-self-examination with patient-initiated teledermoscopy. This, in turn, can improve the quality of the teledermatology consults; however, standard protocols for imaging must be explained to the patients for this to be effective. The development of business models related to patient-initiated teledermatology must take into account issues related to financial reimbursement for the consultants as well legal and ethical issues.

There is strong evidence to show that teledermatology is effective in earlier diagnosis and triage of skin diseases, but practitioners need to take into account regional legal frameworks while practicing teledermatology.