FXIII is a zymogen that circulates as a tetramer of 2 subunits of A and B. The A subunit represents the pro-transglutaminase that is catalyzed to become the active transglutaminase. The B subunit serves as a carrier and regulatory protein for the A subunit, which is not stable in plasma on its own. In the plasma, half of the B-subunit is attached with subunit A, and the rest half exists as FXIII-B2 dimer. Cellular FXIII is a dimer of 2 of the 'A' subunit. It has been found in macrophages, monocytes, megakaryocytes, and platelets.

The function of FXIII is not limited to achieving hemostasis. FXIII also plays a critical role in wound healing, tissue repair, extracellular matrix deposition, and osteoblastic differentiation. In addition to this, the A subunit of FXIII has been identified as a novel obesity gene and may play a role in adipogenesis. FXIII is also involved in regulating immune responses at both the cellular and humoral levels. The fibrin clot, which is formed with the help of FXIII, is an integral part of innate immunity. In addition to this, FXIIIa enhances the proliferation and migration of monocytes.

FXIIIa introduces covalent bonds between fibrin gamma-gamma, gamma-alpha, and alpha-alpha chains, making the fibrin clot stiff and compact. This activity is further enhanced by cross-linking the fibrinolysis inhibitors such as alpha-2 antiplasmin and thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitors. The platelet-FXIII, which is expressed on the surface of the activated platelet, helps in clot stabilization and retraction, which are necessary for wound healing. FXIII also plays a crucial role in wound healing by cross-linking proteins of the extracellular matrix, including fibronectin, vitronectin, thrombospondin, collagen, and by promoting cellular signaling in leukocytes and endothelial cells.

The deficiency of FXIII, either acquired or congenital, can disrupt the above mechanisms, which would lead to hemostatic problems, poor wound healing, and tissue repair.