There are no methods to measure residual volume directly. Other lung volumes and capacities must first be measured directly before RV can be calculated. The first step in calculating RV is to determine the FRC. Measurement of the FRC can be done using one of the following three tests.

**Helium Dilution Test**

In this test, the patient inhales a known volume of air (V1) containing a known fraction of helium (FHe1) at end-expiration of tidal breathing, where the volume of air left in the lungs is equal to FRC. A spirometer measures the fraction of helium after equilibration in the lungs (FHe2).

- FRC = V1(FHe1-FHe2) / FHe2

**Nitrogen Washout**

The nitrogen washout test utilizes the nitrogen that makes up 78% of atmospheric air. A patient breathes through a 2-way valve connected to 100% oxygen on inspiration and a collection spirometer on expiration. The spirometer measures the volume of air and fraction of nitrogen expired with each breath. Once the fraction of nitrogen is below 1.5% for 3 consecutive breaths, the test is complete. The initial amount of nitrogen in the lungs must be equal to the total amount of nitrogen exhaled, and thus the FRC can be calculated.

- FRC = V exhaled * C exhaled N2 / C initial alveolar N2

**Body Plethysmography**

Plethysmography is based on Boyle’s law of gases. In a closed system at a constant temperature, the product of pressure and volume of a known mass of gas is constant. That is to say, pressure and volume are inversely proportional.

- P1V1 = P2V2

To conduct the test, a patient is placed inside an enclosed chamber and breathes through a spirometer that can measure changes in pressure and volume. After a period of tidal breathing, the spirometer is closed at end-expiration, and the patient breathes against it. Changes in pressure at the mouthpiece are recorded. As the patient exhales, the volume of the thoracic cavity can be calculated by recording the change in pressure of the entire chamber. This test is the most accurate measure of FRC, but also the most expensive.

Once the FRC has been measured using one of these three methods, the expiratory reserve volume (ERV) and vital capacity (VC) are measured using standard spirometry. Calculations of TV and TLC can be made using the measured FRC, ERV, and VC values and the following equations:

- RV = FRC - ERV

- TLC = VC + RV