Most patients with acute myocarditis require admission due to the risk of rapid progression to life-threatening conditions, including decompensated heart failure, lethal arrhythmias, and multi-organ failure. These patients benefit from an interprofessional team that includes a cardiologist, a heart failure and transplant specialist (in refractory heart failure despite maximal therapy), a cardiac interventionist (in case mechanical cardiac support is needed), and nursing, pharmacy, and rehabilitation staff. Specialist clinicians will drive the case through diagnosis and management, but nursing is crucial in implementing and assisting in these endeavors. Pharmacists will vet any drug therapy, perform medication reconciliation, and offer patient counsel on appropriate dosing and monitoring of their medications. Rehabilitation staff will help during recovery and report back to the clinicians regarding patient progress and if they note any concerning developments. The interprofessional care model relies on collaborative effort and open communication channels, leading to the best patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Strong social and economic support is needed for complete recovery. Patients with heart failure require the use of long-term anti-heart failure medications. All patients must be educated on the need for rest and abstaining from alcohol during the acute stage. Cardiac rehabilitation is of paramount importance in these patients to help build exercise endurance. Patients should be educated on a healthy lifestyle, maintaining a healthy body weight, and a low-fat diet.