Treatment is often supportive in nature and depends on the severity of laryngitis.

- Voice rest: This is the single most important factor. Use of voice during laryngitis results in incomplete or delayed recovery. Complete voice rest is recommended although it is almost impossible to achieve. If the patient needs to speak, the patient should be instructed to use a "confidential voice;" that is, a normal phonatory voice at low volume without whispering or projecting.l

- Steam Inhalation: Inhaling humidified air enhances moisture of the upper airway and helps in the removal of secretions and exudates.

- Avoidance of irritants: Smoking and alcohol should be avoided. Smoking delays prompt resolution of the disease process.

- Dietary modification: dietary restriction is recommended for patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease. This includes avoiding caffeinated drinks, spicy food items, fatty food, chocolate, peppermint. Another important lifestyle modification is the avoidance of late meals. The patient should have meals at least 3 hours before sleeping. The patient should drink plenty of water. These dietary measures have been shown to be effective in classic GERD, though their efficacy in LPR is disputed, they are often still employed.

- Medications: Antibiotics prescription for an otherwise healthy patient with acute laryngitis is currently unsupported; however for high-risk patients and patients with severe symptoms antibiotics may be given. Some authors recommend narrow-spectrum antibiotics only in the presence of identifiable gram stain and culture.

Fungal laryngitis can be treated with the use of oral antifungal agents such as fluconazole. Treatment is usually required for three weeks period and may be repeated if needed. This should be reserved for patients with confirmed fungal infection via laryngeal examination and/or culture.

Mucolytics like guaifenesin may be used for clearing secretions.

In addition to lifestyle and dietary modifications, LPR-related laryngitis is treated with anti-reflux medications. Medications that suppress acid production such as H2 receptor and proton pump blocking agents are effective against gastroesophageal reflux, though proton pump inhibitors are found to be most effective for LPR. These may require higher doses or twice-daily dosing schedule to be effective in this setting.

Prevailing data do not support the prescription of antihistaminics or oral corticosteroids for treating acute laryngitis.