**Oral Candidiasis**

The candidal load can be reduced in the oral cavity through proper oral hygiene practices and antimicrobial mouthwash. Denture-wearing patients must be instructed to remove their dentures at night, wash and place them in 0.2% chlorhexidine solution. Patients must also be counseled to quit the use of tobacco. Patients using inhaled steroids should be instructed to rinse the mouth with water every time after use.

**Aspergillosis**

Patients at high risk of inhaling fungal spores like construction workers should wear protective masks, preferably an N95/P2 respirator. Patients with active sinus infections should avoid air travel since high altitude can worsen the pre-existing hypoxemia.

**Mucormycosis**

Nonhealing of extraction sockets, especially in patients with diabetes or immunodeficiency, should raise high suspicion for mucormycosis.

**Histoplasmosis**

Patients with oral histoplasmosis may subsequently develop disseminated disease. Hence there is a need for periodic evaluation of these patients.

**Blastomycosis**

People involved in outdoor activities like hunting or fishing in wooded areas have an increased chance of acquiring the disease. Hence to prevent the disease, the soil should not be disturbed.

**Cryptococcosis**

Screening for cryptococcal polysaccharide antigen and preemptive therapy is vital in immunocompromised patients.

**Paracoccidiomycosis**

Patient follow-up is essential to monitor the side effects of ketoconazole on liver function.