MC is the most common non-dystrophic myotonia (NDM). The condition is non-dystrophic because the muscle tissue is not structurally compromised as part of the disease process, and instead, myotonia is caused by defective ion channels in skeletal muscle resulting in discord within ion conductance. In addition to dysfunctional anion channels seen in MC, mutations within cation channels, namely sodium ion channels, cause paramyotonia congenita (PMC), potassium-aggravated myotonia (PAM), and potassium-sensitive (hyperkalemic) periodic paralysis (HyperPP).

It is mutations in the SCN4A gene that result in loss of function of these voltage-gated sodium channels. Symptoms are usually worse in the lower limbs in MC (patients often struggle to stand up quickly) whereas, in PAM, the eyes and face are more severely affected. Myotonia associated with HyperPP is mild and particularly associated with eyelids and tongue.

Distinguishing MC from other disorders is often possible clinically with careful consideration of exacerbating or alleviating factors, presence of extra-muscular disease, and findings on electromyography. The symptoms and features of potassium channel disorders are worsened following the ingestion of potassium-rich foods, and patients may describe their myotonia as painful. This history is not typical of MC. The myotonic dystrophies are also an important differential to consider when investigating muscle weakness and spasticity in early childhood and infancy. Myotonic dystrophy (MD) type I and II are associated with systemic features, including endocrine dysfunction, cardiac conduction defects, and cataract formation. Additionally, the pattern of muscular weakness observed in MD is very different from that observed in MC.