**TAVR Technique**

The most important aspects to decide prior to the day of surgery is the valve size and vascular access. Various approaches include transfemoral, transaxillary, transapical, transaortic, and transcarotid.

For the transfemoral approach, the vessels can be accessed either percutaneously or via open surgical cutdown. For the percutaneous route, the contralateral common femoral artery and vein are accessed and small caliber sheaths (such as 5 Fr and 6 Fr) are placed. A temporary pacing wire is inserted through this venous access and positioned into the right heart for pacing during valve deployment. A pigtail catheter is placed via this arterial access and positioned in one of the aortic sinus cusps. The operative side common femoral artery is then accessed using fluoroscopic guidance and a micropuncture needle. Two pre-deployed percutaneous vessel closure suture devices are placed for future use. Exchange length guidewires and catheters are then placed per institutional routine. Heparin is administered. The aortic valve is crossed with a guidewire and then exchanged to a soft wire over an exchange catheter. The delivery sheath (if the selected TAVR device uses a sheath) is inserted. The new device is loaded onto the delivery device and appropriate orientation is confirmed. BAV can be performed now if desired. The TAVR valve and delivery device are then inserted and positioned appropriately across the aortic annulus under fluoroscopy. Depending on the specific valve type, rapid ventricular pacing may be necessary. Self-expanding valve prostheses may not required rapid pacing. The valve is then deployed under fluoroscopic guidance. Once deployed, TEE is performed to evaluate positioning, valve function, and assess for paravalvular leak. If TEE shows acceptable findings, the delivery device is then removed. All other catheters are removed sequentially. The temporary pacing wire can be removed or left in place if there is any concern for heart block or conduction abnormalities. The delivery sheath is removed and the pre-deployed suture closure devices are secured.

For the transaxillary approach, an infraclavicular incision is made and soft tissue dissected to expose the axillary artery. The brachial plexus structures are often overlying the artery in this location and must be clearly identified and gently retracted to avoid injury. Furthermore, the use of electrocautery in this area should be avoided again to minimize the risk of injury to the nerve structures. Once the artery is exposed, proximal and distal control are obtained. Heparin is given. Pursestring sutures are placed at the site of planned access. Once the artery is accessed and wire placed via Seldinger technique, the remainder of the procedure can proceed as listed above for Transfemoral approach.

For the transpaical approach, an echocardiogram probe is placed on the left inframammary region to ascertain the exact location of the LV apex. An inframammary skin incision is made and soft tissue dissected to expose the intercostal space. A finder needle can be used to confirm location. The intercostal space and pericardium are opened to expose the LV apex. A pursestring suture is placed and LV cavity accessed using Seldinger technique. One note of caution for this approach: the valve must be loaded in the appropriate orientation. The orientation for the transapical approach is opposite that of all other approaches since the access direction is antegrade.

The transaortic approach requires an upper hemi-sternotomy to expose adequate ascending aorta. A pursestring is placed and aorta accessed again using Seldinger technique. The remainder of the procedure proceeds as described above.

**BAV Technique**

Access is obtained similar to the TAVR procedure described above. After obtaining access, a balloon catheter is introduced and positioned across the stenotic aortic valve. Aortic valvuloplasty is then performed with balloon inflation with the aim to increase aortic valve area (AVA) and reduce transaortic pressure gradient. To obtain the mean transaortic pressure gradient, a pigtail catheter is used to measure this gradient before and after valvuloplasty. The goal of this procedure is to reduce the pressure gradient by at least a half. If the initial attempt fails to achieve the gradient change then balloon inflation can be repeated.