Breast reconstruction with a transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous flap is a specific type of breast construction that allows women a delayed or immediate breast restoration. Since the tissue that is being used is part of the patient's body, this has many benefits for the patient. First, it is not a foreign body so the common complications associated with breast implants, inflammatory reaction, or capsular contracture, are avoided. Second, the scar from the abdominal donor site can be hidden under most clothing styles.

The first step in deciding if a patient is a candidate for this procedure is to assess the patient. The practitioner should focus on the breast defect and the volume needed to correct it. For immediate reconstruction of the breast, both oncologic and reconstructive surgeons can operate simultaneously and communicate about the incisions and mastectomy defect. If doctor and patient decide on a delayed repair, a transverse rectus abdominis (TRAM) flap can provide additional skin and fatty tissue for breast volume and closure. A transverse rectus abdominis (TRAM) flap is a better option for patients with larger breasts or significant ptosis. The most important factor for aesthetic success is the match between the tissue volume of the transverse rectus abdominis (TRAM) flap and the other breast. The abdominal pannus is used to reconstruct the breast. Therefore, thicker abdominal pannus for a smaller breast reconstruction often requires a secondary revision for symmetry, while a thin patient with larger breasts would not be an ideal candidate. They may need implant augmentation of the transverse rectus abdominis (TRAM) flap or reduction of the opposite breast. The main advantage of the procedure for the patient is the similarity to a natural breast. This includes the softness and the way the tissue appears on the chest