**CNCP Management Options**

Chronic pain often does not respond to medications alone.  Physical therapy with active modalities such as strengthening, cognitive therapy, injections, surgery, or alternative modalities like acupuncture should be included.  In selected cases, a surgical evaluation may need to be considered.

Medications such as non-opioid analgesics: anti-inflammatories, muscle relaxants, topicals, neuropathic pain agents which include antidepressant medications selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI), tricyclics, and gabapentinoids are frequently used in chronic pain therapy.

Antidepressants
****

The most common comorbidities with CNCP are anxiety and depression. Duloxetine and venlafaxine both are FDA-approved for general anxiety disorders. There is some evidence for the effectiveness of lamotrigine for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), valproic acid for panic disorder, pregabalin for social phobia and generalized anxiety disorder, gabapentin for social phobia.

Antidepressants are more effective for pain caused by arthritis, post-herpetic neuralgia (shingles), fibromyalgia, diabetic neuropathy, peripheral neuropathy, spinal cord injury, stroke, radiculopathy, pelvic pain, migraine, facial pain, and low-back pain.

The mechanism of pain relief due to antidepressants is not completely understood. Antidepressants can cause an increase of neurotransmitters that reduce pain signals. Patients might feel the pain relief within 7 to 10 days, but the maximum effect is after several weeks. Tricyclics are the most common antidepressant used for pain control.

People with chronic pain are at high risk of developing depression. Some serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) like duloxetine (Cymbalta), venlafaxine (Effexor XR), and milnacipran (Savella) can be used in the same dosage to treat both CNCP and these comorbidities (depression and anxiety).

Tizanidine has an enhancing effect on the inhibitory function in the central nervous system (CNS) which causes pain relief as a muscle relaxant. Amitriptyline (Elavil) and nortriptyline (Pamelor) are members of the tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) most frequently used to treat CNCP. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), and sertraline (Zoloft), and SNRI duloxetine (Cymbalta) are common medications prescribed for CNCP by healthcare providers.

Gabapentinoids

Gabapentin and pregabalin are used in neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia. Gabapentin and pregabalin acts on the alpha 2 delta receptor on voltage-gated calcium channels blocks that activate excitatory synapse formation.

The recommended dosing for gabapentin use in CNCP:

- Neurontin (short-acting gabapentin), the first day of treatment of 300 mg, doubled on the second day (300 mg twice a day), and tripled on the third day (300 mg three times a day). The dose can be increased as needed for pain relief to a maximum dose of 1800 mg daily (divided into three doses). Clinical studies referenced that effectiveness for a range of doses from 1800 mg/day to 3600 mg/day; however, there was no additional benefit seen with doses greater than 1800 mg/d.