Pharmacotherapy consists of two processes: pharmacokinetics (effect the body has on the drug) and pharmacodynamics (physiological impact the drug has on the body). Pharmacokinetics involves four different steps: Absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion. These four individual processes vary greatly depending on the physiologic status of an individual. Drug absorption can be affected by the route of administration (e.g., gastroenteritis will result in minimal absorption via the oral route). Drug distribution varies according to the percentage of body fat per individual. The total area of distribution increases with fat, which then determines how much of the drug remains in circulation to interact with the desired receptors at target organs. Drug metabolism is the structural change that drugs undergo, most commonly seen in the liver, lungs, and kidneys. There are two phases of metabolism. For phase 1, the prodrug is biotransformed into an active or inactive metabolite via oxidation, reduction, and/or hydrolysis. During phase 2, the remaining compounds are metabolized into polar molecules allowing for future elimination. Lastly, drug excretion is dependent on how fast a drug and its metabolites get removed from the body.

A significant percentage of drug metabolism in the liver relies on the P450 family of isozymes, of which six are responsible for the metabolization of about 80% of all drugs: CYP1A2, CYP2C19, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4. Isozymes biotransform drugs into their active components.

Drug-drug interactions are particularly important as they will affect the onset of action, time to Cmax, half-life, and steady-state after roughly five half-lives of drug administration of a fixed-dose at regular intervals.

**CYP450 Inducers**

- Rifampin

- Barbiturates

- Carbamazepine

- Griseofulvin

- Primidone

- Phenytoin

**CYP450 Inhibitors**

- Amiodarone

- Cimetidine

- Diltiazem

- Grapefruit juice

- Omeprazole

- Macrolides (except azithromycin)

- Ketoconazole

- Verapamil

Genetic polymorphism also plays a significant role in drug pharmacokinetics. The hepatic isozyme CYP2D6 has been found to have the largest number of allelic variants. Interindividual variability response to CYP2D6 substrates is the result of high interethnic genetic variance. This genetic variance produces a spectrum ranging from poor metabolizers that have very little to no enzymatic CYP2D6 activity to ultra-fast metabolizers, as observed in the general population. Poor metabolizers are more likely to experience poor analgesic relief due to limited substrate biotransformation, thus increasing the risk for therapeutic failure and the need for rescue pain medications. Poor metabolizers get unevenly distributed amongst different ethnic populations: White race 6 to 10%, African Americans 2 to 5%, and Asians less than 1%. For example, poor metabolizers require increasing doses of the opioid analgesic codeine due to its decreased bioactivation into its far more potent metabolite, morphine. As a result, health workers may erroneously perceive poor metabolizers as drug-seekers. Conversely, ultra-fast metabolizers will experience heightened analgesic effects and are at higher risk of toxicity, even at labeled dosage regimens. Similar results are also observable with additional medications such as tramadol, which undergo CYP2D6 polymorphic drug metabolism; therefore, caution is necessary. Non-opioid analgesics and morphine are considered suitable alternatives in these instances. CYP2D6 ultra-fast metabolizers are also at risk for therapeutic failure with the selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SSNRI) venlafaxine. The use of this antidepressant is prevalent in the palliative care setting for concurrent treatment of depressive disorders and neuropathic pain.

**Medications often found to have the highest number of drug-drug interactions in the PC setting include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), warfarin, anticonvulsants, anticholinergics, and methadone.**

NSAIDs: Used as an adjunct for pain management, they decrease renal perfusion via inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis, a critical arteriodilator. NSAIDs react synergistically with other agents such as clopidogrel, aspirin, and warfarin, thereby increasing the risk of cardiovascular adverse events, stroke, bleeding, and death.

Warfarin: Oral anticoagulant used to prevent the formation of blood clots. Warfarin is a vitamin K antagonist that blocks the hepatic synthesis of several coagulation factors. It has the potential to interact with NSAIDs, acetaminophen, macrolides, quinolones, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and phenytoin, consequently increasing bleeding risk.

Anticonvulsants: Phenytoin and carbamazepine have significant drug-drug interactions due to their role as CYP450 inducers. Phenytoin is primarily used as an anticonvulsant, while carbamazepine is an option in managing neuropathic pain.

Anticholinergics: Atropine, scopolamine, and glycopyrrolate are primary agents used to decrease salivary, bronchial, and gastrointestinal secretions in the palliative care (PC) setting. Anticholinergic medications have a cumulative effect, manifesting as constipation, mydriasis, urinary retention, tachycardia, altered mental status, bowel obstruction, and decreased sweating.

Methadone: A potent, long-acting opioid agonist, is favored in PC due to its cost-effectiveness, convenient routes of administration, inactive metabolites, and relatively safe profile in end-stage-renal disease. Methadone is a racemic mixture of two stereoisomers. Its R-enantiomer has analgesic properties, while its S-enantiomer acts as an NMDA receptor antagonist, thereby preventing opioid tolerance with prolonged use. This drug is mostly metabolized in the liver by the CYP2B6 isozyme. Due to CYP2B6 polymorphism, diminished methadone N-demethylation may account for interindividual pharmacokinetic variability. Furthermore, several studies support allelic variations of the CYP2B6.6 gene, thereby predisposing African Americans to lower drug metabolic and clearance rates. Due to the potential association between methadone use and QTc prolongation and cardiac arrhythmia, ECG monitoring before initiation of methadone and during methadone dose changes is recommended. In the presence of risk factors for QTc interval prolongation such as electrolyte abnormalities, liver impairment, structural heart disease, use of drugs with QTc-prolonging properties, close ECG monitoring, and dose reduction are recommended as necessary.

Additionally, antidepressants like selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and tricyclics vary in their anticholinergic effects; therefore, it is appropriate to replace drugs like paroxetine and amitriptyline with better-tolerated antidepressants such as sertraline and nortriptyline, respectively. Similarly, low-dose haloperidol has fewer anticholinergic effects when compared to other antipsychotics.

A severe adverse event often encountered and misdiagnosed when using serotonergic drugs is Serotonin Syndrome (SS). Clinicians may utilize the **Hunter Criteria**as a diagnostic aid, which requires that the patient be on a serotonergic agent and exhibit one of the following:

- Spontaneous clonus

- Inducible clonus PLUS agitation or diaphoresis

- Ocular clonus PLUS agitation or diaphoresis

- Tremor PLUS hyperreflexia

- Hypertonia PLUS temperature above 38oC PLUS ocular clonus or inducible clonus

Many drugs can precipitate serotonin syndrome, including but not limited to fentanyl, tramadol, metoclopramide, ondansetron, lithium, buspirone, levodopa, SSRIs, SNRIs, and linezolid.

It is worth noting that despite the side-effect profile of medications such as benzodiazepines, low- molecular-weight heparin, morphine, proton-pump inhibitors, and gabapentin, all were found to have the lowest risk for DDIs in the palliative care setting.