The first hour of the exam is fairly standard regardless of the indication. The patient lies supine on a table. Tc-99 is rapidly infused, and a computer starts collecting images. For the first minute, 60 one-second frames are acquired, followed by 60 one-minute frames. At one hour, left anterior oblique and right lateral views are obtained to differentiate signal from the common bile duct, gallbladder, and duodenum. The left anterior oblique view shifts the gallbladder anteriorly and the common bile duct and duodenum posteriorly.

After the first hour of the exam, the various techniques used may change depending on the clinical question or suspected diagnosis. Some conditions (biliary leak, stent patency, biliary atresia, evaluation for hepatocellular carcinoma) require direct visualization of signal outside the biliary system, biliary anatomy, focal areas of decreased uptake, and/or passage of signal into the duodenum. Other conditions such as acute cholecystitis, chronic cholecystitis, and biliary obstruction evaluate for biliary duct patency.

Acute Cholecystitis

The absence of gallbladder signal at one hour is unusual but not sensitive or specific enough to diagnose or exclude acute cholecystitis. At one hour, there are two options which increase sensitivity and specificity. The first is acquiring delayed imaging at 3 to 4 hours. However, delayed images are suboptimal in the setting of acute cholecystitis when prompt diagnosis and intervention are preferred. Current practice for gallbladder non-visualization at one hour employs the second option which is the administration of a sub-analgesic dose of morphine which causes the sphincter of Oddi to contract and the ampulla of Vater to close. This diverts incoming bile to the gallbladder. In a normal patient filling of the gallbladder will be visible at 5 to 10 minutes after morphine administration and be complete by 30 minutes. The entire exam can be completed in 90 minutes. Continued non-visualization of the gallbladder confirms the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis. Morphine administration in cholescintigraphy is approximately as sensitive as delayed imaging.

Chronic cholecystitis

The hallmark of chronic cholecystitis is gallbladder inflammation from decreased ejection fraction. Sincalide is administered as a ten-minute infusion (to reduce nausea), and image acquisition occurs in one-minute frames for 60 minutes.

Because hepatic cholescintigraphy is a reflection of hepatic physiology, hepatic hypofunction may require delayed imaging even past the usual 3- to 4-hour protocol. In patients with advanced liver dysfunction, it is not unusual to acquire images at 24 hours for gallbladder visualization. Imaging beyond that point is not recommended due to degradation of the radiotracer.