# Introduction

The spinal trigeminal nucleus (SN) is a sensory tract located in the lateral medulla of the brain stem whose principal function is relaying pain and temperature sensations from the oral cavity and the surface of the face. It is subdivided into three segments representing topographical regions of the face in an inverted fashion; the forehead is represented ventrally (distally), and the oral region is represented dorsally (proximally). Lesions of the SN cause important clinical syndromes owing to the crucial utility in the daily life of the orofacial region.

# Structure and Function

The spinal trigeminal nucleus (SN) is located in the lateral medulla of the brainstem. It extends down to the level of the C3 vertebra, at which point it becomes continuous with the dorsal spinal horn.

The SN incorporates sensory information from different cranial nerves, but its inputs and physiological importance come principally from the three extracranial divisions of the trigeminal nerve (V1, ophthalmic; V2, maxillary; V3, mandibular). These extracranial nerves initially fuse at the trigeminal ganglion,****entering the cranial vault through the superior orbital fissure, foramen rotundum, and foramen ovale.

The spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve is a longitudinally-shaped nucleus situated in the caudal pons and medulla, which receives sensory afferents relating to pain and temperature from the orofacial region supplied by the trigeminal nerve and, together with the principal sensory nucleus, is sometimes termed the trigeminal sensory nuclear complex (TSNC)

The spinal trigeminal nucleus is further subdivided anatomically into the pars oralis, pars interporalis, and pars caudalis

The SN projects both contralaterally and ipsilaterally to the ventral posteromedial nucleus of the thalamus via the ventral and dorsal trigeminothalamic tracts

# Embryology

During embryological development, the cranial nerve nuclei are some of the earliest structures in the brain to emerge and are distinguishable by day 28. The trigeminal sensory nuclei develop from neural crest cells, a highly migratory population of multipotent cells that originates in the dorsal neural tube.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The area of the brainstem where the spinal trigeminal nucleus is situated is supplied by the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA)

Specifically related to the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve are the first and second of these segments, which pass over the ventrolateral part of the brainstem. Any disruption of blood flow through the vertebral artery or posterior inferior cerebellar artery would interrupt the processing of sensory information from the trigeminal nerve. Such pathologies include vertebral artery dissection, thrombotic occlusion, and stenosis from extrinsic compression, such as from a tumor or fibrous band.

# Nerves

The spinal trigeminal nucleus incorporates sensory information from all three branches of the trigeminal nerve (CN V). CN V1, also known as the ophthalmic nerve, relays sensory information from the face in regions located above the orbit of the eyes. CN V2, also known as the maxillary nerve, is primarily responsible for sensory information between the orbit and the mouth. The final branch is CN V3, also known as the mandibular nerve. CN V3 has both a sensory component as well as a motor component; however, only the sensory component projects to the SN.

The spinal trigeminal nucleus also consolidates sensory input from the facial, glossopharyngeal, and vagus nerves; this is a minor role of SN in comparison to its integration of sensory information from the three branches of the trigeminal nerve.

# Surgical Considerations

It should be kept in mind that since the spinal trigeminal tract extends inferiorly down to the level of C3, this tract can be involved clinically in patients with craniovertebral junction pathologies. For the same reason, surgical intervention at this level, for example, posterior fossa decompression, could affect this area and related brainstem structures.****

The caudal end of the spinal trigeminal nucleus terminates at the obex of the fourth ventricle in a raised tubercle, termed the trigeminal tubercle. This is a valuable landmark for neurosurgeons operating in this region.

# Clinical Significance

**Lateral Medullary Syndrome**

Lateral medullary syndrome, also known as medullary or posterior inferior cerebellar artery syndrome, occurs due to the occlusion of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery or the vertebral artery. An occlusion to either of these arteries can result in a lack of blood flow to the lateral medulla, the location of the spinal trigeminal nucleus. The primary ischemic events that trigger lateral medullary syndrome can result from stenotic blood vessels, as seen in adults, often with other comorbid conditions. In children, however, ischemia can be due to injury to the vertebral artery following a hyperextension neck injury.

The lateral medullary syndrome presents with many symptoms, including contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation in the body with ipsilateral Horner syndrome, dysphagia, and loss of sensation in the face.

**Trigeminal Neuralgia**

Trigeminal neuralgia is a condition that most often presents with unilateral, stabbing, and paroxysmal painful sensations from the face along the trigeminal nerve distribution.

This theory has as its basis the characterization of trigeminal neuralgia as focal epileptic and neuronal hyperactivity. An increase in activity at the spinal trigeminal nucleus has been shown to precipitate the pain seen in trigeminal neuralgia in both cats and monkeys. Furthermore, the administration of anti-epileptic medications in cats and monkeys was able to decrease the intensity and duration of the attacks. The difficulty of treatment approaches makes the understanding of trigeminal neuralgia imperative. Though there is no consensus on the underlying mechanism of trigeminal neuralgia, recent evidence suggests that the spinal trigeminal nucleus, particularly the pars oralis, plays a vital role in this process.

**Chronic Orofacial Pain**

Understanding chronic orofacial pain is important as it has been determined as a source of significant psychological distress in patients. This distress is likely because procedures and medications often cannot relieve symptoms.

A recent study was conducted in humans to demonstrate changes in synapses of patients with chronic orofacial neuropathic pain. Utilizing T1-weighted MRI imaging, the study showed that alterations in the anatomy of primary synapses of the trigeminal nerve, particularly in the pars oralis, are critical for both the generation and maintenance of chronic pain in the distribution of the trigeminal nerve. These changes included significant regional gray matter volume reduction, a decrease in mean diffusivity, and a fractional anisotropy increase.

**Craniocervical Dystonia**

Craniocervical dystonia is a poorly-understood neurological disorder, part of the group of primary focal dystonias which present with involuntary muscle contractions, sustained or intermittent.****No cause or candidate pathological gene has been found,****and treatment for this condition, which has significant deleterious effects on quality of life, remains limited.****

The observation that these reflexes associated with the trigeminal ganglia are aberrant in patients with craniocervical dystonia has led to the hypothesis that aberrant plasticity in the basal ganglia leading to tonic inhibition of the trigeminal sensory complex may be involved in the pathological process of this condition.

# Other Issues

There is evidence in rats suggesting the presence of oxytocin receptors in both the medulla oblongata and pons.