**Steps to Reporting Impaired Peers**

**Step 1**

Evaluate the signs and symptoms expected and compare them against the overt findings of the peer. Ask honest questions. Compare the signs and symptoms associated with impairment against those of the colleague. If there is a strong suspicion, it is better to err on the side of patient safety and report.

**Step 2**

Concerned about reporting? Review personal ethics, morals, and the principles under which you became a health professional. A fellow professional should not be allowed to use substances and place a patient's safety at risk. Would anyone want them caring for his or her own family member in their present state? Allowing another professional to continue to use alcohol or drugs and place patient lives at risk is not appropriate. No matter what the consequences to the individual, reporting is the proper course of action. Enabling another health professional to cover up their alcohol or drug use is not appropriate, and it is dangerous.

Do not make excuses or cover up for an impaired professional. The potential is not only the individual will be harmed but also their patients. The professional has, unfortunately, put themselves in the situation and must accept the consequences.

**Step 3**

Consider and review hospital and state reporting requirements. Become educated about the rules and regulations. Most states and institutions will protect a reporting health care professional against the retaliation of a colleague. Review the organization's policies and procedures regarding alcohol and substance use and the assistance the institution offers. If unsure, consider contacting the risk management nurse or lawyer of your institution. Usually, either one can assist in following the appropriate steps. If these resources are unavailable, consider discussing the situation with the department manager.

**Step 4**

Once a fellow professional is identified as potentially having an alcohol or drug use disorder, report it immediately to avoid any negative consequences for the individual reporting, the patients, or in reality, the individual with the disorder. While it may initially seem like a negative, reporting a peer is a positive act that protects patients and gets the colleague into a treatment program before they cause a severe or even fatal medical error. Once criminal behavior or patient safety is abrogated, the consequences are severe. The sooner an individual is investigated, the less likely they are to do real harm.

Unfortunately, sometimes it may be easier to pass the problem on to someone else. It is crucial not to ignore signs or symptoms of impairment. It is inappropriate to transfer an impaired healthcare worker or threaten termination. Passing the problem on to another department or institution is not an ethical or moral solution.

**Example Reporting Requirements [Florida]**

Each state has different requirements for reporting an impaired peer. If a health professional believes a peer has an alcohol or drug problem, they must report it to their supervisor and the appropriate state-mandated authorities

For example, in the State of Florida, the nurses have developed an effective reporting and treatment system. Nurses report to the Florida Department of Health or Intervention Project for Nurses. The call to the Intervention Project for Nurses is confidential. The Intervention Project for Nurses can be reached at 800.840.2720. The Intervention Project for Nurses in Florida provides an opportunity for intervention and monitoring of nurses that use alcohol or drugs. Many states have similar reporting mechanisms for health professionals, including physicians, nurses, and allied health professionals. **[See Florida Nurse Practice Act S. 455.261]**

In Florida, the Intervention Project for Nurses provides:

- Rehabilitation in a confidential, non-punitive manner

- The goal is to treat the health professional instead of the more punitive sanction of permanently losing their license.

- The Intervention Project for Nurses helps get the nurses into recovery and treatment programs.

- The nurse does not return to practice until the Intervention Project reports they are safe to return to clinical duties.

In Florida, any practitioner who believes a nurse is unsafe due to using alcohol or drugs should make a report to either the Intervention Project for Nurses or the Department of Health. The Nurse Practice Act [Florida Statute 464.018 1(k)] of the Nurse Practice Act states, "Failing to report to the department any person who the licensee knows violates this part of the rules of the department or the Board; however if the licensee verifies that such person is actively participating in a board-approved program for the treatment of a physical or mental condition, the licensee is required to report such person only to an impaired professionals consultant.”

In Florida, the Intervention Project for Nurses provides an acceptable alternative to a legal remedy with discipline. Benefits of the Intervention Project for Nurses include:

- Early recognition of impairment

- Rapid intervention

- Stops nurses practice for days rather than the Department of Health process, which may take 1 to 2 years.

- Standardized evaluation process

- Standardized treatment process

- Standardized monitoring process that may involve the employer

- Identifies potential relapses quickly

- Avoids negative consequences, essentially getting evaluation and treatment before serious safety and criminal violations become apparent or are reported.

**The Florida Intervention Project Process**

- Self, peer, or employer referral

- Intake evaluation

- Intervention options offered

- Professional selects intervention

- If they do not agree on an intervention or fail to comply, they are reported to the Florida Department of Health.

- Continued monitoring by Intervention Project for 2 to 5 years

**Benefits of the Florida Intervention Project for Nurses**

- Evaluates and quickly determines fitness to practice

- Long-term monitoring

- Long-term recovery support

- Support and relapse prevention groups available

- The nurse signs a contract.

- The nurse evaluated on progress.

- The nurse gets random blood or urine drug screens.

- Qualified practitioner treatment pre-screened

**Fitness to Practice**

The Intervention Project will evaluate and assess a nurse's ability to safely practice, including stability, recovery, support systems, and specific job skills, including problem-solving, judgment, cognitive function, and coping skills. The Intervention Project enforces several requirements of the nurse and determines when they can return to work. Requirements and determinations include the following:

- Agree to practice restrictions including no overtime and settings with less controlled narcotic access

- Agree to random drug screens

- Continued and ongoing treatment

- Treatment required and completed to practice safely.

- Signed advocacy contract

- Relapse prevention workbook

- When the nurse can return to practice

- Workplace monitoring and reporting

If a nurse consistently meets the fitness to practice guidelines set in place with positive work and monitoring reports, negative drug screens, regular attends support group meeting, meets their contract agreement, they are quickly reintroduced into the workforce. After the Intervention Project program is successfully completed, fitness to practice is established, and long-term monitoring is completed, the nurse's record is sealed. However, if the nurse fails the process, they will be reported to the Department of Health for disciplinary proceedings.

The Intervention Project process does not hire the individuals that provide evaluation or treatment, but it does offer appropriate referrals to health professionals skilled in the assessment and treatment of individuals with alcohol or drug addiction. Referrals are made to local addiction specialists that work within the community.

Perhaps one downfall of the Intervention Project is that while the nurse does not have to pay for a referral to the Intervention Project for Nurses, they are personally responsible for paying for the evaluation, treatment, and random alcohol and drug testing. This cost can be particularly onerous, considering the nurse is usually unable to work during the initial phases of evaluation and treatment. Fortunately, in many cases, employers and insurance policies pay for these services.