**Types of Enteral Feeding Tubes**

There are several types of enteral feeding tubes. They are usually made of polyurethane or silicone. Feeding tube diameters are measured in French units (Fr). Each French unit is equivalent to 0.33 millimeters. Feeding tubes are usually denoted or classified by the site of placement.

- Nasogastric tube

- Nasoduodenal tube

- Nasojejunal tube

- Gastrostomy tube

- Jejunostomy tube

- Gastrojejunal tube

Tubes can be placed:

- Manually

- Endoscopically

- Surgically

- By interventional radiology

**Nasogastric Tube**

A nasogastric tube (NG) is mainly utilized for patients with no issues with vomiting, gastroesophageal reflux (GER), poor gastric emptying, and no evidence of ileus or small or large bowel obstruction. NG tube is risky in patients with poor swallowing coordination or reflex. Fine bore 5 to 8 Fr NG is usually recommended. If there is a need for nasogastric decompression, a larger bore NG can be used. For patient safety, the recommendation is that a well-trained and qualified medical personnel places the feeding tube. After the placement, the position should be verified by auscultation or x-ray. Although not routinely recommended, an x-ray is used to confirm NG tube placement for high-risk patient populations, specifically intensive care and neonatal patients. The National Patient Safety Agency advocates for analyzing gastric aspirate with pH-graded paper to confirm the proper position. The pH should be less than 5.5 before feeding is started.

**Nasoduodenal and Nasojejunal Tube**

These are enteral feeding tubes placed with the tip in the duodenum or jejunum. Placement can be done at the bedside or with fluoroscopy guidance.

**Gastrostomy Tube**

The feeding tube passes through the anterior abdominal wall into the gastric cavity. A gastrostomy tube is utilized for patients who require long-term feeding. It can be placed via endoscopy percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG).

**Jejunostomy Tube**

This feeding tube passes through the anterior abdominal wall into the jejunum. It can be placed surgically or radiologically by extending through the pylorus into the jejunum. Endoscopically a percutaneous endoscopic gastrojejunostomy (PEGJ) can be placed. Placement of direct percutaneous endoscopic jejunostomy tubes is less commonly performed, but PEGJs are more robust and less likely to be dislocated.