There is no definitive treatment or universally accepted disease-modifying agent that can alter the natural course of the disease. However, the management of the affected system or systems has proven effective. Early diagnosis is a key strategy to achieving improved outcomes.

Several agents have been studied for various manifestations of SSc, although there is a generalized lack of large randomized controlled trials confirming the efficacy of any of these agents. Cyclophosphamide (lung disease, skin disease), mycophenolate mofetil (lung disease, skin disease), methotrexate (skin disease, inflammatory arthritis, myositis), azathioprine (skin disease, lung disease, myositis), and hydroxychloroquine (skin disease) are some of the most commonly used immunosuppressive agents. Cyclosporine (skin disease), infliximab (inflammatory arthritis), and rituximab (skin disease, lung disease) have limited data on them. Corticosteroids shall be generally avoided in SSc. High-dose corticosteroids and even long-term use of low to moderate dose corticosteroids have been associated with precipitation of scleroderma renal crisis. The shall be used in the lowest possible dose for the lowest possible time only if absolutely needed, such as inflammatory myositis, inflammatory arthritis that is refractory, and/or active inflammatory alveolitis.

**Specific Therapies in Scleroderma**

**Raynaud Phenomenon**

The goal of treatment in Raynaud is to prevent digital ischemia and ulcers. These ischemic ulcers are much easier to prevent than to treat. Conservative management for Raynaud phenomenon is still the cornerstone of management, and patients shall be avoided to keep the extremities and body warm, avoid smoking, stress and eliminate sympathomimetic medications when possible. In patients on beta-blockers, an attempt must be made to switch to another agent if possible, as beta-blockers can worsen Raynaud. Vasodilator therapy has been proven to be effective in Raynaud syndrome. The first-line agents are the dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers such as nifedipine or amlodipine. Other vasodilators such as pentoxifylline, nitroglycerin, phosphodiesterase inhibitors (sildenafil) can also be considered. Prostacyclin analogs (iloprost) and endothelin receptor antagonists (bosentan) can be used for refractory cases with digital ischemic ulcers. Proximal/distal sympathectomy can be considered in refractory cases. Botulinum toxin injections have been shown to be effective in some small studies, although efficacy is still limited. Vasodilator pumps can be used in patients unable to tolerate vasodilator therapies. Appropriate wound care is crucial in the management of patients with digital ulcers.

**Skin Disease**

Several immunosuppressive agents have been used in sclerodactyly, including methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, mycophenolate mofetil, and cyclophosphamide. While there is a lack of robust data, mycophenolate mofetil is the preferred agent by most rheumatologists in moderate to severe skin thickening. Antihistamines and topical moisturizing agents can help the pruritus. Telangiectasias usually do not require any treatment, although laser therapy can be considered for cosmetic purposes. No medical treatment has been proven to be effective in calcinosis, and surgical debulking may provide some relief in severe cases.

**Musculoskeletal Involvement**

Most patients have mild arthralgias that do not require treatment by themselves or respond well to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Inflammatory arthritis can be managed by disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs such as hydroxychloroquine, methotrexate. Anti-TNF agents can be used in refractory severe inflammatory arthritis.

**Pulmonary Involvement**

Pulmonary involvement in SSc is now the leading cause of mortality. Management requires interprofessional involvement, including rheumatologists, pulmonologists, and cardiologists.

Interstitial lung disease: Early detection and management may be key, and management of interstitial lung disease in SSc. Cyclophosphamide has been studied and did show benefit for up to 18 months, but the benefit was lost at 24 months.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension: In addition to patient education, healthy lifestyle, and exercise as tolerated, supplemental oxygen, diuretics, and anticoagulation are recommended when no contraindication. Calcium channel blockers are usually not effective. Vasodilator therapy is recommended and can include phosphodiesterase - 5 inhibitors (tadalafil, sildenafil), endothelin receptor antagonists (bosentan, sitaxsentan, ambrisentan, macitentan), and/or prostacyclin analogs (epoprostenol, treprostinil, beraprost, iloprost). Prostacyclin therapy is considered to be most effective, although all these agents improve hemodynamics and quality of life. Combination therapy can be considered in patients who fail to improve on monotherapy or have severe pulmonary arterial hypertension.

**Cardiac Involvement**

Management of arrhythmias includes antiarrhythmic agents and, sometimes, pacemaker placement. So far, there is no evidence of any efficacy of immunosuppressive agents or vasodilators therapy in scleroderma-related cardiac involvement.

**Gastrointestinal Involvement**

Exercises can help with decreased oral aperture, and good dental hygiene is required to prevent caries and cavities due to sicca symptoms. Sugar-free lozenges and secretagogues such as pilocarpine or cevimeline can also be used to help the dry mouth. In patients with heartburn and gastroesophageal reflux, lifestyle and dietary modifications such as elevating the head of the bed, avoiding late and large meals, and avoiding spicy foods, consuming small frequent meals are recommended. NSAIDs shall be avoided. Proton pump inhibitors are recommended over H2 blockers, and high doses of proton pump inhibitors may be used, especially in patients with erosive esophagitis. In severe cases, a combination of proton pump inhibitors with H2 blockers can be considered. Patients with gastroparesis may benefit from motility agents such as metoclopramide in addition to proton pump inhibitors. Laser coagulation shall be considered in patients with bleeding secondary to gastric antral vascular ectasia. Patients with small bowel bacterial overgrowth syndrome may need rotational antibiotics.

**Scleroderma Renal Crisis**

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are the only effective treatment for scleroderma renal crisis. They shall be initiated at the earliest signs of SRC, and a maximum tolerated dose shall be used. Captopril, a shorter-acting ACE-inhibitor, is preferred due to the flexibility with its dosing, although any ACE-inhibitor can be used. There is no data on the efficacy of angiotensin receptor blockers and renin inhibitors in scleroderma renal crisis. Renal function may continue to decline initially; however, the ACE-inhibitor shall be continued. When appropriately managed, renal function can improve considerably, although it may take several months to years, allowing for discontinuation of dialysis. Notably, prophylactic use of ACE inhibitors does not prevent scleroderma renal crisis and is not recommended and has been shown to be associated with increased morbidity and mortality.