There is no available data regarding the safety of atezolizumab in pediatric patients and pregnant or breastfeeding women.

**Immune-Mediated Colitis**

- Grade 1 colitis should be treated with symptomatic management.

- Atezolizumab must be held in Grade 2 and Grade 3 colitis, and patients should be started on steroids with a slow taper.

- Atezolizumab should be permanently discontinued in Grade 4 colitis.

**Immune-Mediated Pneumonitis**

- Tapering corticosteroids is recommended if there is evidence of pneumonitis or interstitial lung disease on lung imaging.

- Atezolizumab should be held for Grade 2 pneumonitis and permanently discontinued if there is evidence of Grade 3 or 4 pneumonitis.

**Immune-Mediated Hepatitis**

- After ruling out viral hepatitis and other etiologies of elevated liver function tests, atezolizumab must be held in Grade 2 hepatitis. Patients should be started on oral or IV steroids followed by a slow taper.

- Atezolizumab must be permanently discontinued in Grade 3 and 4 immune mediated-hepatitis, and patients should be started on IV steroids.

**Immune-Mediated Endocrinopathies**

-  **Thyroid Disorders**
- If clinically indicated, consider thyroid hormone replacement therapy in hypothyroidism or medical management of hyperthyroidism.

- **Adrenal Insufficiency/Hypophysitis**
- Consider initiating stress dose corticosteroids and hormone replacement therapy as clinically indicated.

- **Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus**
- Consider starting insulin if indicated.

- 
**Atezolizumab should be held in Grades 2 to 4 endocrinopathies.**

- **Immune-mediated Renal Dysfunction****and Nephritis**
- Atezolizumab should be held with grade ≥2 toxicities, and corticosteroid administration should be considered.

- **Immune-mediated Cutaneous Adverse Reactions**
- Topical steroids are indicated for Grade 1/Grade 2 toxicity.
- Atezolizumab must be held in Grade 2 and Grade 3 toxicity; patients with Grade 2 toxicity should be treated with PO steroids.
- Atezolizumab must be permanently discontinued in patients with Grade 4 immune toxicity, and patients should be treated with IV steroids in an intensive care unit(ICU)