The majority of hip fractures can be diagnosed on plain film radiographs. An anteroposterior view of the pelvis should be obtained along with a lateral view of the affected hip. Occult fractures are those that are not visible on x-ray and account for between 2% to 10% of hip fractures.

It is important to recognize the fracture pattern on radiographic images as this will dictate the surgical management. Generally speaking, hip fractures are described by comparing their location relative to the insertion of the joint capsule on to the femoral neck. The joint capsule of the hip originates from the acetabulum and encompasses the entirety of the femoral neck. Distally the capsule inserts into the femur at the intertrochanteric line anteriorly and the intertrochanteric crest posteriorly. The capsule is reinforced by three ligaments: the iliofemoral and pubofemoral ligaments anteriorly and the ischiofemoral ligament posteriorly. Fractures proximal to the capsular insertion are described as intracapsular, while fractures distal to this are extracapsular.

Intracapsular hip fractures may be classified using the Pauwel classification. This classification divides fractures into three groups based on the angle of the fracture from the horizontal plane

- Type 1: <30 degree

- Type 2: 31-50 degrees

- Type 3: >50 degrees

An increased angle is associated with increasing shear forces and is, therefore, a more unstable fracture with reduced healing potential. This classification demonstrates marked inter-observer variation, particularly in displaced fractures.

The Garden classification is a more commonly recognized classification system for intracapsular hip fractures. It describes four fracture patterns and defines them based on the completeness and displacement of the fracture.

- Type 1: incomplete fracture and no displacement

- Type 2: complete fracture and no displacement

- Type 3: complete fracture and partial displacement

- Type 4: complete fracture and complete displacement

This classification is more reproducible than the Pauwel classification but again demonstrates intra-observer variation.

Extracapsular fractures can be divided into trochanteric and subtrochanteric fractures. Trochanteric fractures are fractures that occur between the greater and lesser trochanter. These fractures are historically classified with Evan’s classification, which assesses the stability of the fracture. In modern practice extracapsular fractures are typically described using the AO classification:

- A1: two-part, stable fracture

- A2: comminuted, unstable fracture

- A3: reverse or transverse, unstable fracture

Recognizing the different fracture types is important as it influences the surgical management.

Subtrochanteric fractures are fractures that occur between the lesser trochanter and 5 cm distal to the lesser trochanter. These were historically classified using the Russell-Taylor classification but now have a modernized AO classification system. Both of these classification methods are often academic and rarely influence management.

As part of the clinical evaluation, all patients should have blood tests on admission to assess for anemia, renal function, and coagulation profile. A bone screen is also of use and may aid the management of underlying osteoporosis or calcium abnormalities. Finally, a cross-match should be performed as operative management for fractured hips is associated with significant blood loss.

Patient evaluation should be approached in an interprofessional format with the involvement of the surgical, medical, and anesthetic teams, along with physiotherapists, pharmacists, and dieticians. This interprofessional approach ensures that the patient is comprehensively assessed and optimized prior to undergoing surgery. Hospitals are recommended to adopt this approach and formalize a hip fracture program to improve postoperative outcomes and reduce mortality.