History and physical examination plays a crucial role in the evaluation of arthritis and determining the type of arthritis, and differentiating symptoms from non-articular etiologies.  The 1st step in the physical examination of a patient with musculoskeletal complaints should be determining and confirming if the pain is articular or not. Non-articular pain can be seen secondary to several pathologies including fibromyalgia, where patients have tenderness in articular as well as extra-articular areas, but no effusion, swelling, warmth or erythema localized to the joints.  Tendinitis can also cause periarticular pain, a physical exam in these cases usually reveals tenderness along the tendon course or insertion without any focal tenderness or loss of range of motion of the joint.

Usual symptoms of arthritis are pain, swelling, loss of function, stiffness, deformity, weakness, and instability. They may also be accompanied by fatigue, sleep disturbance, emotional liability and symptoms of the underlying systemic illness. Pain from arthritis is usually worse by activities and at the end of the day. Inflammatory arthritis will also cause pain in the morning and at rest that may initially improve with activity, but subsequently gets worse with prolonged use and activity. Patients with fibromyalgia and myofascial pain syndrome usually complain of a diffuse all over pain. Neuropathic pain can be accompanied by paraesthesias in the nerve distribution. Morning stiffness lasting more than 45 minutes is typically associated with inflammatory arthritis,

Physical examination is the most important tool in assessing arthritis and arthralgias. Inflammatory arthritis is associated with tenderness, swelling, effusion, erythema and warmth. These features are more obvious in an acute inflammatory arthritic process, but maybe less pronounced in chronic inflammatory arthritides. Osteoarthritis can also be associated with tenderness, swelling, and effusion, although erythema and warmth are usually lacking. Decreased range of motion and obvious joint deformity can also be observed in arthritis.

The next step shall be assessing the arthritis onset, the number of joints involved, symmetry, distribution, and pattern.

**1. Onset.**

Acute onset arthritis is typical of septic arthritis, crystalline arthropathies, and reactive arthritis. Osteoarthritis, on the other hand, is almost always insidious onset. Rheumatoid arthritis and psoriatic arthritis are of insidious onset in most cases, although occasionally they can be acute onset as well. Arthritis associated with underlying autoimmune disorders is usually insidious onset.

**2. Number of involved joints.**

Arthritis can be monoarticular (single joint), oligoarticular (2-4 joints) or polyarticular (several joints). Bacterial, Lyme's, mycobacterial and Neisseria infections present with acute monoarthritis. Monoarthritis is also seen in patients with gout (especially early in the disease), pseudogout, hydroxyapatite disease, and trauma. Rarely, psoriatic arthritis can have an initial presentation as monoarthritis, which may later evolve into oligo or polyarthritis. Chronic monoarthritis can be seen in patients with untreated infections (Bacterial, Lyme's, mycobacterial and fungal), gout, pseudogout, osteoarthritis, Pigmented villonodular synovitis, hemarthrosis, tumors, osteonecrosis, early oligoarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) and rarely in rheumatoid or psoriatic arthritis.

In general, diseases with monoarticular or polyarticular involvement can also present as oligoarthritis. However, oligoarthritis predominantly of the lower extremity joints (knees or ankles) is characteristic of HLA-B27 associated seronegative spondyloarthritides. A subgroup of patients with psoriatic arthritis present with oligoarticular involvement of small joints of the hands including the distal interphalangeal (DIP), proximal interphalangeal (PIP), and metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints.

Polyarthritis can be caused by several inflammatory as well as non-inflammatory arthritides. The causes of inflammatory polyarthritis include rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, IBD associated arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, undifferentiated spondyloarthritis, gout, pseudogout and arthritis associated with underlying autoimmune diseases such as SLE and MCTD. Non-inflammatory polyarthritis can be seen in osteoarthritis, especially erosive osteoarthritis, nodal osteoarthritis, and primary generalized osteoarthritis.

**3. Symmetry.**

Polyarticular symmetrical inflammatory arthritis involving the small joints of hands and feet is the hallmark of RA. Other causes of symmetrical polyarthritis include JIA, psoriatic arthritis, pseudogout (pseudo-RA type), Adult-onset Still disease, arthritis associated with underlying autoimmune diseases such as SLE and MCTD and osteoarthritis, especially erosive osteoarthritis, nodal osteoarthritis, and primary generalized osteoarthritis. Asymmetrical polyarthritis can be seen in psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, IBD associated arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (pauciarticular or oligoarticular type), undifferentiated spondyloarthritis, gout, pseudogout, and osteoarthritis. As noted above, asymmetrical oligoarthritis of lower extremity joints can be seen in HLA-B27 associated seronegative spondyloarthritides.

**4. Distribution.**

Axial or spine involvement is common in osteoarthritis. Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is another cause of non-inflammatory axial arthritis. Of the inflammatory arthritides, axial involvement is mostly seen in HLA-B27 associated seronegative spondyloarthritides including ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, IBD associated arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, undifferentiated seronegative spondyloarthritis, and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis. Other causes of inflammatory arthritides with axial involvement include JIA and SAPHO syndrome. Axial involvement is not seen in RA.

Several patterns on peripheral involvement can give a clue to the diagnosis. RA is typically associated with polyarticular symmetrical inflammatory arthritis involving the small joints of hands (MCP, PIP) and feet (MTP). Wrist, ankle and knee involvement is also common. However, DIP joints of the hands are usually spared in RA. DIP joint involvement can be seen in osteoarthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and gout. Knee, wrist and 2nd and 3rd MCP joints are the commonly involved joints in pseudogout. Pain, stiffness and limited range of motion of bilateral shoulders and hips due to underlying inflammatory arthritis and periarthritis is the hallmark of Polymyalgia rheumatica, although rarely, RA can have a similar presentation.

**5. Pattern.**

Progressive additive pattern with the ongoing involvement of more joints can be seen in RA, psoriatic arthritis and polyarticular osteoarthritis. A migratory pattern where arthritis moves from one joint to another with complete resolution in the previously involved joint can be seen in Whipple disease, neisserial arthritis, and rheumatic fever. An intermittent pattern can be seen in palindromic rheumatism, gout, pseudogout, familial Mediterranean fever, Adult-onset Still disease and Muckle-Wells syndrome, This is characterized by complete resolution of symptoms in the previously involved joints with the asymptomatic period lasting varying amount of time before arthritis recurs in the same or other joints.

Other clinical features that can assist narrowing the differential diagnosis include family history and the age of onset with osteoarthritis more common in the older population while inflammatory arthritides more common in younger adults. It is also important to closely evaluate the neighboring joints to rule out referred pain. Skin examination is crucial and can greatly assist in diagnosis (eg. skin psoriasis, subcutaneous nodules, tophi, lupus rashes, sclerodactyly, etc.).