Diagnosis of relapsing polychondritis is primarily based on a combination of clinical features, radiographic findings, and biopsy of a cartilaginous site. It is guided by a set of clinical criteria suggested by McAdams et al.

- Recurrent chondritis of both auricles

- Nonerosive inflammatory arthritis

- Chondritis of nasal cartilage

- Inflammation of ocular structures presenting as conjunctivitis, keratitis, scleritis, or uveitis

- Chondritis of the respiratory tract with laryngeal or tracheal cartilage involvement

- Cochlear or vestibular damage presenting with neurosensory hearing loss, tinnitus, or vertigo

Any patient suspecting of having relapsing polychondritis should have a dynamic exploratory CT scan to evaluate for airway involvement. CT scans findings include functional airway abnormalities such as air trapping and collapse. Additional findings include thickening of the airway wall and luminal narrowing. Pulmonary function testing is done to further evaluate for airway trapping and to assess lung volumes. PET-CT is a new diagnostic modality that aids in early disease recognition and provides a site for targeted biopsy.

Biopsy of the auricular cartilage is performed to confirm the diagnosis of polychondritis. Positive serologic testing for rheumatoid factor and anti-nuclear antibody may be seen in patients with other associated rheumatologic diseases. Complement levels are usually normal in patients with relapsing polychondritis. Radiographic findings can include a non-erosive juxta-articular osteopenia and uniform, joint space narrowing; these findings are suggestive of arthropathy in relapsing polychondritis. Anti-type II collagen antibody tests are not routinely available, and, when these tests are done, these antibodies are not present in all the cases. There are no lab markers to assess for ongoing cartilage damage.