A multitude of causes cause fistulas, but the well-known mnemonic "FRIEND" here aids memory. "F" for foreign body, "R" radiation, "I" infection or Inflammatory Bowel Disease, "E" epithelialization, "N" neoplasm, and "D" for distal obstruction (as is the case in the cryptoglandular theory).

Foreign bodies in the rectum often are those placed intentionally, such as a seton to lower a fistula tract and make it more localized and aid healing. Radiation causing fistulas are well known and will be discussed briefly later on in this article. Infection is the most common cause of anorectal fistula and is thought to originate from a blockage of the anal glands and crypts. The two anal sphincters are divided by an avascular fatty areolar plane, which provides means for the spread and infiltration of an infection. Often an abscess will develop in this region, and it will find a way to drain via a fistula spontaneously.  Obstruction of the anal glands allows bacteria to proliferate and ultimately forms a perirectal or anorectal or perianal abscess. With or without surgical treatment of the anorectal abscess, there is a significant risk of fistula formation. In addition to an incision and drainage, a 5 to 10-day course of antibiotics has been shown to decrease the rate of fistula formation.

A thorough understanding of anorectal anatomy is critical to understanding abscess-to-fistula development. The correct localization of the fistula relative to the sphincters is vital to correct operative management. The essential structures in the anorectal region include the rectum itself, anal glands, anal sphincters, the levator ani, which is comprised of the puborectalis, pubococcygeus, and iliococcygeus. The anal canal lining is composed of stratified squamous epithelium distally, which changes to squamocolumnar epithelium proximally past the dentate line. Proximal to the dentate line is where the columns of Morgagni appear, which are folds of columnar glandular epithelium.

Anal fistulas are rarely a presentation of anal tuberculosis and should be suspected in endemic regions or nonhealing recurrent fistulas. Utilizing the polymerase chain reaction of pus samples is more sensitive than histopathology in testing for tuberculosis.

Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) of the anus and rectum, usually secondary to anal receptive intercourse, may predispose individuals to perianal abscess and fistula. These anorectal STIs are most commonly caused by gonorrhea, chlamydia as well as, syphilis (Treponema pallidum) and herpes simplex.

Radiation proctitis is another cause of anal fistulas. Radiation proctitis requires surgical intervention in less than 10% of the cases with fistula tracks to the vagina, urethra, and bladder being a common complication. Impaired microvascular healing often requires multiple treatment modalities, including local excision, flap reconstruction, and diversion of stool or urine from the site.

Complicated vaginal deliveries with 3rd or 4th-degree tears or requirement of episiotomy may predispose to anal fistula; however, these fistulas often heal spontaneously. In nonhealing obstetric related anal fistulas, surgical therapy is dependent on the location of the fistula as well as vaginal involvement. When distal to the dentate line, a recto-vaginal fistula becomes an ano-rectovaginal fistula. Causes include obstetrical trauma typically associated with a traumatic vaginal birth. Patients who undergo episiotomy are at increased risk for sphincter injury and fecal incontinence.

Although the majority of the resting anal tone is attributed to the involuntary internal sphincter, the external sphincter is vital to maintaining fecal continence and is comprised of striated voluntary muscle fibers. Three nerve branches innervate it; the external perineal nerve anteriorly, the inferior rectal nerve posteromedially, and in 31% of cases, an additional posterior branch arising from either S4 or the inferior rectal nerve.