A progestogen (also called progestagen, gestagen, or gestogen) is a molecule, either natural or synthetic, that shows similar effects as progesterone, binds to the progesterone receptor and acts as an agonist. Progestins are synthetic progestogens. Progestin drugs can be subclassified in two ways: (1) generationally or (2) based upon structural properties. The generational subclassification is based upon when the group of progestins was introduced into the market, regardless of structure derivation, and consists of the first, second, third, and fourth generation. Fourth-generation progestins are newer preparations and have some antiandrogenic properties. Of particular importance is drospirenone, a fourth-generation progestin structurally related to spironolactone. When divided based upon structural properties, there are three major groupings to consider. These include pregnanes, estranes, and gonanes. Pregnanes are derived from progesterone, and the latter two are derived from testosterone. Estranes have more androgenic activity than gonanes. The testosterone derivatives are the majority of progestins used in contraceptives. Each of the progestin drugs is listed by their group below:

- Pregnanes: medroxyprogesterone acetate, nomegestrol acetate

- Estranes: Norethindrone, norethindrone acetate, ethynodiol diacetate, norethynodrel

- Gonanes: levonorgestrel, desogestrel, norgestimate, gestodene

Progestins are used in medications primarily for contraception, either alone or in combination with estrogen and postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy (HRT), but they are also used in the treatment and management of a variety of other conditions. Contraceptive vaginal ring and transdermal patch contain estrogen and progestin combination. There are no differences in contraceptive efficacy among various progestins in combined oral contraceptives (COC: combined estrogen and progestin oral contraceptive pill). In women who use COC, there is a decrease in the risk of endometrial and ovarian cancer. Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate use also has been shown to reduce endometrial and ovarian cancer. There is a lack of data on the progestin-only pill, progestin-containing implants, and intrauterine devices.

Progestins are used with estrogens for contraceptive purposes:

- Combined oral contraceptives

- Contraceptive vaginal ring

- Transdermal patch

Progestins are also used without combination for contraceptive purposes:

- Progestin-only oral contraceptive pill: Norethindrone 0.35 mg tablets in the US, desogestrel 75 µg in Europe

- Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) injections

- Etonogestrel subcutaneous implant

- Levonorgestrel intrauterine device

- Postcoital contraception: levonorgestrel

The other postcoital contraceptive options do not involve progestins, ulipristal acetate, a progesterone receptor antagonist or modulator, and a copper T 380A intrauterine device.

Progestins, by themselves or in combination contraceptives, can be used to treat dysmenorrhea, irregular menstruation, abnormal uterine bleeding, and endometriosis-related pain. They are also indicated in the diagnostic evaluation of secondary amenorrhea. They are used in an emergency or postcoital (morning-after pill) contraception. Progestin-only contraceptives appear to be appropriate for many women with contraindications to estrogen-containing contraceptives or women who prefer to avoid estrogen exposure. Levonorgestrel is used in levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine devices.

When used in combination with estrogen, progestin-containing contraceptives can be used to treat menstrual cycle disorders such as oligomenorrhea due to polycystic ovary syndrome, menstrual migraines, and premenstrual syndrome or premenstrual dysphoric disorder. They also can be used to suppress the formation of ovarian cysts. Progestins with less androgenic activity (mainly Gonanes) in combination with estrogen are indicated in the treatment of hyperandrogenism (acne and hirsutism) from polycystic ovary syndrome and nonclassical congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency.

Progestins, along with estrogen, can be used for hormone replacement in women with premature ovarian failure, menopause, and secondary (pituitary) or tertiary (hypothalamic) hypogonadism. Progestins are given with estrogens to postmenopausal women with an intact uterus for hormone replacement therapy. Estrogens can be administered orally, transdermally, or vaginally for hormone replacement therapy. Progestogens can be given as a continuous or cyclical regimen. In a cyclical regimen, women will have menstrual bleeding, an estrogen most commonly conjugated estrogens are given orally for 25 days, medroxyprogesterone acetate oral is given during the last 12 to 14 days of estrogen administration. For 5 to 6 days, the patient receives no hormone, and withdrawal bleeding is expected. Continuous administration does not trigger withdrawal bleeding, but intermittent spotting or bleeding can be seen, especially in the first year. Other postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy options include ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone acetate, estradiol and norethindrone, estradiol and norgestimate, and estradiol and drospirenone combinations.

Estrogens and progestins are used to stimulate puberty and secondary sexual characteristics in women with primary ovarian failure, for example, Turner syndrome.

Clinicians use progesterone therapy to prevent preterm labor. Progesterone inhibits proinflammatory cytokines and delay cervical ripening and has been recommended to women who suffered a previous preterm delivery and is at risk for it. Progesterone therapy has been shown to be effective in preventing miscarriage in women with both first-trimester vaginal bleeding and a history of more than two miscarriages.

Progesterone as micronized progesterone, progesterone in oil intramuscular injection, or vaginal micronized progesterone is used in in-vitro fertilization (IVF) protocols after placement of embryo(s) to uterus 3 to 5 days post-fertilization. GnRH agonists or antagonists are given before IVF suppresses pituitary LH, which in turn cannot stimulate the corpus luteum. Progesterone is administered to support the embryo until the placenta takes over.

Progestins have a role in gender transition treatment in female-to-male transition. These women are treated with androgen. Androgens suppress ovarian sex steroid production by suppressing the pituitary, but if the suppression is not enough and the patient experiences breakthrough bleeding, depot medroxyprogesterone acetate 150 mg every three months can be given to prevent uterine bleeding.