The clinical presentation of symptomatic ankyloglossia varies; however, the biggest concern, as well as research and data collection, focus on breastfeeding difficulties that include prolonged feeding, difficulty latching, and irritability while feeding. These all lead to poor weight gain. During breastfeeding periods, it has also been reported that mothers with infants with this conditions have a higher risk of significant nipple pain, which could lead to frustration and the start of formula feeding in newborns. With the American Academy of Pediatrics campaign to exclusively breastfeed babies up to 6 months of age, ankyloglossia and its management have gained more attention due to the difficulties that babies encounter when breastfeeding is attempted.

There are concerns that ankyloglossia can persist beyond the neonatal period. While some authors describe the possibility of speech related issues due to decreased tongue mobility, others disagree. However, concerned parents frequently ask their pediatricians about future problems with articulation. As the speech develops, some children may exhibit difficulties with the sounds of several letters or a combination of letters: l, r, t, d, n, z, th, and sh. It is quite difficult to predict which patients will have articulation problems, or if in fact, this association exists.

Other reported problems in patients with ankyloglossia include difficulty eating certain foods that include licking (ice cream), playing certain wind instruments (examples include flutes, clarinets, tubas, trumpets), and orthodontic problems (open bite and malocclusion).

Among complications, self-esteem and psychological issues can also be a concern in patients with tongue-tie.