The muscles innervated by the median nerve can be divided into four layers of the anterior compartment of the forearm. The first layer arises from the medial epicondyle and contains three muscles:  the pronator teres, flexor radialis longus, and palmaris longus. The second layer contains the flexor digitorum superficialis, whose tendons insert into the middle phalanx of the four fingers. Thus it is a flexor of the fingers at the proximal interphalangeal joint. The first and second layers are innervated by the median nerve proper.

The muscles of the third layer are the lateral half of the flexor digitorum profundus that innervates the index and ring fingers, the flexor pollicis longus, and the pronator quadratus. These are innervated by the anterior interosseous nerve, which has no sensory branches.

Sensory innervation:  None of the sensory nerves that serve the forearm crosses the wrist (with the exception of the palmar branch of the median nerve). The sensory distribution of the median nerve in the hand consists of the palmar surfaces of part of the thumb, the index finger, the middle finger, and the lateral half of the ring finger. The rest of the sensory innervation of the hand is provided by the ulnar nerve (medial hand and medial half of the ring finger and all the little finger). The ulnar nerve also provides sensation to the medial dorsal surface through the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve. The superficial branch of the radial nerve completes the innervation of the dorsal surface of the hand by way of the superficial branch of the radial nerve.