Quality assurance is a significant concern within the field of mammography, and a team approach is essential for navigating the complexities of patient care. Morbidity and mortality reduction is dependent on early identification of malignant lesions on mammography. This depends not only on the chain of events from image preparation, acquisition to interpretation but also critically includes patient communication. Identifying high-risk lesions is of no clinical benefit if the patient is not promptly notified and engaged with adequate services and healthcare specialists. As such, an interprofessional team approach to breast cancer management affords the most significant benefit for clinical care.

Patients with abnormal or concerning results should be promptly notified of the results and given clear direction on the necessary follow-up care. Once a lesion is identified, the patient requires additional imaging with diagnostic mammography and/or ultrasound. For patients with findings concerning for malignancy, a breast biopsy is necessary. Coordinating these steps requires a comprehensive breast imaging team. Radiologists identify the lesions initially and notify the clinical support staff of the results. These support staffs are tasked with reaching out to the patients and the referring provider with the results and suggested course of action. Once further diagnostic imaging and biopsy are performed, coordination with pathology is required, and the results must be communicated directly to the patients. Finally, if a high-risk or malignant lesion is identified, the patient is referred for surgical oncology consultation, and often the case is discussed in an interprofessional meeting that includes medical oncologists, radiologic oncologists, breast surgeons, pathologists, radiologists, genetic counselors, and nurse navigators. The cycle from identifying a concerning lesion on mammography to the diagnosis of breast cancer should take no longer than approximately three months.