In the emergency department, the patient must be kept nil per os (NPO) and hydrated intravenously with crystalloid, and antibiotics should be administered intravenously as per the surgeon. The responsibility for the consent falls on the surgeon. The gold-standard treatment for acute appendicitis is to perform an appendectomy. Laparoscopic appendectomy is preferred over the open approach. Most uncomplicated appendectomies are performed laparoscopically. Several studies have compared the outcomes with the laparoscopic appendectomy group and patients who underwent open appendectomy. The results were suggestive of a lower incidence of wound infection, decreased level of postoperative analgesic requirement, and shorter postoperative hospital stays in the former group. The main disadvantage of laparoscopic appendectomy is the longer operative time.

In cases where there is an abscess or advanced infection, the open approach may be needed. The laparoscopic approach affords less pain, quicker recovery, and the ability to explore most of the abdomen through small incisions. Situations, where there is a known abscess from a perforated appendix may require a percutaneous drainage procedure usually done by an interventional radiologist. This stabilizes the patient and allows the inflammation to subside over time, enabling a less difficult laparoscopic appendectomy to be performed at a later date. Practitioners also start patients on broad-spectrum antibiotics. There is some disagreement regarding preoperative antibiotic administration for uncomplicated appendicitis. Some surgeons feel routine antibiotics in these cases are not warranted, while others give them routinely. There have also been several studies promoting the treatment of uncomplicated appendicitis solely with antibiotics and avoiding surgery altogether.

In patients with an appendiceal abscess, some surgeons continue antibiotics for several weeks and then perform an elective appendectomy. When the appendix has ruptured, the procedure can still be done laparoscopically, but extensive irrigation of the abdomen and pelvis is necessary. In addition, the trocar sites may have to be left open. A significant number of patients with an impression of acute appendicitis can be managed with a laparoscopic approach uneventfully. However, several factors predict the demand to convert to the open approach. The only preoperative independent factor predicting the conversion during laparoscopic appendectomy is the presence of comorbidities. Moreover, a couple of intra-operative findings, including the presence of peri-appendicular abscess and diffuse peritonitis, are independent predictors of not only a higher conversion rate but also a significant increase in postoperative complications.

While laparoscopic appendectomy has been widely used as the preferred approach for the surgical management of acute appendicitis in many centers, still open appendectomy might be selected as the practical choice, specifically in the management of complicated appendicitis with phlegmon and in the patients who are subjected to the conversion from the laparoscopic approach mainly due to the potential issues related to poor visibility. Several other alternative surgical approaches, including Natural Orifice Transluminal Endoscopic Surgery (NOTES) and Single-incision Laparoscopic Surgery (SILS), have been introduced recently. The idea of utilizing a flexible endoscope to enter the gastrointestinal or vaginal tract and consequently traversing the mentioned organ to enter the peritoneal cavity is an interesting alternative for patients who are considerate about the cosmetic aspects of the procedures. It has been later tested with successful performing of trans-gastric appendectomy in a group of ten Indian patients. The major potential advantages of appendectomy with NOTES are avoiding scars and limiting postoperative pain. Regarding the limited number of patients who have been under NOTES appendectomy, a detailed comparison of postoperative outcomes is still impossible. Hence, the major drawback with performing this technique is the demand to hybrid with the laparoscopic approach is to provide adequate retraction during the procedure and to confirm the closure of the entry site.