Pericardial effusion refers to abnormal levels of fluid within the pericardial space. This is often attributed to a decrease in fluid resorption, which can occur with a lymphatic obstruction or venous hypertension. In acute cases, the sudden increase of volume can lead to heart dysfunction if the pressure increases enough. However, slow accumulation of fluid can cause the pericardium to stretch, which allows the cavity to withstand higher pressures. While a range of clinical features exists, effusions commonly present with chest pain or dyspnea.

Pericarditis refers to inflammation of the pericardium, which often presents with chest pain and fever. Typically, the pain worsens with inspiration or coughing and is alleviated by leaning forward or sitting. On auscultation, a friction rub is often present. Acute pericarditis can be attributed to both infectious and non-infectious causes. While often idiopathic, many cases are thought to be viral with echovirus and coxsackievirus being the most common. Noninfectious causes of pericarditis include neoplasms and damage caused by myocardial infarction. Electrocardiograms in patients with pericarditis typically show ST-segment elevation in all leads besides aVR and V1.

Dressler syndrome is a form of pericarditis, believed to be an autoimmune reaction to certain myocardial antigens, that occurs at least 2 to 3 weeks after myocardial infarction.

Constrictive pericarditis refers to fibrosis and thickening of the pericardium. The subsequent loss of compliance decreases the heart’s ability to pump blood adequately. The majority of cases of constrictive pericarditis are considered idiopathic. In addition to reduced cardiac output and elevated venous pressures, Kussmaul’s sign may also be observed. This refers to a paradoxical increase in jugular venous distension during inspiration.

Cardiac tamponade occurs when an increase in pressure, due to causes such as hemopericardium or pericarditis, compresses the heart and restricts adequate cardiac output. By decreasing compliance, normal venous return to the right atrium is hindered. Acute cardiac tamponade can present with Beck’s Triad, which includes hypotension, jugular venous distension, and muffled heart sounds on auscultation. Pulsus paradoxus, an exaggerated decrease in systolic blood pressure during inspiration, is also often seen.