Treatment of CMTs is mostly rehabilitative and symptomatic since there is no definite and effective disease-modifying treatment to alter the natural progressive course of the disease.

**Pharmacotherapy**

Rests on the current understanding of the underlying genetic abnormality and pathophysiology of CMTs coupled with newer drug development techniques such as systemic biology-based modeling, anti-sense oligonucleotides, adenoviral vector-based drug delivery, and RNA interference technology. In CMT1A, agents target PMP22 overexpression such as ascorbic acid, onapristone, geldanamycin, and rapamycin have been beneficial in animal models and cell lines with improved muscle mass and weakness. However, these agents were not useful in human clinical trials.MPZ associated neuropathy in mice.

Other agents whose therapeutic role in CMTs have been explored with limited results include those that promote axonal regeneration (neurotrophin-3, neuregulins), regulators of gene expression (histone deacetylases), chaperones and inducers of heat shock proteins (arimoclomol and celastrol), calcium homeostasis (P2X7 antagonists-adenosine homodinucleotide P18), neuroprotective and antioxidant drugs (purified polyols-resveratrol) and potassium channel blockers (3,4-diaminopyridine).

**Rehabilitation**

Involves a multi-disciplinary team and is the cornerstone of medical management. Patients are at risk of developing a reduced range of movement, contractures, and deformities. The important components of physical therapy are stretching exercises, aerobics, resistance training, and timely use of orthotic devices. They improve and keep-up muscle strength and function besides improving joint flexibility and range of movement, balance, and cardio-respiratory fitness. There is also a positive impact on fatigue and pain and in preventing stiffness and deformities.

**Others**

Symptomatic treatment of fatigue, depression, neuropathic pain, and RLS is like that for other neuropathies. Foot deformities, scoliosis, and hip dysplasia may need corrective surgeries and tendon transfers depending on the merit of the case. Restrictive lung disease, sleep apnea, and vocal cord palsy need suitable intervention in collaboration with surgeons, pulmonologists, otorhinolaryngologists, physiatrists, and allied specialties.