Directly visualize the access vein with ultrasound and anesthetize the skin and subcutaneous tissue over the area of the vein with 1% lidocaine. Using the access needle, puncture the vein while directly visualizing the needle tip. Ultrasound will confirm the correct positioning of the needle within the vein, as will blood return from the needle. An axial view of the vessel with the ultrasound will allow visualization of the needle tip. Advance guidewire through the needle and check wire purchase with fluoroscopy to ensure positioning in at minimum the subclavian vein. Remove the needle while keeping the wire in place. Using the scalpel, make a small nick in the skin to widen the needle tract to allow more room for the introducer. Thread the introducer and dilator over the wire, through the skin, and into the vein. Trim the catheter to the previously measured length using the scalpel provided in the PICC kit. Remove the wire and dilator while leaving the introducer in place. Place a finger over the opening of the introducer to avoid air aspiration during removal. Slowly insert the entire length of PICC with obturator into the introducer sheath and visualize with fluoroscopy correct positioning at the cavoatrial junction. Snap open and pull the two wings of the sheath apart and alternate advancing catheter between pulls slightly. Aspirate and flush each lumen checking for blood return. Remove the obturator and place caps on the PICC lumens. Secure the catheter to the skin using a locking device and cover it with dressings.

**Post Procedure Care**

The dressing and venotomy site should be inspected to check for bleeding and erythema. Dressings should be changed at a minimum once per week. After each use, the PICC should be flushed with normal saline.