# Continuing Education Activity

Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB) describes a transient and reversible contraction of bronchial smooth muscle after physical exertion that may or may not produce symptoms of dyspnea, chest tightness, wheezing, and cough. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of EIB and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB).
- Summarize the pathophysiology of exercise-induced bronchoconstriction.
- Identify the typical management considerations for patients with exercise-induced bronchoconstriction.
- Review the importance of collaboration and communication among the interdisciplinary team to enhance care coordination for patients affected by exercise-induced bronchoconstriction.

# Introduction

Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB) occurs during physical exertion and involves a narrowing of the airway.

# Etiology

Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB) describes a transient airway narrowing occurring during physical exertion. The name EIB is favored over exercise-induced asthma (EIA) as recommended by the American Thoracic Society (ATS), and American Academy/College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology. EIB can also be denoted as EIB with asthma (EIBa), and EIB without asthma, (EIBwa).

# Epidemiology

Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction occurs in 40% to 90% of people with asthma and up to 20% of the general population without asthma.

EIB occurrence is dependent on what sport is played. High-risk sports include long episodes of exercise greater than 5 to 8 minutes in certain environments such as cold, dry air or chlorinated pools such as long-distance running, cycling, cross country or downhill skiing, ice hockey, ice skating, high altitude sports, swimming, water polo, and triathlons. Medium risk sports include soccer, rugby, football, basketball, volleyball, baseball, cricket, and field hockey, where athletes rarely perform more than 5 to 8 minutes of continuous exercise. Low-risk sports include non-long distance track events inducing sprints, tennis, fencing, gymnastics, boxing, golf, weightlifting, bodybuilding, and martial arts.

Screening for EIB is not supported by quality evidence, and further research and development of a symptom measurement tool is needed.

# Pathophysiology

Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction results from the alteration of normal lung physiology occurring with evaporative water loss, thermal changes, and irritant exposure induced by a large increase in minute ventilation and demand on the respiratory system to heat and humidify air with exercise-related hyperpnea.

Also, nasal breathing becomes insufficient, leading to mouth breathing and increased exposure of lung surfaces to pollutants, irritants, and allergens, which result in the generation of reactive oxygen species and a neutrophilic inflammatory response.

Changes in mucus composition and decrease function of mucociliary clearance can lead to mucus plugging and bacterial growth.

Long term exposure can lead to epithelial damage and shedding, with remodeling and inflammation resembling asthma.

The osmotic theory is supported by evidence that EIB severity is directly related to the rate of water loss in the airways, EIB can be prevented by inhaling fully humidified air at body temperature, and bronchoconstriction can also be induced by inhalation of hyperosmolar saline.

Interestingly, EIB has not been proven to affect exercise or athletic performance negatively.

# History and Physical

Symptoms of exercise-induced bronchoconstriction can include mild to moderate symptoms of chest tightness, wheezing, coughing, and dyspnea that occurs within 15 minutes after 5 to 8 minutes of high-intensity aerobic training.

Risk factors include a personal or family history of asthma, a personal history of atopy or allergic rhinitis, exposure to cigarette smoke, participating in high-risk sports (see epidemiology), living and practicing in areas with high levels of pollution, and female gender. Some small studies suggest sugar-sweetened beverages may increase risk by increasing inflammation and adiposity.

# Evaluation

Clinical diagnosis by symptoms has low sensitivity and specificity, and some patients are asymptomatic. Standardized testing for diagnosis includes direct and indirect methods and usually involves spirometry measurement of FEV1 changes from baseline expressed as a percent decrease.

Direct stimulation of smooth muscle receptors by methacholine to induce bronchoconstriction is well established. Sensitivity at predicting EIB has been reported to be 58.6% to 91.1%.

Indirect testing, which is more specific for EIB, can involve aerobic exercise in a controlled environment with cold, dry air as these conditions are known to precipitate EIB in susceptible individuals. Alternatives to exercise testing include eucapnic voluntary hyperpnea or hyperventilation of dry air, and airway provocation testing, including hyperosmolar 4.5% saline or dry powder mannitol, which act to dehydrate the respiratory epithelium to induce EIB. The sensitivity and specificity of the alternatives are not well established and may vary by the lab.

**Exercise Challenge Testing**

The ATS recommends exercise challenge testing in a controlled dry environment. Exercise testing parameters outlined by the ATS include recommendations on ventilation level, heart rate, time at maximal capacity, and medications to hold before testing, including caffeine. The patient must avoid entering the refractory period before exercise testing. Serial measurements of spirometry, specifically FEV1, are recorded during exercise at 5,10,15, and 30 minutes. FEV1 has good repeatability and is recommended by ATS to diagnose EIB.

**Pulmonary Function Testing**

CHEST guidelines provide 2B recommendation for pulmonary function tests (PFT), exercise or bronchoprovocation studies as described above, and allergy testing for common airborne allergens to distinguish between the most common causes of exercise-induced cough.

**Fractional Excretion of Nitric Oxide (FENO) Testing**

A few smaller studies suggest fractional excretion of nitric oxide (FENO) may replace FEV1 to diagnose and measure the severity of EIB instead of spirometry with FEV1 percent change. The FENO can be used with direct or indirect testing and can be easily performed by younger children. FENO measures the T helper cell type 2 (Th2) inflammatory response, versus airway hyperresponsiveness, and may be better suited to distinguish EIB from another etiology of symptoms. Cut off values of 27 to 46 ppb FENO have been suggested as diagnostic, with greater than 46 ppb being 100% specific.

# Treatment / Management

**Short-Acting Beta Agonists (SABA)**

American Thoracic Society (ATS) guidelines from 2013 provide a strong recommendation with high-quality evidence for short-acting beta 2 agonists (SABA) use 5 to 20 minutes (optimally 15) minutes before exercise.

**Inhaled Corticosteroids (ICS)**

If symptoms are not well controlled with the SABA or patient is using SABA daily, additional medications can be added after medication adherence, and proper use has been confirmed. It is estimated that 15% to 20% of the patients will not respond to SABA treatment. ATS provides a strong recommendation with moderate-quality evidence for daily inhaled corticosteroids (ICS).

**Leukotriene Receptor Antagonists (LTRA)**

ATS provides a strong recommendation with moderate-quality evidence for daily leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA) to address the inflammatory mediator release involved in EIB.

**Mast Cell Stabilizing Agents (MCSA)**

ATS also makes strong recommendations with high-quality evidence for adding mast cell stabilizer (MCSA) before exercise. Mast cell degranulation plays a key role in EIB pathology. There is no additional benefit when MCSA is combined with SABA, and MCSAs are less effective than SABA. MCSA is not widely available in the U.S.

**Short-acting Muscarinic Antagonists (SAMA)**

Inhaled anticholinergic agents are weakly recommended with low-quality evidence. Short-acting muscarinic antagonists (SAMA) are less effective than SABA; however, they can be used in combination when SABA tolerance develops.

**Antihistamine**

An antihistamine may be beneficial in patients with underlying allergies.

**Long-acting Beta Agonists (LABA)**

ATS strongly recommends against, with high-quality evidence, the daily use of long-acting beta 2 agonists (LABA) because the potential side effects do not outweigh the benefits.

**Non-pharmacologic Interventions**

Nonpharmacologic treatment approaches are strongly recommended with moderate-quality evidence.

Secondly, masks to promote warming and humidification of the air with exercise are weakly recommended with low-quality evidence and may be as effective as using a SABA.

Thirdly, wearing a mechanical barrier mask and/or avoiding exercise in environments high in pollen, allergens, ozone, exhaust, and high levels of chlorine can reduce EIB. Alternatives for pool disinfection are available.

Increasing general exercise tolerance and endurance and decreasing bodyweight if the patient is obese are helpful, and a Cochrane review found exercise to improve EIB severity, pulmonary function, and reduce airway inflammation in people with asthma and EIB.

Caffeine may offer protection against bronchoconstriction and decreased ventilatory dead space and decreases exercise-induced hypoxemia and respiratory muscle fatigue when used before exercise.

Low salt diet and supplementation with fish oil and vitamin C may be beneficial in some patients.

**Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV)**

Treatment with non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) support has been shown to decrease airway reactivity in children with asthma and was evaluated in combination with respiratory physical therapy in one study for EIB in asthmatics with positive results in a Brazilian study. The benefit of NIPPV was postulated to involve the stretch mechanism in airways and with the resulting induction of an inhibitory pathway that stopped the cycle of inflammation and promoted bronchodilation. Participants completed 10 1-hr sessions twice a week. The first 20 minutes were spent completing respiratory exercises while sitting and supine, followed by either continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) at 8 cmH2O, inspiratory muscle training, or bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) at 8/12 cm H2O. Results included exercise FEV1 measurements as outlined by ATS, FENO to measure airway inflammation, and a questionnaire for symptom measurement. PPV both bilevel and CPAP reduced EIB. Respiratory muscle training (RMT) was shown in the same study to reduce medication use and increase respiratory muscle strength.

**Treatment to reduce the perception of symptoms**

Another treatment approach involves reducing the perception of symptoms. Breathing control, including yoga, or supervised breathing training, has been shown in some small studies to decrease symptoms, reduce medication use, decrease anxiety and depression associated with EIB, and increase the quality of life. Further research and adaptation for use during EIB events are needed.

# Differential Diagnosis

Symptoms of chest tightness, wheezing, coughing, and dyspnea occurring with exercise can indicate pathology along the entire airway.

**Nasal Airway**

The differential includes diseases of the nasal airway, including exercise-induced rhinosinusitis, allergic rhinitis, upper airway cough syndrome, upper respiratory infection (URI), and anatomic abnormalities. The nasal airway participates in filtering, humidifying, and regulating airway resistance and, therefore, nasal airway conditions can be comorbid with EIB.

**Pharynx and Larynx**

The differential also includes diseases of the pharynx and larynx, including EILO, previously called exercise-induced vocal cord dysfunction. Athletes with EILO present similarly to EIB; however, treatment is not, and differentiation is required with appropriate testing, including visualization of the larynx with exercise.

**Lower Airways**

Lastly, the differential included diseases of the airways, including asthma, respiratory tract infection (RTI), and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).

**Cardiac**

Cardiac causes of exertional dyspnea should be investigated, especially in children.

**Gastrointestinal**

GERD

**Others**

CHEST guidelines recommend the evaluation of cough in adolescent athletes include asthma, EIB, respiratory tract infection, upper airway cough syndrome, and environmental exposures.

Less common causes include exercise-induced pulmonary edema, mainly seen in water immersion sports or high-altitude winter sports, PE, saltwater aspiration syndrome, and smoking. No studies were identified by the authors of CHEST guidelines for exercise-induced cough caused by cardiac abnormalities.

# Prognosis

With appropriate treatment, athletes can perform at the same level as peers and compete and win a medal in the Olympics and other international competitions.

# Complications

Complications involve sequela of poorly managed asthma, reduction in physical activity, and a sedentary lifestyle.

# Pearls and Other Issues

It is important to consider the anti-doping regulations present in many athletic programs. Some medications utilized for Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction may require a therapeutic use exemption (TUE). ICS, LTRA's, MCSA's, inhaled anticholinergics, SABA (including albuterol and formoterol), antibiotics, 1st generation antihistamines with or without oral decongestant, nasal ipratropium, dextromethorphan, nasal corticosteroids, topical decongestants, and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) in appropriate doses do not enhance performance and therefore do not require a TUE.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Care coordination between primary care providers, pulmonologists, ENT, sports medicine practitioners, and coaches is required to ensure proper diagnosis and treatment of Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction. Sports coaches play an important role in identifying athletes who are experiencing symptoms during the practice or who express a desire to quit the sport due to poor fitness, as it can be a sign of EIB. The education of coaches is important to ensure adherence to face protection from cold, dry air, exposure to pollutants, particulate matter, and allergens during practice. Coaches can also work with school administration to ensure practice locations and pool chemicals are safe for practice. Primary care sports medicine practitioners may be the first contact for athletes with symptoms. Proper testing for diagnosis is required as clinical symptoms are not sensitive or specific, and some patients are asymptomatic. Differential diagnosis includes the entire airway, and each part may contribute to symptoms requiring referral to an otolaryngologist. Coordination with pulmonology for testing may be required. Pulmonology may already be involved in asthma management in hard to control patients. Communication and coordination will lead to an optimal diagnosis, treatment, treatment adherence, and control of bronchoconstriction, allowing patients to participate in an activity as they desire.