Most psychologists now agree that classical conditioning is a basic form of learning. Furthermore, it is well-known that Pavlovian principles can influence human health, emotion, motivation, and therapy of psychological disorders. There are many clinically related uses of classical conditioning. For example, former drug users often have a craving when they are in a drug-related environment or around people that they associate with previous highs. Drug counselors often advise these people to stay away from settings that could trigger a desire to take drugs again. Also, it has been proven that classical conditioning can even affect the human immune system. When a particular taste accompanies a drug that influences an immune response, sometimes the taste itself can induce the immune response at a later time. Another example can be found in the overcoming of phobias. One patient, who had feared getting into an elevator for 30 years, forced herself to enter 20 elevators a day. After 10 days, her fear had almost completely vanished.

O.H Mowrer discovered that certain behaviors can be reconditioned when he successfully developed a therapy for bed-wetters. In his therapy, the child would sleep on a liquid-sensitive pad connected to an alarm. Once moisture was detected, the alarm would go off. After repetition, bladder relaxation became associated with waking up and 75% of the time, frequent bed-wetters were healed and longer wet the bed while they slept.

Another example of an effective therapy that is used to cure phobias is counterconditioning, which pairs the trigger stimulus with a response that is contrary to fear. Two counterconditioning techniques that have been proven to be effective are exposure therapy and aversive therapy. In general, exposure therapies are therapies that expose people to what scares them. Two types of exposure therapies are systematic desensitization and virtual reality exposure therapy. In systematic desensitization, a pleasant, relaxed state is associated with increasing anxiety-triggering stimuli. This therapy is common in the treatment of phobias. Virtual reality exposure follows the same concept as general exposure therapy but uses virtual reality to do instead of real-life situations. Aversive conditioning has the goal of substituting a negative response for a positive response to a harmful stimulus. This is essentially the reverse of systematic desensitization in which a positive response is replaced with a negative response to a harmless stimulus. One common example of aversive conditioning is mixing alcohol with an extremely bitter taste or lacing fingernails with something that causes severe nausea. The problem with this therapy is that patients can differentiate between situations inside and outside of the psychiatrist’s office. An alcoholic understands that if he drinks alcohol, it will normally not have that bitter taste. For this reason, a combination of conditioning therapies is the best approach to treat certain issues.