# Definition/Introduction

**Opioids Receptors and Classification**

The mu receptors are a class of receptors that neuromodulate different physiological functions, but above all, nociception but also stress, temperature, respiration, endocrine activity, gastrointestinal activity, memory, mood, and motivation. Because these receptors bind opioids, they are also commonly referred to as mu-opioid receptors (MORs). However, opioid receptors are a very large family of receptors that includes in addition to MORs also delta-opioid receptors (DORs), kappa opioid receptors (KORs), and nociceptin receptor (NOR) also referred to as opioid-receptor-like receptor 1 (ORL1) which seems to have a critical role in the development of tolerance to mu-opioid agonists used as analgesics. Also, there are some other opioid receptors such as the zeta, the epsilon, the lambda, and the iota opioid receptors. Sigma receptors are no longer considered to be opioid receptors as the opioid antagonist naloxone does not reverse their activation. Although according to the International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology (IUPHAR) recommendation the appropriate terminology for the three classical opioid receptors and the nociceptin receptor should be MOP ("Mu OPioid receptor"), DOP, KOP, and NOP respectively, in this chapter we will refer to the acronym MOR for indicating mu-opioid receptors as it is the most used in the scientific literature.

**Receptor Mechanism**

Opioid receptors are part of the G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) family. Crystallographic studies have allowed researchers to characterize this important superfamily of receptors that control different aspects of cellular function and are implicated in a vast number of neurotransmitter processes. Their basic structure consists of a single polypeptide chain that crosses the cell membrane seven times (seven-transmembrane domain receptors), has an N-terminal extracellular domain of variable length, and a C-terminal intracellular domain, and interacts with heterotrimeric G proteins.

Endogenous and exogenous opioids operate through both inhibitory and excitatory action at the presynaptic and postsynaptic sites. In particular, the MORs interact with a G protein of the inhibitory type, the G-alpha-iota/o class of adenylate cyclase inhibitory G-alpha proteins. Based on the structure of the alpha subunit, there are the G-alpha-iota forms (G-alpha-iota1, 2, and 3), G-alpha-omicron types (A and B), and G-alpha-zeta type. On the other hand, the beta-gamma heterodimer forms from one of the five different betas and one of the twelve different gamma subtypes. In the resting state, there is a G-alpha-beta-gamma complex, and the subunit α binds guanosine diphosphate (GDP). The binding of the opioid agonist (endogenous or exogenous) to the extracellular N-terminus domain of the MOR induces dissociation of GDP from the G-alpha subunit, which is replaced by guanosine triphosphate (GTP), and subsequent dissociation of the G-alpha-GTP from the beta-gamma heterodimer. The now active G-alpha-GTP and beta-gamma subunit complex interact with different intracellular signaling pathways such as the phospholipase C and the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, as well as irk-mediated hyperpolarization mechanisms and calcium channels processes. The intracellular signal ends with the action of the GTPase, which hydrolyzes the G-alpha bound GTP to GDP. G-alpha-GDP is not able to activate effector proteins and re-associates with the beta-gamma heterodimer to restore the inactive GDP-bound heterotrimer. Because the enzymatic GTP turnover lasts for approximately 2 to 5 minutes, a new signal may find the receptor still not ready to respond. However, the regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS) protein speed up the GTP hydrolysis up to 100-fold. This protein binds the G-alpha subunit and removes the active G-alpha-GTP and beta-gamma species. In turn, RGS works as a negative regulator of GPCR signaling. RGSs are a family of proteins and represent another interesting perspective for targeted therapy as their specific pharmacological inhibitors could potentiate opioids effects.

**MOR Subtypes and Tissue Expression**

There are several subtypes of MOR, which are splice variant forms. These variant forms were designated MOR-1A through MOR-1X; some of the variants express truncated forms of the receptor. The B, C, and D variants differ in the amino acid composition at the C-terminus. All variants get transcribed from a single gene (OPRM1 gene, chromosomal location 6q24-q25).

MORs are present in the central nervous system (CNS) and represent the most highly expressed of all the opioid receptors. These receptors get expressed in neurons throughout the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and in different brain regions (mainly somatosensorial cerebral cortex) involved in processing nociceptive information. In particular, in the spinal cord, MORs are localized (presynaptic and postsynaptic) into the substantia gelatinosa of Rolando (laminae I and II), which receives sensory information from primary afferent nerve fibers innervating the skin and deeper tissues of the body. Presynaptic MORs activation inhibits the release of excitatory neurotransmitters (e.g., substance P and glutamate), whereas the postsynaptic binding to MORs involves direct hyperpolarization of postsynaptic neurons and, in turn, inhibition of the afferent neural transmission of the painful information, and other types of information. Apart from the somatosensory system, MORs are localized in the extrapyramidal system and the limbic system including the limbic lobe, orbitofrontal cortex (involved in the process of decision-making), piriform cortex, entorhinal cortex (memory and associative functions), hippocampus (opioid-induced consolidation of new memories by increasing LTP in CA3 neurons)

**MOR Ligands**

**Endogenous Opioids**

Endogenous opioids are the natural ligands of opioid receptors that play a role in neurotransmission, pain modulation, and other homeostatic and functional pathways of the brain and peripherally. Beta-endorphin serves as an agonist for MORs and less for DORs. This peptide is derived from a larger precursor peptide, proopiomelanocortin (POMC), and is secreted by the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus (via the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland) during stress and exercise, inducing euphoria, inhibition of postexercise pain, and muscular fatigue, and stimulating glucose uptake. Moreover, because beta-endorphin exerts a tonic inhibitory influence upon the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion, it is involved in the regulation of the reproductive function. Other endogenous opioids are the enkephalins that bind mainly the DORs and less the MORs, whereas the dynorphins bind mainly the KORs. Enkephalins are short (5-amino-acid) polypeptides, including met-enkephalin (YGGFM), and Leu-enkephalin (YGGFL). These pentapeptides are generated from a precursor protein called proenkephalin and are found primarily in the amygdala, brainstem, dorsal horn of the spinal cord, adrenal medulla, and other peripheral tissues. Again, dynorphins include dynorphin A (17 amino-acids of which the first five are Leu-enkephalin), dynorphin B (rimorphin), and dynorphin 1-8. They get secreted in the hippocampus, amygdala, hypothalamus, striatum, and spinal cord and are involved in numerous functions related to learning and memory, emotional control, stress response, and pain.

**Exogenous Ligands**

Drugs that activate MORs are useful for their pharmacological benefit in providing pain relief. These agents (i.e., opioid drugs) include the so-called weak opioids codeine and tramadol, and the strong opioids oxycodone, morphine, hydromorphone, meperidine, tapentadol, methadone, fentanyl, sufentanil, remifentanil.

# Issues of Concern

**Tolerance and Physical Dependence**

Issues of concern regarding the MOR agonists lie in their ability to cause opioid tolerance and physical dependence. Consistent stimulation of the MORs can ultimately result in drug tolerance, requiring higher doses to achieve the same effect. However, the phenomenon of opioid tolerance usually is of limited occurrence in cancer patients receiving treatment for pain as the need for increasing doses in those patients is mostly due to an increasing level of pain. The knowledge of the precise mechanisms underlying tolerance and dependence phenomena is of fundamental importance for the accurate management of opioid therapy and the development of new pharmacological strategies. For example, a lot of research has recently focused on the role of particular domains and amino acid residues of the MOR for proper receptor function. This research is usually carried out through the methodology of in vitro mutagenesis and the analysis of receptor chimeras.

Furthermore, the effects linked to the timing of opioid administration require a better explanation. Studies on tolerance mechanisms demonstrated that high doses of exogenous opioids might produce MOR (and DOR) internalization. Thus an increased opioid intake is necessary to generate the same effect on a reduced number of receptors. Again, upon removal of the exogenous opioids from the system (e.g., through an opioid antagonist), the endogenous opioids are not able to activate the small number of remaining receptors. Physical dependence can develop after 2 to 10 days of continuous use when the drug gets stopped abruptly. The effect is the withdrawal syndrome, which according to the ICD-10 Clinical description, represents 'a group of symptoms of variable clustering and severity occurring on absolute or relative withdrawal of a substance after repeated, and usually prolonged and/or high-dose, use of that substance.' The withdrawal syndrome is usually accompanied by signs of physiological disturbance whereas the onset and duration of clinical manifestations including pain (e.g., abdominal cramping, bone pain, and diffuse muscle aching), autonomic symptoms such as diarrhea, rhinorrhea, diaphoresis, lacrimation, shivering, nausea, emesis, piloerection, central nervous system (arousal, sleeplessness, restlessness, tremors), and craving for the medication depend on the drug used. The addiction phenomenon is a potential consequence of drug dependence and is characterized by psychological and behavioral symptoms with a drug craving, compulsive use, and a strong tendency to relapse after withdrawal.

**Research Perspectives**

The changes produced by the use of opioids occur on a large scale and are documentable on the morphological level. Gray matter changes in patients with chronic pain are apparent after only one month of morphine administration, and these alterations can persist for up to 5 months after the end of the therapy.

The genetic aspects represent an important variable to interpret the effects linked to the use/misuse of opioids. Genetic variations in the OPRM1 gene can influence the response to opioids, including the dose of medications needed to obtain pain relief. Interestingly, research has shown that these variations (single nucleotide polymorphism Asn40 -> Asp) can be associated with the risk of opioid addiction.

**Opioid Addiction: Receptors and Strategies**

Another challenge concerns the choice of opioid for replacing more destructive opioids via maintenance therapy in case of opioid addiction. This condition is a chronic disease that can cause major health, social, and economic problems. In this context, as MOR agonists with rapid onset of action and short half-lives such as heroin induce immediate reward followed by noticeable withdrawal symptoms, clinicians must be aware that these drugs have the greatest potential for destructive addictive behaviors. MOR agonists with delayed onset of action and longer half-lives, such as methadone, can induce dependence without necessarily destructive behaviors and reduced impact on mood, judgment, and psychomotor skills. Furthermore, buprenorphine is a partial MOR agonist that induces all the typical opioid effects, although only up to a certain limit called the ceiling effect. By increasing the dose, that is, a significant increase in the effect such as additional euphoria is not obtained, limiting cravings and withdrawal symptoms. The ceiling effect of buprenorphine means that there is also a limit on respiratory depression. Moreover, because buprenorphine has a very high affinity for the opioid receptors, other full agonists such as heroin have strong difficulties to displace it. However, the use of buprenorphine, while heroin, or other opioids, are already on the MORs can induce an antagonist effect with a sudden drop in receptors activation, which, in turn, can be experienced as withdrawal. The introduction of buprenorphine must occur when the strong opioid has dissipated from the receptor. Several tools, such as the Clinical Opioid Withdrawal Scale, can guide the replacing process for addiction treatment.

# Clinical Significance

The clinical significance of MORs lies in their ability to provide pain relief to patients. However, it is also critical to remember the importance of managing patients who have overstimulated MORs and are experiencing an opioid overdose. If a patient presents with opioid overdose, antagonism of the MOR is made possible by various medications, one of the most common being naloxone.

Agonism of the MOR has proven incredibly helpful in the clinical management of individuals presenting with both chronic or acute pain. Still, it is essential to ensure that the administration of MORs agonists occurs in circumstances where appropriate and safe administration of the drug is available.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The healthcare team, e.g., clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, etc., need to work together to address pain control in their patients accurately.  The healthcare team should schedule their patients for routine follow-up visits that include a history and physical exam to monitor for adverse drug effects and drug misuse. Monitoring for signs of drug misuse of MOR agonists is a very important responsibility for the healthcare team because of the epidemic rates of drug misuse worldwide, e.g., the USA, which lead to death because of respiratory depression. Methods for monitoring drug abuse as well as drug diversion include the following examples: assessment surveys, state prescription drug monitoring programs, urine screening, adherence check-lists, motivational counseling, and dosage form counting, e.g., tablet counting. [Level V]