The siRNAs are identified as small double-stranded RNAs that exert their effects by dividing into single strands and binding to their distinct target messenger RNA (mRNA) sequences. This action catalyzes a string of activities that yield the target mRNA to break and degrade, further halting translation and inducing gene suppression by the short RNA strands. It is also known as RNA interference (RNAi).

The siRNA agents initiate their RNAi action in the cytoplasm with the help of an enzyme, endoribonuclease dicer, also known as helicase, with an RNase motif. It cleaves the double-stranded RNA and yields a siRNA.

The short double-strand RNA fragments integrate with a cluster of essential proteins known as the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) and are then split into two single RNA strands recognized as sense and antisense. The single antisense strand further targets its mRNA arrangement while the sense strand is dismissed from the complex. The essential enzymes in the RISC complex, such as the Ago-2 endonucleases, cleave their target mRNA sequence once affixed.

**Patisiran**

Patisiran exerts its mechanism of action through RNAi, resulting in cleavage and breakdown of all types (mutant and wild-type) of transthyretin (TTR) mRNA. The agent is a double-stranded siRNA formulated as a lipid nanoparticle (LNP) taken up by hepatocytes once bound to apolipoprotein E (APOE) receptors. The RNAi of the TTR mRNA decreases the production of TTR protein in circulation and its deposition in tissues and organs.

**Givosiran**

Givosiran exerts its mechanism of action through RNAi, resulting in the cleavage and breakdown of its target, aminolevulinate synthase 1 (ALAS1) mRNA, which is found in the liver. The agent is a double-stranded siRNA conjugated with N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) ligand for intake by hepatocytes. Once taken up by hepatocytes and degrading its target mRNA, it decreases aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen (PBG) levels in the blood, further limiting AHP disease characteristics.

**Lumasiran**

Lumasiran exerts its mechanism of action through RNAi in the liver resulting in cleavage and breakdown of its target, hydroxy acid oxidase 1 (HAO1) mRNA. The agent is a double-stranded siRNA conjugated with GalNAc ligand for effective uptake by hepatocytes. HAO1 produces glycolate oxidase (GO), an enzyme responsible for producing glyoxylate, a substrate for the further synthesis of oxalate. The inhibition of the GO enzyme results in decreased oxalate precursor levels which in turn reduces the production of the enzyme alanine glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT) that is mutated in PH1.

**Inclisiran**

Inclisiran exerts its mechanism of action through RNAi in the liver and orchestrates hepatic mRNA degradation of proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9). The sense strand of the siRNA is bound with GalNAc ligand, allowing hepatocytes to efficiently uptake the siRNA agent and target PCSK9. PCSK9 internalizes and breaks down the hepatic LDL receptors once attached. Inclisiran inhibits this action of PCSK9, further promoting the expression of LDL-C receptors on the cell's surface and facilitating receptor cycling. Once LDL-C is bound to its receptor, it is subject to degradation by lysosomal enzymes and recycled back to the cell's surface. This results in a raised uptake of LDL-C and reduces its levels in the blood.