# Continuing Education Activity

Dietary deficiency of niacin results in pellagra. It is characterized by dermatitis, diarrhea, dementia, and eventually death if not treated by giving niacin. This is why it is called the 3 D syndrome, or 4 Ds disease. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of niacin deficiency and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of niacin deficiency and pellagra.
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of niacin deficiency.
- Review the management options available for niacin deficiency.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the care of patients with pellagra and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Niacin (vitamin B), also known as nicotinamide or nicotinic acid, is an essential water-soluble vitamin. It is important for the metabolism of macronutrients (carbohydrate, protein, and fat) due to being part of the NAD (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) and NADP (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) coenzymes.

Dietary deficiency of niacin results in pellagra. Pellagra was first described 250 years ago by the Spanish physician Don Gaspar Casal in 1763.

# Etiology

The main etiology of pellagra is consuming a diet deficient in niacin or eating uncooked grains.

Furthermore, pellagra could develop in the elderly population due to malabsorption.

# Epidemiology

Corn was the staple food in China, India, Africa, and Latin America, yet pellagra was common in African nations.

In the United States, pellagra is very rare due to the enrichment of processed flour with B vitamins. In the past, native people in North, Central, and South America consumed maize treated with lime or wood ashes, which increased the bioavailability of niacin in maize.

# Pathophysiology

Niacin is important for the metabolism of macronutrients (carbohydrate, protein, and fat), due to being part of the NAD and NADP coenzymes.

# Histopathology

Dermatitis in pellagra is characterized by erythematous bullous changes secondary to mild acute inflammation. This leads to degeneration of the stratum corneum, followed by increased cellularity and fibroblasts, capillary dilation, and increased proliferation and thickening of the epidermis. Inflammatory cells include lymphoid cells and few plasma cells. Hyperpigmentation also occurs.

# History and Physical

The history should emphasize the presenting symptoms, which can include weight loss, anorexia, nausea, dyspepsia, abdominal pain, diarrhea, excessive salivation, skin rash, fatigue, headaches, dizziness, irritability, tremors, dementia, anxiety, and depression. Nutritional, past medical, family, social, and medication histories should be reviewed carefully.

Physical examination should assess the general health and the mental status (progressive derangement with confusion, or tremors).

# Evaluation

Overall, pellagra is a clinical diagnosis and biochemical testing is rarely used. If needed, niacin deficiency can be assessed by two methods:

**Biochemical Assessment**

- This approach is not widely used. Measurement of urinary N-methylnicotinamide or erythrocyte NAD: NADP (ratio) can be obtained to evaluate the metabolic rate of niacin in the body. Thus, high levels reflect adequate intakes of this vitamin.

**Clinical A****ssessment**

- It is more widely used by assessing for diarrhea, glossitis, and dermatitis. The skin is assessed for hyperpigmentation, dryness and scaling, facial butterfly sign, and/or Casal’s collar (necklace) in sun-exposed areas. It is important to note that diarrhea and dementia may not always be present.

# Treatment / Management

Pellagra can be reversed by giving niacin accompanied by a high energy diet that is rich in all other B-vitamins, zinc, and magnesium that are important for optimum metabolic reactions in the body.

To ensure sufficient intakes of niacin, several countries fortified some of the staple food items, such as wheat flour, milk, maize flour, cornmeal, and/or rice with niacin.

# Differential Diagnosis

Some of the health conditions that can be mistaken for pellagra include deficiencies of vitamins B1, B2, and B12.

# Prognosis

Diarrhea and glossitis usually improve in 2 to 3 days, while recovery from dementia and dermatitis is seen within 7 days of treatment.

# Complications

If pellagra is left untreated, it would result in patient death.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Currently, niacin deficiency and pellagra are rare. However, it is important to educate the public about the importance of consuming a balanced diet that consists of all food groups that are adequate in all essential nutrients (macro- and micronutrients) for the achievement of optimal health. Health awareness campaigns, therefore, should be carried out to spread knowledge about the: foods that are rich in or fortified with niacin and tryptophan and health conditions and compounds (such as drugs) that adversely affect its bioavailability.