Rehabilitation after surgery is dependent upon several factors. Mechanism of initial injury should be considered to avoid repeating the maneuvers and stressing the repair. For debridement procedures and stable SLAP patterns, passive and active range of motion exercises begin within the first week of surgery. Care must be taken to avoid exercises activating the biceps. Gradually, active strengthening and improvement of neuromuscular control are undertaken from two to four weeks. As pain recedes and range of motion is returned, dynamic strengthening exercises and sport-specific protocols are initiated. As function is restored without pain, a gradual return to sport is recommended on a case-by-case basis, dependent upon clinical exam.

In SLAP repairs with unstable patterns, a more gradual approach is taken. A sling with an abduction pillow is typically utilized with avoidance of external rotation and abduction. Gentle passive and limited active range of motion exercises is recommended for the first four weeks. At four weeks, progressive range of motion exercises are continued; however, active external rotation and abduction are still avoided. By weeks five to six, strengthening exercises are started, and active external rotation and abduction motions are allowed. Active strengthening of the biceps is still avoided. A structured advancement of strengthening sports specific rehabilitation and dynamic exercises are continued for several months. By six to nine months, a gradual return to sport is undertaken dependent upon the painless progression of activity and clinical exam.

Postoperative rehabilitation for tenotomy and tenodesis of the biceps is typically included within the above protocols. Isolated tenotomy patients typically can resume activity within a week. Tenodesis patients are protected for four weeks, and avoidance of supination and flexion of the elbow is recommended. Strengthening exercises can be initiated at six weeks postoperatively.