The etiology of melanoacanthoma has not been definitively established. Many researchers consider the lesion to be a variant of seborrheic keratosis. However, the unique pathologic features of a melanoacanthoma, the presence of melanocytes throughout all the layers of the epidermis, are not universally noted in seborrheic keratoses.

The secondary colonization by dendritic melanocytes of nonmelanocytic lesions has been observed. This phenomenon has been observed in reactive (such as lichen simplex chronicus), benign (such as verruca), and malignant (such as squamous cell carcinoma) lesions. Therefore, it has been postulated that dendritic melanocyte colonization may account for the presence of these pigmented cells that are found at all levels of the epidermis in a melanoacanthoma.

Irritation of a seborrheic keratosis may be associated with the development of a melanoacanthoma. Yet, exposure of a seborrheic keratosis to either croton oil or surgical trauma or both did not result in the subsequent development of the pathological features observed in a melanoacanthoma. However, some investigators postulate that irritation may promote the maturation of the basal cells of the epidermis into squamous cells that would subsequently impede the transfer of melanin from the melanocytes into the keratinocytes.

The solitary melanoacanthoma, in some patients, has been observed to be located in areas of trauma. The extent to which trauma directly or indirectly influences the potential development of a melanoacanthoma is unknown. However, several patients with oral melanoacanthomas associated either the onset or persistence of their lesions to continued exposure of a traumatic etiology or the resolution of the mucosal lesion to the cessation of the irritating factor.

Mishima and Pinkus described a 68-year-old Japanese man with a 4.5 x 2.8 centimeter dark brown melanoacanthoma on the nape of his neck. The lesion had been present for 10 years. However, during the prior 2 months, the melanoacanthoma displayed rapid growth after trauma to the area had occurred.

Mishra et al. reported a 61-year-old woman whose melanoacanthoma presented on the cutaneous medial half of her right lower eyelid (sparing the punctum) as a painless 8 x 4 x 3 millimeter brownish-black firm mobile tumor. The pruritic lesion had been noted 4 years earlier. However, it slowly began to increase in size after tree extract had fallen into her right eye.

Jain et al. published the case of a 58-year-old woman with multiple melanoacanthomas of 10 years duration. One of the lesions was a 4 x 3 cm ulcerated plaque on her mid-back. The authors attribute the large size of the melanoacanthoma to have caused the ulceration by several mechanisms: compromised blood flow, friction, pressure while lying down, and trauma. However, it is reasonable to postulate that ulceration (perhaps secondary to friction or pressure or both) resulted in an originally smaller progressively growing into a much larger tumor.