The brachial plexus provides somatic motor and sensory innervation to the upper extremity, including the scapular region. As the brachial plexus travels through the posterior triangle of the neck into the axilla, arm, forearm, and hand, it contains various named regions based on how the plexus is formed. Ventral rami from spinal nerves C5 through T1, often referred to as roots of the brachial plexus, come together to allow their fibers to intermingle forming superior, inferior, and middle trunks.

The 3 trunks continue from the posterior triangle into the axilla with C5 and C6 roots forming the superior trunk, C8 and T1 roots forming the inferior trunk, and the C7 root continuing as the middle trunk.

Continuing from the trunks are bundles that are called divisions. Each of the trunks of the brachial plexus continues as an anterior and posterior division to form lateral, posterior, and medial cords.

The 3 cords (posterior, medial, and lateral) are formed from the anterior and posterior divisions, and they are named based on their relationship to the 2 parts of the axillary artery. The 3 posterior divisions converge to form the posterior cord while the anterior division from the superior trunk and the anterior division from the middle trunk join to form the lateral cord. The medial cord is formed as a continuation of the anterior division from the inferior trunk. The result of this “mixing” of nerve fibers is that the lateral cord contains components of C5, C6, and C7, the medial cord with contribution from C8 and T1, and the posterior cord carrying fibers from all levels of the brachial plexus (C5 to T1).

The final subdivision of the brachial plexus consists of five terminal branches containing different contributions from the C5-T1 spinal levels.

The branches, terminal and otherwise, of the brachial plexus are expanded on below in the section Nerves and Muscles.