In imaging of the skull, CT and MRI usually complement each other in terms of their strengths and disadvantages and are often used in combination. MRI is superior in imaging the diploic area and demonstrating bone marrow involvement. It can detect a lesion in the diploic area even before it changes bone architecture, and can shed light on the content of the lesion. Another strength of MRI is that it provides the opportunity to evaluate the associated soft tissue component accurately and precisely define scalp involvement and intracranial/extracranial extension.

The skull MRI sequence profile shows some differences as compared with that of the head MRI. First, a skull MRI study should include more fat-saturated imaging sequences compared to brain imaging because of the considerably high adipose tissue content of the structures surrounding the skull, especially the skull base. Second, the study should always include non-contrast T1-weighted images without fat saturation since it is the best sequence in evaluating possible marrow replacement by a tumor or edema. While most physicians are usually persistent in requesting contrast-enhanced MRI for skull imaging, it should be taken into consideration that gadolinium may obscure lesions in case the appropriate technique is not performed. Therefore, the administration of contrast material should be justified according to the suspected pathology.

On MRI, intact inner and outer tables appear as signal-free areas, and the diploic space displays variable signal intensity depending on patient age. While most of the skull lesions are hypointense on T1-weighted and hyperintense on T2-weighted images, the signal characteristics of the lesions show a wide range of variations according to their cellular content.