The diagnosis of tinea barbae is often clinical. Knowledge about the disease and its clinical presentation, along with a good history and physical examination, can help in early diagnosis. Since the mainstay of treatment for tinea barbae is systemic antifungal therapy for an extended period with the potential for side effects, it is important to verify the diagnosis. The diagnosis can be established by simple, inexpensive in-office testing by direct microscopic examination of the skin scrapings from the lesion or by direct visualization of the affected area under a Wood's lamp. Visualization of the affected area under Wood's lamp is of limited use, as most dermatophytes that cause tinea barbae do not fluoresce except for Microsporum species.

**Direct Microscopic Examination**

Obtain scales and skin scrapings from the active border of the lesion by using a scalpel or moist cotton tip along with epilated hairs. Transfer the collected sample onto a slide and add a few drops of 10%-20% solution of potassium hydroxide (KOH). To speed up the emulsification of the skin cells, gently warm the slide or add dimethyl sulfoxide.

**Fungal Culture**

Innoculate the collected skin scrapings and hair samples into the specialized dermatophyte test medium. Mycocel and mycobiotic agar are some of the commercially available test media for dermatophytes. These specialized media have cycloheximide and chloramphenicol to inhibit the growth of contaminating fungi and bacteria.

**Skin Biopsy and Histopathological Examination**

The majority of the tinea barbae infections can be diagnosed either by direct microscopic examination or by fungal cultures. Skin biopsy and histopathological examination of the tissue is reserved for cases refractory to treatment or where a definitive diagnosis can not be established by other methods.

Conventional diagnostic methods mentioned above are adequate for diagnosing tinea barbae, but may not be specific to identify the exact causative pathogen by species. Newer diagnostic modalities like polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) on the ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region will help in the identification of the specific pathogen. Currently, these tests are expensive and are limited to specialized centers, mostly participating in studying epidemiology, transmission patterns, and drug development.