Nodular silicosis is characterized by the presence of silicotic nodules. Grossly, silicotic nodules are firm, discrete, rounded lesions that contain a variable amount of black pigment. The nodules tend to occur around respiratory bronchioles and small pulmonary arteries and in the subpleural and paraseptal areas. Progressive expansion causes obliteration of small airways and pulmonary vessels. The latter are characterized by concentrically arranged hyalinized collagen bundles surrounded by variable numbers of dust-filled histiocytes. In early nodules, fibroblasts and histiocytes are prominent with acellular collagen lamellae. Small, polarizable, doubly refractile, round or oval particles are often found within nodules. Their presence helps to confirm the diagnosis but they may be absent in some cases and they are not specific of silicosis. Granulomatous reaction may be observed in the capsule of silicotic nodules. Its presence raises the possibility of the coexistence of mycobacterial infection. Central necrosis is unusual. The surrounding lung may be unremarkable although dust macules and pigment-laden macrophages are usually seen around small airways. A non specific type of interstitial fibrosis has been reported occasionally in patients with chronic silicosis.

In acute silicosis, microscopic findings mimic pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. Unlike ordinary alveolar proteinosis, there are usually also interstitial inflammation and fibrosis or irregular hyaline scars as well as a variable amount of pigment. Silicotic nodules are poorly formed or absent in most cases.

Microscopic exam may be helpful in revealing some complications including progressive massive fibrosis or tuberculosis and non tuberculous infections. Progressive massive fibrosis is characterized by the presence of a nodular fibrosis that is greater than 1 cm in dimension. Usually, there is a large amorphous mass of fibrous tissue that is composed of conglomerated nodules causing obliteration and contracture of lung parenchyma. this lesion also occurs in other pneumoconioses including asbestosis, coal workers' pneumoconiosis or mixed dust fibrosis. Tuberculosis and non tuberculous mycobacteriosis can be suspected when facing a granulomatous infection with necrosis.