There are numerous causes of hemolytic anemia, which have several ways that can be broken down to include acute and chronic disease, immune vs. non-immune mediated, intravascular or extravascular, inherited or acquired, and intracorpuscular or extracorpuscular.

Intracorpuscular causes refer to abnormalities in the red blood cell itself. A red blood cell can be internally damaged when the solubility of hemoglobin is altered (hemoglobinopathy), the structure of the membrane or cytoskeleton is changed (membranopathy), or its metabolic abilities (enzymopathy) is decreased. Examples of hemoglobinopathies include sickle cell disease (SCD) and thalassemias. SCD is caused by a beta-globin gene mutation leading to polymerization of hemoglobin-S, sticking, and, therefore, hemolysis. Thalassemia is the most common cause of hereditary hemolytic anemia and is caused by partial or complete lack of synthesis of one of the major alpha or beta globin chains of hemoglobin A.

Membranopathies include hereditary spherocytosis (HS) and hereditary elliptocytosis (HE). HS is often autosomal dominant; however, non-dominant and recessive traits have been seen. It has been seen in all racial groups. HS has been documented as a rare disease, however, due to limited knowledge as the onset and severity vary considerably, as well as, the lack of specific lab tests, make it a difficult disease to study. HE is a heterogeneous red cell membrane disordered where the autosomal dominant inheritance can lead to a spectrum of presentations from asymptomatic to life-threatening.

Several RBC enzymopathies alter the shape of RBCs and cause nonspherocytic hemolytic anemias.

Alternatively, extracorpuscular causes refer to defects that were influenced by external factors, including mechanical, immune-mediated, or infectious. RBC transfusions can cause both acute and delayed hemolytic reactions. Mechanical trauma to RBCs is seen with microthrombi, fibrin, or valve shearing forces. Pathogens such as malaria and babesiosis are known to destroy RBCs as well as medications like dapsone, that can be used to treat these diseases, also have deleterious effects as it has oxidant potential.