**Cyclosporine**

It is approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in its oral, intravenous injection, and ophthalmic formulations.

- **Oral formulation:**It is available in non-modified and modified formulations and is not bioequivalent. Capsules are available in 10 mg, 25 mg, 50 mg, and 100 mg strengths, and oral solution in 50 mg/ml strength. The oral form of cyclosporine should be administered in two divided doses. Patients should be consistent in administering the drug to their meals and plan to space the two doses exactly 12 hours apart. It is best to avoid grapefruit and grapefruit juice since it affects the drug's metabolism and increase blood levels of the drug.
- Cyclosporine non-modified formulation: The drug depends on bile for absorption, hence having varying absorption percentages in the gastrointestinal tract.
- Cyclosporine modified formulation: It is available as a microemulsion formulation that does not depend on bile salts to get absorbed; hence it has good bioavailability.

- **Intravenous formulation:**IV cyclosporin is reserved for patients who cannot take the drug orally. Concentrated cyclosporin is available in 5 mL ampules, and each ml contains 50 mg cyclosporine.

- **Ophthalmic formulation:**It is available as cyclosporine 0.05 %, 0.1% ophthalmic emulsion. Special instructions have to be given to patients before they use the drug. They should invert the unit dose several times, get a uniform white opaque emulsion, and be used concomitantly with artificial tears. It is available in 0.09% ophthalmic solution.
- Keratoconjunctivitis sicca: Cyclosporin emulsion 0.05 %  and cyclosporin solution 0.09% is dosed one drop instilled two times per day 12 hours apart in each eye.
- Vernal keratoconjunctivitis: Cyclosporin 0.1% ophthalmic emulsion is dosed one drop four times per day in affected eyes until signs and symptoms are resolved in patients age four years or older. In the case of vernal keratoconjunctivitis recurrence, it can be initiated again. Cyclosporin emulsion 0.05 % is dosed one drop four times per day in patients between 5 and 14 years of age.

**Tacrolimus**

It is approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in its oral, intravenous injection, and topical formulations.

- **Oral formulation:**It is available as immediate-release capsules and extended-release capsules.
- Tacrolimus immediate-release capsules: The oral formulation is available as 0.5 mg, 1 mg, and 5 mg immediate-release capsules. It is administered in 2 divided doses as follows: 0.2 mg/kg/day for adult patients post kidney transplant who are taking the drug in combination with azathioprine, 0.1 mg/kg/day if taken in combination with mycophenolate mofetil/IL-2 receptor antagonist, 0.1-0.15 mg/kg/day for adults post-liver transplant, 0.15-0.2 mg/kg/day for pediatric patients post-liver transplant, and 0.075 mg/kg/day for adults post heart transplant. Patients with hepatic or renal impairment should only use the lowest recommended value of the doses suggested. Grapefruit and grapefruit juices should be avoided for the reasons mentioned above.
- Tacrolimus extended-release capsules: Extended-release tacrolimus capsules are available in 0.5 mg, 1 mg, and 5 mg. Capsules should not be crushed and chewed. They are a modified-release formulation that allows slow release of the drug by controlling water penetration and forming a protective polymer gel layer around the drug. Extended-release tablets come in 0.75 mg, 1 mg, and 4 mg strengths and use a drug delivery technology that improves drug bioavailability with low water solubility. Immediate release and extended-release formulations are not interchangeable.

- **Intravenous formulation:******IV formulation is available as a 5 mg/mL concentrate in 5 mL ampules. Due to its increased toxicity, the IV form is reserved for patients who can't take the oral forms.

- **Topical formulation:**The topical formulation is available as an ointment of 0.03% or 0.1% concentrations and is found in 30 g and 60 g tubes.

**Pimecrolimus**

- **Topical formulation:**It is available in 1% concentration topical cream. It is not indicated for usage in children aged less than two years. A thin layer of the cream is applied to the skin twice daily. Its administration should be limited to the sites of atopic dermatitis in addition to the avoidance of its long-term use.

**Voclosporin**

- **Oral formulation:**It is available as 7.9 mg capsules, and patients should be cautioned to take it on an empty stomach consistently as close to a 12-hour schedule. The recommended dose is 23.7 mg twice daily with mycophenolate mofetil and/or corticosteroids. Before initiating the drug, an accurate glomerular filtration(GFR) rate baseline should be established. The dose of the voclosporin should be adjusted based on GFR.