In all patients with bacterial pneumonia, empirical therapy should be started as soon as possible. The first step in treatment is a risk assessment to know whether the patient should be treated in an outpatient or inpatient setting. Cardiopulmonary conditions, age, and severity of symptoms affect the risk for bacterial pneumonia, especially CAP.

An expanded CURB-65 or CURB-65 pneumonia severity score can be used for risk quantification. It includes C = Confusion, U = Uremia (BUN greater than 20 mg/dL), R = Respiratory rate (greater than 30 per min), B = B.P (BP less than 90/60 mmHg) and age greater than 65 years. One point is scored for each of these risk factors. For a score of 0-1, outpatient treatment is advised. If the total score is 2 or more, it indicates medical ward admission. If the total score is 3 or more, it indicates ICU admission. Recommended therapy for different settings are as follows:

- **Outpatient Setting:**For patients having comorbid conditions (e.g., diabetes, malignancy, etc.), the regimen is fluoroquinolone or beta-lactams + macrolide. For patients with no comorbid conditions, macrolide or doxycycline can be used empirically. Testing is usually not performed as the empiric regimen is almost always successful.

- **Inpatient Setting (non-ICU):**Recommended therapy is fluoroquinolone or macrolide + beta-lactam.

- **Inpatient Setting (ICU):**Recommended therapy is beta-lactam + macrolide or beta-lactam + fluoroquinolone.

- MRSA: Vancomycin or linezolid can be added.

After getting a culture-positive lab result, therapy should be altered according to the culture-specific pathogen.

The patient also can benefit from smoking cessation, counseling, and vaccination for influenza and pneumococcus.

All patients treated at home should be scheduled for a follow-up visit within 2 days to assess any complications of pneumonia.

The role of corticosteroids remains controversial and may be used in patients who remain hypotensive with presumed adrenal insufficiency.

**Other Measures**

- Hydration

- Chest physical therapy

- Monitoring with pulse oximetry

- Upright positioning

- Respiratory therapy with bronchodilators

- Mechanical support if patients are in respiratory distress

- Nutrition

- Early mobilization