The treatment of choanal atresia is essentially surgical. The objectives are to restore choanal patency, not to interfere with the patient normal craniofacial development, to minimize invasiveness, and to avoid recurrences. Unilateral choanal atresia does not require surgical treatment as urgently as the bilateral case and can be postponed until school-age when the anatomy of the region is more similar to that in adults. However, it needs to be closely monitored for any signs of a breathing problem. Using a nasal saline spray can also help to keep the nasal route clear. The acute care of infants with bilateral choanal atresia in asphyxia consists of endotracheal intubation or when available, may be utilized a McGovern nipple to maintain an adequate oral airway, consisting in an intraoral nipple with a large opening by cutting its end off, secured in the mouth with ties around the infant’s occiput, followed by perforation of the atresia plate. Five different surgical approaches have been proposed, including transpalatal, transeptal, sublabial, transantral, and transnasal. The transpalatal approach was the most frequently used until the advent, in the last decades, of the endoscopic endonasal approach. The growing experience in both instrumentation and technique in endoscopic sinus surgery have led many surgeons to make more frequent use of the endoscopic endonasal technique for the repair of choanal atresia, which has provided better results and fewer surgical complications than in traditional procedures. The use of choanal stenting and mitomycin C as an adjunct therapy to prevent restenosis are a controversial topic in the management of choanal atresia as there is no clear-cut evidence on the effectiveness of using stents or mitomycin after choanal atresia repair.