Cryptorchidism is the absence of at least one testicle from the scrotum. It is the most common congenital defect involving male genitalia. About 3% of full-term and 30% of premature male infants are born with one or both testicles undescended. The testes normally descend by month 7 of gestation. Approximately 80% of cryptorchid testes descend by the third month of life after birth. This makes the true incidence around 1%.

Cryptorchidism may occur on one or both sides but more commonly affects the right testicle. Bilateral cryptorchidism is present in about 10% of all undescended testicle patients.

The testicle may be anywhere along the "path of descent," including:

- High in the retroperitoneal abdomen close to the inguinal ring

- In the inguinal canal

- Ectopic from the path of descent

- Hypoplastic

- Dysgenetic

- Missing or Absent

- Unilateral (two-thirds)

The undescended testicle can usually be palpated in the inguinal canal. In a minority of patients, the missing testicle may be located in the abdomen or be nonexistent. About 20% to 30% of undescended testes are non-palpable.

Undescended testicles are associated with decreased fertility (especially bilateral cases), increased testicular germ cell tumors (overall risk under 1%), testicular torsion, inguinal hernias, and psychological problems.

From 10% to 30% of patients with a unilateral undescended testis will develop infertility. This increases to 35% to 65% or more for bilateral disease. If bilateral cryptorchid testes are left untreated, the infertility rate increases to over 90%.

Without surgical correction, an undescended testicle will likely descend during the first three months of life. If it remains undescended, to reduce risks and minimize infertility, the testis should be brought into the scrotum with an orchiopexy starting at age six months.

Cryptorchidism is associated with male infertility due to poor semen quality in adults. It impairs Sertoli cell function and possibly Leydig cell function as well.

Cryptorchidism, hypospadias, testicular cancer, and poor semen quality make up testicular dysgenesis syndrome. This syndrome is thought to be due to harmful environmental factors that disrupt embryonal programming and gonadal development during fetal life.