All adult umbilical hernias need to be fixed because of the high risk of complications. surgery is indicated in symptomatic patients. Relative contraindications include uncontrolled ascites.

There are two main surgical repair options for umbilical hernias: suture repair and mesh. Primary suture repair is performed either by simple primary suture repair which can be used for small defects (<2 cm) or by using Mayo technique which is basically an overlapping abdominal wall fascia in a “vest-over-pants” manner which was described by William Mayo in 1901

Mesh repair can be performed via both open or laparoscopic approaches. Open mesh repair can either be placed as onlay or sublay fashion; the onlay mesh placement is the technically easier but associated with higher wound complications e.g. seroma or hematoma and surgical site infection in some cases. Preperitoneal or sublay mesh placement requires more surgical skill and experience but less recurrence and wound complications

Laparoscopic mesh repair can be performed either via transabdominal preperitoneal approach (TAPP) or intraperitoneal onlay mesh (IPOM) technique. Laparoscopic repair resulted in shorter hospital stay, shorter return to normal activities, lower wound complications and recurrence rates

IPOM technique is based on the dissection of the sac, repair the defect with continuous suture followed by placement of mesh with a broad overlap of at least 5 cm. Abdominal wall structures like the falciform ligament must be dissected and the perivesical space must be opened to allow adequate incorporation and fixation of the mesh.

TAPP approach involves reducing hernial sac contents, incising the peritoneum 5 cm away from the margin of the defect and creating a preperitoneal space. After obtaining adequate hemostasis, a mesh will be placed with at least 5-cm overlap on all sides. Finally, the mesh will be fixed with either a few absorbable tacks or suture and the same absorbable fixation system or suture will be used to close the peritoneal flap