Dental fractures are classified into the following categories according to the fractured tissue and pulp involvement:

**1) Enamel infractions**are microcracks in the enamel without tooth structure loss that are usually asymptomatic. They are diagnosed by transillumination and must be differentiated from thermal attack cracks.

**2) Enamel fractures**(uncomplicated crown fracture)****are limited to the enamel without exposing dentin or pulp. This type of fracture is usually located at a proximal angle or the incisal edge of the anterior region.

**3) Enamel-dentin fractures****(uncomplicated crown fracture)**exhibit visible loss of enamel and dentin without exposing the dental pulp. When performing a clinical examination, the dentist will usually find a vital tooth with no sensitivity to percussion and no mobility.

**4) Enamel-dentin fractures with pulp exposure (complicated crown fracture)**are diagnosed clinically by observing a missing crown structure and pulp exposure. The tooth is usually sensitive to air, temperature, and pressure; however, pulp testing is generally positive unless a simultaneous luxation injury occurs.

**5) Crown-root fractures**extend apically to the cementoenamel junction and may or may not involve the pulp. Diagnosis is made clinically and radiographically. This fracture extends below the gingival margin, but its apical extension is generally hard to visualize. The fragment is present most of the time and mobile. If this is the case, the patient will complain of sensitivity to percussion and pressure. If the piece is missing, the tooth can react like crown fractures, according to pulp involvement.

The recommended x-rays include a parallel periapical radiograph, two additional images with different angulations (vertically and horizontally), and an occlusal x-ray. A cone-beam CT is encouraged since it will allow a thorough analysis of the fracture and treatment alternatives.

**6)**A**root fracture**affects dentin, pulp, and cementum, and it can be horizontal, oblique, or both. Clinical findings include bleeding from the gingival sulcus, tenderness on percussion, and a mobile crown fragment, which may be displaced. Pulp tests may be negative at first due to a temporal or permanent neural injury.

Radiographic examination is essential to identify the location and extension of the fracture. The recommended x-rays include a parallel periapical radiograph, two additional images with different angulations (vertical and horizontal), and an occlusal x-ray. A cone-beam CT scan is advised if the above radiographs are insufficient for diagnosis and treatment planning.

If the tooth fragment is missing in any of the above-mentioned cases and the patient presents soft tissue lesions, further x-rays of lips and cheeks are recommended to search for the missing piece.