Doxepin antidepressant formulations are commercially available in the form of oral tablets, capsules, and solutions. Oral administration is the most common method used by patients with depression.

- Doxepin tablets are available in two strengths; 3 mg, and 6 mg.

- Oral capsules are available in 10 mg, 25 mg, 50 mg, 75 mg, 100 mg, and 150 mg.

- Oral solutions are available as 10 mg/mL.

- Other forms available include topical creams (5%) and transdermal patches.

- Transbuccal delivery of doxepin has been a topic of research, but not enough data has been reported to support its effectiveness.

**Adult Dosing**

**Tablets:**For treatment of insomnia doxepin tablets, 3 to 6 mg are used once daily within 30 minutes of bedtime, for a short duration(less than 4-8 weeks).

**Capsule and Oral Concentrate:**For Major depressive disorder (unipolar) and treatment-resistant depression initial dose is 25-50 mg at bedtime. The dose is increased every third day or more by 25-50 mg to reach a total daily dose of 100 mg - 300 mg It is preferred to be given into divided doses of two to three times.

**Withdrawal:**Doxepin should be tapered gradually like other antidepressants although abrupt discontinuation usually does not precipitate symptoms as it has a long half-life.

**Specific Patients Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment. However, doxepin is converting into active metabolite desmethyldoxepin in the liver, so the drug should be used with caution in these patients.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with renal impairment.

- **Pregnant women:**It is considered as pregnancy category C medicine.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**Doxepin is not recommended in nursing mothers as the drug and its active metabolite presents in breast milk.

- **Pediatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of doxepin are not established in pediatric patients. As per box warnings, it is not recommended to use in pediatric patients below 12 years of age.

- **Geriatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of doxepin are not systematically studied for adults versus geriatric patients. It is listed as potential inappropriate medicine which should be avoided in patients 65 years and older. However, the usual starting dose in geriatric patients should be the low end of the dosing range as they have a greater probability of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac functions. Moreover. doxepin may cause confusion and oversedation in geriatric patients so close monitoring is recommended.