Hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (hATTR) is an autosomal-dominant disease with variable penetrance in which the peripheral nervous system becomes impaired due to excess deposition of transthyretin (TTR), caused by a mutation in the TTR gene. Approximately 50,000 patients are thought to have hATTR worldwide, highlighting the importance of managing and treating the disease.

Predominantly affected tissues lie in the peripheral nervous system, though patients with hATTR may experience deposition of mutant TTR in the heart, kidney, and ocular vitreous. Both somatic and autonomic peripheral nervous system functions are affected by hATTR, further complicating the disease, symptoms, and management. Additionally, most patients will present with the disease during adulthood rather than early in life. Further, the disease exhibits tremendous variability in expression and is notoriously difficult to manage due to its multi-system nature and relatively poor prognosis. Death typically occurs approximately ten years after the initial diagnosis of hATTR.

Inotersen is an antisense oligonucleotide drug indicated for polyneuropathy in patients affected by hATTR. The drug was first used in the European Union and later approved by the federal drug administration (FDA) in the United States and Canada in October 2018, where it received orphan drug designation.

Hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis can be a distressing disease. As previously mentioned, it reportedly targets several organs, including the heart, eyes, and nervous system. As such, many patients develop polyneuropathy secondarily to the disease, among other multi-system complications, which inevitably negatively affect an individual's quality of life and activities of daily living. Therefore, the medication inotersen is commonly indicated and may play a vital role in managing signs and symptoms in patients suffering from this debilitating disease.