In the kidney, urinary citrate levels are predominantly determined by acid/base status and cellular metabolism in the proximal tubules of the renal cortex. The apical membrane cotransporter NaDC activity regulates the absorption of citrate, while cellular metabolism is mediated by ATP citrate lyase and mitochondrial enzymes in the proximal tubules. In chronic acidosis, both citrate transport and cellular metabolism are increased, causing hypocitraturia. Conversely, an alkaline load causes a reduction in these cellular activities and results in higher urinary citrate excretion.

Renal cells contain large amounts of adenosine triphosphate citrate lyase (ATP citrate lyase). This enzyme will convert intracellular citrate into acetyl CoA.

Dietary citrate intake averages only about 4 grams daily, but it is readily absorbed from the intestine in both healthy individuals and hypocitraturic stone formers.

Hypocitraturia affects stone disease in several ways:

- Urinary citrate forms a soluble complex with calcium. This reduces ionic (free) calcium's availability to form urinary crystals and stones. This effect is somewhat pH-dependent as it becomes more pronounced as the urinary pH increases.

- Urinary citrate directly inhibits calcium crystallization and crystal aggregation in the urine.

- Urinary citrate increases pH, which drastically increases uric acid solubility as the pH approaches 6.5 to 7. Uric acid stones will generally not form with a sustained urinary pH of 6.5 or greater.

- Hypocitraturia reduces urinary osteopontin, an important constituent of the matrix component of urinary calculi.

- Hypocitraturia decreases the inhibitory effect of urinary macromolecules (primarily Tamm-Horsfall protein) on nephrolithiasis.

- Hypocitraturia increases urinary viscosity by reducing calcium binding in the urine, increasing viscosity as free calcium interacts with urinary macromolecules such as Tamm-Horsfall protein.