Immunoglobulins, aka antibodies, are glycoprotein molecules produced by plasma cells in response to a variety of antigenic stimuli involved in diverse physiological and pathological processes. Immunoglobulins primarily function in the adaptive arm (although “natural immunoglobulins” work in the innate arm) of the immune system and are subdivided, based on heavy chains they contain, into various classes, i.e., IgM, IgG, IgD, IgA, and IgE.

IgG is subdivided into various subclasses, i.e., IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4 (in order of decreasing abundance), and IgA into IgA1 and IgA2. IgG is the most abundant immunoglobulin with a plasma concentration range of 700-1600 mg/dL, and this constitutes about 75% to 80% of the immunoglobulins. IgA constitutes about 15% of the immunoglobulins at a plasma concentration of 70-400 mg/dL, whereas IgM has a range of 40-230 mg/dL in the plasma.

**Intravenous immunoglobulin**(IVIG) is a concentrate of the pooled immunoglobulins derived from 1000 to 100000 healthy donors depending upon the manufacturer. Immunoglobulins play a pivotal role in humoral adaptive immunity; ergo, IVIG reflects a collective exposure of the donor population to their environment and can be expected to contain an antibody repertoire of multiple specificities against a broad spectrum of infectious agents (bacterial, viral, and others), self-antigens and anti-idiotype antibodies.

The composition of IVIG products closely corresponds to that of immunoglobulins in the normal human plasma, especially IgG (along with its subclasses), IgA, traces of other Igs, cytokines, and soluble receptors. IVIG products are prepared using the Cohn-Oncley procedure, the first step of which is cold ethanol precipitation used to enrich the IgG from the plasma of donors. Any two IVIG product varies with respect to the presence of excipients such as substances used to stabilize proteins and prevent aggregation of IgG (sugars such as glucose, maltose, D-sorbitol or more recently amino acids such as glycine or proline), sodium levels, pH levels, osmolality and other immunoglobulins (for example, IgA can vary from 0.06 mg to 40 mg in different preparations).

IgG comprises more than 90% of the proteins in an IVIG preparation, and it is the principal component required for the therapeutic effect of IVIG. Some authors even consider IVIG to stand for intravenous IgG.

The indications for IVIG can be classified informally into a few broad categories based on the mechanism of action and the type of conditions they treat. They are as follows:

- As a replacement therapy in immunodeficiencies.

- For immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory therapy, (a) Immunomodulation in hematological and organ-specific autoimmune disorders (b) Anti-inflammatory in rheumatic inflammatory conditions, infectious and neurological disorders.

- As a hyperimmune therapy against specific infectious agents.

Different IVIG doses (low vs. high) are administered based on the indicated medical condition because the mechanisms of action differ with different doses. Low-dose immunoglobulins serve merely as a passive replacement in immunodeficiencies (category I only). High-dose immunoglobulins take an active part and modulate the immune functions with additional anti-inflammatory activity (category II only). Of note, there is considerable overlap between autoimmunity and inflammatory conditions as they almost always co-exist. Category III, hyperimmune therapy does not fall under the purview of dose-differentiation as they are specific antibodies and are given at doses “pro re nata” so that they neutralize the small proportion of specific pathogenic antigens. The actual difference in doses and their plausible differences in mechanisms of action are discussed below in their respective sections.

According to the latest report of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (AAAAI), the indications for IVIG therapy are divided into four ordinal groups depending on how the therapy benefits the patients: “Definitely beneficial,” “Probably beneficial,” “May provide benefit” and “Unlikely to provide benefit.” Here we will discuss only the first group as the number of diseases included in all the groups is too large and outside the scope of this paper.

IVIG replacement therapy is the apparent treatment of choice for humoral primary immunodeficiencies, as these patients cannot mount an effective immune response towards pathogens. Humoral primary immunodeficiencies are the most common and comprise the largest patient population of primary immunodeficiency (PI) diseases.

Agammaglobulinemia due to lack of B cells is the archetype condition in the group of PIs and was first described by Bruton in an 8-year old boy with recurrent pneumococcal infections. He discovered the lack of serum immunoglobulins and treated it successfully with subcutaneous immunoglobulins.

Secondary humoral immunodeficiencies can be caused by a number of conditions, and the most common of those is malnutrition. While malnutrition is manageable and leads to the recuperation of immune defense, there are several other conditions for which treatment is unavailable or where secondary immunodeficiency is inevitable.

In autoimmune and inflammatory conditions, two to four-fold increases in doses of IVIG, when compared to replacement doses, can bring a variety of protective changes.

For specific therapy against infectious pathologies, hyperimmune IVIG that contains high concentrations of specific IVIG targeted against a specific organism or antigen is administered. Hyperimmune IVIG is purified from human donors who were recently vaccinated or are in the convalescent period recovering from an infection. Such hyperimmune IVIG is currently indicated for postexposure prophylaxis of hepatitis A and B, tetanus, rabies, diphtheria, botulism, varicella-zoster, respiratory syncytial virus, and cytomegalovirus infections.

However, the US-Food and Drug Administration approved conditions that are indicated for IVIG therapy are dispersed among all the categories described above and include humoral PIs, ITP, B-cell CLL, common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), Kawasaki disease (KD), multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN), bone marrow transplantation and HIV infection. Along with FDA approved use of IVIG, the off-label uses of this product are growing rapidly. Other conditions where IVIG therapy demonstrates benefit include toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens-Johnson syndrome, neonatal sepsis, birdshot retinochoroidopathy, Henoch-Schönlein purpura, and toxic shock syndrome. IVIG is used in a multitude of other conditions where it is regarded as beneficial. The list is extensive, and the readers are advised to refer to the updates from the most recent guidelines when necessary.