There are multiple treatment options for ON. The most conservative treatments, such as immobilization of the neck by the cervical collar, physiotherapy, and cryotherapy, have not been shown to perform better than placebo.

It remains a common practice to utilize a landmark-only approach when performing greater and lesser occipital nerve blocks. For blockade of both nerves, medication is infiltrated along the nuchal ridge. While easy to perform and relatively safe if done correctly, this technique may not be particularly accurate and, as a result, could theoretically increase the risk of a false-positive result. To improve accuracy, ultrasound-guided techniques were developed. The original ultrasound-guided technique for injection of the GON (utilized routinely by this article's editor for diagnostic injection and cryoablation) was described by Greher et al. in 2010; it targets the nerve as it courses superficial to the obliquus capitis inferior muscle at the C1-C2 level.

There are several advanced interventional procedures in clinical use.

- Pulsed or thermal radiofrequency ablation (RFA) may be considered for longer-lasting relief after a local anesthetic blockade confirms the diagnosis. Thermal RFA aimed at destroying the nerve architecture can render long-term analgesia but also comes with the potential risks of hypesthesia, dysesthesia, anesthesia dolorosa, and painful neuroma formation. Chemical neurolysis with alcohol or phenol carries the same risks as thermal RFA.

- Neuromodulation of the occipital nerve(s) involves the placement of nerve stimulator leads in a horizontal or oblique orientation at the base of the skull across where the greater occipital nerve emerges. Patients should be trialed with temporary leads first, and greater than 50% pain relief for several days is considered a successful trial, after which permanent implantation may be considered. Risks include surgical site infection and lead or generator displacement or fracture after the operation.

- Ultrasound-guided percutaneous cryoablation of the GON is a commonly performed procedure by many clinicians. At the correct temperature, there should be stunning but not permanent damage to the nerve, but at temperatures below negative 70 degrees Celsius, nerve injury is possible. Most recently, in the literature, a 2018 article by Kastler et al. described 7 patients who underwent cryoneurolysis in a non-blinded fashion to good effect, but the follow-up was limited to 3 months.

- Surgical decompression is often considered to be the last resort. In one study of 11 patients, only two patients did not experience significant pain relief postoperatively. The mean pain episodes per month decreased from 17.1 to 4.1, with mean pain intensity scores also decreasing from 7.18 to 1.73.