# Introduction

The liver has a central and critical biochemical role in the metabolism, digestion, detoxification, and elimination of substances from the body.

Most major plasma proteins (except immunoglobulins [Igs] and the von Willebrand factor) are mainly or exclusively synthesized in the liver. The liver responds to multiple hormonal and neural stimuli to regulate blood glucose concentrations.

The liver is also the primary site of metabolism of both endogenous substances and exogenous compounds (e.g., drugs and toxins). This process, known as biotransformation, converts lipophilic substances to hydrophilic ones for subsequent elimination.

As a large organ, the liver shares with many other organs the ability to perform its functions with extensive reserve capacity. Individuals with liver disease often maintain normal function despite extensive liver damage. In such cases, liver disease may be recognized only using tests that detect injury.

This review focuses on the significance of the hepatic enzyme ALT in assessing hepatic injury and malfunction. ALT is aggregated primarily in the cytosol of hepatocytes and consists of 496 amino acids, and has a half-life of approximately 47 hours.

Therefore, the elevation of serum ALT concentration is a sensitive but not specific measure of hepatocellular injury, as the degree of elevation can not determine the exact cause.

# Etiology and Epidemiology

The liver transaminases, mainly alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST), are aggregated in the cytosol of hepatocytes. These enzymes are normally detectable in the serum at low concentrations, typically <30 IU/L.

Increases in alanine transaminase (ALT) alone affects 8.9% of the U.S. population.

**Physiological Factors**

- Extreme physical exertion can induce a reversible elevation in serum ALT, approximately 2 to 2.2-fold higher than the normal limit.

- ALT activity has a diurnal variation; the nadir value is at 4:00 hr, and the peak value is at 16:00 hr.

- ALT is higher in males compared to females. These gender-based differences in ALT levels are possibly related to hormonal differences between males and females.

- Ethnicity affects ALT levels. Research shows that Mexican Americans have a higher ALT elevation prevalence than other ethnicities.

- Research has found no overall association between the hypoxia-inducible factor 3 alpha subunit (HIF3A) rs3826795 polymorphism and ALT. However, a significant interaction between obesity and rs3826795 concerning ALT was found - rs382695 G-allele number elevation of ALT significantly only in obese children but not in non-obese children.

- In another study, Bekkelund, and Jorde, found that serum ALT was associated with body fat mass index in men. ALT was associated with lean mass index in men and women in the overweight and obese population.

**Pathological Causes**

- Depending on the region, alcoholic hepatitis and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) are considered the most common cause of abnormally high****ALT levels.

- Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)

- Chronic hepatitis B or C

- Autoimmune hepatitis

- Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency

- Drug-associated, occupational exposure, or herbal supplement-induced liver injury

- Hemochromatosis

- Wilson disease

- Celiac disease

- Ischemic hepatitis,

- Budd-Chiari syndrome,

- Vascular disease

- Genetically-related conditions affecting the liver

# Pathophysiology

ALT enzyme catalyzes the transfer of amino groups from the L-alanine to alpha-ketoglutarate, and the conversion products are L-glutamate and pyruvate. The process is critical in the liver in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Pyruvate can be used in the citric acid cycle to produce cellular energy. The coenzyme needed for this reaction is pyridoxal 5'-phosphate, also known as vitamin B6.

The pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (P-5′-P)  is bound to the inactive apoenzyme and serves as a true prosthetic group. The pyridoxal 5'-phosphate attached to the apoenzyme accepts the amino group from the first substrate, aspartate or alanine, to form enzyme-bound pyridoxamine-5′-phosphate and the first reaction product, oxaloacetate or pyruvate, respectively.

Both coenzyme-deficient apoenzymes and holoenzymes may be present in serum.

ALT is found ubiquitously throughout the human body, in the kidney, myocardium, skeletal muscle, brain, pancreas, spleen, and lung. More specifically, the highest tissue concentration of ALT activity is in the cytosol of hepatocytes. The activity of ALT in hepatocytes is approximately 3000 times higher than that of serum ALT activity.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

According to the International Standard ISO 6710, the light green cap contains lithium-heparin and is used for the hepatic function panel.

After the specimen is collected and fulfills the requirements, they go for testing. Hepatic function panels evaluate for alanine aminotransferase (ALT) through the use of blood samples. The quality of blood specimens is vital to decrease laboratory errors, prevent diagnosis delay, and ensure a proper diagnosis.

A hemolysis index assesses the sample at specific wavelengths to determine the potential concentration of cell-free hemoglobin and ensure quality. If the hemolysis index is unavailable, then a visual inspection should be conducted instead.

# Diagnostic Tests

A panel of laboratory tests to assess liver functions, also known as the liver function test, is commonly used in clinical practice. The liver function test comprises the following:

- Serum bilirubin

- Serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT)

- Serum aspartate transaminase (AST)

- Serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP)

- Serum gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT)

- Prothrombin time or an International Normalized ratio (INR)

- Serum albumin

# Testing Procedures

The liver function tests are performed on semi-automatic or fully automated analyzers which are based on the principle of photometry. Photometry is the measurement of light absorbed in the ultraviolet (UV) to visible (VIS) to infrared (IR) range. This measurement determines the amount of an analyte in a solution or****liquid. Photometers utilize a specific light source and detectors that convert light passed through a sample solution into a proportional electrical signal. These detectors may be photodiodes, photoresistors, or photomultipliers.

# Interfering Factors

Patients are instructed to avoid certain medications and foods before a hepatic function panel to ensure the integrity of blood specimens.

Up to 5% of patients on statin medications were found to develop elevations in ALT.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

The results of a hepatitis panel should correlate with the initial findings in a complete history and physical examination. A thorough review should include essential questions regarding the patient’s age, past medical history (diabetes, obesity, hyperlipidemia, inflammatory bowel disease, celiac sprue, thyroid disorders, autoimmune hepatitis, acquired muscle disorders, alcohol consumption, medication use, toxin exposure, and family history of genetic liver conditions (Wilson’s disease, alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency, hereditary hemochromatosis).

A review of systems should also include signs and symptoms of chronic liver disease such as jaundice, ascites, peripheral edema, hepatosplenomegaly, gynecomastia, testicular hypotrophy, muscle wasting, encephalopathy, pruritus, and gastrointestinal bleeding.

A hepatitis panel’s reference ranges can fluctuate amongst different laboratories. Reported values also can vary depending on gender, body mass index, and past medical history. Repeated liver enzymes are typically unnecessary in the workup for elevated transaminase levels.

- Normal serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) is 7-56 U/L.

- Normal serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) is 0 to 35 U/L.

- Normal serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is 41 to 133 U/L.

- Normal serum gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) is 9 to 85 U/L.

- Normal serum total bilirubin is 0 to 1.2 mg/dL.

- Normal albumin is 40 to 60 g/L.

# Clinical Significance

It is essential to consider that any liver cell injury can cause an increase in ALT serum levels.

Viral hepatitis is liver inflammation from hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E. Acute hepatitis A, in comparison with both Hepatitis C and B, is associated with higher increases in serum ALT and AST levels, reaching the levels of 3000 to 4000 IU/L for each. The diagnosis of chronic hepatitis will have elevations in ALT levels for greater than six months.

The most efficient aminotransferase threshold for diagnosing acute liver injury lies at seven times the URL (sensitivity and specificity >95%).

The persistence of increased ALT for longer than six months after an episode of acute hepatitis is used to diagnose chronic hepatitis.

Ischemic liver injury, also known as ischemic hepatitis, occurs when there is an acute reduction in blood perfusion to the liver, leading to necrosis of hepatic centrilobular cells on histology.

Medications can account for an elevation in ALT. Paracetamol toxicity (also known as acetaminophen) has been shown in a recent study to account for almost half of the drug-induced liver injuries. In paracetamol toxicity, the levels of serum ALT are usually higher than 1,000 U/L.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) should merit consideration among the most common cause of abnormally elevated ALT levels in asymptomatic patients.

In 1957, DeRitis described in a publication the ratio between AST and ALT in the diagnosis of viral hepatitis, where ALT is usually higher than AST.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

The collection of blood samples carries significant safety risks for both personnel and patient if done improperly. Structured curricula designed to standardize collecting blood samples, educate participants on the risks, and address common errors can increase lab safety.

Healthcare workers should demonstrate a degree of competency before working with patients. Healthcare workers should utilize personal protective equipment and antiseptics to prevent accidental contamination of blood samples or infection. Personal protective equipment includes single-use nonsterile gloves, eye protection, and masks if there is a potential for blood exposure. Equipment such as trays or tube holders should be cleaned and disinfected if used on multiple patients. Disposal of all needles and syringes must be considered immediately after use. Using a sharps container can decrease the risk of a needle-stick injury.

For non-waived tests, laboratory regulations require, at the minimum, analysis of at least two levels of control materials once every 24 hours. To ensure accurate results, laboratories can assay QC samples more frequently. Quality control samples should be assayed after calibration or maintenance of an analyzer to verify the correct method performance. To minimize QC when performing tests for which manufacturers’ recommendations are less than those required by the regulatory agency (such as once per month), the labs can develop an individualized quality control plan (IQCP) that involves performing a risk assessment of potential sources of error in all phases of testing and putting in place a QC plan to reduce the likelihood of errors.

Westgard multi-rules are used to evaluate the quality control runs. In case of a rule violation, proper corrective and preventive action should be taken before patient testing is performed.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Multi-disciplinary and interprofessional rounds are when medical and other health providers collaborate to enhance patients' healthcare outcomes. Clinicians may review the significance of the hepatic function test panel in correlation with each patient's medical history and physical examination to detect any drug-induced hepatic injury early and build a differential diagnosis. Changes in the patient's patterns of ALT and AST over time or other liver function tests may necessitate a referral to gastroenterologists for consultation. Clinical pharmacists can also advise about potential contraindications or hepatotoxic medication interactions. The charge nurse of each floor can communicate updates on a patient's response to treatment, other recent laboratory orders, and current disposition. A multi-disciplinary approach can ensure a higher quality of care for each patient and enhance outcomes.