Once a patient recovers from an acute attack, an effort should be made to identify the inciting factors that contributed to the attack and to advise him/her to avoid those exacerbating factors. Thus, an interprofessional team approach is an ideal way to limit this complication. For example, a physician and pharmacist can provide a list of medications to avoid – available on the websites of the American Porphyria Foundation and the European Porphyria Network – and reinforce to the patient to avoid smoking and drinking alcohol, known exacerbating factors of acute hepatic porphyrias. Furthermore, a dietitian can counsel the patient regarding what to eat to lower the risk of future attacks, for example, maintaining a healthy, well-balanced diet that is fairly high in carbohydrate content, such as foods including bread, pasta, fruits, starchy vegetables, and dairy products. When faced with a female patient whose attacks are related to monthly hormonal changes, an obstetrician-gynecologist or a primary care provider can prescribe treatment to help with this too, such as a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analog to suppress ovulation. A pharmacist should always be involved to provide medication reconciliation and to make sure the combination of medications will not lead to an exacerbation. Working with the clinical team and providing guidance for appropriate therapy. A specialty-trained nurse is usually in the best position to assist with patient and family education and coordinate follow-up care. Keeping the team apprised of untoward developments or when the patient is non-compliant.  In severe cases, if a patient has had repeated attacks and hemin has not helped, referral for evaluation for liver transplantation may be an option. Thus, an interprofessional team of specialists that provides an integrated approach to the care of these patients can help to achieve the best possible outcomes. [Level 5]