When studying the potential adverse effects of HRT, the most referenced information in the United States comes from the Women's Health Initiative (WHI).

**WHI Trial**

This was a multifaceted trial, including two double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trials of postmenopausal hormone therapy.

The first arm included CEE at 0.625 mg per day with medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) 2.5 mg per day. The second arm studied patients who had prior hysterectomies and treated with CEE 0.625 mg only.

**HRT and the Breast**

The CEE/MPA arm was discontinued earlier than expected due to an increased incidence of invasive breast cancer of 24% (HR=1.24). The CEE-only arm was not discontinued early, completed in 2004, and extended follow-up of patients has continued for 11.8 years. CEE use for 5 to 9 years is associated with a statistically significant reduction in breast cancer by 23% (HR=0.77). Those in the CEE arm also had decreased mortality from breast cancer by 63% compared to those not on CEE, and 38% fewer died from all other causes after breast cancer was diagnosed.

When examining evidence from European studies which usually use estradiol derivatives rather than CEE, and non-MPA progesterone or progestins, the conclusions are vastly different and unequal. Transdermal estradiol alone increased the risk of breast cancer by 10%, but estradiol with progesterone decreased the risk of breast cancer by 10%.

**HRT and the Heart**

In the WHI CEE/MPA arm, the overall incidence of coronary heart disease (CHD) increased by 24% over five years of use, with the most substantial elevation in risk within the first year, with an increase of 81% (HR=1.81).

- The average age of the patient treated in this study was 62 years. In women who started on therapy within ten years of menopause, there was a risk reduction of CAD of 11% (HR=0.89), but this was not statistically significant.

- In those women who continued CEE/MPA for over six years, the risk of CAD dropped by 30% (HR=0.70).

These risks do not apply to estradiol and progesterone based treatments. Basic science studies show several mechanisms through which estradiol (not CEE) is cardioprotective. These include stabilization of atherosclerotic plaques, reduction of carotid intima-media thickness (CIMT), and decreasing coronary artery calcium (CAC) scores. Numerous subsequent studies both in Europe and the United States show that cardiovascular disease and death are prominently reduced when HRT commences within the first four years of the menopause transition. The "Timing Hypothesis" refers to the theory that when starting HRT closer to the time of the menopause transition, a cardiovascular benefit is seen compared with later initiation.

**HRT and Risk of Stroke**

Stroke incidence increased in both arms of the WHI trial by 31% in the CEE/MPA arm, and 39% in the CEE arm.

Studies using oral estradiol are conflicted, showing a similar stroke risk, but the incidence of fatal stroke is unchanged.

**HRT and the Risk of Venous Thromboembolism (VTE)**

VTE, comprised of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, was increased by 2-fold (HR= 2.06) in the WHI CEE/MPA arm.

Transdermal estradiol does not confer the same thromboembolic risk, as is evidenced by numerous European studies. The ESTHER study from France showed an overall risk of 0.9 for a blood clot, which is a decreased risk.