Postoperative pain control is a complex endeavor requiring interprofessional participation that begins in the preoperative setting and continues into patient recovery. A thorough preoperative assessment of the patient by the primary care provider, nurse practitioner, operating surgeon, and anesthesiologist can aid in identifying patient risk factors and comorbidities that may influence the severity of his or her postoperative recovery period and allow for the development of an individually tailored pain regimen. A multimodal, interprofessional approach to pain control allows for safer, more efficacious pain relief in the postoperative patient as opposed to primary reliance on opioid therapy. In the immediate postoperative period, nurses play an essential role in monitoring the severity of the patient’s pain level and communicate the need for further intervention to other team members as necessary. Clinical pharmacists play an integral role in deciding about the least effective dose for patients postoperatively and provide them with adequate information about various available options, such as alternative medication suggestions and knowledge about adverse effects and interactions, in order to help them make informed decisions about their care in the postoperative period. The nurse, the provider, and the pharmacist all play a crucial role in educating patients and their families about postoperative pain control. They should ensure that they provide patients with well-written information about how to control pain, postoperatively. This interprofessional approach will drive better outcomes for postoperative pain control and increase patient quality of life. [Level 5]