The most common cause of curable blindness worldwide is cataract. It accounts for nearly 75% of blindness in the developing world. Every year about 1 to 2 million cataract cases are added to the global burden, and the number of cataract surgeries performed worldwide accounts for approximately 10 to 12 million. To address this global concern, numerous efforts are underway to reduce the cataract backlog by performing cost-effective manual small incision cataract surgery on the poor and the needy. This has helped in making cataract services available to all. The transition from intracapsular cataract extraction to extracapsular cataract extraction and the manual small incision cataract surgery has transformed outcomes of cataract surgery in terms of visual outcomes, quality of life, and increased surgical acceptance by the patients. Cataract surgery has undergone a massive revolution and technical advancements, and now MSICS has become the surgery of choice in the developing world and phacoemulsification in the developed world. Today is the rollable and accommodative IOL era, which can be implanted through an incision as small as 2 mm. MSICS offers the advantages of being a high-quality surgery, comfort for the patients, less surgical induced astigmatism than extracapsular cataract extraction, no suture-related problems, early rehabilitation, and reduced postoperative visits. MSICS has a short learning curve, is cost-effective, and simple with various indications in nearly all types of cataracts. This activity deals with the anatomy, indications, contraindications, instruments, personnel, technique, complications, and clinical significance of MSICS for the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the indications of manual small incision cataract surgery.
- Outline the potential complications of manual small incision cataract surgery.
- Summarize the technique of manual small incision cataract surgery.
- Review the equipment required for manual small incision cataract surgery.