Arachnoiditis is an incurable disease that is challenging to treat. The treatment of this condition focuses mainly on alleviating pain, improving quality of life, and managing symptoms. It is essential to help these patients cope with their pain and any functional limitations with which they may struggle. Multimodal and interprofessional pain management strategies are recommended. Medication management may include NSAIDs, opioids, and various adjuncts such as duloxetine, gabapentin, pregabalin, and muscle relaxants such as baclofen. Other important treatments include physical therapy as well as cognitive behavioral therapy, biofeedback, imagery, and possibly other forms of psychotherapy and support. Additional treatment modalities may include thecaloscopy and neurostimulation. Intrathecal therapy has also been used, albeit with some potential risk of worsening the arachnoiditis. The role of surgical treatment remains unclear, but when used, surgical treatments usually involve releasing a tethered cord and restoring CSF flow. Reported surgical interventions include shunt, cyst fenestration, myelotomy, duralplasty, lysis of adhesions, and laminectomy. Long-term prognosis after surgery remains poor with immediate improvement, often followed by relapse and progressively worsening symptoms. Though surgery can provide temporary relief such as decompressor resection of isolated ossified plaques in arachnoiditis ossificans, it has a poor outcome overall. For advanced chronic adhesive arachnoiditis with obstruction of CSF flow, various treatment options are present to restore flow continuity, though with a high rate of recurrence and limited success. The only condition that might benefit from early surgical intervention is the local reduction of epidural infection as it provides the benefit of preventing inflammation from passing through the dural sac and subsequent severe adhesive arachnoiditis. Epidural steroid injections are generally not recommended due to concerns that these injections could potentially exacerbate the arachnoiditis condition since various injectates have been suggested to possibly cause arachnoiditis. There are, however, isolated reports of pain improvement after epidural steroid injections. Oral corticosteroid so far has not shown therapeutic benefit. Since most patients with arachnoiditis have difficulty sitting due to the pain, some patients may have significant benefits (improved quality of life and mobility) from motorized assistant devices such as standing wheelchairs, although standing acceptance and vibration endurance should be evaluated before proceeding.