Through the motor branches to its 21 muscles and its many sensory fibers, the tibial nerve plays a role in the following functions:

Motor:

- Hip extension

- Knee flexion, internal rotation

- Ankle plantar flexion, inversion

- Hallux IP, MTP flexion

- Hallux abduction, adduction

- Second  to fifth toe DIP, PIP, MTP flexion

- Second  to fifth toe DIP, PIP extension (lumbricals, interossei)

- Second  to fifth toe adduction, abduction

Sensory:

- Sensation to the posterolateral leg: medial sural cutaneous nerve and sural nerve

- Sensation to the lateral aspect of the heel: sural nerve

- Sensation to the lateral surface of the foot: sural nerve

- Sensation to the medial aspect of the heel: medial calcaneal nerve

- Sensation to the lateral aspect of the plantar surface of the foot: lateral plantar nerve

- Sensation to the medial aspect of the plantar surface of the foot: medial plantar nerve

**Gross Anatomy and Course**

To better understand the tibial nerve and its functions, one would benefit from having an understanding of the nerve's course through the lower extremity, and from having a strong grasp of the surrounding anatomy. As stated earlier, the tibial nerve is a component of the sciatic nerve, the largest nerve in the human body. The sciatic nerve derives from the ventral rami of spinal nerves L4-S3, then exits the pelvis at a point inferior to the piriformis muscle through the greater sciatic foramen to enter the posterior compartment of the thigh. While in the posterior thigh, it travels superficial to the adductor magnus and deep to the biceps femoris, carrying fibers from the common peroneal and tibial nerves.

It is worth noting that there can be a significant degree of anatomical variation seen with the sciatic nerve, and these variations lead to many relevant clinical and surgical considerations. Tomaszewski et al. performed a meta-analysis of the nerve’s variations, examining a total of 7210 lower limbs. The most common course of the sciatic nerve was as described above: to exit the pelvis undivided directly below the piriformis muscle, and this pattern occurred in 85.2% of cases.within the pelvis. In these cases, the tibial and common peroneal divisions of the sciatic nerve can pierce, exit above, or exit below the piriformis. A detailed discussion of the variations of the sciatic nerve bifurcations is beyond the scope of this review.

In the cases where the sciatic nerve travels undivided through the posterior thigh, the nerve bifurcates a few centimeters superior to the popliteal fossa. The popliteal fossa is the space on the posterior side of the knee joint created by the border of four muscle bellies. Superomedially is the semimembranosus muscle, superolaterally is the biceps femoris muscle, and inferomedially and inferolaterally are the medial and lateral heads of the gastrocnemius, respectively. From superficial to deep when viewing posteriorly, the popliteal fossa includes the tibial nerve, popliteal vein, popliteal artery, small saphenous vein, common peroneal nerve, and the popliteal lymph nodes. The common peroneal nerve travels laterally after bifurcation, and it is typically visible in the superior border of popliteal fossa near the biceps femoris muscle. It continues laterally around the neck of the fibula to supply motor and sensory innervation to the leg.

The tibial nerve continues coursing inferiorly after its bifurcation and passes directly down the midline of the popliteal fossa to enter the leg. Before crossing the margin of any posterior leg muscles, the tibial nerves gives off its first sensory branch: the medial sural cutaneous nerve. This nerve courses superficially between the two heads of the gastrocnemius muscle. It continues its course inferiorly near the midline of the posterior leg to eventually unite the with the sural communicating branch of the common fibular nerve. Together, these nerves form the sural nerve, which continues coursing inferiorly to supply sensory innervation to the lateral side of the posterior leg.

The main trunk of the tibial nerve continues deep to the plantaris muscle and two heads of the gastrocnemius to enter the tendinous arch of the soleus muscle.

Just proximal to the tarsal tunnel, the tibial nerve gives off its second sensory branch, the medial calcaneal nerve. Just distal to the tarsal tunnel, the tibial nerve gives off its terminal branches, the medial and lateral plantar nerves, which continue to supply motor and sensory innervation to the plantar foot. These nerves travel in the 2nd layer of the foot; the medial plantar nerve travels just deep to the abductor hallucis to branch into common plantar and eventually proper plantar digital nerves to the first through fourth digits. The lateral plantar nerve travels obliquely to the lateral side of the foot deep to the flexor digitorum brevis and superficial to the quadratus plantae muscle. This nerve then gives off a deep branch, which supplies deep muscles of the foot, as well as a superficial branch which continues coursing laterally. This superficial branch of the lateral plantar nerve terminates as common and proper plantar digital nerves supplying the fourth and fifth digits.