Proper selection of patients for neurolytic blocks is the key to the success of these potentially harmful procedures. Clear communication of alternative techniques, outcomes, complications, expectations, and disease progression with the patient and the family is important prior to a neurolytic procedure. An interprofessional approach, including an aggressive trial of opioids and adjuvant medications, along with temporary nerve blocks and psychological support, are the mainstays of therapy. A thorough medical examination, including laboratory testing and imaging studies, if appropriate, is necessary before performing this procedure.

Neurolytic blocks are also useful in the differential diagnosis of the site and cause of the pain, and in determining the patient's reaction if the pain is eliminated. Properly applied, certain nerve blocks are used to predict the effects of prolonged interruption by injection of neurolytic agents or by the neurosurgical section.

**Upper Abdominal Malignancies or Chronic Pancreatitis:**Patients with intractable abdominal pain due to upper abdominal malignancies or chronic pancreatitis have chronic refractory pain significantly decreases the quality of life and often requires high doses of opioids, which can lead to serious adverse side effects.

**Trigeminal Neuralgia (TN):**It is one of the most common forms of craniofacial pain.

**Chest Wall Pain or Postsurgical Thoracic Pain:**Intractable cancer-associated chest wall pain or for postsurgical thoracic pain, intercostal nerve block by chemical neurolysis with phenol may be a promising therapeutic option in patients with chronic neuropathic pain.

**Pelvic Cancer Pain:**Pain associated with pelvic malignancies can be treated by superior hypogastric plexus blockade or neurolysis.

**Other Indications:**Ultrasound-guided alcohol ablation has been described to treat Morton neuroma, and several studies have been performed describing the safety and efficacy of alcohol ablation in these cases.