Confidentiality plays a critical role in patient care; however, there may be special circumstances where confidentiality must be breached in order to not only ensure the safety of the patient but also to protect third parties. This concept of ‘duty to warn’ stems from California Supreme Court case of Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California that took place in the 1970s and comprised of two rulings known as the Tarasoff I (1974) and Tarasoff II (1976).

In the fall of 1968, a man named Prosenjit Poddar, who was a student at the University of California at Berkeley, met a woman named Tatiana Tarasoff at a dance class. Ms. Tarasoff kissed Mr. Poddar on New Year’s Eve of 1968. Mr. Poddar took a liking to Ms. Tarasoff; however, she did not reciprocate. Mr. Poddar began struggling mentally regarding the circumstances and began seeing a counselor at Cowell Memorial Hospital at the recommendation of a friend in 1969.

There have been other extensions to the duty to protect third parties such as in the instances where a patient should not be operating a motor vehicle as a result of certain conditions, patient notification of medication side effects as well as risks of a procedure, and when a patient may transmit an infectious disease to the public.

The American Psychiatric Association established guidelines for physicians on the ‘duty to protect’ in 1987. The guidelines state that a patient must express a clear threat of killing or significantly injuring a specific (or at least a reasonably identified victim), voice threats of destruction of property that may place others in danger, express intent, and also possess the ability to execute the threat. The provider must take reasonable precautions of protecting third parties such as notifying the identifiable victim(s), notifying the police, or hospitalizing the patient voluntarily/involuntarily. There have been no established standard legal guidelines for assessing the risk to third parties.

It is important to note that the meaning of the term “confidentiality” is not the same as “privilege.” Confidentiality refers to an ethical concept which declares that clinicians must keep patients’ information private unless the patient (or legally appointed surrogate decision maker) provides consent for that information to be disclosed, a court order is made by a judge requesting a release of information, the (minimum necessary) information must be communicated for continued treatment of the patient such as in cases of civil commitment, and finally when mandatory reporting is required such as in suspected child abuse or the Tarasoff warning.

The term “privilege” is a legal term and is the right of a patient to withhold any communication with their clinician from court proceedings as long as the communication was confidential and free of presence or knowledge by third parties.

The federal laws of the patient-psychotherapist privilege were set in place in 1996 following a U.S. Supreme Court case of Jaffee v. Redmond where the plaintiff requested psychotherapy notes of a police officer (the defendant) who lethally shot a man. The court concluded that privilege applied to patient-psychotherapist communication because the communication was (1) confidential, (2) with a licensed psychotherapist, and (3) occurred at the time of therapy.Jaffee v Redmond, Justice Stevens, added a footnote (nineteen) which allowed for an exception to the patient-psychotherapist privilege in the instances where disclosure of information may prevent a significant risk of harm to patient or others which became known as the “dangerous patient exception.” The exceptions to the psychotherapist-patient privilege include the dangerous patient exception, the patient-litigant exception/malpractice lawsuits, and when the patient discloses plans to commit crime/fraud or asks the clinician for assistance to avert the punishment of a crime already committed.

Other important laws concerning mandatory reporting are patients with gunshot wounds, elder abuse or neglect, and child abuse or neglect.