Typically, a fentanyl overdose manifests as an extrapolation of its pharmacological side effects. Although the clinical scenarios may vary among patients, one of the main concerns is the level of expression of OIRD. In such cases, oxygen administration and respiratory assistance are a priority. An opioid drug antagonist such as naloxone can help to correct OIRD symptoms. Commonly, repeated doses are necessary since, over time, respiratory depression may overcome the effects of the antagonist drug, particularly with opiates such as fentanyl, in which increased receptor affinity may be present as compared to other opiates. Thus, the therapeutic approach should continue until a normal respiratory rate coincides with appropriate oxygen saturation levels.

Naloxone/naltrexone are robust opioid antagonists that function by blocking µ-receptors. The FDA has approved these antidote medications for emergency treatment of patients with known or suspected opioid overdose experiencing respiratory and/or central nervous system (CNS) depression. Common routes of naloxone administration include IV, IM, IN, or subcutaneous (SC). Researchers have recently posed a caveat regarding the intranasal route for naloxone administration. Since the incidence of obstructive nasal pathology is relatively high in patients who experience serious OIRD, there is documentation of relevant instances of treatment failures when using the IN formulations.

Also, an IV neuromuscular blocker may be employed in cases of severe muscular rigidity to assist the controlled respiration treatments.