People frequently seek treatment for cosmetic reasons, to avoid social stigma, or because they have concerns of transmission to other individuals. The treatment depends on the patient’s (or their parent's) preferences. Because the condition is usually self-limiting, awaiting spontaneous resolution should be considered. However, the patients should be aware that the resolution of molluscum contagiosum may take several months. Even though many treatments had been proposed for molluscum contagiosum, none has proven its effectiveness. Current treatment options include physical removal of mollusca, topical medications, and systemic treatment.

Physical removal is based mainly on cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen or curettage. Techniques might be associated. Laser treatment (carbon dioxide or pulsed dye laser) may also be used but not as first-line therapy. Physical removal is usually painful and may require local anesthesia. Postoperative scarring is possible. Topical trichloroacetic acid can be used to treat mollusca with minimal scarring.

Doctors recommend many topical treatments for molluscum contagiosum. Podophyllotoxin (contraindicated in pregnant women), potassium hydroxide, salicylic acid (associated or not with povidone-iodine), benzoyl peroxide, and tretinoin are used as home treatments and must be applied to each lesion. They are used with the aim to induce an inflammatory reaction, thus accelerating recovery. In a recent analysis, imiquimod, which is used as a modulator of the immune system, and cantharidin, a blistering topical applied by the physician, has not been found to be more effective than other vehicles.

The use of oral cimetidine has been described as a safe alternative to physical removal in children who fear pain (except for facial involvement). However, a recent meta-analysis did not show any difference with cimetidine. Cidofovir, a DNA polymerase inhibitor, has been used successfully in immunosuppressed persons, but it may induce nephrotoxicity and neutropenia when used intravenously. In people living with HIV/AIDS, molluscum contagiosum is best managed with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).