In the last two decades, rapid advances in genomic and biologic technologies have allowed genetic testing and analysis to become essential components of clinical practice and academic research. Furthermore, testing methods have become widely accessible and have substantially decreased in cost, allowing for the participation of more laboratories.

Significant genomic alterations, such as chromosomal translocations, deletions, or duplications, could be detected by conventional methods such as karyotyping. However, single nucleotide changes were difficult to detect.

PCR was used in techniques such as restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) and single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) testing. However, these methods were not able to detect every mutation, particularly if the sequence of a gene was not known. The development and subsequent automatization of Sanger sequencing overcome this limitation, thereby allowing the human genome to be sequenced rapidly and accurately. Sanger sequencing allowed for the Human Genome Project to be launched and completed ahead of time. However, despite advances in Sanger sequencing, newer techniques such as massively parallel sequencing (MPS) allowed for even more rapid and cost-effective technologies.

Currently, targeted sequencing, whole-exome sequencing (WES), and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) are the three main sequencing approaches used in the clinical setting to evaluate for the presence of a rare or novel genetic variant. These techniques are often collectively referred to as next-generation sequencing (NGS). The first of these, gene panels, evaluate a certain, specific number of genes or regions within genes that have been reported to contain mutations contributory to a specific disease or group of diseases.

Gene panels are economical, rapid, and flexible but may vary between laboratories regarding the included genes and their reasoning for inclusion. This makes a comparison between different panels difficult. Furthermore, as the literature expands on certain diseases, panels must be updated routinely to capture newly described mutations. Additionally, many of the current panels are predominantly based on genetic analysis of individuals with European ancestry, limiting generalizability to other groups. In contrast, WES and WGS are both more extensive regarding the extent to which they sequence the genome. WES involves the sequencing of protein-coding regions of the genome, which can identify genetic mutations not yet associated with specific pathologies.

Furthermore, WES can be used to evaluate a pre-selected list of genes or evaluate all potential genetic mutations. In contrast, WGS is the most extensive and can reveal the entire genome. It has the most potential to discover new genetic mutations, genes, and other novel findings.