One of the most common knee injuries is an ACL sprain or tear. Typically, injury occurs during activity/sports play that includes sudden changes in the direction of movement, rapid stopping, jumping and landing abnormally, a direct blow to the lateral aspect of the knee, or slowing down while running.

Most patients complain of hearing and feeling a sudden “pop” and feel that their knee “gives out” from under them at the time of injury. Other symptoms include tenderness along the joint line, pain, and swelling, decreased or loss of range of motion, and difficulty ambulating.

The physical exam should include timing of the injury, mechanism of injury, ambulatory status, joint stability, mobility, strength, palpation, and evaluation of possible associated injuries.

Multiple maneuvers are employed to test the ACL and include the anterior drawer, the pivot shift, and the Lachman tests.

- The anterior drawer test is performed with the patient lying supine with their affected knee flexed to 90 degrees and the foot in a planted position (Sometimes it is easiest for the clinician to stabilize the patient’s foot by sitting on it). The clinician will grip the proximal tibia with both hands and pull with an anterior motion. If there is excessive anterior motion and instability, then the test is positive. It may also be useful to compare to the unaffected knee as patients may have increased laxity of the ACL that is not pathologic. This test has a sensitivity of 92% and specificity of 91% in chronic injuries, but not acute injuries.

- The pivot shift test is performed with the patient in the supine position. The clinician should hold the patient’s lower leg and begin with the knee in extension and flexion of the hip to 20 to 30 degrees. Next, the clinician will bring the tibia into the internal rotation with one hand and begin placing valgus stress on the knee using the other hand. While holding this position, the knee should now be flexed. This causes stress, instability, and ultimately subluxation of the ACL of the affected knee. With flexion of the knee, if the tibia becomes subluxated posteriorly and one may feel a “clunk,” this would indicate a positive test. This test can be difficult to perform in patients who are guarding, and some may not allow the clinician to perform the test. This is a highly specific test (98%) when positive but is insensitive (24%) due to the difficulty in evaluation secondary to patient pain and cooperation.

- The Lachman test is performed with the patient in the supine position with the knee flexed to about 30 degrees. The clinician should stabilize the distal femur with one hand and, with the other hand, pull the tibia toward themselves. If there is increased anterior translation, then this is a positive test. Again, a comparison to the unaffected side may be helpful. This test has a sensitivity of 95% and a specificity of 94% for ACL rupture.

It is important to evaluate for associated injuries such as medial or lateral collateral ligamentous injury, injury to the posterior collateral ligament, or meniscal injuries.