Light microscopy of a peripheral blood smear is a mainstay of hematologic evaluation and diagnosis. A typical erythrocyte will be circular in shape with a central area of pallor due to its biconcave shape. When evaluating the erythrocyte size, it can be described as macrocytic (large), microcytic (small) or normocytic. Anisocytosis means a variation in size amongst the red blood cells on a single slide. Color can undergo evaluation as hyperchromic or hypochromic. Anisochromia refers to a variance in the amount of central pallor amongst a group of RBCs. Polychromasia is a variety of color amongst the erythrocytes. Red blood cell agglutination means that the cells are clumped together in a cluster and rouleaux refers to the erythrocytes arranged in a linear formation. The shape can vary drastically with many different forms of red blood cells described in the literature. Acanthocyte or a spur cell has irregular projections of varying size and distance from either other. A bite cell has a semi-circular indentation as if someone took a bite from it. Echinocytes are erythrocytes with uniform projections all equidistant apart. Schistocyte is a term that refers to an RBC fragment that has been sheared. A sickle cell is an RBC with a crescentic shape. Spherocytes are erythrocytes that have no central pallor and are uniformly red throughout. Stomatocytes have a linear central clearing rather than a circular one. Target cells have a red center with a central clearing. Teardrop cells taper on one end. One last group of erythrocyte descriptors evaluated with light microscopy is inclusion bodies. These are cytoplasmic or nuclear findings that give clinical clues. For example, Heinz bodies are small round masses seen with supravital or Heinz stains that indicate hemolysis. Howell-Jolly bodies are solid, large, round masses found in the hemoglobin of the cell and are visualized with Wright-stain and have many clinical significances. Pappenheimer bodies are multiple, small blue inclusion bodies throughout the entire RBC indicating iron overload, hyposplenism or myelodysplasia. Finally, basophilic stippling is course blue/purple granules seen in thalassemia, lead poisoning and other pathologies.