Inflammation triggered by an infectious or noninfectious stimuli sets forth a complex interplay of the humoral and cellular immune response, cytokines, and complement pathway — eventually, systemic inflammatory response syndrome results when the balance between proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cascades tip over towards the former.

Roger Bone laid out a five-stage overlapping sepsis cascade that starts with SIRS and progresses to MODS, if not appropriately countered by compensatory anti-inflammatory response or alleviation of the primary inciting etiology.

**Stage 1**is a local reaction at the site of injury that aims at containing the injury and limit spread.

Immune effector cells at the site release cytokines that in turn stimulate the reticuloendothelial system promoting wound repair through local inflammation. There is local vasodilatation induced by nitric oxide and prostacyclin (rubor) and disruption of the endothelial tight junction to allow margination and transfer of leukocytes into tissue space. The leakage of cells and protein-rich fluid in extravascular space causes swelling (tumor) and increased heat (calor). Inflammatory mediators impact the local somatosensory nerves causing pain (dolor) and loss of function (functio laesa). That loss of function also allows the part of the body to repair instead of persistent use.

**Stage 2**is an early compensatory anti-inflammatory response syndrome (CARS) in an attempt to maintain immunological balance. There is a stimulation of growth factors and recruitment of macrophages and platelets as the level of pro-inflammatory mediators decreases to maintain homeostasis.

**Stage 3**is when the scale tips over towards proinflammatory SIRS resulting in progressive endothelial dysfunction, coagulopathy, and activation of the coagulation pathway. It results in end-organ micro thrombosis, and a progressive increase in capillary permeability, eventually resulting in loss of circulatory integrity.

**Stage 4**is characterized by CARS taking over SIRS, resulting in a state of relative immunosuppression. The individual, therefore, becomes susceptible to secondary or nosocomial infections, thus perpetuating the sepsis cascade.

**Stage 5**manifests in MODS with persistent dysregulation of both SIRS and CARS response.

AT a cellular level, non-infectious noxious stimuli, an infectious agent or an endotoxin or exotoxin produced by an infection activates a multitude of cells including neutrophils, macrophages, mast cells, platelets, and endothelial cells.

The early response mediated by these inflammatory cells involves three major pathways

- Activation of IL-1 and TNF alfa.

- Activation of prostaglandin and Leukotriene pathway

- Activation of C3a – C5a complement pathway

Interleukin 1 (IL1) and tumor necrosis factor alfa (TNF-alpha) are the early mediators within the first hour. Their role is of paramount importance in tilting the scale towards a proinflammatory overdrive.

Their actions can broadly divide into three categories

- Propagation of cytokine pathway

- Alteration of coagulation causing microcirculatory abnormalities

- Release of stress hormones

**Propagation of Cytokine Pathway**

The release of IL1 and TNF-alpha results in the dissociation of nuclear factor-kB (NF-kB) from its inhibitor. NF-kB is thus able to induce the mass release of other proinflammatory cytokines including IL-6, IL-8, and Interferon-gamma.IL-6 induces the release of acute-phase reactants including procalcitonin and C reactive protein. Infectious triggers tend to produce a greater surge of TNF-alpha and thus IL-6 and IL-8. Another potent proinflammatory cytokine is High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein which is involved in the delayed cytotoxic response of SIRS and sepsis. It has been established as an independent predictor of 1-year mortality in an observational study of traumatic brain injury patients.

**Alteration of Coagulation Causing Microcirculatory Abnormalities**

Like most other early responses in SIRS, alteration of the coagulation pathway also gets triggered by IL-1 and TNF-alpha. Fibrinolysis becomes impaired by the activation of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1. There is direct endothelial injury, thus resulting in the release of tissue factor, which triggers the coagulation cascade. Also, the anti-inflammatory mediators Activated protein C and antithrombin get inhibited. As a result, there is widespread microvascular thrombosis, an increase in capillary permeability, as well as fragility and impairment of tissue perfusion contributing to progressive organ dysfunction.

**Release of Stress Hormones**

Primarily the catecholamine, vasopressin, and activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis result in an increased surge of endogenous steroids. Catecholamines are responsible for the tachycardia and tachypnea component of sepsis while glucocorticoids contribute to leukocyte count increase as well as their margination in the peripheral circulation.

**Compensatory Anti-inflammatory Response S**yndrome (**CARS)**

The compensatory anti-inflammatory response is mediated by interleukins IL-4 and IL-10 which tend to inhibit the production of TNF-alpha, IL-1, IL-6, and IL-8. The balance of SIRS and CARS decides where the termination point in the continuum of SIRS to MODS is. CARS has its own perils. If allowed to perpetuate, it subjects the surviving individual to a prolonged state of immunosuppression. The individual thus becomes susceptible to nosocomial infection, which can thus reinitiate the septic cascade.