Conservative treatment of lateral ankle instability consists of early functional rehabilitation; including rest, ice, elevation, compression, initial range of motion, progressive weight-bearing guided by symptom tolerance, and physical therapy. Even with proper functional rehabilitation 10 to 40% of patients will go on to develop chronic ankle instability following acute ankle sprains. Multiple studies have been published which show both the benefits of conservative therapy as well as surgical treatment for cases that do not adequately respond to conservative treatment.

There have been more than 70 different operative techniques described in the literature for correcting ankle instability, and can be divided into three main categories; anatomic, non-anatomic, and anatomic augmented tenodesis reconstruction.

Anatomic reconstruction consists of the Brostrom procedure, which includes direct repair of the ATFL in pants over vest fashion, this reduces any redundancy due to ligamentous laxity and can be used for completely torn ligaments. The Brostrom procedure has been modified and can include the use of the extensor retinaculum to increase the efficacy of the repair.

Non-anatomic reconstructions are aptly named because they do not repair or recreate the native lateral ligament complex. The use of the peroneus brevis tendon in the Evans and Christman-Snook procedure recreates stability to the lateral ankle.

Anatomic augmented tenodesis reconstructions typically combine a traditional Brostrom procedure with either autograft or allograft tissue and can be accomplished via suture anchors or interference screws.