Generally, the management of SSc mostly involves target organ management. Treatment of microvascular coronary artery disease is similar to the general population with optimization of anti-anginal therapy, including antiplatelets, lipid-lowering therapy, nitrates, and calcium channel blockers. Heart failure is generally similar to the general population. Non-selective beta-blockers should generally be considered due to the lower risk of worsening vasoreactivity. Limited data showed some benefits on myocardial function and perfusion with the use of vasodilators such as calcium channel blockers or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. One study of 601 patients on the use of vasodilators or low dose aspirin suggested potential myocardial preventive benefits in SSc.

Management of heart failure is not different than the general population. This generally varies based on the type of heart failure, whether diastolic, which is more common with SSc or systolic heart failure. The treatment of diastolic heart failure is mainly with diuretics and blood pressure control. The treatment of systolic heart failure is mainly with beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs), angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), diuresis, and the use of inotropes and device therapy in select cases if indicated. Care should be taken to address any underlying medical condition that may predispose to or worsen heart failure or coronary artery diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia. Myocardial inflammation in SSc, whether myocarditis or myopericarditis, was shown to respond to immunosuppression in some studies. However, these data are limited and mostly observational. Several treatments were suggested with reported success, including systemic steroids, cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate, and intravenous immunoglobulin. Normalization of cardiac enzymes with clinical improvement was reported with the use of systemic steroids and cyclophosphamide.