Oral rehydration therapy (ORT) is the mainstay treatment for acute cholera infection and has had a dramatic global impact, not only for V. cholerae but for all dehydrating diarrheal infections.

In order to respond to the severe electrolyte and fluid losses of the small intestine, equimolar oral rehydration solutions rich in sodium and glucose were produced in the 1960s.

Regardless of volume deficit, special considerations must be taken with patients who present with profound vomiting. Often, ORS is not sufficient and intravenous rehydration must be started to avoid the progression of dehydration. Subsequently, it is paramount to assess for ongoing fluid losses in order to keep up with fluid replacement and reassess for volume status periodically. For this purpose, litters, where patients defecate directly into a measuring collection bucket, were developed and named cholera cots.

It has been found that the most common errors in the treatment of patients with cholera are underestimating the fluid needs. This is due to errors in estimating initial dehydration and not reassessing the patient to be aware of increased fluid losses.

Antibiotics are considered as an adjunctive treatment for V. cholerae and are typically administered once the initial volume deficit is corrected and vomiting has ceased. Antibiotics result in substantial improvements in clinical and microbiological outcomes by shortening the mean duration of diarrhea by a day and a half, reducing the total stool volume by 50%, reducing the amount of rehydration fluids required by 40%, and reduction of excretion of hyperinfective bacteria by 3 days.

For infants, breastfeeding in conjunction with ORS and zinc supplementation has been recommended.

Anti-emetics and anti-motility agents have been found to have no benefit and may actually impede ORS therapy, hence producing worse outcomes.