**Ask the Patient and Caregiver:**Since most patients will have endured previous episodes, it is reasonable to ask them what their most common precipitating event is and the usual remedy. Most patients with a history of autonomic dysreflexia will be quite knowledgeable about the condition and are prepared to implement a treatment plan. It is strongly recommended that patients prone to this condition carry an emergency treatment pack or kit with appropriate pharmacological therapies and a card or summary of autonomic dysreflexia to explain the condition and its acute treatment to those unfamiliar with it in emergency situations.

**Immediate First Steps:**In the event of an episode, the immediate first step is to sit the patient upright with their legs dangling and remove any tight clothing or constrictive devices, which will help lower their blood pressure orthostatically by inducing the pooling of blood in the abdominal and lower extremity vessels as well as eliminating possible triggering stimuli.

Bladder and/or bowel distension are the most common triggering causes, with bladder over-distension being the most likely. Therefore, checking and restoring bladder drainage is immediately recommended as the first source to be investigated. If the patient has an indwelling catheter, it should be evaluated for obstruction, malfunction, or malpositioning, and a workup for a urinary tract infection should be performed. Irrigation of the catheter with normal saline, warmed if possible, can be performed to determine patency. Minimal volumes of irrigation should be used. If there is any question about the functionality of the Foley catheter, it should be changed immediately. Avoid undue suprapubic pressing, tapping, or palpating the bladder as this may exacerbate the dysreflexia. If the patient does not have a Foley catheter, one should be placed immediately. Prior to placement, anesthetic gel should be administered directly into the urethra and left for a minimum of two minutes if possible. Placement of a Foley catheter in a patient suffering from autonomic dysreflexia may be challenging as the increased sympathetic tone can tighten the urethral sphincter. Use of a coude catheter or a guidewire is recommended if difficulty is encountered in the initial placement of the Foley.

Patients with significantly overdistended bladders are at a markedly increased risk of rebound hypotension, especially if they have already received antihypertensive medication. In such cases, a bladder scan can be used to identify patients at risk with significantly elevated bladder volumes. Blood pressure should be monitored carefully during bladder drainage in patients with known bladder overdistension. Warmed normal saline should be used for catheter irrigation as cold fluids could trigger further dysreflexic reactions.

Urine leakage around unobstructed catheters is often due to bladder spasms that may be associated with dysreflexia episodes. Acutely, a belladonna and opium (B & O) suppository is often the most effective, immediate treatment for bladder spasms. Overactive bladder medications such as oxybutynin, trospium, vibegron, and mirabegron can be used both therapeutically and prophylactically. In severe cases, bladder wall injections of botulinum toxin (botox) can be helpful.

If the blood pressure remains elevated despite optimal bladder management, consideration should be given to a potential bowel problem as the triggering etiology, especially if the blood pressure is <150 mmHg. A rectal exam should be considered to evaluate for impaction; however, this should be done with care as it can precipitate a worsening dysreflexic crisis due to the rectal stimulation. A topical anesthetic gel applied directly into the rectum has long been recommended to minimize unnecessary stimulation, but recently this has been called into question by a randomized clinical trial that suggested this prolongs care routines and may actually worsen autonomic dysreflexia.

If neither bladder nor bowel problems appear to be the triggering stimulus, a systematic search for other causes should be undertaken. Relatively frequent triggers include skin lesions, infected or ingrown toenails, infected decubitus ulcers, hip dislocations, fractures, venous thromboses, rectal fissures or abscesses, medication effects (nasal decongestants, sympathomimetic drugs, misoprostol, etc.), gastric or bowel disorders, cholelithiasis, testicular problems such as epididymitis or torsions, sunburn or insect bites, and recent traumas which may be previously unrecognized, among others.

Rarely, pyocystis can cause autonomic dysreflexia in susceptible spinal cord injured patients. (Pyocystis is a lower urinary tract infection in anuric patients where the bladder interior contains purulent material.)  In pyocystis, oral and intravenous antibiotics do not adequately reach the bladder interior. In such situations, an aminoglycoside instillation into the bladder of amikacin (25 mg/100 ml) or gentamicin (80 mg/50-60 ml) has been used successfully to treat the pyocystis, based on culture and sensitivity testing, after initial bladder drainage and irrigation of infected debris and mucus.

It is important to document the underlying triggering event for the autonomic dysreflexia if possible, especially if it is something uncommon or unusual.

"Boosting" refers to the deliberate triggering of an episode of autonomic dysreflexia to enhance athletic performance for a sporting event such as the Paralympics. Such activities are strongly discouraged due to the extremely high-risk dangers and hazards it presents to the athletes. While athletic performance can be improved, possibly by up to 10%, boosting is very dangerous, and most sporting events for the disabled, including the Paralympics and the International Paralympic Committee, ban such intentional acts.

**Emergency Antihypertensive Pharmacological Treatment:**If the triggering event cannot be identified and initial maneuvers do not improve the systolic blood pressure below 150 mmHg or less than 40 mmHg above the patient's usual baseline, emergency antihypertensive pharmacologic management should be initiated. Hypertension should be promptly corrected with agents that optimally have a rapid onset but short duration of action.

Nitroglycerine 2% paste is the recommended initial emergency treatment of severe hypertension in patients with autonomic dysreflexia.

Immediate-release nifedipine 10 mg has also been recommended as the initial medical pharmacotherapy when required. This should be reduced to 5 mg in the elderly and those already taking other antihypertensive medications.

Other examples of acceptable antihypertensive treatment would include sublingual and chewable nitrates, sublingual captopril 25 mg., sublingual clonidine (0.2 mg initially followed by 0.1 mg. hourly as needed), intravenous hydralazine (10 to 20 mg slow IV PRN), intravenous labetalol (if the heart rate is not too slow), phentolamine 5 mg IV PRN, sodium nitroprusside (0.5 to 3 mcg/kg/min PRN), diazoxide (20 mg IV bolus), prazosin, and terazosin, among others.

**Summary of Preferred Initial Pharmacological Antihypertensive Therapies for Emergency Use in Autonomic Dysreflexia:**

- Nitroglycerine 2% Paste: Dosage 1 to 2 inches (placed on the non-hairy chest or elsewhere above the level of spinal injury) - Onset of activity: 3 to 5 minutes. The duration of action is 8 hours. The maximum dose is 5 inches.

- Nifedipine "Bite and Swallow": Dosage 10 mg. - Onset of activity: 10 to 20 minutes - Peak activity in 1 hour - May repeat every 20 to 30 minutes. The duration of action is 4 hours. The maximum dose is 40 mg./24 hours.

- Sublingual Captopril: Dosage 25 mg. - Onset of activity: 20 to 30 minutes - May repeat in 1 hour as needed. Peak activity in 1 hour. The duration of action is 4 hours. The maximum dose is 50 mg.

- Sublingual Clonidine: Dosage 0.2 mg. initially followed by 0.1 mg. hourly as needed. - Onset of activity: 10 to 20 minutes. Peak activity in 1 hour. The duration of action is 12 hours. The maximum dose is 0.8 mg.

After emergency hypertensive treatment, the patient's blood pressure should be monitored for at least an additional two hours. The need for ongoing blood pressure monitoring should not deter clinicians from using pharmacological agents when necessary as uncontrolled high blood pressure combined with cerebral vasodilation is particularly dangerous and potentially lethal. Patients should be warned about potential side effects of medical therapy, including tachycardia, rebound hypotension, nausea, vomiting, drowsiness, flushing, and cardiac arrhythmias.

**Hospital Admission:**Hospital admission is recommended if the patient is responding poorly to treatment, the underlying etiology of the episode remains unknown or in pregnancy. Transfer to an intensive care unit should be considered if control of the autonomic dysreflexia and its associated hypertensive crisis has not been achieved within 30 minutes. Discharge is dependent on identifying the underlying cause and/or the episodes cease. Those with continuing or frequent episodes of autonomic dysreflexia should be well prepared with an emergency treatment kit, including necessary supplies and instructions, and only when their caregivers are able to comfortably treat the condition outside the hospital.

**Pregnancy:**Women with a T6 or higher spinal cord injury who become pregnant are at risk for developing a dysreflexia episode during labor and delivery. In women with spinal cord injuries, the symptoms of labor may only be some abdominal discomfort, increased spasticity, and autonomic dysreflexia. Epidural anesthesia has been reportedly the best choice for controlling autonomic dysreflexia during labor. For cesarean sections or instrumentally assisted deliveries, a spinal or epidural anesthetic may be used. The anesthetic level should be extended to T10 to minimize the risk for autonomic dysreflexia. The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology states that it is vital that any obstetrician caring for a pregnant patient with a spinal cord injury be familiar with the complications related to such injuries.

**Procedures:**Patients with spinal cord injuries and autonomic dysreflexia often undergo medical procedures and surgeries, such as urologic instrumentation, that can trigger dysreflexic episodes. General or regional anesthesia may be used for these procedures when feasible. Regional anesthesia in the form of a spinal anesthetic has the advantage of blocking both limbs of the reflex arc and thereby avoids autonomic dysreflexia. However, determining the level of anesthesia can be difficult, and administration/placement of the regional anesthetic may be challenging in patients with spinal cord injuries. An epidural catheter may also be considered for longer cases as it has the advantage of being able to be "topped off." Epidurals are subject to incomplete blocks and might be even more difficult to place. If general anesthesia is used and hypertension or other evidence of a dysreflexic episode develops, deepening the level of anesthesia by increasing the anesthetic agent often alleviates the episode. If hypertension remains unresolved by deepening the anesthetic, antihypertensive medications should be used until the stimulus is withdrawn.

Patients susceptible to autonomic dysreflexia undergoing routine urological diagnostic procedures, such as cystoscopy and urodynamics, should be continuously monitored.

**Prophylaxis:**Optimal management of patients with spinal cord injuries who are prone to autonomic dysreflexia is usually achieved by a multidisciplinary team which may include a spinal rehabilitation specialist, urologist, gastroenterologist, and other specialists who are experienced in these cases. For example, patients may be asked to perform intermittent self-catheterization more often (5-6 times a day) than similar patients with neurogenic bladders who are not as susceptible to autonomic dysreflexia. Bowel management may include abdominal massage, periodic careful digital rectal stimulation, regular suppositories, and routine laxatives. Additional prophylactic measures include careful positioning, seating guidelines, use of appropriate pads along with pressure-relieving cushions and mattresses, as well as periodic inspections for skin lesions to minimize ulcers and breakdowns.

The use of 10 ml of 2% lidocaine administered intravesically 4-6 minutes prior to routine Foley catheter changes has been shown to significantly reduce episodes of autonomic dysreflexia in patients at high risk.

Minocycline has been shown to have a neuroprotective effect in animal testing models but has not yet been shown to have a similar clinical benefit in humans.

While not the current standard of care, there is some evidence that gabapentin might be somewhat beneficial as a prophylactic agent in some spinal cord injured patients, particularly when a low dose is used before scheduled procedures to help mitigate the expected autonomic dysreflexic response.

Noninvasive transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation has been shown in a limited study to significantly mitigate the degree of hypertension during a period of autonomic dysreflexia and even prevent it altogether.