# Continuing Education Activity

Inamrinone is a medication used in the short-term management and treatment of congestive heart failure. It is a phosphodiesterase-III inhibitor, which increases cardiac inotropy. It is prescribed for short-term management to relieve symptoms of CHF, such as fatigue, weakness, edema, dyspnea, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. This activity outlines the indications, action, and contraindications for this drug as a valuable agent in managing acute congestive heart failure. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in the treatment of patients with congestive heart failure and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the most common adverse events associated with inamrinone therapy.
- Explain the importance of monitoring patients given inamrinone.
- Identify the indications for the use of inamrinone.
- Outline the importance of improving collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected with acute congestive heart failure exacerbation resistant to commonly used medications.

# Indications

Inamrinone, also known as amrinone, is a drug that increases cardiac output through its positive inotropic and vasodilatory effects. It is prescribed for the short-term management of congestive heart failure, relieving symptoms of CHF such as fatigue, weakness, edema, dyspnea, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.

There is uncertainty regarding the effect of amrinone compared to standard cardiac care with dobutamine on patients with cardiogenic shock (CS) or low cardiac output syndrome (LCOS).****The long-term use of inamrinone has been widely abandoned due to its capacity to induce thrombocytopenia.

While the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the United States acknowledges that inamrinone has the potential to cause severe adverse effects, it has indicated its use in specific, limited circumstances – it stipulates that indications for short-term inamrinone administration are only if an adult patient's myocardial function (i.e., cardiac output) has not improved sufficiently in response to doses of digoxin, diuretics, and vasodilators.

# Mechanism of Action

Inamrinone is a phosphodiesterase-III (PDE3) inhibitor. Inodilators such as inamrinone and milrinone increase stroke volume and cardiac output by stimulating myocardial contractility and decreasing afterload from systemic vasodilation (decreased systemic vascular resistance).

Throughout the vascular network, the inamrinone-mediated increase in the bioavailability of cyclic adenosine monophosphate has an opposite effect on the mechanisms of action in the myocardium. Indeed, an increase in cyclic adenosine phosphate within the vascular smooth muscle causes a reduction in the intracellular calcium concentration, subsequently relaxing the vascular smooth muscle.****However, chronic treatment with PDE3 inhibitors deteriorates heart failure and should be avoided.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Inamrinone shows the following pharmacokinetic behavior after 1 to 2 minutes of an intravenous bolus dose in the 0.68 to 1.2 mg/kg range.

**Absorption:**The onset of action is rapid (within 5 minutes), and the peak effect is observed in 10 minutes.

**Distribution:**Inamrionone has minimal plasma protein binding, ranging from 26% to 40%. The volume of distribution is 1.2 L/ kg.

**Metabolism:**Inamrinone is metabolized by conjugation. Metabolites are N-glycolate, N-acetate, O-glucuronide, and N-glucuronide (pharmacologically inactive).

**Elimination:**In healthy volunteers, approximately 63% of the orally administered dose was excreted unchanged in urine over 96 hours, while 18% of the administered dose was excreted in feces in 72 hours. Similarly, approximately 10% to 40% of the intravenously administered dose was excreted in the urine within 24 hours. Terminal half-life is 3.6 hours in normal volunteers and 5.6 hours in patients with congestive heart failure after intravenous bolus.

# Administration

The following are FDA guidelines for administering inamrinone by intravenous injection and infusion in the short-term management of congestive heart failure. These guidelines only apply to adult patients.

- An initial undiluted inamrinone loading dose of 0.75 mg/kg is injected slowly over 2 to 3 minutes. After that, a maintenance dose of diluted inamrinone may be infused at 5 to 10 mcg/kg/min with a 2.5 mg/mL concentration. The infusion rate can be titrated depending on the patient’s cardiac response.

- If the cardiac output has not elevated sufficiently or symptoms of heart failure have not been alleviated, a secondary loading dose of 0.75 mg/kg may be injected slowly over 2 to 3 minutes, at least 30 minutes after the initial loading dose.

- The peak effect of an inamrinone loading occurs within 10 minutes of administration, regardless of the dosage. It has an elimination half-life of greater than 2 hours, lasting approximately 8 hours in some instances. The total daily dose of inamrinone should not exceed 10 mg/kg.

- An equivalent volume of normal (0.9%) or half-normal (0.45%) saline should be used to dilute inamrinone for the maintenance infusion. Dextrose (glucose)-containing diluent should never be used due to the potential for a chemical reaction between the drug and diluent, which may occur over 24 hours.

- The FDA also highlights that furosemide should not be administered to the patient in the same intravenous lines used for inamrinone due to the instant chemical reaction between the two drugs.

- The FDA has not approved inamrinone for the safe and effective treatment of congestive heart failure in pediatric populations.

**Specific Patients Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment. However, to date, hepatotoxicity has rarely been observed in clinical settings after intravenous administration. If an acute hypersensitivity reaction occurs in patients with hepatic impairment, then therapy should be discontinued promptly.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with renal impairment. However, in patients with congestive heart failure and compromised renal functions, the drug plasma level may be increased, and it may be necessary to monitor the plasma drug level in these patients.

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**Inamrinone is a former FDA pregnancy category C medicine. In a few animal studies, oral doses of 16 mg/kg and 50 mg/kg in rabbits showed adverse effects of fetal skeletal and gross external malformations. However, in other animal studies, inamrinone intravenously dose of 15 mg/kg/day showed no malformations. The safety and efficacy of inamrinone are not adequately and systematically studied in pregnant women. Therefore, the use of inamrinone during pregnancy should only be considered after the potential benefit over risk to the fetus. The recommendation is also that if inamrinone administration is necessary during pregnancy, its use should strictly be if the benefits outweigh the risks.

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**The cation should be taken while administering inamrinone to breastfeeding women, as it is unknown if the drug is excreted in milk.

- **Pediatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of inamrinone are not established for use in pediatric patients.

- **Geriatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy are not systematically studied in geriatric patients by the manufacturer. However, based on the clinical trial reported in the literature, inamrinone may be used in geriatric patients with congestive heart failure to improve hemodynamics.

# Adverse Effects

As reported by the FDA, intravenous infusion of inamrinone is associated with a range of hematologic, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, nervous system, dermatologic, respiratory, and hepatic adverse effects.

- Thrombocytopenia is among the most commonly reported adverse effects of prolonged inamrinone therapy, with reduced platelet counts in 20 to 46% of patients.

- New, sustained atrial and/or ventricular arrhythmias or worsened heart failure occurs in 9% of patients; and chest pain in 0.2%.

- Inodilators such as inamrinone worsen myocardial ischemia from oxygen supply-demand mismatch.

- Patients may also experience general abdominal pain, anorexia, diarrhea, nausea, and/or vomiting.

- The FDA also reports that patients may experience dizziness, headache, or fatigue, and there are reports of inamrinone-mediated respiratory infections in other patients. Skin dryness, yellow-nail discoloration, loss of smell, and loss of taste may also occur. Only 0.2% of patients experience a burning sensation at the site of intravenous infusion.

- Some patients may be hypersensitive to inamrinone and may experience general viral-like symptoms such as myalgias, arthralgias, and fever. Hepatic toxicity has been recorded, but it is infrequent in the short-term administration of inamrinone.

- Excessive vasodilation and hypotension can be significant limitations of type-3-phosphodiesterase inhibitors, particularly when administered at high doses and/or when therapy is initiated with a bolus dose.

- Severe ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death are the leading cause of mortality, the mechanism of which could be explained by the intracellular calcium overload due to cAMP in myocardial cells and disproportionate increase of cardiac contractility, heart rate, and metabolism.

# Contraindications

The FDA stipulates that those patients who have a known hypersensitivity to inamrinone should not receive the drug. Given that the drug contains sodium metabisulfite, the FDA includes administering inamrinone as a contraindication if the patient has a known hypersensitivity to bisulfites. Sodium metabisulfite allergy can lead to contact dermatitis.

Additionally, clinicians should not give inamrinone to patients with aortic or pulmonic valvular disease.

It should be administered with caution if the patient is taking disopyramide due to the drug combination’s potential to induce severe hypotension.

# Monitoring

The therapeutic dosage range for inamrinone is 0.5 to 7.0 mcg/mL. The maximum daily dose of inamrinone should not exceed 10 mg/kg. The FDA recommends that the patient’s blood pressure, heart rate, electrocardiogram, electrolytes, renal function, and hepatic function be monitored carefully throughout inamrinone therapy.

Infusion of inamrinone should stop entirely if the patient experiences severe hypotension and arrhythmias or if there are signs of hepatic toxicity. It is not automatically necessary to stop administering inamrinone to patients who present with thrombocytopenia. However, it is essential to carefully monitor patients if their platelet count drops to less than 150,000 cells/mm^3.

Patients requiring inotropic support should have continuous telemetry monitoring, as patients risk developing arrhythmias.

In selected patients with heart failure with worsening clinical features, invasive hemodynamic monitoring can be useful to guide management.

# Toxicity

There is no specific recommended antidote for an overdose of inamrinone. However, the FDA recommends implementing general cardiac support measures such as fluid and electrolyte replacement if necessary. It is important to consult a medical toxicologist in an accidental overdose of inamrinone.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The use of inamrinone is associated with significant side effects. However, inamrinone is valuable for short-term treatment when digoxin, diuretics, and vasodilators fail to improve cardiac output. Therefore, it becomes imperative for the healthcare team to monitor the adverse effects of inamrinone and communicate any abnormalities in blood pressure, heart rate, electrocardiogram, electrolytes, renal function, and hepatic function. Clinicians must be even more vigilant if platelet count drops to less than 150,000 cells/mm3. Nursing staff should ensure short-term use of inamrinone with a careful watch on side effects to improve patient outcomes. Pharmacists should perform medication reconciliation and notify the prescriber if drug interactions are present. Critical care and cardiology consultation are required for refractory heart failure or cardiogenic shock. A systematic review and meta-analysis indicated that critical care pharmacists, as part of the interprofessional ICU team care, are associated with a decreased likelihood of mortality and decreased ICU length of stay.

In addition, due to the intricacy of heart failure management and coordination of other health and social services required, advanced heart failure care is optimal if delivered by interprofessional teams that include cardiologists, nurses, and pharmacists specializing in heart failure, social workers, primary care clinicians, and additional specialists.