Treadmill stress testing is a form of cardiovascular stress testing that uses exercise with electrocardiography (ECG) and blood pressure monitoring. This form of stress testing is usually performed with exercise protocols using either a treadmill or bicycle. In addition, patients who are unable to exercise may benefit from the administration of a pharmacologic agent that stimulates the heart's activity, simulating exercise-induced changes.

With treadmill stress testing, providers can determine a patient's functional capacity, assess the probability and extent of coronary artery disease (CAD), and assess the risks, prognosis, and effects of therapy.

**Exercise Physiology**

Exercise is associated with sympathetic stimulation and changes in the coronary vasomotor tone, which affects coronary blood flow. Several studies have reported that the coronaries dilate during exercise.

During exercise, the increase in myocardial oxygen demand and coronary vasodilation allows for increased oxygen delivery which is crucial to myocardial perfusion, thereby preventing ischemia. Through this hyperemic effect, providers can identify ischemia, as stenotic vessels do not vasodilate as well as normal vessels.

Due to sympathetic stimulation and vagal inhibition, an increase in stroke volume, heart rate, and cardiac output is noted. Alveolar ventilation and venous return also increase as a consequence of selective vasoconstriction. The hemodynamic response depends on the amount of muscle mass involved, exercise intensity, and overall conditioning. As exercise progresses, skeletal muscle blood flow increase and peripheral resistance decrease leading to a rise in systolic blood pressure (SBP), mean arterial pressure (MAP), and pulse pressure.

The age-predicted maximum heart rate is a useful measure for estimating the adequacy of stress on the heart to induce ischemia. The goal is usually 85% of the age-predicted maximum heart rate, calculated by subtracting the patient's age from 220.