Although manufacturers design anesthesia systems with specific measures to mediate inappropriate exposure to volatile agents, no system is perfectly secure.  Points of failure can occur anywhere, but suboptimal environmental concentrations of anesthetic gas are more often a result of operator error or neglect.  For example, equipment-related issues may stem from passive exhaust hoses becoming occluded by unrecognized debris, or conduit tubing becoming kinked or compressed by the wheels of the anesthesia machine or other operating room equipment.  Sources attributable to the anesthesia provider may be due to a failure to perform pressure leak checks in the setting of unrecognized incompetent valves, or improperly performing these checks.  Despite these unique situations, the most common source of environmental contamination is the practice of the anesthesia provider.  The peri-induction period is fraught with opportunities to employ conservative and responsible practices.  Some examples of volatile anesthetic stewardship include ensuring an adequate mask seal, minimizing high fresh gas flows when possible, closing vaporizer dials, and carefully refilling the vaporizer.

The effects of chronic exposure to these volatile agents are not benign: decreased fertility, spontaneous abortion, teratogenicity, and carcinogenicity are among the reported outcomes described in surgical healthcare personnel.  Nitrous oxide specifically has been suggested to be responsible for a myriad of acute and chronic adverse effects on the anesthesia provider.  Acute exposure may manifest as lightheadedness, headache, anxiety, depressed motor skills, and nausea or vomiting.  The peripheral nervous system may be compromised in chronic nitrous oxide exposure, manifested by paresthesias and possibly the irreversible inhibition of vitamin B 12-dependent methionine synthase.  These effects depend on the concentration and duration of exposure, but minimizing the possibility for such is essential.

Not only are personnel affected by anesthetic gases, but so too is the global environment.  The majority of gas delivered to the patient does not undergo metabolism; thus, when scavenged from the breathing circuit, it is typically disposed into the outside environment in its chemically unaltered form.  Sevoflurane, desflurane, and isoflurane are known greenhouse gases and have a global warming potential up to 2000 times greater than carbon dioxide.  Approximately, the atmospheric lifespan of nitrous oxide is 150 years, desflurane 10 years, isoflurane 3.6 years, and sevoflurane 1.2 years.  Technologies that aim to recycle and reduce the concentrations of these greenhouse gases work by chemically trapping them in proprietary canister absorbers.  Additionally, silica zeolite is being investigated as an agent to remove exhaled isoflurane.  Other technologies capture gases from the anesthesia machine itself and permit the collection of unaltered volatile agents to prepare them for future use.  Maintaining adequate infrastructure-based ventilation capacities can assist in the redistribution of harmful concentrations of these gases.  Operating room conditions conducive to do this requires at least 15 exchanges of the room's air per hour.  Optimizing current practices and developing new strategies are sure to play critical roles in future anesthetic care.

There is a new patented centralized system that collects halogenated drugs from the anesthetic gas scavenging systems (AGSS) or Waster Anesthetic Gas Disposal (WAGD) system in operating rooms. Gases are compressed, dried, sterilized, and captured on hydrated alkali aluminum silicate adsorbent in sealed tanks.