**Management**

After following the principles of wound debridement (discussed in another article), the wound should be profusely irrigated with a neutral solution like normal saline to wash off any debris. The use of toxic or irritating solutions like hydrogen peroxide must be avoided as they are detrimental to wound healing.

The next step is to choose a dressing material that is easy to replace, stays in place with appropriate anchoring, and does not cause harm to the wound bed or normal surrounding skin by shearing force or sticking to the skin. Patients can develop complications like contact or allergic reactions.

The ideal dressing should keep the wound moist but not macerated, limit bacterial overgrowth, keep odor to a minimum, and be comfortable to wear. Frequent inspection of the wound is necessary to optimize wound dressing selection.

Today there are many types of dressings and even techniques to manage wounds. For the most part, the majority of wounds that require special dressings are chronic wounds or surgical wounds. The overall objective of a wound dressing include the following:

- Decrease the pain

- Apply compression for hemostasis

- Protect the wound from the environment

- Protect the wound from soiling with body fluids or waste

- Immobilize the injured body part

- Promote wound healing

Before applying any type of wound dressing, it is important to assess the following:

- Mechanism of injury

- Risk of contamination

- Injury to deeper structures

- Underlying nerve or tissue damage

- Any perfusion deficits

- Tetanus status

- Disability

- Amount of tissue loss

When there is a nonhealing or chronic wound or a wound caused by trauma, it is important to get an x-ray to ensure that there is no fracture or a foreign body left in the tissues. If the x-rays do not reveal a foreign body, then ultrasound is a useful technique to identify radiolucent foreign bodies like splinters or thorns.

**Currently Available Dressing Options**

- The semipermeable dressing allows for moisture to evaporate and also reduces pain. This dressing also acts as a barrier to prevent environmental contamination. The semipermeable dressing does not absorb moisture and requires regular inspection. It also requires a secondary dressing to hold the semipermeable dressing in place.

- Tulle is a non-adherent dressing impregnated with paraffin. It aids healing but does not absorb exudate. It also requires a secondary dressing to hold it in place. It is ideal for burns as one can add topical antibiotics to the dressing. It is known to cause allergies, and this limits its wider use.

- Plastic film dressings are known to absorb exudate and can be used for wounds with a moderate amount of exudate. They should not be used on dry wounds. They often require a secondary dressing to hold the plastic in place.

- Hydrogels are insoluble and hydrophilic materials that are made from synthetic polymers which have a high water content (70%-90 %) that helps granulation tissues and epithelium in a moist environment. It also decreases the temperature of cutaneous wounds resulting in a soothing and cooling effect. These may be used for dry chronic wounds, pressure ulcers, necrotic wounds and burn wounds. Setbacks involving these dressings are that exudate accumulates and leads to maceration and bacterial proliferation which then produces a foul smell in wounds.

- Fixation sheets can conform to body contour and provide pain relief and also allow exudate to escape. These sheet dressings do need oil application before removal and can be used to manage low-intensity wounds that do not require regular check-ups. They should not be applied to infected wounds.

- Calcium alginate dressings keep the wound moist, reduce pain, and can be used to pack cavities. They also provide hemostasis and can absorb excess exudate. It has been reported that alginates accelerate the healing process by activating macrophages which in turn produce TNF-α which initiates inflammatory signals. They should not be used in the presence of an infection or on dry wounds. Often another dressing is required to hold the alginate in place.

- Foam dressings keep the wound moist, can absorb fluid, and can also protect the wound. They can be used on wounds with a moderate amount of exudate and should be avoided on dry wounds. They can be painful to remove if they dry out.

- Hydrocolloid dressings are made up of a combination of gel-forming materials (carboxymethylcellulose, gelatin, and pectin) with other agents such as elastomers and adhesives. These dressings retain moisture and are painless to remove (thus their indication in the pediatric age group). They are ideal for small abrasions and not to be used on dry or infected wounds.

- Paper adhesive tape is useful for just approximating wound edges and ideal for small wounds. The tape is not useful on wounds with large exudates.

Medicated dressings including antimicrobials are being explored as a new entity. Infections causing a delay in wound healing can be dealt with on the skin by the appropriate antimicrobials. Growth factors could be added to revitalize damaged tissues. Enzymatic debridement of necrotic tissues without actually harming healthy tissue is also a very crucial part of the normal healing process. Papain and collagenase containing or based ointments are also a good option to remove or digest necrotic tissue.

**Wound Types and Appropriate Treatment**

- If too dry, use a hydrogel to hydrate. Dry eschar may also benefit from enzymatic debridement ointments such as collagenase.

- If the wound has minimal drainage, a hydrocolloid will keep it just right.

- If there is heavy drainage, absorb excess fluid using material like alginate, hydrofibers, cellulose, foam, ceramic fiber, or negative pressure wound therapy.

- If the surrounding skin shows maceration, use zinc oxide, protective films, or a negative pressure wound therapy.

- If the wound is infected and there is a lot of sloughs, which cannot be mechanically debrided, then a chemical debridement can be done with collagenase-based products.

- If the bioburden needs to be controlled, a silver-based or iodine-based product should be used.

- If the wound has an excessive odor, topical metronidazole or activated-charcoal dressing material will help.

- If the wound has healthy granulation tissue and needs to have faster healing and epithelialization, hydrocolloid, foams, collagen, or silver collagen will help.

- If the wound is superficial, occlusive semiocclusive dressings help to heal. Polymeric membrane dressings also are good to treat superficial abrasions.