**Route of Administration**

Intravenous; should not be administered intramuscularly due to excessive tissue irritation. Atracurium can be given via bolus or infusion. Studies have demonstrated that continuous infusion is a viable option to achieve a steady state of neuromuscular blockade due to its relatively predictable and organ-independent metabolism.

**ED****95****and Intubating Dose**

- 0.23 mg/kg and 0.5 mg/kg for adults and children older than 2 years of age, 0.3 to 0.4 mg/kg for children less than 2 years of age. In morbidly obese patients, an atracurium dose should be administered based on ideal body weight.

**Onset of Action**

- Atracurium has an onset of action of approximately 2 minutes when an intubating dose is given.

**Duration of Action**

- Classified as an intermediate-acting non-depolarizing muscle relaxant with a duration of action of approximately 40 to 45 minutes. The elimination half-life is approximately 20 minutes. In elderly patients, the half-life may increase by approximately 15% due primarily to decreased clearance.

**Distribution**

- 160 ml/kg

**Protein Binding**

**Metabolism**

Nonenzymatic degradation (Hofmann elimination) accounts for 45% of the metabolism of atracurium. Hoffman elimination is a temperature and pH-dependent process and is slowed by acidosis and hypothermia. The remainder is metabolized via ester hydrolysis by non-specific esterases in the plasma that are unrelated to pseudocholinesterase. A drop in pH enhances the rate of ester hydrolysis. Neuromuscular blocking agents of the Benzylisoquinolinium class are preferred in critically ill patients as their metabolism is not affected by renal or hepatic dysfunction. A primary metabolite of Hofmann elimination of atracurium is laudanosine which does not have any neuromuscular blocking activity but acts as a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant. Studies have shown that long-term infusions of atracurium in critically ill patients can cause an elevation in laudanosine levels.

**Excretion**

Less than 5% of atracurium is excreted in the urine. Laudanosine is hepatically and renally eliminated and has a significantly longer elimination half-life than atracurium (197 minutes).