The thigh divides into three compartments: anterior, posterior, and medial. These compartments surround the only bone in the thigh, the femur. The anterior compartment contains the vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus medius, rectus femoris, and genu articularis. Branches of the femoral nerve lie within the anterior compartment and innervate the musculature. A cutaneous nerve, the saphenous, arises from the femoral nerve and innervates the medial skin of the thigh and leg. The iliotibial band runs along the lateral border of the thigh, superficial to the vastus lateralis. The sartorius muscle is in the anterior portion of the thigh more proximally and in the medial portion more distally as it travels from the anterior superior iliac spine to its insertion on the anteromedial aspect of the proximal tibia as part of the pes anserinus. The medial compartment of the thigh contains the adductor magnus, adductor longus, adductor brevis, and gracilis. These muscles receive their innervation from the obturator nerve, except for the adductor magnus, which also receives innervation from the sciatic nerve. The medial compartment also contains the femoral artery and vein, which pass posteriorly after going through the adductor hiatus.

Proximally, the femoral artery divides into superficial and deep branches, with the deep branch providing blood flow to the muscles of the thigh and the femoral shaft. The great saphenous vein runs superficially along the medial aspect of the thigh. The posterior compartment contains the long and short head of the biceps femoris, semitendinosus, semimembranosus, and sciatic nerve. Branches of the sciatic nerve innervate the musculature of the posterior compartment.