The amnestic syndrome

Amnestic syndrome is an impairment in the ability to form new memories. Regardless of etiology, it seems that memories of recent events (STM) are most vulnerable, whereas older memories (LTM) are more 'resilient' and protected from damage. This concept is not new, as, towards the end of the nineteenth century, the French psychologist Theodule-Armand Ribot (1839-1916) demonstrated that amnesia affects memories in reverse order of their development.anterograde amnesia and retrograde amnesia. The former concerns the new memories and the latter what is well established by neural networks, which is why some conditions (e.g., drugs such as BDZs) can lead to a deficit, especially within the STM. In turn, amnestic disorders primarily affect anterograde memories.

Neural correlates for STM domains and damages.

Research proved that lesions to the prefrontal cortex in primates caused STM alterations. Based on the brain area affected by the damage, research has demonstrated specific modifications in the different domains of STM. The assumption is that these different components are the expression of different neuronal correlates. In this regard, neuroimaging studies reported significant information. For instance, inferior parietal lobule, frontal premotor regions, and insula in the dominant hemisphere are the major neural correlates of the phonological STM subtype.

On the other side, the medial temporal lobes play a fundamental role in the coding and consolidation of the type of memories that are accessible to consciousness, but these regions do not permanently preserve memories and are not necessary for encoding or consolidating other types of memory. The demonstration comes from the emblematic case of patient H.M. who, suffering from severe posttraumatic epilepsy, was operated on median resection of the temporal lobe bilaterally.

Relationship between STM and LTM: clinical evidence.

Because STM and LTM are distinct memories with distinct mechanisms, a selective deterioration of STM may not impair the tasks of LTM. However, it is also true that difficulties in STM performances can trigger a pathogenetic chain that involves other types of memory. Probably, the interconnections between STM and LTM require more explanation.