When non-masked hearing thresholds are established, and it has been determined that masking should be employed, then the effective masking threshold should be obtained for the non-test ear.

Several methods are used to determine the effective masking level for each frequency being tested, often with an initial masking tone loudness similar to the non-masked air conduction threshold used. This is played into the non-test ear via over-ear headphones or inserted earphones, while the new accurate threshold of the test ear is determined, using the same process as described above for a pure tone audiogram. The masking noise in the non-test ear is increased in intervals, with further testing of the pure tone thresholds in the test ear with each new interval until a "plateau" threshold is found. This is the level at which the masking noise is loud enough to avoid cross-hearing of the pure tone by the non-test ear but not loud enough to cause cross-hearing of the masking noise in the test ear, which is known as "over-masking."

Once a new accurate threshold has been found for each frequency in both ears, these results are plotted onto an audiogram, as seen below.

An audiogram is a graphical representation of hearing thresholds in both ears at specific frequencies. Different symbols represent different aspects of the audiogram, including masked and non-masked air conduction and bone conduction, so that the person interpreting the audiogram can establish whether masking has been employed and whether there is an air-bone gap, inferring a conductive hearing loss. Examples of audiograms can be seen below.