The presence of a bioprosthetic valve or implantable cardiac device plays a significant influence on antibiotic selection duration of treatment as it portends a more severe infection with higher rates of treatment failure than native valve endocarditis. They also have a higher mortality rate, increased complications rate, and a higher rate of treatment failure than patients with native valve endocarditis, even if infection occurs with the same pathogen. Additionally, patients with a prosthetic valve or implantable cardiac device are at higher risk for developing endocarditis. Empiric antibiotic therapy for prosthetic valve and health-care-associated endocarditis should be broader and cover MRSA, enterococci, and gram-negative pathogens. Empiric antibiotics should consist of combination bactericidal treatment with vancomycin, gentamicin, and either cefepime or another antipseudomonal carbapenem (imipenem, meropenem, or doripenem). If the patient is found to have Staphylococcus and a prosthetic valve, combination antibiotic therapy with rifampin is recommended. Rifampin has been shown to sterilize and should be started three to five days after blood cultures become negative.

Prosthetic valve endocarditis is more challenging to treat with higher rates of antibiotic failure and increased risk of complications. These patients should receive an early evaluation with a cardiothoracic surgeon as surgery has been shown to improve mortality.

- Early prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) occurs within 60 days of valve replacement. It is typically iatrogenic and caused by S. aureus or coagulase-negative Staph.

- Intermediate PVE occurs between 60 to 365 days of valve replacement, and most common is the result of Streptococcus or staph infection.

- Late endocarditis occurs one year or longer after valve replacement. It typically results from organisms similar to those found in native valve endocarditis.