The Sylvian fissure can be divided into two parts: superficial and deep. The superficial part is visible on the brain's surface and is divided into a stem and three rami: posterior ramus, anterior ascending ramus, and anterior horizontal ramus. The deep part is located below the brain's surface and is divided into two compartments: sphenoidal and operculoinsular.

**Superficial Part**

The superficial part of the Sylvian fissure can be appreciated on the brain's lateral and basal hemispheric surfaces, between the frontal, parietal and temporal lobes (Figs. 1 and 2). It is divided into a stem on the basal surface and three rami on the lateral surface. The stem arises lateral to the anterior perforated substance. It is directed laterally and anteriorly, between the temporal pole and the orbital gyri, towards the lateral surface of the brain. The Sylvian fissure stem has an important topographic relationship with the lesser wing of the sphenoid bone. The stem starts medially to the anterior clinoid process, stays behind the lesser wing of the sphenoid bone following the sphenoidal ridge, and ends at the level of the pterion, in the lateral margin of the sphenoidal ridge. The average length of the Sylvian fissure stem is about 39 mm.

The Sylvian fissure stem is divided into three rami as it reaches the lateral surface of the brain, the anterior horizontal ramus, the anterior ascending ramus, and the posterior ramus. The first two rami divide the inferior frontal gyri on the lateral surface of the frontal lobe into three regions from anterior to posterior: pars orbitalis, pars triangularis, and pars opercularis. The posterior ramus is directed posteriorly and superiorly. It is the posterior continuation of the fissure, separating the frontoparietal operculum above from the temporal operculum below. The posterior ramus ends in the inferior parietal lobule, wrapped around by the supramarginal gyrus. The average length of the posterior ramus is 75 mm.

**Deep Part**

The deep part of the Sylvian fissure, also known as cisternal, can be divided into two compartments: anterior or sphenoidal and posterior or operculoinsular. The sphenoidal compartment has a roof formed by the anterior perforated substance and the posterior region of the basal surface of the frontal lobe, and a floor formed by the anterior region of the planum polare. The limen insulae, the prominence of the uncinate fasciculus on the anteroinferior region of the insula, is located at the lateral border of the compartment.

The Sylvian vallecula is the tubular opening that communicates the sphenoidal compartment medially with the subarachnoid spaces around the carotid artery and the optic nerve. Through the Sylvian vallecula, the middle cerebral artery (M1 segment) enters the sphenoidal compartment. The operculoinsular compartment is formed by the opercular and insular clefts. The former is located between the temporal and the frontoparietal opercula, which form the lower and upper lips, respectively, of the opercular compartment. The latter is the space between the opercula and the insula. It is divided into two limbs, superior and inferior. The superior limb is located between the frontoparietal operculum and the insula, and the inferior limb is located between the temporal operculum and the insula (Figs. 3 and 4).

**Temporal Lobe - Sylvian Fissure**

The temporal lobe has four surfaces medial, inferior, lateral, and Sylvian. The superior temporal gyrus that overlies the insula forms the temporal operculum and is located inferiorly to the posterior ramus of the Sylvian fissure (Fig. 2). The Sylvian surface of the temporal lobe constitutes the floor of the deep part of the fissure (Fig. 5). It forms the lower lip of the opercular cleft laterally, the inferior limb of the insular cleft medially, and the floor of the sphenoidal compartment anteromedially.

The anterior area of the Sylvian surface is formed by the planum polare, a smooth area without gyri near the temporal pole. The posterior region is the planum temporale, a triangular region composed of the transverse temporal gyri. The longest and most anteriorly located transverse temporal gyrus is the Heschl's gyrus (Brodmann area 41), a medial extension of the Wernicke area. The Heschl's gyrus and the adjacent cerebral cortex form the primary auditory cortex. The postcentral gyrus is "sitting" just above the Heschl's gyrus in the Sylvian fissure, an important orientation landmark.

Wernicke’s language area is located in the dominant hemisphere, on the posterior third of the superior temporal gyrus (Brodmann area 22) and supramarginal gyrus (Brodmann area 40), in close relationship with the temporal and parietal opercula. This area is part of the posterior language system, and its major function is the support of phonologic retrieval, a component of speech production. Lesion of the Wernicke area produces phonemic paraphasia and anomia.

**Frontal Lobe - Sylvian Fissure**

The frontal lobe has four surfaces lateral, medial, basal, and Sylvian. On the lateral surface, the inferior frontal gyrus is divided into pars orbitalis, pars triangularis, and pars opercularis by the anterior horizontal and anterior ascending rami of the Sylvian fissure (superficial part). The pars triangularis and the pars opercularis of the inferior frontal gyrus and the lower portion of the precentral gyrus constitute the frontal part of the frontoparietal operculum (Fig. 2). The pars orbitalis of the inferior frontal gyrus with the posterior part of the lateral orbital gyrus and the posterior orbital gyrus from the fronto-orbital operculum.

The fronto-orbital operculum covers the anterior surface of the insula. In most brains, the lower precentral gyrus connects with, the lower postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe via the subcentral gyrus. The subcentral gyrus (pli de passage) interrupts the central sulcus at its lower end, forming the rolandic operculum, part of the frontoparietal operculum just behind the pars opercularis. The Sylvian surface of the frontal lobe is located in the deep part of the Sylvian fissure. It forms the upper lip of the opercular cleft laterally and the upper limb of the insular cleft medially. The posterior region of the basal surface of the frontal lobe, with the anterior perforated substance, forms the roof of the sphenoidal compartment of the Sylvian fissure.

Broca’s language area is located in the pars opercularis (Brodmann area 44) and pars triangularis (Brodmann area 45) of the inferior frontal gyrus in the dominant hemisphere. This area is involved in “word formation.” The precentral gyrus (Brodmann area 4) is the primary motor cortex.

**Parietal Lobe - Sylvian Fissure**

The parietal lobe has three surfaces lateral, medial, and Sylvian. The lower postcentral gyrus and the superior part of the supramarginal gyrus form the parietal portion of the frontoparietal operculum (Fig. 2). The Sylvian surface of the parietal lobe forms the upper lip of the opercular cleft laterally and the upper limb of the insular cleft medially. The supramarginal gyrus in most hemispheres wraps around the posterior end of the posterior ramus of the Sylvian fissure.

The postcentral gyrus (Brodmann area 3b, 1, and 2) is the primary sensory cortex of the brain. The supramarginal gyrus is part of the posterior language system.

**Insula - Sylvian Fissure**

The insula is part of the deep compartment of the Sylvian fissure (Fig. 3). It can be divided into an anterior surface and a lateral surface. The anterior insular surface is covered by the pars orbitalis and the posterior surface of the posterior orbital gyrus (fronto-orbital operculum). The space between the anterior insular surface and the posterior orbital gyrus creates a true fissure called the anterior limiting sulcus, which is part of the circular sulcus of the insula. The lateral insular surface is covered superiorly by the frontoparietal operculum (pars orbitalis, pars opercularis, subcentral gyrus, and supramarginal gyrus) and inferiorly by the temporal operculum. The lateral surface of the insula resembles a pyramid with a triangular base. The vertex of this pyramid is oriented anteroinferiorly, at the limen insulae. In addition, the lateral insular surface is divided into anterior and posterior regions by the central sulcus of the insula.

Three short gyri (anterior, middle, and posterior short gyri) are typically identified in the anterior region. Two long gyri (anterior and posterior long gyri) are present in the posterior region. The three short gyri of the anterior region converge in the anteroinferior edge of the insula, forming a 2-cm, rounded area called the insular pole between the anterior limiting sulcus and the central insular sulcus.

The insular pole is located lateral to the limen insulae. The long gyri of the posterior insular region arise as a single gyrus near the limen insulae and bifurcate posteriorly into the two long gyri. From the insular pole and directed medially toward the posterior orbital gyri of the basal surface of the frontal lobe is the transverse insular gyrus. Separating the lateral insular surface from the frontoparietal and temporal opercula are the superior limiting sulci and inferior limiting sulci, respectively. The anterior limiting sulcus of the anterior insular surface and the inferior and superior limiting sulci of the lateral insular surface form the circular sulcus of Reil or limiting sulcus of the insula.[6]

The insular cortex is part of the paralimbic group that connects the limbic cortex and the neocortex. It integrates pain and temperature sensation with visceral sensation and is considered the primary viscerosensory area.

**Arachnoid Membranes - Sylvian Fissure**

The arachnoid layers cover the Sylvian fissure creating a cisternal space where the cerebrospinal fluid and the vascular structures are located (Fig. 3). The distribution of the arachnoid layers in the fissure creates three compartments (from superficial to deep): superficial opercular, deep opercular, and cisternal. These compartments are limited by two membranes and one plane (from superficial to deep): outer arachnoid membrane, lateral Sylvian membrane, and the operculocisternal plane. The superficial opercular compartment contains the superior Sylvian vein and the distal branches of the middle cerebral artery (M4-M5).

The deep opercular compartment extends from the lateral Sylvian membrane to a parasagittal plane passing by the deepest point of apposition between the temporal and frontoparietal opercula (the operculocisternal plane). This compartment mainly contains the M3 segment of the middle cerebral artery, the intermediate Sylvian membrane, and the proximal Sylvian membrane. The cisternal compartment is located between the operculocisternal plane and the insular cortex and contains the proximal segments of the middle cerebral artery (M1-M2), the medial Sylvian membrane, and the deep middle cerebral vein.

**Vascular Structures - Sylvian Fissure**

**Middle Cerebral Artery**

The Sylvian fissure has a significant relationship with the middle cerebral artery and its branches. There are four segments of the middle cerebral artery: M1 or sphenoidal segment, M2 or insular segment, M3 or opercular segment, and M4 or cortical segment. The sphenoidal segment (M1) has its origin at the terminal bifurcation of the internal carotid artery, in close relationship with the optic chiasm medially and the anterior perforated substance superiorly. It courses in a lateral direction entering the sphenoidal compartment of the Sylvian fissure through the Sylvian vallecula.

The M1 segment ends at the right-angle bend (genu) of the vessel at the limen insulae and, during its course, presents a bifurcation. The M1 segment is subdivided into two parts: prebifurcation (1 trunk) and postbifurcation (2 to 4 branches). The insular segment (M2) has the origin at the genu, at the limen insulae. It ends at the superior, inferior, and anterior circular sulcus of the insula, where it turns 90 degrees to 180 degrees, becoming the M3 segment. The opercular segment (M3) has its origin at the circular sulcus of the insula. It runs along the opercular cleft and ends at the cortical surface, leaving the Sylvian fissure. The cortical segment (M4) starts when the middle cerebral artery exits the Sylvian fissure.

**Sylvian and Insular Veins**

The Sylvian fissure contains superficial and deep veins. The superficial veins from the superficial Sylvian venous complex, composed of three interconnected systems: the anterior Sylvian venous system, the posterior Sylvian venous system, and the superior Sylvian venous system. The three systems have different drainages (described in table 1). The superficial veins are the biggest challenge for neurosurgeons during the first steps of the Sylvian fissure splitting.

The deep insular veins are found in the deepest region of the fissure, and they converge at the limen insulae to drain to the deep middle cerebral vein. The deep middle cerebral vein runs medially toward the anterior perforated substance, where it joins the anterior cerebral vein, forming the basal vein of Rosenthal (anterior segment).[2]

**TABLE 1**. Venous drainage of the superficial Sylvian venous complex

Sphenoparietal sinus

Cavernous sinus

Sphenopetrosal sinus

Lateral temporal vein

Vein of Labbé

Transverse sinus

Frontoparietal veins

Vein of Trolard

Superior sagittal sinus

**Topographic Sulcal Points - Sylvian Fissure**

**Anterior Sylvian Point**

The confluence of the anterior horizontal, anterior ascending, and posterior rami of the superficial part of the Sylvian fissure forms the anterior Sylvian point (Fig. 2). This point is located inferior to the pars triangularis and anterior/inferior to the pars opercularis of the inferior frontal gyrus. It divides the Sylvian fissure into the proximal segment (stem, anterior ramus) and the distal segment (anterior ascending and posterior rami). At this point, the Sylvian fissure is enlarged, giving a cisternal aspect, and therefore, it can be used as a starting point to open the Sylvian fissure.

**Inferior Rolandic Point**

The inferior extremity projection of the central sulcus on the Sylvian fissure is the inferior rolandic point. It is located 2.0 to 2.5 cm posterior to the anterior Sylvian point and corresponds to the anterior boundary of the Heschl's gyrus.