The SIR has published complication rates for PTC and PBD. The rate of major complications is around 2% to 10%. Major complications include inducing sepsis, other severe infection (such as an abscess), bile leak/biloma, hemorrhage (subcapsular hematoma, pseudoaneurysm), pneumothorax, and death.

Transgression of blood vessels during PTC is to be expected.  Coagulation usually occurs successfully, and hemorrhage ceases entirely within 2 to 3 days. Bleeding through the catheter can occur if a catheter side hole is left in communication with a hepatic vessel or if a pseudoaneurysm develops.

**Hemodynamically Stable**

In hemodynamically stable patients, if hemorrhage is obvious (such bright red pulsatile blood is coming out of the tube), then the patient should be taken for emergent angiographic embolization.

If hemorrhage is suspected, such as from observing hemobilia, a falling hemoglobin level, or unstable vital signs, then CT angiography (CTA) can be considered as a first-line diagnostic tool. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) via arterial puncture can be performed thereafter for embolization treatment if evidence of bleeding is seen on the CTA.  However, whenever there is strong clinical suspicion of bleeding in the absence of hemorrhage seen on CTA, then a fluoroscopic tractogram should be performed next.

If no vessels are opacified or if the drainage catheter sideholes are found to lie outside biliary tract, then the catheter should be repositioned and the tractogram repeated. Angiographic with possible embolization should be considered. If a vein is opacified, then the catheter should be upsized to tamponade the vein. Time should be given to see if the intervention worked. If an artery is opacified, then the catheter should be upsized to tamponade the artery. If blood can still be aspirated through the larger catheter, then angiographic embolization of the hepatic artery branch involved should be performed urgently.

**Hemodynamically Unstable**

A decision must be reached between the radiologist and surgeon whether the patient should go to surgery, to angiography, or both if angiography can be performed in the operating room.

**Bleeding**

- Tumor bleeding can occur, particularly in hilar tumors. It is difficult to treat and may not respond to embolization or to the placement of a larger catheter thereby requiring surgery.

- In rare instances, bleeding can occur after planned catheter removal.  In this situation, the bleeding is almost always venous and cannot be addressed through angiography (i.e., arteriography).  An attempt can be made to embolize the initial tract via ERCP or a second PTC.

Bile lining the skin, peritoneum, or pleura even in small amounts can cause severe pain in some patients, while a large leak may cause no pain in others. If bile leaks out of or around the catheter into the abdomen (peritonitis) or chest (pleuritis), then the catheter should be repositioned, unclogged, and/or upsized to tamponade the leak. Biloma and/or subcapsular hematoma formation does not in and of itself require remediation because the body can resorb the fluid, but if the fluid becomes painful or infected, then it can be percutaneously drained.

If electrolyte depletion occurs due to high-output external drainage, then the electrolytes should be replaced and considerations should be made on converting the catheter to internal drainage as soon as possible.

PTC +/- PBD provides a conduit for bacteria to enter the biliary tract from an external source. Preventive measures include routine catheter exchange every 2 to 3 months and using a catheter that has a good chance at remaining patent (e.g., at least 12 Fr caliber). Cholangitis is treated with antibiotics.

Although PTC may be performed to treat the obstruction that is the cause of sepsis, PTC itself may also cause sepsis. Antibiotics, IV fluids, oxygen, and vasopressors in the setting of an intensive care unit should be considered.

**Catheter Dislodgement**

Catheter dislodgement can occur even with educating the patient regarding measures to avoid allowing traction to be placed on the catheter. A safety stitch at the skin surface and/or a catheter with a self-retaining mechanism are both usually used. The creation of a stable patent tract by the initial drainage catheter takes 4 to 6 weeks, so this initial time is particularly important to take measures to prevent catheter dislodgement.

If the catheter has become partially dislodged, then it is usually able to be replaced fairly easily over a guidewire. If it has retracted out of the liver entirely, then it becomes much more challenging to replace. If the catheter tract can be opacified with contrast, then often an angiographic type catheter and a guidewire can be used to negotiate the transhepatic tract and then reinsert a new drainage catheter through the original tract.