The secretion of aqueous by the lacrimal gland is a response to parasympathetic and sympathetic stimulation. The gland receives parasympathetic innervation via fibers that originate in the lacrimatory nucleus of the facial nerve in the pons. Presynaptic parasympathetic fibers travel with the facial nerve to the geniculate ganglion, where they diverge, forming the greater petrosal nerve. The greater petrosal nerve passes through the foramen lacerum and is joined by the deep petrosal nerve (which contains sympathetic fibers from the superior cervical ganglion), forming the nerve of the pterygoid canal. This nerve then synapses on the pterygopalatine ganglion. Postsynaptic parasympathetic fibers leaving the pterygopalatine ganglion form the zygomatic and zygomaticotemporal nerves. These fibers travel with the lacrimal branch of the maxillary nerve to reach the lacrimal gland. Innervation of the gland by these parasympathetic fibers is either direct, indirect via communication with the lacrimal nerve, or both. In the majority of cases, the zygomaticotemporal nerve directly enters the lacrimal gland.

Sympathetic innervation of the lacrimal gland originates in the superior cervical ganglion. These postsynaptic fibers travel with the internal carotid artery before joining the greater petrosal nerve, forming the nerve of the pterygoid canal. As this nerve reaches the pterygopalatine ganglion, sympathetic fibers do not synapse but continue to travel with the parasympathetic fibers that reach the lacrimal gland.

Sensory innervation of the lacrimal gland is via the lacrimal nerve, a branch of the ophthalmic nerve.