Patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection have been noted to have various forms of neuropsychiatric illnesses. Neuropsychiatric illnesses include symptoms of both cognitive disorders as well as mood and anxiety symptoms.

**Frascati Classification of HIV-associated Neurocognitive Disorders**

The United States National Institutes of Health published a classification scheme in 2007 to define these neuropsychiatric disorders so that there may be uniformity in clinical assessments and research for these disorders. This classification system is called the "Frascati criteria," although it has not been universally adopted.

- Asymptomatic neurocognitive impairment (ANI): When the individual scores 1 standard deviation (SD) or more below the mean in 2 or more cognitive domains on standardized neuropsychological testing. There is usually no overt functional impairment.

- Mild neurocognitive disorder (MND): When the individual scores 1  SD or more below the mean in 2 or more cognitive domains on standardized neuropsychological testing AND has evidence of overt (usually mild) functional impairment.

- HIV-associated dementia (HAD) – When the individual scores 2 SD or more below the mean in 2 or more cognitive domains on standardized neuropsychological testing AND has evidence of functional impairment affecting activities of daily living.

As is clear from the above definitions, the application of these criteria requires formalized testing and should not be applied without objective evaluation.