Ankle and foot injuries are common in the occupational setting and during amateur and professional sporting activities.

The tendinous insertion of the peroneus brevis can be injured following an inversion or supination injury resulting in a tendon sprain. For example, during an ankle sprain, the peroneus brevis can be torn, presenting as persistent swelling along the lateral aspect of the ankle at the peroneal tendon sheath. Likewise, supination-adduction injuries to the ankle often involve damage to the lateral ligaments of the ankle, fracture of the distal fibula, and possibly an injury to the peroneal tendons and peroneal retinacula. Occasionally, the base of the fifth metatarsal is also fractured in a lateral ankle sprain, and the peroneus brevis tendon may pull on and detach the bone at the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction, which is called a Jones fracture.

There is a groove in the posterior aspect of the distal fibula where the tendon of the peroneus brevis muscle sits with the tendon of the peroneus longus behind it. The groove is variable in depth and, in some instances, shallow; this is why the peroneal tendons are the most commonly dislocated ankle tendons. Another cause for tendon dislocation is the peroneus brevis tendon rubbing on the fibula, causing an inflammatory periosteal reaction and bony proliferation, which can cause chronic subluxation or displacement of the peroneal tendons. A longitudinal (vertically oriented) split of the peroneus tendon can also occur with subluxation. Furthermore, a low-lying or inferiorly positioned peroneus brevis muscle belly can cause tendon problems and lead to instability, dislocation, tendonitis, or tendon tears.