# Introduction

Chimeric antigen receptor-T (CAR-T) cell therapy is a type of genetically modified immunotherapy that is directed at cancer cells. The method involves using an individual's own T-cells (or donor cells in allogeneic CART), transduced with gene encodes ex vivo, then introduced to the patient.

Clusters of differentiation-19 (CD-19), a B cell surface marker, -directed CAR-T cells show encouraging outcomes in a variety of malignancies, including pediatric and B-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). The first approved CAR-T therapy targeting CD-19, tisagenlecleucel (tisa-cel, ELIANA), was initially approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for patients with ALL in 2017, and later diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), high-grade B-cell lymphoma, and DLBCL arising from follicular lymphoma (JULIET).

Since then, more agents such as lisocabtagene maraleucel (liso-cel) have made their way onto the market, demonstrating better tolerance.

Despite the current success rate of CAR-T therapy, it comes with the caveat of significant toxicities. The most common adverse events (AEs) of CAR-T therapy, including cytokine release syndrome (CRS) and immune effector cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome (ICANS), remain barriers to the use of CAR-T cell therapy. Other AEs, such as cytopenia,s, infections, tumor lysis syndrome (TLS), acute anaphylaxis, etc., are also challenging.

# Etiology

The exact mechanism of CRS is not well understood. CRS is a systemic inflammatory response that occurs during the CAR-T activation and expansion in the human body.

ICANS is thought to be related to myeloid cell activation, including granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) mediated stimulation of monocytes after CAR-T and monocyte-derived IL-1 and IL-6.

The costimulatory domain is a component of CAR-T necessary for T cell activation and expansion of the CAR-T cells.

# Epidemiology

CAR-T-related toxicity occurs with varying frequency depending on factors discussed later. CRS is the most common type of toxicity associated with CAR-T therapy, followed by ICANS.

**Cytokine Release Syndrome (CRS)**

CRS is considered a predominantly reversible complication of CAR-T therapy, with an incidence of occurrence in 42 to 100% of the patients. It presents with varying severity, with 0 to 46% of patients exhibiting features of severe CRS and from 0 to 9.1% of cases progressing to fatal outcomes.

**Immune Effector Cell-Associated Neurotoxicity Syndrome (ICANS)**

Similar to CRS, ICANS presents in most patients after CAR-T infusions as a reversible complication. It occurs less frequently and is often delayed compared to CRS, with the incidence ranging between 3 and 64% and 0 to 54% of cases exhibiting signs of severe illness.

# Pathophysiology

**Cytokine Release Syndrome (CRS)**

CRS is the most common type of toxicity following CAR-T therapy. It is a multi-systemic inflammatory response caused by cytokines released following the infusion of CAR-T cells that can lead to multiorgan dysfunction. The onset of symptoms usually occurs during the first week after CAR-T cell infusion, with a typical duration of 7 to 8 days.

Multiple risk factors for CRS include high disease burden, a high number of administered CAR-T cells, the high peak of CAR-T cell expansion, thrombocytopenia, endothelial activation before CAR-T infusion, and lymphodepletion therapy with fludarabine and cyclophosphamide.

Studies have suggested that disease characteristics such as tumor burden, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status, ferritin, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and C reactive protein (CRP) levels prior to CAR-T can be used as predictors of the onset of CRS and ICANS, thus guiding the outcomes of CAR-T.

**Pathophysiology**

CRS is thought to be related to the production of inflammatory cytokines by CAR-T, e.g., TNF-a, IFN-γ, IL-2, IL-8, IL-10, and GM-CSF following interaction with corresponding target cells.

**Clinical Features**
****

CRS typically presents with constitutional symptoms such as a fever, fatigue, myalgia, arthralgia, rigors, or anorexia. It can rapidly progress to tachycardia, hypotension requiring vasopressors and intensive care unit (ICU) care, tachypnea, and hypoxia. Eventually, it can lead to coagulopathy, capillary leak, respiratory failure, shock, and multiple organ failure.

**Immune Effector Cell-associated Neurotoxicity Syndrome (ICANS)**

It is a form of clinical and neuropsychiatric disease manifestation that occurs within days to 2-3 weeks following CAR-T therapy administration.

**Pathophysiology**

The pathophysiology behind ICANS is not well studied. Theories include CNS trafficking of CAR-T cells and endothelial disruption within the blood-brain barrier. Moreover, myeloid cell activation in the CNS with the secretion of IL-1 and IL-6 by monocytes, GM-CSF-mediated stimulation of monocytes after CART, elevated levels of IL-15, and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor agonists (e.g., glutamate and quinolinic acid) have all been suggested to cause ICANS.

**Cytopenias**

Cytopenias are very frequent following CAR-T cell therapy, the most common being neutropenia. They occur in about 20-40% of patients and can last beyond 30 days after administration.

**Tumor Lysis Syndrome (TLS)**

TLS can be a life-threatening condition leading to arrhythmias and renal failure. It usually occurs due to cell depletion following chemotherapy but can occur as a direct effect following CAR T-cell therapy.

**Anaphylaxis and Immunogenicity**

CAR-T cells involve the addition of non-human products that renders a risk for allergic reactions. Anaphylaxis is rather uncommon and is reported only with repeated CAR-T infusions. Additionally, anti-murine antibodies against CD-19 have been detected prior to CAR-T cell infusion. Fully human-containing CAR-T cells are under clinical trials.

**Hypogammaglobulinema due to B-Cell Aplasia**

B-cell aplasia with hypogammaglobulinemia is an expected AE associated with CAR-T therapy.

**Infections**

Multiple etiologies can explain recurrent infections, including underlying disease, cytotoxic treatment, neutropenia, hypogammaglobinemia, treatment for CRS and ICANS, and the CAR-T itself. In addition, patients with an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) <500 cells/mm3 receiving higher doses of CAR-T therapy administration carry a higher risk than other patients.

**Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)**/Macrophage Activation Syndrome (MAS)****

Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) was reported in around 1% of patients receiving CAR-T cells.

**Diagnostic Criteria of Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)/Macrophage Activation Syndrome (MAS) [****adapted from criteria proposed by the CARTOX Working Group]**

Ferritin >10,000 ng/ml during CRS

And two of the following:  Grade 3 liver toxicity (increase in levels of bilirubin, aspartate aminotransferase, or alanine aminotransferase)  Grade 3 kidney toxicity (oliguria or increase in serum creatinine)  Grade 3 pulmonary edema  Hemophagocytosis in the bone marrow or other organs

**Secondary Malignancies**

Secondary malignancies after CAR-T are primarily related to lymphodepletion chemotherapy, including myelodysplastic syndrome, acute myeloid leukemia, etc.

**Graft-Versus-Host Disease (GVHD)**

Patients receiving allogeneic CAR-T cells from donors carry a risk of developing mild acute GVHD or slow worsening of previously existing chronic GVHD, though this has only rarely been reported.

# History and Physical

Healthcare professionals caring for patients receiving commercial CAR-T products must complete product-specific Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) training.

Every CAR-T center has institutional guidelines to evaluate the patients for related toxicities, depending on whether the CAR-T product was infused in an inpatient or outpatient setting. Generally, in an outpatient setting, patients are evaluated once daily for both CRS and ICANS-related features for at least 14 days and up to 30 days post-infusion. If the CAR-T therapy is administered inpatient, vitals are typically assessed every 4 hours; the ICE score is at least once a day, with a daily comprehensive physical exam and blood work including complete blood count (CBC) and complete metabolic panel (CMP).

If a patient is admitted with an AE such as CRS, vital signs are checked more frequently, ideally every 2-4 hours, immune effector cell-associated encephalopathy (ICE) score is evaluated at least once a day and up to every 8 hours, and blood work including CBC, CMP, and other relevant tests are done once to twice daily.

Most centers alert neurology service for a neurological evaluation of the patient before the CAR-T administration. However, in case of a suspected or confirmed ICANS-related toxicity, a neurological exam is performed at least 4-6 hourly or more frequently if a decline in the neurological status is noted.

# Evaluation

Toxicities related to CAR-T cell therapy are diverse and still poorly understood. The evaluation of CAR-T-associated toxicities and their severity is based on clinical symptoms and signs, which are further aided by laboratory biomarkers and/or radiological findings.

**CRS**: It is a clinical diagnosis and usually presents with varying degrees of fever, tachycardia, hypotension, hypoxia, nausea, vomiting, etc. The vital signs are assessed frequently, depending on the institutional policies, with most centers mandating reevaluation every 4 hours for grades 1 and 2 and 1 to 2 hourly evaluations for grades 3 and 4 CRS.

Useful laboratory evaluation for CRS involves performing a CBC, renal and liver function test, coagulation profile, LDH, serum ferritin, IL-6, and CRP. These biomarkers are performed serially to determine the severity and response to the treatment. Some have also postulated checking IL-5,  IL-13, TNF-a, and IFN-γ levels.

**ICANS**: Like CRS, ICANS is diagnosed based on clinical symptoms, including headache, impaired attention and consciousness, lethargy, agitation, hallucinations, tremors, aphasia, encephalopathy, and seizures.

Laboratory evaluation of ICANS includes biomarkers similar to CRS in addition to a lumbar puncture to analyze cerebrospinal fluid, neuroimaging, and EEG to determine the extent of damage from ICANS and rule out other organic factors and/or sinister causes, including but not limited to infections.

# Treatment / Management

Here, we review the toxicities caused by CAR-T cell therapy and summarize the clinical findings, grades, and management of the most relevant adverse events associated with CAR-T cell therapy.

The toxicity of CAR-T remains challenging. However, numerous safety measures have been implemented in clinical trials.

Management of CRS and ICANS requires frequent assessment and grading several times a day in addition to monitoring inflammatory markers such as ferritin and CRP. Aggressive supportive care is the cornerstone of managing all patients experiencing CAR T-cell toxicities, with early intervention for hypotension and treatment of concurrent infections being essential. IL-6 receptor blockade with tocilizumab remains the mainstay pharmacologic therapy for CRS, though indications for administration vary among centers. For FDA-approved CAR-T cell products, REMS requires prompt availability of at least two doses of tocilizumab per patient that can be administered within two hours of CAR-T infusion.

Corticosteroids should only be reserved for neurologic toxicities and CRS not responsive to tocilizumab. Pharmacologic management is complicated by the risk of immunosuppressive therapy abrogating the activity of the CAR-T cells.

**Cytokine Release Syndrome (CRS)**

Grading and management of CRS are derived from the American Society for Transplantation and Cellular Therapy (ASTCT) consensus guidelines for CRS grading.

Symtpoms require symptomatic treatment only

- Fever, nausea, fatigue, headache, myalgia, malaise, etc., but no hypotension or hypoxia.

Symptoms require and respond to moderate intervention

- Fever (temperature ≥38°C), and

- Hypotension that doesn’t require vasopressors and/or

- Hypoxia on low-flow oxygen (O2) <40% FiO2.

- Supportive measures, similar to grade 1 CRS, IV fluid boluses, supplemental oxygenation, and

- Tocilizumab 8 mg/kg once (maximum dose: 800 mg [based on CAR-T cell CRS dosing]). If there is no clinical improvement in the signs and symptoms of CRS after the first dose, repeat tocilizumab every 8 hours as needed. Limit to a maximum of 3 doses in a 24-hour period and a total of 4 doses.

- Corticosteroids (dexamethasone 10 gm every 6 hours or methylprednisolone equivalent, that is 1 mg/kg twice daily) if no improvement within 24 hours of starting tocilizumab.

Symptoms require and respond to aggressive intervention

- Fever, and

- Hypotension that requires one vasopressor and/or

- Hypoxia that necessitates high-flow O2 (high-flow nasal cannula, mask, non-invasive ventilation) ≥40% FiO2.

- Supportive management similar to CRS grade 1 and intensive care unit (ICU) management with vasopressor support and/or supplemental oxygen, and

- Tocilizumab 8 mg/kg once (maximum dose: 800 mg [based on CAR-T cell CRS dosing]), plus

- Dexamethasone 10-20 mg IV every 6 h or methylprednisolone equivalent.

Life-threatening symptoms

- Fever, and

- Hypotension that requires multiple vasopressors and/or

- Hypoxia requiring positive pressure (e.g., CPAP, BiPAP, intubation, mechanical ventilation).

- Supportive management similar to CRS grade 1, ICU admission, vasopressor support, and/or supplemental O2 via the positive pressure method, and

- Tocilizumab 8 mg/kg once (maximum dose: 800 mg [based on CAR-T cell CRS dosing]), and

- Methylprednisolone 1000 mg/day for three days.

**Immune Effector Cell-Associated Neurotoxicity Syndrome (ICANS)**

The grading and proposed management of ICANS are according to and adapted from the ASTCT consensus guidelines for ICANS grading.

- Immune effector cell-associated encephalopathy (ICE) score 7-9.

- Awakens spontaneously.

- No motor findings or seizure-like activity.

- No signs of increased intracranial pressure (ICP) or CNS edema.

- ICE 3-6.

- Awakens to a voice.

- No motor findings or seizure-like activity.

- No signs of increased ICP or CNS edema.

- Supportive management similar to ICANS grade 1.

- Consider dexamethasone 10 mg every 6 hours or methylprednisolone equivalent.

- ICE 0-2.

- Awakens only to tactile stimuli.

- Usually presents with a seizure that resolves rapidly, with/without interventions.

- There is usually focal or local edema on imaging.

- Supportive management similar to ICANS grade 1; consider transfer to ICU and airway protection.

- Dexamethasone 10-20 mg IV every 6 hours or methylprednisolone equivalent. If deterioration, increase steroids to that in grade 4.

- Control seizures with antiepileptics and status with benzodiazepines.

- ICE 0.

- Unarousable, stuporous, or in a coma, or requires vigorous stimuli to wake.

- Usually presents with prolonged life-threatening seizures (>5 min) or repetitive clinical or electrical seizures without returning to baseline. Additionally may have deep focal weakness, i.e., hemiparesis or paraparesis.

- Imaging shows diffuse cerebral edema. On physical examination, usually papilledema, decerebrate/decorticate posture, cranial nerve VI palsy, or Cushing’s triad (bradycardia, hypertension, and abnormal breathing).

- Supportive management similar to ICANS grade 1, transfer to ICU, and airway protection, e.g., by intubation and mechanical ventilation.

- High-dose methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day).

- Control seizures with antiepileptics.

- Lower elevated ICP with hyperventilation, hyperosmolar therapy, and/or neurosurgical intervention.

- If refractory, discuss agents such as siltuximab or anakinra, as detailed below.

Immune effector cell-associated encephalopathy (ICE) assessment adapted from ASTCT grading consensus guidelines:

**ICE Parameter**

**Task**

**Scoring point**

**Orientation**

Orientation to the year, month, city, and hospital

4

**Naming**

Ability to name three objects

3

**Follow Commands**

Ability to follow simple commands

1

**Writing Ability**

Ability to write a standard sentence

1

**Attention Ability**

Ability to count backward from 100 by 10s

1

**CRS and ICANS Refractory to the Above Treatment**

If despite the use of tocilizumab and corticosteroids, patients with CRS and ICANS continue to worsen, siltuximab, a monoclonal antibody, binds to  IL-6, thus preventing it from binding to the IL-6 receptors.

**Cytopenias**

Mostly, cytopenias resolve over time. Bone marrow biopsy is recommended in patients with prolonged or delayed cytopenias to evaluate for secondary bone marrow malignancy.

**Tumor Lysis Syndrome**

Management involves frequent hydration and the use of uric acid-lowering agents (allopurinol, rasburicase, and febuxostat) as per the standard guidelines for chemotherapy.

**Hypogammaglobulinema Due to B-Cell Aplasia**

Long-term follow-up is essential to assess the need for IgG replacement.

**Infections**

Patients with fevers and neutropenia should have blood cultures drawn and broad-spectrum antibiotics initiated.

Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or alternative agents are recommended for pneumocystis jirovecii (PJP) starting before conditioning chemotherapy and is usually continued until CD4 reaches more than 200/ml.

**Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis**

Treatment usually involves corticosteroids and tocilizumab if co-existent with CRS. In refractory cases or if independent of CRS, treatment with etoposide and intrathecal methotrexate or cytarabine has been suggested. Additionally, anakinra has also been proposed but needs further evaluation.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnoses for CRS are mainly related to its clinical manifestations and laboratory findings, such as fever and/or hypoxia and hypotension, elevated CRP, ferritin, and IL-6 levels.

These patients are usually required to undergo extensive evaluation and investigations to rule out other causes and often require empirical treatments until proven otherwise.

ICANS can be frequently confused with uncommon viral infections, stroke, chemotherapy-related toxicity, and the CNS involvement of malignancy.

# Prognosis

**CRS**: It is a reversible complication, mostly symptoms resolving within 2 to 6 weeks. Mortality can be observed in 0 to 9.1% of cases.

**ICANS**: A vast majority of cases of neurotoxicity associated with CART therapy show symptom resolution within 3-8 weeks.

# Complications

While, in most instances, CAR-T complications are reversible, occasionally, they can lead to death or irreversible organ damage.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Frequent monitoring, clear instructions for patients and caregivers, and a robust on-call system are essential post-CAR-T. Patients and caregivers should be provided with after-hours contact information, clear instructions for monitoring symptoms and vital signs, and when to present to the hospital.

Patients need to be provided with a product-specific wallet card identifying their reception of a CAR T-cell product and giving information about the managing oncologist. They will need to show their wallet card if and when they present for evaluation of symptoms, especially if they arrive at a hospital or emergency department (ED) outside of the CAR-T therapy programs.

Caregiver support throughout the process of CAR-T and after is critical. The need for a 24-hour caregiver for at least four weeks and staying close to the center after treatment should be emphasized.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Cancer immunotherapy has greatly advanced in recent years, with CAR-T cells emerging as an innovative technology that harnesses the immune system to combat malignant diseases. An interprofessional team is needed to recognize and appropriately manage CAR-T AEs, including but not limited to neurology, critical care, and infectious diseases subspecialties. Most centers alert the neurology team for a neurological evaluation of the patient prior to the CAR-T administration. Efforts should be aimed at providing accommodation to the patients traveling far from home for CAR-T and assisting with out-of-pocket costs.

Patient prerequisites that are fundamental for managing complications of HSCT post-discharge are also relevant to successful CAR-T, including socioeconomic and caregiver support and patient staying within a 1-hour transportation distance from the hospital for at least four weeks post-infusion.