Children with CGD suffer from numerous recurrent bacterial and fungal infections. Symptoms typically begin within the first 2 years of life; however, some experience symptoms later in life. The median age at diagnosis is 2.5 to 3 years of age. In patients with a mild case of the disease, diagnosis may not be made until later childhood or adulthood.

The infections often occur in organs exposed to the outside environment, including lungs, gastrointestinal tract, and skin, as well as the lymph nodes that drain these areas. Many other organs may also be affected by contiguous or hematogenous spread, including the liver, bones, kidney, and brain.

Patients also experience other systemic problems in organ systems involved in protecting the body from microorganism entry from the outside environment. The most common include skin, gingiva, lungs, lymph nodes, gastrointestinal tract, liver, and spleen.  The majority of patients experience their first CGD symptoms during their first year of life, including infections, dermatitis, gastrointestinal complications (obstruction or intermittent bloody diarrhea from colitis), and failure to thrive. Specific complications include portal venopathy, liver abscesses, hepatomegaly, urethral strictures, urinary tract infections, altered renal function, keratitis, periodontitis, gingivitis, gingival hypertrophy, discoid lupus, photosensitivity, vasculitis, chronic respiratory disease, immune thrombocytopenia, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, and growth retardation. There may also be an association with X-linked CGD and McLeod syndrome due to deletion of the Kell erythrocyte antigens' genes leading to hemolytic anemia, neuroacanthocytosis, elevated creatinine phosphokinases, and late-onset peripheral and central nervous system manifestations. Clinical presentation is highly variable, with some suffering multiple complications and others experiencing few symptoms. This issue's importance is that patients with X–linked CGD need to be evaluated for their Kell phenotype to avoid serious transfusion reactions.

Infections in patients with CGD are typically from catalase-positive organisms, commonly Staphylococcus aureus, Burkholderia (Pseudomonas) cepacia complex, Serratia marcescens, and Nocardia species. Aspergillus species are the most common fungal infectious agents. Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) infections are an issue for patients who received BCG vaccinations and living in endemic tuberculosis areas. Cutaneous abscesses and lymphadenitis are the next most common infection types, but some patients also experience cellulitis, impetigo, osteomyelitis, bacteremia, and adenitis. Other common microbial types include Escherichia coli, Klebsiella species, and Candida species.

In some cases, patients with CGD do not develop overt pyogenic infections; instead, chronic inflammation develops. Consequentially, granulomas form, which is a hallmark of this disorder, causing symptoms of obstruction of the biliary tract, bladder, gastrointestinal, uteropelvic, or bronchus. The gastrointestinal and genitourinary tracts are the most problematic, but the retina, liver, lungs, and bone are also affected by granulomata. The exact reason for granuloma formation in CGD is unknown. Still, the general belief is that CGD cells are incapable of disarming chemotactic and inflammatory signals, and, as a result, exuberant inflammation persists.