Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine administration is via the oral route. Prescriptions can be as a tablet (immediate-release) or capsule (extended-release).

**Dosage Forms**

- Extended-release capsule: 5 mg, 10 mg, 15 mg, 20 mg, 25 mg, 30 mg

- Tablet: 5 mg, 7.5 mg, 10 mg, 12.5 mg, 15 mg, 20 mg, 30 mg

Extended-release capsules should be swallowed whole (without chewing), or the entire capsule may be sprinkled on food and consumed immediately. Do not divide the dose of a single capsule.

Patients should avoid afternoon or late evening doses due to insomnia caused by dextroamphetamine/amphetamine.

The temperature of 20 to 25 degrees C (68 to 77 degrees F) is the preferred temperature to store the medication.

**FDA Dosage for Management of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder**

**Pediatric**

Younger than 3 years

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine is not recommended for children younger than 3 years of age.

Three to 5 years

An immediate-release tablet is used for children 3 to 5 years of age. Clinicians should evaluate the potential for misuse by the patient or parents before prescribing the short-acting tablets.

- An initial dose of 2.5 mg of an immediate-release tablet once daily in the morning. The first dose should be upon awakening. Subsequent doses of immediate-release tablets may be at intervals of 4 to 6 hours.

- Increase daily dose by 2.5 mg at weekly intervals until reaching the optimal response.

- The dosage range is 2.5 to 40 mg per day, given in 1 to 3 divided doses.

Six years and older

Both immediate-release tablets and extended-release capsules are appropriate for children 6 years of age and older.

Immediate-release tablet:

- An initial dose of 5 mg once or twice daily. The first dose should be upon awakening. Subsequent doses of immediate-release tablets may be at intervals of 4 to 6 hours.

- Increase daily dose by 5 mg weekly until obtaining an optimal response.

- The dosage range is 5 to 40 mg per day in 1 to 3 divided doses.

Extended-release capsule:

- An initial dose of 5 to 10 mg once daily in the morning.

- Increase daily dose by 5 to 10 mg weekly until obtaining an optimal response.

- The maximum daily dose is 30 mg.

Adolescents

Both immediate-release tablets and extended-release capsules are appropriate for this age.

Immediate release:

- An initial dose of 5 mg once or twice daily. The first dose should be upon awakening. Subsequent doses of immediate-release tablets may be at intervals of 4 to 6 hours.

- Increase daily dose by 5 mg weekly until obtaining an optimal response.

- The dosage ranges from 5 to 40 mg per day in 1 to 3 divided doses.

Extended-release capsule:

- An initial dose of 10 mg once daily in the morning.

- Increase to 20 mg daily after one week if needed. There is no adequate evidence that higher doses afford additional benefits.

**Adult**

Immediate release tablet:

- An initial dose of 5 mg once or twice daily

- Increase daily dose by 5 mg weekly until obtaining an optimal response

- Usually, dosage range from 5 to 40 mg per day in 1 to 3 divided doses. Subsequent doses may be at 4 to 6 hours intervals

Extended-release capsule:

- An initial dose of 20 mg once daily in the morning;

- Based on the available evidence, higher doses (up to 60 mg per day) do not provide additional benefits.

**FDA Dosage for management of Narcolepsy**

**Pediatric (6 years or older)**

- An initial dose of 5 mg immediate-release tablet daily.

- Increase daily dose by 5 mg weekly until obtaining an optimal response.

- Usually, the dosage ranges from 5 to 60 mg per day in 1 to 3 divided doses.

**Adult**

- An initial dose of 10 mg immediate-release tablet once daily in the morning.

- Increase daily dose by 10 mg weekly until obtaining an optimal response.

- Usual dosage range: 5 to 60 mg per day in 1 to 3 divided doses

There are no specific dosage adjustments provided in the manufacturer's labeling for patients with renal or hepatic impairment and geriatric population, but dextroamphetamine/amphetamine should be used with caution and start at the low end of the dosage range.