Reference methods for determinate the ADAMTS-13 activity are complex, and the results usually cannot be available in an emergency setting. Thus the initial management should be started on the basis of clinical presentation. Blood samples for evidence thrombocytopenia (usually counts under 30,000 x 10/L), microangiopathic hemolysis (schistocytes more than 1% in blood smear), ischemic organ injury, ADAMTS-13 activity and presence of autoantibodies should be obtained before initiating the treatment. The direct Coombs test should be negative (except in some cases as SLE), and the coagulation test should not be prolonged. Other biomarkers as troponin and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) can be helpful to prognosis. In all cases, the hematologist should be consulted.

In a patient with thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia, the severe deficiency of plasma ADAMTS-13 activity below 10%, with or without detectable inhibitory autoantibodies is specific for TTP and in the absence of another probable cause. The differential diagnosis is challenging and extensive, and the following should be considered: Evans syndrome, antiphospholipid syndrome, disseminated, intravascular coagulation (DIC), HUS (especially in patients with pronounced renal failure), and other causes of TMA (drugs, hypertension, disseminated cancer). In pregnancy, it is very important to discharge conditions as HELLP syndrome, named for the three features of the disease (hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, and low platelet levels) syndrome or Upshaw-Schulman syndrome.

A special comment is necessary to address renal failure; in most of the cases the creatinine level is below 2 mg/dL, contrary to the previous descriptions, and the renal component is modest and might be present with isolated proteinuria or hematuria.