Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors (AGIs) are a class of drugs that are used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus alone or combined with other antidiabetic drugs. They may also be used in patients with impaired glucose tolerance and delay the occurrence of type 2 diabetes mellitus in these patients. They are particularly useful for patients who are at risk of hypoglycemia or lactic acidosis and, thus, are not suitable candidates for other antidiabetic drugs such as sulfonylureas and metformin.

The FDA approves AGIs for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. They have shown some benefits in type 1 diabetes mellitus and gestational diabetes mellitus but are not FDA-approved for these indications. Acarbose has been shown to decrease body weight in a worldwide observational study.

AGIs are particularly useful for reducing postprandial hyperglycemia. They modestly decrease glycosylated hemoglobin levels and also reduce postprandial insulin concentration. Compared with oral antihyperglycemic drugs, they also reduce glucose variability throughout the day. They, however, do not affect fasting insulin and serum triglyceride concentrations. Controlling postprandial hyperglycemia is essential as it correlates with the development of microvascular complications and increases the risk for the development of cardiovascular diseases. This link between postprandial blood glucose (PPG) and long-term diabetic complications is even stronger than that of fasting hyperglycemia.

Acarbose has been shown to increase life expectancy in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and reduces the risk of the development of cardiovascular events in patients with impaired glucose tolerance. It has proven efficacy in stabilizing carotid plaques; by reducing hyperglycemia, it counters oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction.