Lower extremity varicose veins are defined as enlarged subcutaneous veins that measure greater than 3 mm in diameter. The lower extremity venous system comprises superficial veins, perforators, and deep veins. Superficial veins are those that lie underneath the skin and superficial to the muscles of the leg. The primary superficial veins of the leg are the great saphenous vein and the short saphenous vein, abbreviated as GSV and SSV, respectively. The GSV arises in the medial aspect of the foot and runs along the medial border of the tibia. In the thigh, it runs on the medial aspect and drains into the saphenofemoral junction in the inguinal region. The saphenofemoral junction also drains the superficial circumflex iliac, superficial epigastric, external pudendal veins. There are anterior and posterior accessory great saphenous veins in the calf and thigh that drain into the primary GSV. The thigh portion of the GSV may be duplicated in up to 20% of cases.

The short saphenous vein or the SSV is a posterior superficial vein localized to the calf. It originates in the lateral aspect of the foot and drains most frequently into the popliteal vein, immediately distal to the popliteal fossa. An anatomical variant in which the SSV continues through to the thigh as a distinct branch tributary to then drain in the GSV in the thigh or directly in the saphenofemoral junction is known as the vein of Giacomini.

The deep veins in the leg run alongside the named major arteries of the leg. The calf veins in the leg are paired and include anterior tibial, posterior tibial, peroneal, all of which join together to form the popliteal vein. The thigh veins include popliteal and femoral veins. The soleal veins generally drain into the posterior tibial veins. The gastrocnemius veins drain directly into the popliteal vein.

Perforators include perforators of the foot, ankle perforators, perforators of the leg, perforators of the knee, perforators of the thigh, perforators of the gluteal muscles. Perforator veins serve to connect superficial and deep veins. There are many groups of perforators, depending on the location. For example, perforators in the leg are medial, anterior, posterior, and lateral leg perforators. Medial leg perforators, in turn, are the posterior tibial perforators and para-tibial perforators. The posterior tibial perforators connect the posterior accessory GSV with the posterior tibial vein. The para-tibial perforators connect the primary GSV with the posterior tibial veins. Similarly, there are 4 groups of perforators in the thigh, namely medial thigh, lateral thigh, anterior thigh, posterior thigh perforators. In the medial thigh, the femoral canal perforators and the inguinal perforators connect the main GSV to the femoral vein.

Superficial and deep veins of the lower limb have unidirectional valves that help drain the leg against gravity towards the right heart. Venous insufficiency of a superficial vein or a perforator is defined as the presence of flow reversal greater than 500 milliseconds on ultrasound, in the upright position with distal compression. For deep veins, namely the femoral and popliteal veins, reflux greater than 1000 milliseconds is considered significant. In general, proximal veins should be tested during an increase in intra-abdominal pressure or via the Valsalva maneuver. Distal veins can be tested with distal compression by hand or by pressure cuff.