The history may be obvious as most of the flail chests will be in the setting of major blunt force trauma. The elderly are at increased risk. The diagnosis may be more cryptogenic in cases of abuse. nonverbal patients, cases of abuse, or when history can not be obtained.

The physical exam should be the exam performed in all patients with potential thoracic trauma. Fully expose the patient. Obtain a full set of vitals including an accurate measure of respiratory rate and oxygen saturation. Start with the ABCDE and continue through the secondary survey. Always listen for bilateral breath sounds then palpate for pain, deformity, or crepitus. Examine the chest for bruising or bleeding, seatbelt signs. The patient usually complains of severe chest wall pain and may have tachypnea and splinting or manifest respiratory insufficiency.

Specifically, observe the chest for paradoxical wall motion. In inspiration, the flail segment will go in while the rest of the chest expands and in expiration, the flail segment will be pushed out while the rest of the chest contracts. Of note, the absence of observable paradoxical motion does not exclude this disease and it may become more apparent as the intercostals become fatigued.

Because of the pressure changes with positive pressure ventilation, patients on BiPAP or those who are mechanically intubated do not exhibit paradoxical chest wall motion. Thus, in the mechanically ventilated trauma patient, the diagnosis of flail chest may be delayed and become apparent only after extubation.