**Visual field analysis:**In rod dominated disorders, peripheral visual field loss is a common occurrence. Initially, mild constriction of peripheral fields is seen, which progress gradually over the years to tunnel vision.  The visual field changes are usually symmetric in both eyes. In progressive diseases such as RP, regular field assessments are mandatory, especially if the patient is driving a motor vehicle. All patients with RP have to restrict night driving and eventually stop driving as the disease progresses. Regular field assessments also enable patients to understand their visual limitations, which are not realized otherwise.

In cone-dominated disorders, peripheral field constriction is rarely seen and, if present remains stable over the years. Progression of field defects rules out the diagnosis, and one must consider other differentials like cone-rod dystrophy or retinitis pigmentosa with a cone-rod pattern. Visual field defects in cone-rod dystrophies begin in the paracentral region between 5 and 30 degrees from fixation and involve the periphery in later stages.

**Color vision:**Retinitis pigmentosa patients maintain good color discrimination until advanced stages when cones get affected. Color vision abnormalities are reported once the visual acuity declines below 20/40.

Color vision abnormalities are more reported in cone dominated disorders. Complete achromats are congenitally color blind; however, they may be able to identify different pseudoisochromatic color plates as they train themselves to identify different colors as shades of gray. Hence, higher-order color tests may be required for diagnosis. Blue cone monochromats as the name suggests, have preservation of Tritan color discrimination, which can be tested on higher-order color tests like Berson plates.

**Electrophysiology:**Full-field ERG is a sensitive test for diagnosis. In the early stages of RP, diminished scotopic rod and combined responses are seen. As the disease advances, photopic responses are affected, and eventually, ERG becomes extinguished.

ERG is the mainstay in the diagnosis of the cone or cone-rod dystrophies. Decreased photopic and 30 Hz flicker ERG with delays in implicit times are seen. Multifocal ERGs will be severely diminished. Later in the course of the disease, scotopic responses are also reduced. However, the reduction of scotopic responses in the early stages is a pointer towards the diagnosis of retinitis pigmentosa. The differentiating feature of achromatopsia and blue monochromatism is that in the latter, a cone signal can be obtained using blue light flash on a yellow background. Cases with Leber congenital amaurosis are known to have profoundly abnormal or extinguished ERG.

ERG also is essential in differentiating RP from disorders like cone-rod dystrophy. In cases with CRD, marked reduction or absence of cone ERG responses in the presence of less reduction in rod responses are seen.

**Optical coherence tomography**: Spectral-domain OCT provides valuable information for diagnosis and monitoring progression of the disease. In retinitis pigmentosa, thinning of retinal layers, especially outer retinal layers, is commonly seen. The thinning progresses towards the macula and shows the sparing of foveal layers till advanced stages.

No changes in OCT are noted in cases of CSNB with normal fundi. In Fundus Albipunctatus, hyperreflective deposits are noted over RPE corresponding to retinal flecks observed clinically.