Pathophysiology of chronic constrictive pericarditis involves obliteration of pericardial cavity by granulation tissue during healing of an acute episode of fibrinous or serofibrinous pericarditis or resorption of chronic pericardial effusion. The granulation tissue gradually contracts over time and encases the heart and may get calcified. This rigid thickened pericardium limits the ventricular filling as the elastic limit of the diseased pericardium is much lesser than that of a normal pericardium. Ventricular filling in early diastole is not affected and is only impeded when the elastic limit of the pericardium is reached in contrast to cardiac tamponade where the ventricular filling is impeded throughout the diastole. This results in decreased end diastolic volume and decreased stroke volume and cardiac output. The thickened and scarred pericardium prevents the normal inspiratory decrease in intrathoracic pressure from being transferred to the heart chambers.

There are dissociation intrathoracic and intracardiac pressures. This leads to decreased venous return with inspiration as pulmonary venous pressure decreases. However, the left atrium pressure does not, and pulmonary veins to left atrial (LA) flow decreases on inspiration. This intrathoracic and intracardiac pressure dissociation is a distinguishing feature from cardiac tamponade as in cardiac tamponade the changes in intrathoracic pressure are still conducted to the heart and there is an increase in systemic venous return with inspiration.

In both disorders, there is equalization of the right atrial (RA), right ventricular (RV), left ventricular (LV), and pulmonary wedge pressure however cardiac tamponade the pressure decreases with inspiration whereas in constrictive pericarditis the RA pressure remains constant while the pulmonary wedge pressure decreases.