Patient care is a collaborative effort by many specialized individuals. The forefront of this force is the primary care provider (PCP). They have established relationships with patients and see them on a more regular basis than a specialist would. It is important that the PCP see their patients yearly to help maintain health practices and keep up to date on recommended guidelines for their patients. PCP's should recommend screening for CRC as appropriate by current up to date recommendations, both for high-risk and average-risk patients. As previously discussed, the significant challenges that successfully impact compliance with recommended CRC screening are patient comfort with bowel preparation and the vulnerability of the procedure. Many studies have been developed to help fashion a solution to help encourage patients to pursue screening procedures. However, results have shown that even increasing collaborative efforts among health care professionals still results in non-compliance with recommended colonoscopy screenings.

Some studies have shown that while colonoscopy provides a visual inspection of the entire colon, it may not be the best means for screening. Other possible adjuncts to testing average-risk patients include an annual or biennial fecal occult blood test in addition to a flexible sigmoidoscopy every five years. This has possibly been shown to be as effective, if not better, than colonoscopy every ten years. With it being a less invasive procedure requiring a more tolerable bowel preparation (enema vs. oral bowel cleanse), patients may be more inclined to follow screening guidelines and collaborative efforts among PCP's more successful.