Umbilical Vein

The brief persistence of blood flow through the umbilical vein after birth is the rationale behind the practice of delayed cord clamping following delivery. Umbilical cords are recommended not to be clamped until at least 30-60 seconds following delivery to allow for the maximum volume of blood to be transferred to the infant before disconnection from the placenta; this has been shown to increase iron stores in the neonate, increase hemoglobin levels, and improve transitional circulation. This practice of delayed cord clamping is therefore recommended following birth unless there is either a maternal or neonatal indication for immediate cord clamping.

Foramen Ovale

The foramen ovale only completely closes as expected in about 75% of adults. In the 25% whose foramen ovale does not close, a patent foramen ovale exists. Fortunately, the left atrial pressure is usually higher than the right atrial pressure, a very tiny amount of blood may be shunted back to the right atrium without any clinical significance. During certain uncommon situations such as Valsalva maneuver, a small amount of deoxygenated blood from the right atrium may be allowed to enter the left atrium, bypassing the lungs without oxygenation. This patency may or may not be symptomatic, and management ranges widely as a result. Often no intervention is required, or surgery may sometimes be indicated to close the patent foramen ovale. Note that this is quite different than an atrial septal defect, in which a pathological opening exists between the left and right atria, and tends to be more severe and usually shows symptoms, whereas a patent foramen ovale may never be detected nor show symptoms.

A complication of patent foramen ovale (PFO) that may be of clinical concern is a paradoxical embolus, which is an embolus originating in systemic venous circulation that travels to the heart, crosses the heart laterally through the patent foramen ovale, and can result in a stroke. However, it is an uncommon occurrence given the high prevalence of patent foramen ovale and the low prevalence of paradoxical emboli.

Ductus Arteriosus

The ductus arteriosus may persist, failing to obliterate within the months after birth and has associations with congenital rubella infections and as well as with preterm delivery.

If a PDA is the only defect following delivery, and no other cardiac abnormalities are present, a prostaglandin synthesis inhibitor may be used to disrupt the prostaglandin production that is contributing to the maintained patency of the vessel. Indomethacin, a COX-2 inhibitor, has historically been the treatment of choice; ibuprofen and acetaminophen may also be efficacious options, although more research is needed.