Morphological assessment of a lymph node excision/biopsy is crucial for the diagnosis of FL. Lymph node will show variable-sized closely packed follicles containing small cleaved cells without nucleoli (centrocytes) and larger noncleaved cells with moderate cytoplasm, open chromatin, and multiple nucleoli (centroblasts). The morphology will also show minimal apoptotic cells or tingible body macrophages. The mantle zones are typically absent, necrosis is rare. Usually, there is interfollicular involvement or capsular infiltration. Different patterns include Diffuse pattern, floral pattern, and Incipient pattern. There are 4 FL variants: (1) In situ follicular neoplasia (formerly called FL in situ) (2) Duodenal-type FL (3) Testicular FL and (4) Diffuse variant of FL. Pediatric FL has been split off FL into an independent entity in the WHO 2017

FL typically involves the paratrabecular areas of the bone marrow. Centroblasts are enlarged rapidly dividing B-cells in a lymphoid follicle. The WHO (2017) has a grading system (Grade 1, 2 or 3) for FL that depends on the percentage of centroblasts, and is as follows: grade 1 (follicular small cleaved): 0 – 5 centroblasts/HPF, grade 2 (follicular mixed): 6 – 15 centroblasts/HPF, grade 3 (follicular large cell): > 15 centroblasts/HPF (grade 3A - centrocytes present, grade 3B - solid sheets of centroblasts). It is clinically important to differentiate grades 1/2 vs. grade 3. If in areas of diffuse large B cell lymphoma exist with FL, the exact percentage of DLBCL should be reported. IHC is useful in confirming the FL diagnosis. Positive stains supporting FL include CD10, CD19, CD20 (strong), CD79a, BCL2 within follicles, and BCL6. Variable stains include CD30, CD11c, CD23, CD25, CD43 and surface immunoglobulin. Negative stains include T cell markers such as CD5 (although mixed T cells are often present) and cyclin D1