Jejunoileal atresia (JIA) is a condition where there is no opening or passage through a segment of the small intestine (jejunum and atresia). It occurs in 1 in 5000 to 1 in 14000 live births and equally in males and females. It is generally accepted that jejunoileal atresia is caused by an in-utero vascular accident during fetal development. It may be associated with other anomalies such as cystic fibrosis and cardiac abnormalities.

Prenatal screening with ultrasound demonstrates evidence of intestinal obstruction in 29% to 50% of cases. At delivery, the infant will not be fed if this diagnosis is suspected prenatally. However, if the infant is fed, there will be episodes of emesis and abdominal distension.

Diagnosis is made using an abdominal radiograph, which showed air in the proximal small intestine and no air distally. Upper gastrointestinal series and contrast enema are done to exclude other conditions such as malrotation and Hirschsprung disease. Conditions that mimic this condition are malrotation with midgut volvulus, internal hernia, meconium ileus, Hirschsprung’s disease.

Treatment is with surgical intervention. Following surgical intervention, the infant is first stabilized by rehydration and correction of electrolytes and placement of nasogastric or orogastric tubes to remove fluid from the obstructed stomach and small intestine. The procedure is performed either through a laparoscopic-assisted approach or through an open surgical approach with a single incision on the abdomen. The blockage in the small intestine is identified, and the abnormal part of the intestine is resected and removed, after which the proximal and distal ends are joined together.

Postoperatively, nasogastric tube drainage is continued, along with nothing to eat by month. It will take the bowel days or even weeks to begin normal function. Oral feeding is started when there is a small fluid coming out through the nasogastric tube.  Pain is controlled with acetaminophen or ibuprofen, or opioids for more intense pain. The risk associated with surgical anastomosis is a leak at the bowel anastomosis, wound infection, prolonged recovery of the bowel, and shortened intestinal length.

At home, the child continues a normal diet for age, unrestricted activity, and the incisions can be washed with water and soap. Do not submerge under water until at least a week after surgery, when the wound must have healed. Give pain medication as needed for pain control. Call your doctor or bring your child to the hospital if you notice redness, warmth, or drainage from the incision, vomiting, and fever. Follow up with your surgeon in 2 to 4 weeks after surgery for wound checks.