There are three main functions of the lumbar spine. First, the lumbar spine assists in supporting the upper body. The lumbar vertebrae (L1-L5) are much larger compared to other regions of the vertebral column, allowing them to absorb axial forces delivered from the head, neck, and trunk. The lumbar vertebrae form a canal that serves to protect the spinal cord and spinal nerves. This arrangement allows for the communication of information from the central nervous system to the lower extremities and vice versa. The lumbar spine allows for diverse types of truncal motion, including flexion, extension, rotation, and side bending. From a lateral view, the lumbar spine has a concave curvature, referred to as the lumbar lordosis. This curvature is variable in degree and transfers the upper body mass over the pelvis to allow for efficient bipedal motion.

Each lumbar vertebra consists of multiple components. These include the vertebral body, and the dorsal structures termed the posterior elements. Immediately dorsal to the vertebral body lie two pedicles that attach to the laminae. The pedicles resist motion and transmit forces from the posterior elements to the vertebral body. From the junction of the two laminae, the spinous process extends posteriorly. At the junction between the pedicles and laminae, four articular processes and two transverse processes reside. The transverse processes extend laterally, serving as attachment points for ligaments and musculature. The superior and inferior articular processes create the zygapophyseal joints (the facet joints). This joint occurs between the superior articular process of a vertebra and the inferior articular process of the vertebra immediately cephalad. These joints lie in the sagittal plane and participate in flexion and extension of the lumbar spine. The pars interarticularis is the location of the lamina between the superior and inferior articular processes and is prone to the development of stress fractures (spondylolysis) in the growing spine.

The lumbar disc is a fibrocartilaginous structure seated between two vertebral body endplates. It is composed of an internal gelatinous nucleus pulposus and an external fibrous annulus fibrosus. The primary function of the lumbar disc is shock absorption. Two longitudinal ligaments lie anterior and posterior to the vertebral body. The anterior longitudinal ligament resists lumbar extension, translation, and rotation. The posterior longitudinal ligament resists lumbar flexion. The segmental ligaments include the ligamentum flavum, which is perforated when performing a lumbar puncture. The remaining segmental ligaments include the supraspinous and interspinous ligaments, which lie between the spinous processes and resist lumbar flexion.