The severity of the symptoms depends on the age of presentation of symptoms. The infantile disease is rapidly progressive and fatal by age 2. Late-onset disease has relatively milder symptoms and longer life expectancy.

Infantile disease: The symptom progression is best explained by categorizing it into stages.

Stage 1- The child grows well until 4 to 6 months of age when the clinical illness manifests. The symptoms commence with restlessness, irritability, vomiting, feeding difficulty, and failure to thrive. The child may be hypersensitive to touch, noise, or bright light and can develop tonic spasms in the presence of these instigating factors.

Stage 2- The child develops visual difficulty, optic atrophy, and opisthotonic posturing. They experience seizure-like episodes that have to be differentiated from epilepsy as these don't respond to anti-convulsants.

Stage 3- The most debilitating form of the disease when the child develops blindness, deafness, and decerebrate posturing. Spasticity can be severe enough to halt any voluntary movement.

Late infantile disease: Manifests between 13 to 36 months of age with irritability, visual difficulties, and abnormal gait. As the condition progresses, these symptoms worsen with the development of seizures, apneic episodes, and temperature instability. The median age of mortality is usually six years.

Juvenile onset disease:****The child develops visual difficulties, tremors, gait abnormalities, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. The rate of progression of the disease is highly variable, but the disease eventually debilitates the patient, and they die within ten years of the diagnosis.

Late-onset disease: Characterized by burning paresthesias in the extremities, mood and behavior alterations, ataxia, spasticity, visual difficulty/blindness, seizures, hearing loss/deafness, and psychomotor retardation. The patients can present with motor and sensory neuropathy associated with muscular atrophy and scoliosis. Few patients present with symptoms confined to a physical weakness without mental retardation; on the other hand, others deteriorate both mentally and physically.