It is important to understand the anatomy of the IAN and LN to avoid injury to these nerves. The mandibular branch (V3) of the trigeminal nerve exits the skull through the foramen ovale to enter the infratemporal fossa, where the IAN and LN branch off from it. The IAN enters the mandibular foramen of the ramus and runs within the body of the mandible to supply sensory innervation to the mandibular dentition, mandibular vestibular mucosa, and gingiva, as well as the skin of the chin and lower lip.

The LN travels inferiorly between the mandibular ramus and the medial pterygoid muscle, then passes anteriorly near the mandibular lingual alveolar crest. Once the LN has passed the retromolar region, it travels anteriorly, along the lateral aspect of the hyoglossus muscle, and deep to the mylohyoid muscle. The LN supplies somatic sensation to the lingual gingiva and anterior two-thirds of the tongue. Of note, the chorda tympani nerve, the branch of the facial nerve that provides gustatory sensation to the anterior two-thirds of the tongue, joins the lingual nerve at the level of the inferior border of the lateral pterygoid muscle.

Local anesthetic injections are performed prior to most surgical procedures, and both the IAN and LN may be injured during attempts to place blocks around them (see figure). It is very rare, but the needle or the local anesthetic can cause direct or indirect damage to the nerve. The risk is especially increased during the IAN block because the needle travels in close proximity to both the IAN and the LN as they descend medial to the ramus of the mandible. Three theories may explain how nerve damage occurs in these situations.

The injection needle may cause direct axonal trauma if it comes in contact with or penetrates the nerve. Another theory is that the needle may damage the epineural blood vessels and cause a localized hematoma, causing a compression injury to the nerve or forming reactive fibrosis or scar. The last hypothesis is that the local anesthetic itself can cause cytotoxic injuries as the chemicals are metabolized.

Another relatively common cause of IAN and LN injury is mandibular third molar extraction.

Likewise, mandibular fractures from trauma (frequently physical altercations or motor vehicle accidents) can lead to similar damage. Dental implant placement can cause IAN injury from either direct damage to the nerve within its canal or from thermal injury due to drilling.