Nuclear Medicine equipment (both imaging and non-imaging) QC must be performed in various frequencies (daily, monthly, semi-annually, annually, and bi-annually). The nuclear medicine technologist (NMT) is in charge of most of the QC procedures. Service engineers and medical physicists also assist in the process of quality control and quality assurance (typically annual and bi-yearly tests).

Routine quality control procedures for Nuclear Medicine equipment (imaging and non-imaging equipment)

**Instruments**

**Type of instruments**

**Daily Quality control check**

**Weekly Quality control check**

**Annual quality control check**

**Clinical significance**

**Radiation safety significance**

**Dose Calibrator**

Non-imaging

- Background

- Constancy









- Linearity

- Accuracy

- Geometric constancy



Incorrect dosing can impact the diagnostic quality of images

Incorrect dosing can affect radiation exposure

**Radiation Survey meter**

Non-imaging

- Background

- Battery check

- Constancy





- Accuracy

- Sensitivity





-

Affects radiation contamination and routine surveys

**SPECT-CT**

**(Gamma camera)**

Imaging

- Background

- Extrinsic uniformity

- Energy peaking

- Sensitivity

- Touchpad

- Emergency lock

- CT warm-up



- Center of rotation (COR)

- Intrinsic uniformity

- CT number for various components

- Tomographic Uniformity

- Spatial resolution/linearity

- Overall system performance

- Laser alignment

- SPECT-CT image registration

- Dosimetry

- CT number uniformity

QC failure leads to inaccurate image acquisition

Repeat imaging can lead to increased radiation exposure

**PET-CT**

Imaging

- Uniformity

- Coincidence

- Energy peaking

- CT warm



- CT number for various components

- Tomographic uniformity



- Tomographic Uniformity

- Normalization

- Well counter calibration

- Dosimetry

- CT number uniformity

QC failure leads to inaccurate image acquisition

Repeat imaging can lead to increased radiation exposure

**Dose Calibrator**

While a dose calibrator is not an imaging device, every dose injected into a patient or used to fill a phantom is measured with a dose calibrator before it is used in an imaging device. If the dose calibrator is not functioning properly, calibration studies would not be reliable.

Ionization chambers connected to circuits that convert and display the ionization current produced by radioactive sources in digital units of activity account for the vast majority of dose calibrators. Numerous factors influence the accuracy and working performance of a dose calibrator, and regular quality control parameters, such as precision, accuracy, and linearity of its response to activity, as well as operational checks of reproducibility and background, must be performed daily to ensure that the calibrator is operating correctly.

Sealed radioactive sources including cesium-137 ( Cs-137), cobalt-57 ( Co-57) or germanium-68 (Ge-68), cobalt-60 (Co-60), and unsealed radioactive isotopes such as technetium-99m (Tc-99m) are routinely used for checking the reproducibility of dose calibrator.

The following routine checks need to be performed to check the functionality of the dose calibrator:

- Background reading to make sure that the dose calibrator is contamination-free. An increase of more than 10% needs to be investigated.

- Consistency in the voltage supply to the ionization chamber should be evaluated, and any change of more or less than 5% should be reported.

Precision and accuracy tests should be performed quarterly. This test provides information about any loss of precision due to background changes, any sudden change in the pressure of filled gas in an ionization chamber, or fluctuation in power supply to the ionization chamber. The precision test is typically carried out by measuring two different radioisotopes ten times and calculating the mean and standard deviation (SD) of the results to calculate precision variation (or variation in precision) (PV). The ratio of standard deviation to mean is typically calculated for each radioactive source, and any variation of more than or less than 5% must be investigated further.

The accuracy of the dose calibrator is accessed to difference mean measure activity of the source (post decay correction). It is measured with the help of Co-57, Cs-137, Ge-68, or Co-60 radioactive sources. Therefore, it is essential to investigate any variation of more or less than 5% from the previous reading.

Linearity of dose calibrator is checked with the help of Tc-99m sources. It should be performed quarterly by using the following steps:

- Elute Mo-99 generator and try to get at least 100 mCi (3700 MBq) or more equal to or higher than the maximum activity capacity of the calibrator.

- Measure and record the reading for 36 hours with a gap of 1 hour.

- Record in an excel sheet and trace a curve. A straight line is expected for a linear response system, and any variation of more or less than 10% should be investigated.

- It is essential to check that Tc-99m elute should not contaminate molybdenum-99 (Mo-99).

Geometric evaluation (volume-based) and accuracy should be performed once a year or after the system has been serviced or post power down. For geometric evaluation, Tc-99m activity should be filled in various syringes (3 ml, 5 ml, and 10 ml) in the same volume and measured. Any variation of more or less than 5% should be reported for further evaluation. It is essential to maintain a record  (hard and soft copies) of each QC procedure required for future audit purposes.

**Gamma Camera (SPECT-CT)**

The gamma camera (GC) is imaging equipment that can capture both 2D and 3D images. The GC acquires 3D images by rotating around the patient at various angles, known as projection from zero to 360 degrees. These features help to see more details to overcome any uncertainty presented by 2D images. Furthermore, in SPECT-CT, computed tomography (CT) components improve the attenuation correction to enhance image resolution and anatomical localization. For the GC, it is critical that all aspects of the QC procedure, including 2D and 3D, must be performed frequently on various frequencies to upkeep the consistent reproducibility of acquired images. Daily checks for energy peaking, background radiation, and crystal uniformity with a collimator are recommended (extrinsic uniformity). It is always good to use a flood field source made of Cobalt-57 (Co-57), which has a half-life of 272 days and gamma energy of 122 keV for daily uniformity checks of crystal (extrinsic uniformity).

Co-57 based flood field source is recommended as its gamma energy is near Tc-99m (140 keV). Any issue with uniformity should be rectified as it can deteriorate the overall diagnostic quality of images. CT warm-up should be performed daily to ensure that the x-ray tube is working correctly. The SPECT-CT mechanical and software center should be evaluated weekly by checking the Center of Rotation (COR). Intrinsic uniformity (uniformity assessed without a collimator) should be checked once a week to ensure that the crystal performs appropriately. The integral uniformity (IU) at the center field of view (CFOV) and valuable field of view (UFOV) is calculated using the following formula:

%IU=[Maximum counts of pixel- Minimum counts of pixel/ maximum counts of pixel + minimum counts of pixel]X100

GC  spatial resolution should be checked annually with the help bar phantom (2D spatial resolution) and Jaszczak phantom (3D spatial resolution and SPECT performance). In addition, SPECT-CT registration also needs to be checked with the help of a gadolinium-153 (Gd-153) radioactive source.

**PET-CT**

PET-CT imaging equipment can only acquire 3D images but have a higher spatial resolution than the GC. It is essential to regularly check equipment, including constancy and coincidence, and energy peaking. Most vendors recommend using a Ge-68 pre-filled phantom or in-built source for daily QC testing to ensure optimal crystal performance. The processing is often automated in modern systems, and the results can be recorded for further auditing. PET-CT plays an essential role in oncology regarding diagnosis and follow-up. The advantage of PET-CT-based imaging is that it provides quantification of the acquired images in the form of a special uptake value (SUV), which is calculated based on injected radiation dose and body mass index (BMI). It is mandatory to maintain SUV consistency, and this needs to be evaluated by well counter calibration manually. CT-related QC is also required to be performed regularly, including tube warm-up, CT number normalization, and PET-CT image registration.