Dysphagia could be during the oropharyngeal or pharyngeal phases of swallowing.

A. Oropharyngeal dysphagia is a delay in the transit of liquid or solid bolus during the oropharyngeal phase of swallowing. It could be due to three main subgroups:

- Neurological

- Muscular

- Anatomical

- Neurological causes include cerebrovascular accidents (post-stroke dysphagia), brainstem infarctions with cranial nerve involvement. Other causes include basal ganglia lesions as in Parkinson disease. Also, head and neck injuries and surgery, multiple sclerosis, central nervous tumor, botulism, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, supranuclear palsy, and degenerative cervical spine disease.
- Muscular causes include polymyositis, muscular dystrophy, and myasthenia gravis (a lesion at the neuromuscular junction).
- Anatomical causes include Zenker diverticulum, enlarged thyroid, esophageal web, tumors, abscess, external compression by an aortic aneurysm (known as dysphagia aortica).

B. Esophageal dysphagia - could be due to mechanical obstruction, or motility disorders

- Mechanical obstruction causes include Schatzki ring, esophageal stricture, esophageal carcinoma, eosinophilic esophagitis.

- Motility disorder causes include esophageal spasm, achalasia, ineffective esophageal motility, and scleroderma.

Mechanical obstruction is associated with dysphagia only to solid food, while motility disorder causes are usually associated with solid and liquid dysphagia. The dysphagia may be intermittent (e.g., Schatzki ring, esophageal spasm) or permanent (as in esophageal stricture, carcinoma, achalasia, scleroderma, ineffective esophageal motility).

C. Rheumatological disorders

- Sjogren syndrome (occurs in one-third of patients and caused by both xerostomia and abnormal esophageal motility, mainly of the proximal esophagus.

- Systemic lupus erythematosus

- Mixed connective tissue disease

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Systemic sclerosis (as part of the CREST syndrome)

D. Medications

Several drugs may contribute to the severity of dysphagia. The mechanisms by which these drugs may cause dysphagia include xerostomia and changes in esophageal motility. Also, dysphagia may be secondary to the development of drug-induced esophagitis or the development of gastroesophageal reflux disease. Examples of these drugs are:

- Antipsychotic (e.g., olanzapine, clozapine)

- Tricyclic antidepressant

- Potassium supplements

- Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs

- Bisphosphonates

- Calcium channel blockers

- Nitrates

- Theophylline

- Alcohol

- Medications with immunosuppressant effects (e.g., cyclosporin) can predispose to infective esophagitis and dysphagia

- Opioids

It is important to note here that narcotic sedatives such as opioids can lead to compromise of airway due to central effects and could increase the risk of aspiration in patients with dysphagia. The use of opiates, even in mild disease, in patients with psychiatric disorders or Parkinson disease, can develop hypercontractile or hypertensive esophageal consequences mimicking type III achalasia.