Management mainly depends on the grade of inversion. Over the years, there has been a wide variety of surgical and non-surgical techniques utilized to treat nipple inversion with satisfactory and non-satisfactory results. Non-invasive/ conservative techniques were implemented mainly for grade 1 inverted nipples with considerable success and grade 2 with partial success. Invasive/ surgical procedures are primarily indicated for grade 3 and persistent grade 2 inversions. As such, no standardized technique has been implemented.

The conservative methods mainly involve using devices to create graded/sustained suction on the nipple-areolar complex to protract the nipple and maintain the protraction.

A technique of historic significance, introduced by Hoffman in 1952, involved placement of thumbs on opposite sides of the nipple over the areola with firm downward pressure on the breast to evert the nipple, while slowly moving away from the nipple. This repeated all around and multiple times would protract the nipple, but a study done in 1992 by Alexander et al. determined that not only is this not helpful in breastfeeding but may actually disrupt the lactiferous ducts, and this technique has hence been abandoned.

Yukun et al. treated all grades of nipple inversion for 10 years utilizing a nipple retractor made from the hollow end of a single-use syringe, then eight holes were punctured for sutures crossing the base, and the height of the retractor depended on the sizes of the nipple-areola complex and breast volume. Two sutures were made to cross beneath the base of the nipple to elevate the nipple, and the hollow retractor was placed on the areola with the nipple and four ends of the sutures in the center. Sutures were then passed through the prefabricated holes on the retractor base and were fixed with knots and suitable tension. The retractor was worn for 3-6 months and then could be removed.

Suction devices in the form of shells, cups, nipple retractors, and extractors have also been marketed for use to be worn under clothing. They work by pulling the nipple into a small cup, thus stimulating and protracting it. But no study so far has proven their efficacy and long-term benefits. Scholten suggested piercing as a method of correction that preserves the breast function. This is done by piercing the base of the nipple and inserting a stainless steel barbell of a type employed in decorative body piercing.

Surgical methods are generally employed for grade 2 and 3 inversions. The fundamental principle on which the different surgical procedures are based is that of releasing fibrous bands and galactophorous ducts, adding bulk below the nipple, and filling up the dead space created inside to give the nipple support and avoid reinversion.

Morris Ritz et al. suggested a simple operative technique using two dermoglandular flaps. The inverted nipple is elevated using a skin hook. A perinipple "doughnut" of skin is de-epithelialized to a width of 3mm. Two longitudinal 1.5cm dermofibrous flaps are created attached to the nipple base. The nipple is elevated to its maximal length, and the ducts and fibrous tissue are teased out to release the nipple. A blunt dissector is used to create two tunnels in the deep tissue beneath the nipple, wherein the flaps are stitched at the nipple base fairly taut with 4-0 monocryl. The skin is closed with interrupted half-buried sutures. Sidewalls of grade 3 nipples are not closed and left to heal by epithelialization. A doughnut dressing with antibacterial ointment is used with the neonipple secured to the dressing with 4-0 silk for the first 5 days. This technique did not see any major postoperative events but allowed for a successful correction with a minimal, well-tolerated scar around the neonipple base. An advantage of this technique is the ease of revision correction in case of failure.

Some surgeons report the two flap repairs can result in a gradual up/down tilt. Hence Huang proposed a method with three dermofibrous flaps that added more bulk to the reconstruction, provided a stable floor, and maintained the cylindrical nipple structure. It involved the creation of 3 "diamond-shaped" flaps at 2, 6, and 10 o'clock positions and placing them turned down through the tunnels, which creates a conjoined space under the nipple after releasing the fibrosis and retracted ducts. Sloughing of the partial skin over the dome was the only complication noted postoperatively in five study patients, and this healed by epithelialization without incident.

A dissecting microscope was found to be advantageous by Sowa et al., where they attempted correction of grade 3 inversions.

Lee et al. proposed an internal suturing technique to close the soft-tissue defect, sometimes present after eversion. An inferior periareolar 5 to 7 o'clock incision was made, and a superior periareolar nipple flap was raised. A traction nylon suture was applied to the inverted nipple to guide the dissection of the fibrous bands and ducts. After release, the defect was obliterated by a superior and inferior 2- layer suturing of the internal sidewalls of the nipple together. This was a duct-damaging technique that the authors reported had high patient satisfaction and no residual inversion, but had implications on breastfeeding.

To obliterate the defect, rib/auricular cartilage use has been described for severely inverted nipples or recurrent nipple inversion after primary correction. After the release of the lactiferous ducts and fibrous tissue, a platform is created by applying 2-3 nylon sutures. A cartilage graft harvested from the posterior aspect of the ear/rib is fashioned into 2 disks and sutured as a laminated graft and then introduced into the pocket. It is immobilized with a single horizontal mattress suture placed at the base.