The significant undesirable effects of glucocorticoids result from their hormonal actions, which lead to the clinical picture of iatrogenic Cushing syndrome. Facial rounding, puffiness, fat deposition, and plethora usually appear (moon facies). Fat tends to redistribute from the extremities to the trunk, the back of the neck, and the supraclavicular fossae. There is increased growth of fine hair on the face, thighs, and trunk. Steroid-induced punctate acne may appear, and insomnia and increased appetite are also effects.

With concurrent use of methylprednisolone, protein catabolism will continue, diverting amino acids to glucose production, thus increasing the need for insulin and over time resulting in weight gain. Myopathy and muscle wasting can occur, as well as thinning of the skin, with striae and bruising. Hyperglycemia and eventually osteoporosis can develop, as well as diabetes and aseptic necrosis of the hip.

A more detailed way to review the adverse effects of methylprednisolone and other corticosteroids is by classifying them based on the different organ systems affected:

- Dermatologic and side effects in appearance include skin thinning and ecchymoses, Cushingoid features, and weight gain.

- Ophthalmologic side effects include the formation of cataracts, increased intraocular pressure, and the development of exophthalmos.

- Cardiovascular side effects include fluid retention and hypertension, premature atherosclerotic disease, arrhythmias, and possible hyperlipidemia.

- Gastrointestinal effects include the increased risk of gastritis, ulcer formation, and gastrointestinal bleeding.

- Bone and muscle effects include osteoporosis, osteonecrosis, and myopathy.

- Neuropsychiatric side effects include mood disorders, psychosis, and memory impairment.

- Metabolic and endocrine side effects consist of hyperglycemia and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis suppression.

- Immune system effects include increased susceptibility to infections.

- Hematologic side effects include leukocytosis and neutrophilia.