Some complications regarding avulsion fractures are directly related to the injury. The injury alone can lead to heterotrophic ossification, hematoma, cause neurovascular injury or irritation, and loss of proprioception.

Compartment syndrome from avulsion fractures is very rare, or not at all described in some body parts, while certain fractures such as pediatric tibial tubercle avulsion fractures are especially at risk for this complication. One must be extremely vigilant when addressing that injury.

In adolescent apophyseal avulsion fractures, the most common complications are painful nonunion and exostosis formation.

A missed injury or a delay in appropriate treatment has been reported to lead to complications such as pain, nonunion, malunion, recurrent injury or instability, bone loss, bone resorption, erosion, accelerated arthrosis, contracture, loss of function, irreversible injury, avascular necrosis, chronic pain, delayed return to sport, and pseudoarthrosis.

Even with prompt diagnosis, failure to treat an associated soft tissue injury at the time of fixing the fracture is an avoidable complication and, as discussed, can lead to many other complications.

Because avulsion fractures often involve joints and stabilizing structures, loss of motion should always be discussed with the patient as a possible complication. Some risk factors specific to joint rigidity include delayed treatment, prolonged operative time, malunion, prominent hardware, fracture displacement, reoperations, and prolonged immobilization.

Although necessary for many injuries, surgical intervention of any kind does not come without complications. Commonly discussed surgical complications include wound infection, wound dehiscence, septic arthritis, myositis ossificans, pin-tract infections, blood loss, osteonecrosis, heterotrophic ossification, and nerve injury, although the actual incidence of these complications is low.

Altogether, complications from surgery vary greatly, as the nature of some avulsion fractures require greater exposure with large incisions and more extensive dissections, while others can be adequately treated with minimally invasive, percutaneous, or arthroscopic techniques.

Perhaps most complications occur during the healing or rehabilitation phase after either operative or non-operative treatment has been administered. Inadequate protection or inadequately supervised rehabilitation programs can potentially lead to muscle contracture, nonunion, or weakness.