An essential component of the surgical treatment of breast cancer, if performing breast conservation surgery, relies on precise localization.  The surgical oncologist must work closely with radiologists for the best possible outcomes.

There are multiple preoperative localization options available. The most widely known localization technique involves wire needle localization.  Wires often get placed using mammography or ultrasound guidance, with placement on the same day of breast surgery. Multiple wires are occasionally required to bracket tumors greater than or equal to 2 cm.  There are various disadvantages to wire localization, including scheduling issues due to availability of oncologic surgeon and radiology schedule. Additionally, the wire can migrate, cause pneumothorax or hemothorax, hematoma, or breast implant puncture. Retained wire fragments can occur if the wire is inadvertently cut during the procedure.

Recent developments in localization devices do not require the use of a wire; this avoids the risk of the wire becoming dislodged or migrating to another location. Some other advantages include increased flexibility in timing, reduced length of stay on the day of surgery, and localization access is independent of the surgical approach. Non-wire devices can be placed anywhere between five and thirty days before the procedure, which provides a distinct advantage in the uncoupling of schedule coordination between involved personnel.

Non-wire devices further categorize into radioactive and non-radioactive devices. Radioactive seed localization (RSL) consists of a 5-mm I125 pellet with a titanium shell. Deployment is comparable to biopsy clip placement.  Placement can be up to 5 days before surgery, but sometimes placement is on the same day of surgery. The seed requires the use of an intraoperative gamma probe to locate and remove the target lesion properly. Because RSL has been proven to be safe, effective, and possibly reduce the rate of positive margins, it is quickly becoming a popular option among surgeons across the nation.

Non-radioactive devices include the SCOUT RADAR device, MAGSEED, and RFIL.  One additional advantage of non-radioactive non-wire devices compared to radioactive is that the lack of radioactivity allows for deployment in a separate facility if needed. These devices often get placed up to thirty days before surgery. The oncologic surgeon then utilizes a special intraoperative probe that emits infrared light to locate and remove the target lesion.