Transposons can serve as genetic tools to introduce foreign DNA into the genome of another organism.  For example, the insertion of mouse DNA into zebrafish.

Transgenics has helped to identify genes related to diseases and pathologies. For example, transposons have been a tool to study novel culprits of cell transformation in cancer pathogenesis. Before insertional mutagenesis, studying genes involved in cancer pathogenesis was difficult.Cryptococcus neoformans. It is an infectious fungus that is being analyzed through insertional mutagenesis to determine what genes were involved in fungal virulence.

Worldwide mortality rates are increasing due to bacterial infectious disease, and bacterial transposons have implications in the development of bacterial antibiotic resistance.

Some diseases may have arisen from transposition within the human genome. Studies have found that some epithelial tumors arise from spontaneous retrotransposon integration. The research of these retrotransposons may be highly impactful in understanding tumorigenesis.

Gene therapy, using genetic tools to edit the human genome, has a high potential for benefitting patients with genetic pathology, but it is also high risk. The administration of retroviruses in gene therapy trials has correlated with adverse outcomes. In the treatment of 9 patients with SCID, 4 developed acute leukemia within ten years of being treated with gene therapy. One of the four who developed leukemia died. However, the eight remaining had sustained reversal of the immunodeficiency.Sleeping beauty (SB) transposon is the most researched transposon used in non-viral insertional mutagenesis gene therapy. Using transposons instead of viral vectors has two advantages in gene therapy: easier manufacturing and transposons like SB have less preference for integration sites.PiggyBac transposon demonstrated that muscles treated with an autologous cell-based therapy had become more resistant to fatigue.