Before initiating any treatment with bazedoxifene and conjugated estrogens, it is important to get a quantitative understanding of bone health and better assess any potential osteoporosis risks. The ideal diagnostic tool for measuring bone mineral density (BMD) is dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA). A DEXA scan is an imaging device that uses spectral imaging to determine BMD scores and analyze the long-term probability of developing a vertebral or hip fracture. Following initiation of bazedoxifene/conjugated estrogens treatment, it is vital to continue monitoring BMD scores via DEXA every one to two years, which can later be curtailed based on the overall progress of bone strength.

Following initiation of bazedoxifene/conjugated estrogen therapy, it is integral for both the patient and healthcare provider to monitor for any cardiovascular adverse effects. It has been documented that long-term usage of estrogen agonists/antagonists amongst postmenopausal women has led to an increased risk of stroke, pulmonary embolism, and deep vein thrombosis.

Should the patient suspect any symptoms characteristic of a cardiovascular anomaly, it is integral for her to immediately discontinue the drug and report the symptoms to her primary healthcare provider or a cardiologist. If there is a family history of cardiovascular complications, in that case, the patient needs to report that to her primary care physician to determine if necessary to either consider alternative drug regimens or strictly monitor for symptoms in a healthcare setting. Other adverse effects that require monitoring but are not of immediate danger to a patient include abdominal pain, nausea, muscle spasms, and light-headedness.

Another potential long-term concern of unopposed estrogen therapy is endometrial cancer. Clinical trials have demonstrated a slightly increased risk of endometrial hyperplasia following treatment with 20 mg BZA/0.625 mg CE, as opposed to the treatment group with only 20 mg BZA/0.45 mg CE. There were no reported cases of endometrial hyperplasia in the placebo group. While the risk of endometrial cancer for postmenopausal women taking conjugated estrogens/bazedoxifene is quite low, it is important not to supplement this drug with any additional estrogen therapy and to ensure proper clinical surveillance during drug therapy.