Hemoglobin (Hb) is a significant protein within the red blood cell (RBC). It comprises four globin chains, two derived from alpha-globin (locus on chromosome 16) and two from beta-globin (locus on chromosome 11). There are many subtypes of Hb. The most common ones that are found in adults without hemoglobinopathies are listed here:

- HbA1- comprises two chains of the alpha-globin and two chains of the beta-globin (a2b2) - This constitutes 95% of the adult hemoglobin.

- HbA2- comprises two chains of the alpha-globin and two chains of the delta-globin (a2d2) - This constitutes less than 4% of the adult hemoglobin.

- HbF- comprises two chains of the alpha-globin and two chains of the gamma-globin (a2g2) - This Hb is more prevalent in the fetus (due to the high oxygen binding affinity that helps extract oxygen from maternal circulation).

The sickle cell mutation occurs when negatively charged glutamine is replaced by a neutral valine at the sixth position of the beta-globin chain. The mutation is transmitted via Mendelian genetics and is inherited in an autosomal codominant fashion.

A heterozygous inheritance leads to HbAS. Patients with HbAS are not considered within the spectrum of SCD as most of them never present with typical symptoms of SCA. They might only be detected during childbirth, blood donation, or screening procedures.

Several other compound heterozygotes exist where a single copy of the mutated beta-globin gene is coinherited with a single copy of another mutated gene. The second most common variant of SCD is the HbSC disease, where the sickle cell gene is coinherited with a single copy of the mutated hemoglobin C gene. HbC is formed when lysine replaces glutamine at the sixth position on the beta-globin chain. HbSC disease accounts for 30% of patients in the United States.