Angiotensinogen is converted to angiotensin I by an enzyme, renin, that gets released from the juxtaglomerular apparatus of the kidney. Angiotensin-converting enzyme further converts angiotensin I, an inactive decapeptide, to angiotensin II, an active octapeptide. Losartan is a selective and competitive angiotensin II receptor blocker at the AT1 receptor site, resulting in a compensatory elevation of renin and angiotensin I levels. It binds with high affinity to the AT1 receptor and is more than 10000 fold selective for the AT1 receptor than the AT2 receptor. It inhibits angiotensin II-induced vasopressin release, adrenal catecholamine release, rapid and slow pressor response, thirst, cellular hypertrophy and hyperplasia, noradrenergic neurotransmission, and sympathetic tone increase. Losartan also inhibits angiotensin II-induced vasoconstriction and action of aldosterone, which in turn lowers the blood pressure. Losartan increases the urinary flow and increases the excretion of sodium, potassium, chloride, magnesium, uric acid, calcium, and phosphate. Compared to ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II-receptor blockers effectively inhibit the renin-angiotensin system, not affecting the response to bradykinin.

For this reason, the non-renin-angiotensin effects, for example, cough and angioedema, are not commonly seen with ARBs. Hepatic P450 enzyme CYP2C9 metabolizes losartan to a more potent 5-carboxylic acid metabolite, EXP 3174. The onset of action of losartan is 6 hours, lasting for 24 hours, and the half-lives of losartan and EXP 3174 are 1.5 to 2 hours and 6 to 9 hours, respectively. The plasma clearance of losartan and EXP 3174 are through the kidney and liver, respectively.