Hypothyroid myopathy presents with nonspecific symptoms of myalgias, muscle cramps, fatigue, and muscle weakness, particularly exacerbated with exertion and exercise. Proximal weakness especially in the shoulder and pelvic girdle is commonly seen, causing difficulty in climbing stairs, getting up from squatting position, and combing hair. The severity of myopathy correlates with the duration and degree of thyroid hormone deficiency. Diffuse muscle hypertrophy is a relatively rare phenomenon.

There are 4 subtypes of myopathy associated with hypothyroidism: myasthenic syndrome, atrophic form, Kocher-Debre-Semelaigne syndrome, Hoffman syndrome.

- Myasthenic syndrome is associated with ptosis and severe weakness beginning in childhood that can progress to loss of mobility in later life.

- Severe muscle atrophy is seen in the atrophic form of hypothyroid myopathy.

- Kocher-Debre-Semelaigne syndrome is seen in childhood and is associated with generalized muscular hypertrophy, myxoedema, short stature, and cretinism.

- Hoffmann syndrome is usually seen in adults and characterized by pseudohypertrophy, painful spasms, proximal muscle weakness, and stiffness. This is generally seen in primary hypothyroidism and very rarely with secondary hypothyroidism. The cause of muscle pseudohypertrophy in Hoffmann’s syndrome is complex and largely unclear. It is postulated to be due to deposition of glycosaminoglycans and increased muscle fiber size. The muscles commonly involved are the tongue, arm and leg muscles.

Rhabdomyolysis is, fortunately, a rare complication of severe and untreated hypothyroid myopathy, but can be life-threatening. Common precipitating factors are vigorous exercise, trauma, electrolyte abnormalities, and alcohol consumption.

Acute compartment syndrome may also be seen with delayed tendon reflexes and muscle hypertrophy, especially when precipitated by trauma, thrombosis, animal bites, intravenous (IV) drug abuse or surgery.

Myoedema is an interesting clinical sign, characteristic of hypothyroid myopathy. It is demonstrated by percussion or a pressure stimulus on the muscles of the arm. This causes the muscle to form a palpable, painless ridge around the site of the stimulus. The swelling subsides gradually returning the muscle contour to normal in a few seconds. This is believed to be caused by prolonged muscle contraction due to delay in calcium reuptake by the sarcoplasmic reticulum after the stimulus causes local calcium release. This sign if elicited can help differentiate hypothyroid myopathy from other types of myopathies.