Research has revealed leukotrienes to play a crucial role in several diseases, most notably asthma. Leukotrienes have several effects that lead to the production of asthma symptoms. First, they promote bronchiole constriction leading to narrowing of the airways. In regards to this, they also promote smooth muscle proliferation, leading to increased responsiveness in airway constriction. Second, they promote leukocyte recruitment and subsequent cytokine release, leading to further inflammation of the airways. Third, they act directly on airway goblet cells to promote mucus secretion. Collectively, these actions produce many of the symptoms seen in asthma. Given the ability of leukotrienes to lead to airway remodeling with increases in goblet cell and smooth muscle proliferation, there has been a suggestion that those who have chronic asthma will especially benefit from anti-leukotriene therapy.

In addition to asthma, leukotrienes have shown to play a role in the development of cardiovascular disease. Researchers have noted that atherosclerotic vascular lesions express the entire biochemical machinery necessary for leukotriene production, including 5-lipooxygenase, FLAP, and other distal enzymes important for leukotriene synthesis. Moreover, levels of 5-lipooxygenase within atherosclerotic vessels correlates with disease severity. Based on animal models, the belief is that increases in leukotrienes promote the attraction of macrophages as well as their differentiation into foam cells. Globally, researchers have found that several different ethnic populations with variants of leukotriene-related genes that lead to overproduction of leukotrienes have an increased incidence of stroke and myocardial infarction. Although anti-leukotriene therapy is not currently standard in the care of cardiovascular disease, increasing evidence supports the role of leukotrienes in its pathogenesis.

Lastly, leukotrienes have a connection to various cancers. Chronic inflammation leads to an increased risk of certain cancers. For example, the chronic inflammation provoked by inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) appears to promote the transformation to colorectal adenocarcinoma. In such patients, these cancers have increased expression of cysLT. Research also shows that LTD promotes the up-regulation of Bcl-2, an anti-apoptotic protein that promotes cell survival. Similar findings also exist with other cancers, including leukemia, lymphomas, esophageal, lung, and skin cancers. These malignancies express increased amounts of 5-lipooxygenase, FLAP, and other enzymes in the leukotriene synthesis pathway. Cell models and animal studies have suggested that anti-leukotriene therapies decrease cancer cell survival and decrease the incidence of certain malignancies.