EGFR signaling commences with ligand binding. Ligand binding to the extracellular region of the receptor results in dimerization of the receptors. Homodimerization of EGFR receptors, in addition to heterodimerization of the EGFR with any of the other ErbB receptors, results in activation. It is important to note that homodimerization of the ErbB3 receptor does not result in this same active configuration, and ErbB3 receptors are only active after heterodimerization with an alternate ErbB receptor, such as EGFR.

After ligand binding and dimerization, autophosphorylation of specific intracellular tyrosine kinase residues induces formation that allows binding sites for signal transduction substrates. Substrates include phospholipase C-gamma 1 (PLC-gamma1), GTPase-activating protein (GAP) and the syp phosphotyrosine phosphatase. The tyrosine kinase domain can also bind adapter proteins such as the srs homology and collagen (Shc) protein and Grb-2. Altering all of the specific tyrosine kinase autophosphorylation sites results in significantly decreased substrate binding. However, altering only one of the sites can be compensated by binding to the others. Substrate binding leads to downstream signaling, facilitating cell growth and proliferation.

Inactivation of the EGFR is achieved by internalization of the receptor with subsequent lysosomal degradation. Internalization is dependent on tyrosine kinase activity, and activated receptors are internalized. Additional inactivation can be achieved by phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues in the cytoplasmic domain, with subsequent receptor desensitization and reduction of downstream signaling.