**The Language of Trafficking**

Languages are essential to understanding different cultures, environments, enterprises, and socioeconomic groups. Human trafficking and smuggling participants have a dialect unique to traffickers and victims. Exploration of "trafficking vocabulary" will help practitioners relate to and understand patients who have been trafficked.

In a victim-centered approach, much like a patient-centered approach, it is imperative to communicate effectively with a potential victim or patient. The following are legal definitions and terms or "lingo" used by traffickers and victims or as they relate to human trafficking. This list continues to grow as we better understand human trafficking. Other terms may become recognizable as jargon unique to a trafficking situation.

**Trafficking "Lingo"**

- Daddy: The word a victim is required to call their pimp/trafficker.

- Gorilla Pimp: A trafficker or pimp that resorts to violence to control a victim

- Romeo/Finesse Pimp: The trafficker that uses a false romance; a false promise of money, clothing or other gifts; or false hope of marriage to lure victims. Often referred to as "boyfriend."

- Branding: A carving, tattoo, or mark on a victim that implies ownership by a pimp/gang/trafficker. The tattoo may say, "Daddy," "Property of...," or "For sale."

- Quota: The amount of money expected from their trafficker/pimp each night. If quotas go unmet, the victim may be beaten, tortured, or made to work exorbitant hours until the expected amount has been delivered.

- Circuit: A series of places where prostitutes/victims get moved. Keeping them in unfamiliar surroundings increases their vulnerability and facilitates the trafficker's control over the individual.

- Date: The time and location where the sex act is to take place. The buyer or "john" meet them at this pre-determined site.

- The Life: Sex-trafficking victims refer to their situation as being in "the life."

- Bottom: A victim chosen by the pimp or trafficker to "handle" the other victims. They may train the new victim, post ads/control social media posts, inflict punishment if rules get broken, and book the "date." This individual victim may feel tremendous shame and guilt because of her actions and treatment of other victims. The pimp may further control the "bottom" by threatening violence, increasing quotas, or reporting her to the authorities. The "bottom" may be required to entice others into servitude by posing as a student, a concerned friend, or a mother figure.

**Trafficking Victims Protection Act Definitions**

- Coercion: Threats of serious harm to or physical restraint against any person; any scheme, plan, or pattern intended to cause a person to believe that failure to perform an act would result in serious harm to or physical restraint against any person; or the abuse or threatened abuse of the legal process [22 U.S.C. 7102 (3)(a)(b)(c)].

- Commercial Sex Act: Any sex act on account of which anything of value is given to or received by any person [22 U.S.C. 7102 (4)]

- Debt Bondage: The status or condition of a debtor arising from a pledge by the debtor of his or her personal services or those of a person under his or her control as a security for a debt, if the value of those services as reasonably assessed is not applied toward the liquidation of the debt or the length and nature of those services are not respectively limited and defined [22 U.S.C. 7102 (5)].

- Involuntary Servitude: Any scheme, plan, or pattern intended to cause a person to believe that, if the person did not enter into or continue in such condition, that person or another person would suffer serious harm or physical restraint [22 U.S.C. 7102 6 (a)].

- Labor trafficking: The recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, or obtaining of a person for labor or services, through the use of force, fraud, or coercion for the purposes of subjection to involuntary servitude, peonage, debt bondage, or slavery (22 USC § 7102).

- Sex trafficking:  The recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, obtaining, patronizing, or soliciting of a person for the purposes of a commercial sex act, in which the commercial sex act is induced by force, fraud, or coercion, or in which the person induced to perform such an act has not attained 18 years of age (22 USC § 7102).