Perineal fistulas and rectovestibular fistulas:

For patients with perineal fistulas, a repair can be performed in the neonatal period if the surgeon is comfortable with the procedure, and there are no other anomalies that would preclude anesthesia such as a cardiac defect. The clinician can also delay the repair if the fistulous tract is large enough to perform dilations with a Hegar dilator and stool evacuation can be reliable. The same dilation strategy works for a female patient with a rectovestibular fistula as the anatomy can be challenging in the neonatal period, and dilating can allow the child to grow and improve the ease of surgical intervention.

For either patient population, it is crucial to ensure that stool is decompressing well with the dilation management, and the child is not becoming distended. If being managed with dilations, the surgical repair should occur at approximately 3 months of age. This way, the defect can undergo correction before transitioning to solid food, reducing the risk of development of constipation leading to rectal dilation that would impact function.

Surgical repair of these malformations is generally through a posterior sagittal incision, and the abdominal entry is not necessary.

Rectourethral fistulas or Cloaca:

Any male patient with a urinary fistula should undergo diversion in the neonatal period with a diverting descending sigmoid colostomy with a separated mucus fistula. This strategy allows for the child to grow before surgical intervention, and also evacuate stool from the distal limb of the bowel that connects to the urinary system. Furthermore, the mucus fistula allows for a distal colostogram to be performed preoperatively to determine the exact type of rectourethral fistula assisting with preoperative planning and operative strategy for repair.

Patients with a single perineal orifice consistent with a diagnosis of cloaca should also undergo a diverting ostomy and mucous fistula in the neonatal period. These patients also require much more complex preoperative and operative management as well as lifelong care and should be considered for referral to a specialty center.

The timing of the definitive repair of high malformations can depend on the exact type of malformation and other associated anomalies, especially cardiac defects. Typically, surgical repair occurs sometime around or after 3 months of age. Surgical repair can still be performed with a posterior sagittal incision if the rectum and the fistula present on the distal colostogram below the level of the coccyx. Laparoscopy can be a crucial surgical strategy for high malformations such as a recto-bladder neck fistula.