The tongue participates in a variety of functions such as taste, speech, and food manipulation and cleaning of the oral cavity.

**Taste Functions**

The dorsal surface of the tongue is covered by a stratified squamous epithelium, with numerous papillae such as circumvallate papilla, fungiform papilla, filiform papilla, and foliate papilla. Taste buds which are intraepithelial chemosensory organs present within these papillae are responsible for taste perception. The circumvallate papilla carries the maximum number of taste buds. These taste buds via gustatory cell receptors interact with the chemicals present in the food and induce different taste sensations (sweet, salty, sour, and bitter).

**Speech Functions**

Various speech sounds require the interaction of the tongue with the teeth and different parts of the palate. The linguodental sounds such as “Th” require interaction between the tip of the tongue with the incisal surface of upper and lower incisors. The linguopalatal sounds may include the contact of the tongue with the anterior or the posterior part of the hard palate. When the tip of the tongue contacts with the anterior part of the hard palate, sounds such as “D, T, N, and, Z” is produced. When the tongue forms a valve and contacts the posterior part of the hard palate, it produces sounds like “ch" and "sh.” The velar sounds include a contact of the posterior part of the tongue with the soft palate. these sounds include “k" and "g .”

**Food Manipulation Functions**

The tongue aids in moving the food onto the occlusal surface of the teeth, mixing it with saliva as the food move away from the teeth, and in placing the food again on the teeth.