**Intraoperative**

**Wound Related**

**Incision Position**

Anteriorly placed incisions have a poor self-sealing mechanism, resulting in wound leak and, against the rule, astigmatism. This is managed by placing 10-0 nylon tunnel sutures. Posteriorly placed incisions lead to a broader tunnel, risk of hyphema due to bleed and premature entry, and difficulty in delivering the nucleus through the tunnel. This is again managed by placing 10-0 nylon tunnel sutures.

**Incision Length**

Shorter incisions less than 6 mm are related to nucleus engagement in the tunnel and difficulty in nucleus delivery. Tunnel compression during nucleus delivery can aggravate endothelial trauma, iridodialysis, zonular dialysis, and posterior capsular rent. Large incisions are related to the rule astigmatism and wound leak, which sutures can manage.

**Incision Depth**

The incision depth should ideally be one-third of the scleral depth. In highly myopic eyes, with scleral scarring or deep socket, the surgeon may find it challenging to find the correct depth of the incision.

**Scleral Disinsertion**

A deep incision may result in separating the upper sclera from the lower sclera and result in disinsertion. If there is no tissue bridge, there is no support for the sclera from the groove to the limbus. This complication is managed with radial sutures to secure the edges of the scleral groove. Scleral disinsertion is prevented by making a partial thickness groove, freehand incision, or a guarded blade. The scleral tunnel roof or floor may also be torn.

**Button Hole**

There occurs superficial dissection of the sclera flap. The dissection should be terminated, and then a groove should be made at a deeper plane, and then the tunnel should be continued.

**Premature Entry**

This results in from incision at a deeper plane. Once a premature entry is noted, dissection should be stopped as a groove should be made at a correct plane, and then the tunnel should be continued.

**Descemet Membrane Detachment**

Any iatrogenic or traumatic injury to the DM may result in DM detachment. Sometimes DM stripping may occur when fluid from the cannula or viscoelastic from the paracentesis passes into the corneal stroma and DM and separates the DM. Sometimes the DMD appears as a free-floating membrane and is mistaken as a remnant of the anterior capsule and is aspirated in the Simcoe cannula. This results in DM loss and leaves a permanent corneal opacity. The DMD is managed with the help of air tamponade, and if needed, the tunnel is sutured to prevent the leak of air bubbles.

**Conjunctival Ballooning**

Sometimes during block or while hydrating the corneal stroma, the fluid may egress through the stroma into the conjunctiva and result in hooding or ballooning of the conjunctiva. This may impair the anterior chamber visualization and may mask the surgical steps. This is managed by placing a small incision 1-2 mm posterior to the conjunctiva and allowing the fluid to egress.

**Paracentesis**

The configuration of the paracentesis is essential as a too anterior paracentesis in the cornea may lead to DM stripping, too far in the sclera will result in bleeding, too small instruments may result in DM stripping, and too large may result in leakage.

**Capsulorhexis**

**Runaway Rhexis**

There can be a peripheral extension of the tear and may result in a posterior capsular tear.

**Capsulorhexis Size**

A small capsulorhexis may result in difficulty in nucleus prolapse. Difficulty in prolapse may lead to PCR, zonular dialysis, or nucleus drop. A large capsulorhexis may cause a problem with the placement of an IOL. If the rhexis margin is not seen on one side,  the IOL placement will be difficult and may even result in decentration.

**Hydrodissection**

- Inadequate cortical capsular bag dissection

- Fluid misdirection syndrome

- Zonular dialysis

- PCR

- Nucleus drop

- Capsular block syndrome

**Nucleus Prolapse**

Difficulty prolapsing the nucleus may result from the small pupil, incomplete hydro dissection, the small size of the rhexis, synechiae, brown cataract, and soft nucleus. This may result in endothelial damage, iridodialysis, zonular dialysis, posterior capsular rent, or nucleus drop.

**Nucleus Delivery**

While nucleus delivery, if the tunnel is of inadequate size, it can result in Descemet membrane detachment, endothelial damage, iridodialysis, PCR, and ZD. These complications arise due to small tunnel, ragged tunnel, incomplete hydro dissection, anterior chamber leak, premature entry, or vitreous in the anterior chamber.

**Hyphema**

The significant reasons for hyphema can be deeper tunnel incision, iridodialysis, and microbleeds from conjunctival vessels seeping into the anterior chamber. This can be prevented by correct surgical technique and an excellent viscoelastic cover.

**Iris Damage**

Injury to the iris can cause a tear, sphincter damage, iridodialysis, and iris prolapse. Sphincter tears can occur in cases with PXF and complications during nucleus delivery.

- Iridodialysis

- Iris prolapse

- Pupillary constriction

- Zonular dialysis

- Posterior capsular rupture

- Retained cortex

- Nucleus drop

- Positive pressure

- Expulsive choroidal hemorrhage

**Postoperative**

**Immediate**

- Wound leak

- Descemet membrane detachment

- Corneal edema

- Endothelial damage

- Uveitis

- Secondary glaucoma

- Toxic anterior segment syndrome

**Delayed**

- Corneal decompensation

- Uveitis

- Capsular contraction syndrome

- IOL dislocation

- IOL subluxation

- Posterior capsular opacification

- Irvin Gass syndrome

- Endophthalmitis

- Pan ophthalmitis

**Complications Unique to MSICS**

**Tunnel and Scleral Complications**

- Surgically induced necrotizing scleritis

- Buttonhole

- Premature entry

- Nucleus in tunnel

- Cortex in the anterior chamber

- Wound leak

- Paracentesis leak

- Exposed suture knots

- Incorrect suture placement

**Corneal Complications**

- Corneal edema

- DMD

- Striate keratopathy

- Pseudophakic bullous keratopathy

- Epithelial defect

- Recurrent erosions