The first step in the diagnosis of CLL is a peripheral blood smear. The peripheral blood smear shows an absolute lymphocyte count of greater than 5000/mcL and smudge cells that confirm CLL. Although the diagnostic criteria for CLL are >=5000/mcL B lymphocytes on peripheral smear, a large proportion of patients present with an absolute lymphocyte count > 100,000/mcL. In patients with SLL, peripheral blood smear shows an absolute lymphocyte count of less than 5000/mcL along with lymphadenopathy but without cytopenias. However, lymph node biopsy is required to confirm the diagnosis of SLL.

Immunophenotypic analysis of the peripheral circulating lymphocytes by peripheral blood flow cytometry can be performed, which can help confirm the clonality of circulating B cells in CLL patients. Flow cytometry can be performed on both peripheral blood and bone marrow aspirate to look for the classical immunophenotypic markers of CLL. To reiterate, characteristic CLL/SLL lymphocyte phenotype features include low levels of immunoglobulins (most often IgM immunoglobulin and sometimes both IgM and IgD); expression of B-cell associated antigens (CD19, CD20, CD21, CD23, and/or CD24); and expression of CD5 which is a T-cell associated antigen. The most common immunophenotype expression of CLL/SLL is the coexpression of CD5, CD19, and CD23. However, different levels of expression of other immunophenotypic antigens are also seen. Serum immunoglobulins and free-light chains are measured at baseline to assess the immunodeficiency and during treatment, to look at immune reconstitution, especially with the newer generation B-cell receptor signaling drugs. As for the light chain immunoglobulins, only one type of light chain suggesting the monoclonality of the lymphocytes. Rarely, some patients express both kappa and lambda light chains, known as "biclonal CLL."

FISH is a highly sensitive test used to detect chromosomal abnormalities in patients with CLL/SLL.

Although not needed for diagnosis, bone marrow aspiration and biopsy are often done as a part of a diagnostic workup or before treatment. If the biopsy specimen demonstrates greater than 30% lymphocytes of all nucleated cells in a normocellular/hypercellular bone marrow aspirate, this confirms the diagnosis of CLL. The reduction of lymphocytic infiltration to less than 30% on treatment indicates a complete response. Furthermore, three infiltrative patterns of lymphocytes have been recognized in the bone marrow biopsy specimens: nodular, interstitial, and diffuse. A biopsy sample can demonstrate a mixture of nodular and interstitial, or nodular and diffuse patterns. Studies have shown that patients with a diffuse pattern on biopsy tend to have advanced disease with poor prognosis, whereas nodular and interstitial patterns ("non-diffuse" category) have a better prognosis.

Excisional lymph node histology demonstrates diffuse effacement of nodal architecture along with some scattered residual likely germinal centers. These lymph node infiltrates are predominantly composed of small lymphocytes. However, large lymphoid cells, such as pro-lymphocytes, are always present in clusters and are known as " pseudo-follicles" (proliferation centers), a pathognomic finding, and CLL/SLL patients. Spleen histology demonstrates the infiltration of red and white pulp with a more prominent white pulp involvement compared to red pulp. From an imaging standpoint, a CT scan helps in evaluation to see the degree of lymphadenopathy and organ infiltration in the form of spleen and liver sizes.

Diagnoses of complications of CLL such as autoimmune hemolytic anemia involves a positive direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test, increased reticulocyte count, elevated serum LDH, reduced haptoglobin, and elevated serum indirect bilirubin. Diagnosis of further complications such as pure red cell aplasia and thrombocytopenia can be made by a peripheral blood smear and a bone marrow aspiration and biopsy. Hypogammaglobulinemia (less than 15% of cases), elevated uric acid level and elevated hepatic enzymes are other findings seen in CLL. Important lab studies include serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and beta-2 microglobulin (read with creatinine because it can normally be elevated in patients with elevated creatinine), which correlate with disease activity.