**Types of Dislocation**

**Anterior dislocation**is the most common, accounting for up to 97% of all shoulder dislocations.

- Mechanism of injury is usually a blow to an abducted, externally rotated and extended extremity.

- It may also occur with posterior humerus force or fall on an outstretched arm.

- On exam, the arm is usually abducted and externally rotated, and the acromion appears prominent

- There are associated injuries in up 40% of anterior dislocations including nerve damage, or tears and fractures associated with the labrum, glenoid fossa, and/or humeral head.

**Posterior dislocations**account for 2% to 4% of shoulder dislocations.

- Usually, the injury is caused by a hit to the anterior shoulder and axial loading of the adducted internally rotated arm.

- It may also be a result of violent muscle contractions (seizures, electrocution).

- On exam, the arm is usually held in adduction, and internal rotation and patient is unable to rotate externally.

- Higher risk of associated injuries such as fractures of surgical neck or tuberosity, reverse Hill-Sachs lesions (also called a McLaughlin lesion which is an impaction fracture of anteromedial aspect of humeral head), and injuries of the labrum or rotator cuff.

**Inferior dislocations**(also known as luxatio erecta) are the most uncommon type (less than 1%).

- Usually caused by hyperabduction or with axial loading on the abducted arm.

- On exam, the arm is held above and behind the head and patient is unable to adduct arm.

- Often associated with nerve injury, rotator cuff injury, tears in the internal capsule, and the highest incidence of axillary nerve and artery injury of all shoulder injuries.