Scrub typhus in its region of endemicity is one of the causes of acute febrile illness which usually is underdiagnosed. It can affect multiple organ systems principally by its vasculitis and perivascular inflammation. Mite larvae or chiggers which carry the pathogenic gram-negative bacteria act as a vector to humans and they transmit the organism through their bite. The infection is maintained in nature as the organism follows transovarial transmission in the vector and sometimes in small mammals as a reservoir.

The Orientia genome is considered to be the most highly repetitive bacterial genome sequenced. This is attributed to a result of high numbers of intragenomic deletions and duplications that occur in the genome. There are also rearrangements with transposable and conjugative elements within the genome that contribute to this phenomenon. Of the various structural proteins of Orientia tsutsugamushi, the 56-kDa type-specific antigen (TSA) is an outer membrane protein unique to O. tsutsugamushi.

Based on the serological characterization from this particular outer membrane protein which displays variable regions several new subtypes have been identified in different geographical regions as a result of its high genomic plasticity apart from the previously known prototype strains namely Karp, Kato, and Gilliam.

The 56-kDa type-specific antigen is also described as a primary immunogen that can elicit neutralizing antibodies at the time of infection.O.tsutsugamushi that are present in different endemic regions/countries the process of developing an effective vaccine has been hindered.