**Prenatal Diagnosis**

Many women will come in for interim visits with complaints of abdominal pain, abnormal uterine bleeding, and irregular menses. Women with a functioning reproductive system must have a pregnancy test to rule out pregnancy. The gold standard for pregnancy testing is the quantitative beta HCG radioimmunoassay. Most providers in the emergency, ambulatory, or episodic care environments use the urine HCG tests for the initial screen. The quantitative HCG is usually done in conjunction with examination and ultrasound to confirm a normal versus abnormal pregnancy, to correlate gestational age with the last normal menstrual period, or to guide in the management of a potential miscarriage. Once a woman has a confirmed pregnancy, she should be scheduled for the first prenatal visit that includes a full review of the pertinent history.

The prenatal intake should include a thorough history and physical to identify potential risks and to assist in referral to appropriate services. Components include:

- Medical history

- Surgical history (especially history of any uterine or abdominal incisions, salpingectomies, and cesareans)

- Family history (especially history of diabetes, genetic disorders, and hemoglobinopathies)

- Obstetric history including last normal menstrual period, previous pregnancy complications, preterm births, and previous pregnancy losses

- Gynecologic history

- Mental health history

**Risk Assessment**

- Diabetes (assessment for undiagnosed type 2 diabetes using risk factor criteria as set by the American Diabetic Association)

- Infection

- Genetic

- Occupational and environmental

- Psychosocial

- Substance and drug use

- Tobacco use

- Financial

- Nutrition

- Other risks that might impact pregnancy such as medications, exposures, and known teratogens.