The management approach of choledochal cysts depends on the cyst type and the extent of hepatobiliary pathology. As a rule, all cysts should be resected, and bile flow should be restored.

Early surgical excision of CCs is recommended as Diao et al. reported in their randomized clinical trial, where patients who received the diagnosis of CC antenatally and underwent early surgical excision of the cyst (surgery in less than one-month-old neonates) were found to have less risk of hepatic fibrosis and faster normalization of liver function tests compared to control.

Type I and type IV CCs are managed with complete excision of the choledochus and restoration of bile flow by preferably Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy (HJ) or hepaticoduodenostomy (HD). Which type of bilioenteric restoration is preferred was a topic of debate. Most published studies suggest a higher rate of gastric malignancy due to bile reflux and biliary malignancy in HD compared to HJ cases.

In the past, the treatment of CC consisted of either external or internal drainage along with cholecystectomy. The recommended approach to these cases is cyst excision due to the continued risk of malignancy as well as other complications such as pancreatitis, cholangitis, and stenosis.

The risk of type II and type III cysts to transform into malignancies is lower. The management of type II consists of simple excision of the cyst or diverticulectomy along with occlusion of the diverticular neck. Type III choledochal cysts (choledochocele), can be treated in symptomatic cases or young patients without symptoms by sphincterotomy alone in most cases accompanied by a biopsy of the cyst epithelium to exclude dysplasia and identify the type of epithelium lining the cyst as the biliary mucosal lining is associated with a higher risk of malignancy. Cyst marsupialization during ERCP or by marsupialization of the cyst through a transduodenal approach if the cyst is too large.

Caroli disease (Type V CCs) management depends on the extent of the disease. If it is localized or unilobular, then segmental hepatic resection is the best option. If the disease is diffuse or bilobar and symptomatic, then an orthotopic liver transplant is recommended.

For patients with no cyst but an APJ, cholecystectomy is recommended due to the high risk for gallbladder cancer.