As with any surgical procedure, there exists a risk of bleeding or infection. In addition, there is a risk of wound infection, hematoma. Complications that result in significant morbidities include MI, renal dysfunction, and respiratory dysfunction. Late complications include hernias, graft thrombosis, and graft pseudoaneurysms, graft infections, aortoenteric fistulas further discussed below.

Most frequently, (in 50% of cases), cardiac ischemia is responsible for death related to aortic reconstruction, which is because there are seldom patients with normal coronary arteries. Hence the importance of pre-operative screening and treatment and cardiac co-morbidities. Mortality related to cardiac death following surgical intervention is 1% to 2.5% in some centers.

Another common complication following surgery is renal insufficiency. This condition is typically a result of prolonged ischemia after clamping suprarenal, embolization secondary to clamping, hypoperfusion, hypovolemia or intrinsic renal artery disease. Often, this post-operative complication directly relates to the patient's preoperative cardiac and renal function. Knowing your patient's anatomy and having a precise plan preoperatively for clamping help reduce the incidence of renal insufficiency in the perioperative period.

Graft limb thrombosis happens in up to 30% of patients following aortobifemoral bypass. A higher incidence occurs with younger patients, female gender, and extra-anatomic bypasses and those who failed to quit smoking post-operatively. Typically this is unilateral limb thrombosis, which most often occurs due to continuous intimal hyperplasia or outflow disease.

An anastomotic pseudoaneurysm occurs in 1% to 5% of cases as a late complication.Staphylococcus species. Graft infection is associated with high morbidity and mortality.

Aortoenteric fistula is a relatively rare occurrence but tends to be devastating and lethal if it occurs.