# Introduction

In the year 2000, an unidentified hypothalamic neuropeptide found in the quail bird was shown to inhibit gonadotropin hormone release, which researchers later termed gonadotropin-inhibitory hormone (GnIH).

# Cellular Level

The gonadotropin-inhibitory hormone belongs to the family of RFamide related peptides (RFRPs). All RFRPs carry an LPXRF-amide (X represents L or Q) motif at their C termini.

- Inhibiting gonadotropin synthesis and release

- Decreasing the activity of GnRH neurons (to inhibit their effects on gonadotropes)

- Inhibiting reproductive behaviors by its actions on GnRH-II neurons

- Acting in an autocrine/paracrine manner in the gonads.

# Development

In the year 2000, a group of researchers isolated a new hypothalamic neuropeptide which works by inhibiting gonadotropin release, originally identified in the hypothalamus of the Japanese quail bird (Coturnix japonica).

# Organ Systems Involved

The concentration of GnIH is primarily in the dorsomedial hypothalamus (in mammals) and paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (in birds).

# Function

The following are the functions of GnIH:

- Inhibits gonadotropin (FSH and LH) secretion from the anterior pituitary gland

- Inhibits reproduction and reproductive behavior

- Inhibition of gonadal development

- Regulator of steroidogenesis and gametogenesis

- Decreases LH pulse amplitude

- Involved in pubertal delay due to imbalance in the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis (HPG) and hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axes

- Mediates stress-induced reproductive dysfunction

# Mechanism

GnIH binds and stimulates the GPR147 receptor to suppress adenylyl cyclase formation which ultimately suppresses gonadotrope function. The inhibitory effects of GnIH on reproduction is mainly accomplished at the hypothalamic-pituitary level. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons, gonadotropes, and the gonads are major targets of GnIH action based on the interaction and distribution of the GnIH receptor.KISS1 gene in humans).

# Related Testing

Numerous studies have shown the presence of GnIH in several species including non-human primates, vertebrates, mammals, and humans.

# Pathophysiology

GnIH (aka RFamide-related peptide, RFRP) is a recently discovered hypothalamic neuropeptide that regulates reproduction by working on the gonadotropes, GnRH-I and II neurons, and the gonads via the GnIH receptor to exert its functions.

GnIH is believed to be involved in pubertal delay due to imbalances in the hypothalamic axes (HPT and HPG). The thyroid hormones are regulators of development and growth with an important role in pubertal onset.

# Clinical Significance

****LH, FSH, and Gonads****

GnIH induces a significant decrease in the expression of LH and FSH mRNA, as seen in in-vitro studies of quail birds and chickens.

Immunochemistry done on the avian population detected GnIH peptide in the ovary (theca and granulosa cells) and testicle (interstitial, germ, and pseudostratified columnar cells of the epididymis) suggesting the possibility of autocrine/paracrine regulation of gonadal steroid production, germ cell differentiation, and maturation.

Human RFRP-3 (human GnIH) has potential as a therapeutic agent for the treatment of the reproductive cycle and hormone-dependent diseases due to its ability to decrease levels of gonadotropins and steroid hormones.

**Reproductive Behavior**

GnIH may also act in the brain to regulate reproductive behaviors (sexual and aggressive) by controlling the synthesis of neurosteroids. Recent research done on quail suggests that GnIH may affect neurosteroid biosynthesis. GnIH increased neuroestrogen production by stimulation of the cytochrome P450 aromatase through dephosphorylation which subsequently increases aggressive behavior.

In addition, intracerebroventricular (ICV) injection of GnIH in mammals showed reduced sexual behavior in male rats, reduced sexual motivation and vaginal scent marking in hamsters, and altered fos expression in different parts of the hamster brain, which also suggests GnIH has implications in reproductive behavior.

**Thyroid Hormone-Mediated GnIH Regulation**

Thyroid hormones are essential for body growth, brain development, metabolism, and proper function of the reproductive system. Therefore, children with thyroid disorders can experience a delay in pubertal development.

Researchers have conducted molecular studies in an attempt to understand the effect of thyroid hormone on puberty.

**Glucocorticoid and Melatonin-Mediated GnIH Modulation**

Stress is known to inhibit reproductive function mediated via the hypothalamic GnIH system. Studies on birds and mammals have shown that the inhibitory effect of stress on reproductive function becomes mediated by high concentrations of circulating glucocorticoids acting via the GC receptor (GR) and GC response element (GRE) in the GnIH promoter region.

Avian and hamster studies suggest that melatonin also modulates both GnIH expression and release.