The Jodhpur technique is by and large free of any significant complications. Still, one must be aware of the expected peri- and post-operative events, sometimes construed as 'adverse-effects' or complications by the patients, as well as potential complications that may arise in an odd case:

**PERIOPERATIVE**

- **Pain at the recipient and/or donor site**- It rarely causes discomfort, and any troubling painis rare, usually the case of a patient who received local anesthetic agent from a technically dysfunctional batch. But awareness of rare cases of true resistance to local anesthetics, which may be genetic

- **Surgical site infection**- this is uncommon, and the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics can further minimize the possibility started immediately after the procedure.

**DELAYED**

- **Keloid/Hypertrophic scar formation**- Keloid formation is most common in patients who have a keloidal tendency (which may be known or unknown to them), and despite pre-operative work-up, this information does not come to the attention of the dermatology surgeon. Hypertrophic scarring, on the other hand, may occur in rare cases, especially if the healing delays for any reason and if the surgical sites involve the areas around the joints such as the knee or elbow. In either case, 2 to 4 shots of intralesional scar suppressive therapy three times weekly, using triamcinolone, and/or verapamil or 5-fluorouracil with/without silicone sheet compression therapy is often sufficient to resolve this complication.

- **Failure of repigmentation of the recipient site OR healing of CNHU**- This has been observed in only 10 to 15% of the patients only. Partial repigmentation or complete failure of repigmentation after any surgical grafting technique depends on predictable factors like inappropriately/inadequately performed procedure (e.g., superficial or very deep dermabrasion, delay in starting or delivery of suboptimal phototherapy energy) as well as the unpredictable factor of individual skin response. A second session may be curative, but needs further investigation for confirmation.

- **Koebnerization at the donor site in vitiligo patients -**This is also extremely rare, and is expected to happen only if the pre-operative evaluation regarding patient's fitness for surgery (irrespective of the technique used) has occurred in haste or inadequately (vide supra).