Paragangliomas are a rare type of catecholamine secreting neuroendocrine tumors or neoplasms that originate during the neural crest cell migration.

Parasympathetic paragangliomas located in the skull base are usually non-secretory, and less than 5% secrete catecholamines and may become symptomatic. Sympathetic paragangliomas mainly secrete norepinephrine and may arise anywhere from the skull base, along the sympathetic chain to the pelvis, primarily located in the abdomen nearly 75 to 80% of all paragangliomas and always secrete norepinephrine causing symptoms similar to that caused by pheochromocytoma. A small percentage of 5 to 10% may present in the bladder or prostate.

Glomus jugulotympanicum paraganglioma is usually a single tumor that appears sporadically, but it rarely arises by familial autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. It typically appears in the 60s, and it may involve cranial nerves (CN) IX, X, XI, and XII and cause paralysis in the affected nerve distribution. Prognosis is poor and may require embolization, surgical removal, and radiotherapy. Jugular-tympanic paragangliomas can be diagnosed early due to classic symptoms of pulsatile tinnitus with or without conductive hearing loss. Glomus vagale is the rare but most common solitary tumor of post-styloid parapharyngeal space (PPS) causes hoarseness and mass effect due to vocal cord paralysis. It pushes the internal jugular vein posterolaterally and the internal carotid artery anteromedially. CT scan and MRI are very sensitive for the diagnosis due to the increased vascularity of this tumor. Treatment is usually surgical resection but carries a high risk of deficits in the tenth cranial nerve distribution. Carotid body mass is generally located at the carotid bifurcation and displaces the external carotid artery anteromedially and internal carotid artery posterolaterally.