The nuclear imaging is used to evaluate the cardiac function and myocardial perfusion to rule out ischemic cardiomyopathy. It is also useful in restrictive heart diseases, especially in cardiac sarcoidosis and amyloidosis and in the diagnosis of the hypertrophic cardiomyopathy HCM. Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography (PET) are beneficial in the workup for cardiomyopathies. SPECT can help in the evaluation of wall mobility, thickness, and cardiac ischemia. PET is helpful to evaluate cardiac ischemia and inflammation.

In DCM, SPECT myocardial perfusion scintigraphy (MPS) and PET can help to differentiate the ischemic versus nonischemic etiology of the cardiomyopathy. In nonischemic cardiomyopathy, the SPECT MPS shows a good distribution of the blood flow compared to the ischemic CM where there is a decrease in blood distribution due to the ischemia.

In HCM, the perfusion Imaging can demonstrate thickened asymmetric septum or apex, and shows fixed reversible defects without evidence of coronary artery disease. The Thallium-201 can help to detect reversible exercise-induced defects in the left ventricle.

In cardiac sarcoidosis cardiac, fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET scan is considered an important test to establish the diagnosis. FDG PET can show focal areas of increased uptake which represents areas of inflammation. These appear as patchy infiltrates on the scan.

In cardiac amyloidosis, the MIBG SPECT helps for early detection of the myocardium denervation before the incidence of amyloid deposition that leads to heart disease. The use of PET is still limited in the use of work up for cardiac amyloidosis.

In arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), abnormal 123I-MIBG SPECT uptake is related to increased risk of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias.