# Continuing Education Activity

A cerebral cavernous malformation (CCM) is an abnormally large collection of "low flow" vascular channels without brain parenchyma intervening between the sinusoidal vessels. Clinically, cerebral cavernous malformations have highly variable presentations. Adding to the confusion, they are also referred to as cavernomas, cavernous angiomas, and cavernous hemangiomas, though CCM is the preferred nomenclature. CCMs range in diameter from under a millimeter to several centimeters and may occur anywhere in the central nervous system with up to 20 percent located in the brainstem. CCM may be diagnosed in both young children and adults and may develop de novo or even regress spontaneously during a patient’s lifetime. Thorough knowledge of the natural history of this entity is of paramount importance to avoid unnecessary and potentially morbid interventions. Given the heterogeneity of this condition, the ontogenesis, diagnosis, management strategies for CCM are subjects of ongoing debate and treatment paradigms continue to evolve. This activity reviews the pathogenesis, diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment of cerebral cavernous malformations and emphasizes the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the most common signs and symptoms in patients with cerebral cavernous malformations.
- Summarize the diagnostic studies for cerebral cavernous malformations.
- Review how to thoroughly evaluate a patient with a new diagnosis of cerebral cavernous malformation.
- Explain the role of interprofessional, patient-centered care in the management of patients with cerebral cavernous malformations.

# Introduction

Cerebral cavernous malformations (CCMs) are abnormally large collections of "low flow" vascular channels without brain parenchyma intervening between the sinusoidal vessels.

CCM may be diagnosed in both young children and adults and may develop de novo or even regress spontaneously during a patient’s lifetime. A thorough understanding of the natural history of this entity is of paramount importance to avoid unnecessary and potentially morbid interventions. Given the heterogeneity of this condition, the ontogenesis, diagnosis, management strategies for CCMs are subjects of ongoing debate among neuroscientists and treatment paradigms continue to evolve.

# Etiology

Experts do not fully understand the pathogenesis of CCMs, but the genetic underpinnings have been clarified in recent years. The majority of CCMs are sporadic, but up to 20% follow a familial, autosomal dominant inheritance pattern characterized by the presence of multiple CCMs in a single patient.CCM1, CCM2, and CCM3.**.**Many authors have proposed a "two-hit" hypothesis of familial CCM wherein epigenetic or environmental exposure (the second hit) results in CCM gene loss-of-function and may account for the proclivity of these lesions to accumulate over time and with exposure to radiation.

CCM protein products interact with each other and other cellular machinery responsible for a range of functions including cell-cell communication and angiogenesis. The most critical dysfunction found in CCM mutants is endothelial junction permeability, an effect mediated by Notch1 and Rho kinase activity.

# Epidemiology

CCMs are the second most common incidental vascular finding – after aneurysms – on brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), with a prevalence of 1 in 625 neurologically asymptomatic people.

# Pathophysiology

The propensity for intra-lesional and extra-lesional hemorrhage is the chief mechanism underlying the clinical manifestations of CCM. Sluggish blood flow through dysplastic channels results in recurrent thrombosis, calcification, and deposition of hemosiderin along the margins of the lesion. Hemorrhage into adjacent brain parenchyma can produce focal neurologic deficits (FND), seizure, or a headache prompting the patient to present for evaluation. Clinical and lifestyle risk factors for a first symptomatic episode of CCM hemorrhage are unknown, but risk factors for re-hemorrhage are well-studied.****which alters conduction adjacent white matter pathways. The observation that seizure-free outcomes are improved when the entire lesion, including the surrounding hemosiderin rim, is resected, supports this.

# Histopathology

Histopathologically, CCMs are well-circumscribed, multilobate vascular lesions consisting of sinusoidal channels lined by a single layer of epithelium, devoid of smooth muscle and lacking intervening brain parenchyma. On gross inspection, cavernous malformations appear "mulberry-like."

# History and Physical

While the clinical presentation of symptomatic cavernous malformations varies by location, the most common clinical manifestations are seizures (50%), intracranial hemorrhage (25%), and focal neurological deficits (FND) without radiographic evidence of recent hemorrhage (25%).CCM1, CCM2, and CCM3 should be considered. Given the autosomal dominant nature of CCM inheritance, appropriate counseling regarding familial risk is warranted, and risk-benefit discussion regarding testing asymptomatic relatives should be offered.

# Evaluation

The American College of Radiology (ACR) Appropriateness Criteria provide expert consensus recommendations for acute neurologic symptoms including a headache, FND, altered consciousness.

The hemosiderin rim lining the margins of CCMs generates a profound signal void on gradient-echo MRI due to the ferromagnetic dephasing of proton spins. The effect is a striking signal void or "blooming" artifact on gradient echo or susceptibility-weighted sequences (SWI) which is easily detected but can overestimate the actual size of the lesion. MRI has, therefore, become the gold standard tool for the diagnosis and staging of CCM. Guidelines for imaging follow-up of known CCM are not well-established, but it is generally recommended that new symptoms warrant repeat imaging to assess for acute or subacute hemorrhage.

CCMs are characteristically angiographically occult lesions due to the slow transit of blood via the dysplastic channels save for the frequently associated developmental venous anomalies (DVA). CT angiography and digital subtraction angiography are therefore of limited utility in the workup of CCM however they may show indirect evidence of CCM by highlighting adjacent DVAs which typically enhance and opacify briskly on angiogram.

CCM may present on non-contrast head CT (NCCT) as amorphous calcifications, but further imaging with MRI is warranted to confirm the diagnosis unless contraindicated. The principal role of NCCT is the identification of hemorrhage in symptomatic patients. The Angioma Alliance has defined standard definitions of CCM-related hemorrhage and recommended reporting criteria to improve diagnostic consistency and accuracy among neuroimagers and clinicians.

Advanced MR imaging is playing an increasingly important role in the management of surgically complex CCM. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) has been used to identify critical white matter tracts in preoperative planning for brainstem CCM.

# Treatment / Management

Location is the most important factor that determines the natural history of CCM.

Surgical excision is the only definitive treatment for CCM but the decision to operate remains challenging as postoperative morbidity may approach or exceed the complications of the untreated disease.

CCMs located in the deep gray nuclei and brainstem pose a much greater challenge. Studies using diffusion tensor imaging and diffusion tensor tractography have shown that up to 82% of patients with brainstem lesions have involvement of corticospinal tract and other major fiber tracts

The technical goal of surgery should be, at a minimum, complete lesionectomy.

Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) has long served as an alternative to surgery in symptomatic patients with anatomically foreboding lesions or unfavorable risk profile. SRS is highly accurate and allows targeted delivery of high-dose radiation (typically 11 to 15 Gy) with sparing of adjacent, healthy brain parenchyma. The mechanism of therapeutic SRS is uncertain; lesion size may decrease, remain stable, or even increase and there is no reliable imaging biomarker for successful CCM obliteration as with metastasis and high-flow vascular lesions.

CCM is a surgical disease, and the role of medical management is limited but the subject of much ongoing laboratory research. Preclinical animal model studies have recently shown that both statins and targeted Rho-kinase inhibitors may reduce symptoms and lesion progression.

The risks of surgical morbidity should be weighed against the natural history of the disease. While microsurgical resection is curative for intractable cases, most patients with supratentorial cavernous malformations are managed conservatively either with radiographic and clinical observation alone or in addition to anti-epileptic drugs, as the current first-line management strategy.

# Differential Diagnosis

Classic CCM rarely poses a diagnostic dilemma as the radiographic differential diagnosis for isolated T2* artifact, a non-enhancing lesion on MRI is limited. When numerous small CCM are present, as is often the case with familial CCM, the differential diagnosis is broad and includes other etiologies of diffuse cerebral microbleeds including cerebral amyloid angiopathy, chronic hypertension, and hemorrhagic or previously treated metastases, among others. Lesion calcification, which can be detected on routine non-contrast head CT, favors the diagnosis of CCM over other types of microbleed. Finally, the co-existence of a developmental venous anomaly (DVA) strongly supports the diagnosis of CCM.

# Staging

The most widely accepted tool for grading CCM was derived from early observations by Zabramski et al. on the MR manifestations of hemorrhage within the lesion.

# Prognosis

The natural history of CCM has been characterized in several large studies.CCM3 mutants in contrast with a more benign clinical course in CCM1 deletions.

# Complications

The risks and benefits of surgical or radiotherapeutic intervention must be assessed on a case-by-case basis, and the prospective risks of untreated CCM must be balanced with the anticipated morbidity of intervention. The overall mortality associated with CCM hemorrhage is low, estimated at 2.2%, but progressive neurologic deficits can accumulate and reduce a patient's quality of life.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Although there are no guidelines on the role of anti-epileptics following surgical resection of CCM, patients are typically maintained on anti-epileptic monotherapy following surgery.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with CCM are encouraged to explore the official website of the multidisciplinary Angioma Alliance (AA). The Angioma Alliance is dedicated to providing up-to-date patient resources including educational videos.

Information is provided regarding genetic testing, participation in ongoing clinical research, and tissue banking. The Angioma Alliance also provides social support via online forums and social media sites allowing patients and family members to support one another and share their experiences with CCM.

# Pearls and Other Issues

RhoA/Rho kinase pathway is seen as a potential target for the pharmacotherapeutic treatment of cavernous malformations. Normally, CCM2 and CCM1 act together to suppress RhoA. CCM1 and CCM2 deficiency lead to constitutively active Rho-kinase (ROCK), which destabilizes endothelial cell junctions and vascular permeability.

While CCM1, CCM2 or CCM3 deficiencies have been shown to activate bone morphogenic protein (BMP) and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) causing an endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EndoMT), inhibiting either BMP or TGF-beta was found to decrease the lesion burden in CCM-1 deficient mice representing another avenue of research in CCM therapy.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Comprehensive care for CCM requires an interprofessional effort involving neurosurgeons, epileptologists, neuroradiologists, mental health professionals, specialty certified nurses, and genetic counselors.

Given the complexity of this disease and its frequent presentation as an incidental finding, patient counseling and risk profile assessment should be performed at the time of diagnosis. Familial CCM follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern; thus, there is consensus agreement that detailed family history/pedigree and consideration of genetic screening for common mutations should be considered (Class I/Level C).

Neuroradiology reports should adhere to established reporting guidelines for CCM which clarify the clinical-radiologic correlation of symptoms and imaging findings.

Evidence-based consensus guidelines for management have been described and are described in detail elsewhere (see references