# Continuing Education Activity

High-pressure injection injuries of the hand occur when the hand comes into contact with the nozzle of a high-pressure injecting system such as a paint gun or air compressor. The material injected can traverse from the hand to the forearm and upper arm. This injury commonly occurs in male construction workers. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of high-pressure injection injuries and highlights the importance of an interprofessional approach to reducing morbidity.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of high-pressure injection injuries of the hand.
- Describe the evaluation of high-pressure injection injuries of the hand.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for high-pressure injection injuries of the hand.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to improve outcomes for patients affected by high-pressure injection injuries of the hand.

# Introduction

High-pressure injection injuries are one of several orthopedic injuries that require urgent evaluation and treatment. Notoriously, these injuries appear to be benign puncture wounds at initial presentation. However, the zone of injury can extend subcutaneously from the tip of the finger to the mediastinum and have catastrophic effects on the affected extremity. Although relatively rare, high-pressure injection injury is well-described in the current literature, with the first case report dating back to 1937. Patients often present for evaluation at trauma centers, but this is not exclusive. This article provides an overview of the injury and the current literature on management and prognostic factors.

# Etiology

Injection injuries of the hand commonly occur when the patient is cleaning the nozzle of a high pressured spray gun, and the gun misfires. This can also happen when the patient's skin comes in contact with a leak in the high pressured piping. The force generated by many of the modern high-pressure cleaning tools can reach up to 10000 psi and spray the contents at 400 mph.

# Epidemiology

High-pressure injection injuries account for approximately 1 of every 600 hand traumas presenting to the emergency department. The average trauma center may see 1 to 4 cases per year.

The infection rates of high-pressure injection injuries are inconsistently reported in the literature.  This may be because cultures are not routinely obtained except for when signs of infections are exhibited. A review by Hogan et al. found that only 126 of 435 patients obtained wound cultures and 53 of these cultures were positive.  Of the patients with positive cultures in this review, 31% of patients required amputation of the affected limb.

# Pathophysiology

To fully understand the treatment and prognosis, one must separate this injury into three phases. The first phase includes the direct mechanical impact of injection: pressure-induced neurovascular compromise, edema, and possible compartment syndrome. As mentioned above, thousands of pounds of pressure can be transmitted through the nozzle and directly into the patient's hand and upper extremity. The high-pressure injection not only tears ligaments, tendons, and neurovascular structure but also causes osseous lesions in rare cases. The injected material or air rapidly flows around the neurovascular bundle, following the path of least resistance. The injection can reach as proximally as the mediastinum.

The second phase of high-pressure injection injury is the inflammatory sequela and chemical interaction of injected media with biologic substrates. Grease, paint, fuel, plastic, cement, and hydraulic fluid are examples of substances that may get injected into the extremity. Some of these materials, such as turpentine and other organic solvents, are extremely cytotoxic to the tissues and offer an overall poor prognosis. Oil-based paints have been reported to be more inflammatory than water-soluble acrylic-based paints. Turpentine and other paint thinners generally function by dissolving fats and can cause liquefaction of the tissues.

The third phase of high-pressure injection injury is the secondary microbial infection due to direct bacterial inoculation, potentially intensified necrosis precipitated by phases 1 and 2. This phase is relatively rare, ranging from 1.6% to 60% of cases reported in the literature, and is often polymicrobial.

# History and Physical

Patients often present to the emergency department directly from an industrial job site with complaints of swelling, pain, and a small puncture wound on the affected hand. The physical exam may appear benign and initially deceive the practitioner. Weider et al. found that patients see several different physicians with an average of 9 hours before obtaining the correct diagnosis.

The patient's history should help guide the evaluation of the affected extremity, but a full secondary exam is also necessary. Dedicated evaluation of the forearm, elbow, upper arm, and axilla is imperative to assess the proximal extent of the injury. Range of motion, skin discoloration, pulses, and a complete neurologic examination are prudent. Serial examinations of the compartments are also crucial as compartment syndrome can occur hours after the injury as the second injury phase leads to further inflammation and edema.

# Evaluation

In the emergency department, there are several tools to help reveal the diagnosis and extent of the injury. An elevated white blood cell count is expected a few hours after the injury but can be useful in tracking the progression of the inflammatory phase or any secondary infection. Plain radiographs will clearly define the extent of penetration if the substance injected is radiopaque. Radiolucent material will not be visible on plain radiographs but may appear as subcutaneous emphysema. CT and MRI can be helpful with an assessment of soft tissue damage but are usually not necessary.

# Treatment / Management

Upon presentation for medical treatment, the patient should receive a tetanus booster if needed and a prophylactic third-generation cephalosporin antibiotic for coverage of both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria.

Steroids have been historically used to reduce inflammation, but currently, their use in the acute setting is controversial because of the theoretical increased risk of bacterial super-infection.

Early surgical debridement is critical for controlling the inflammatory response, decompressing the compartments, and reducing the risk of long-term morbidity.

Injection injuries with air, water, or high pressured veterinarian vaccines can be treated non-surgically with close observation.

# Differential Diagnosis

In the acute setting, the patient will most likely disclose that his hand was normal before the injury. The differential diagnosis in this scenario includes a crush injury to the hand, fractures of the hand and digits, compartment syndrome of the hand, or just a localized benign laceration of the digit or palm. If the patient presents to the emergency department several days after the initial injury, then one must also be suspicious for flexor tenosynovitis or other infections of the digits and hand.

# Prognosis

The prognosis is dependent on the following factors: time to debridement, the material injected, extent, and location of soft tissue injury, and the magnitude of pressure the device released.   These four factors should be the surgeon's focus when managing a patient with a high-pressure injection injury.

There is not a consensus on how urgently one must perform the initial debridement. However, there have been several studies that demonstrate increased morbidity with delays to the operating room. Hogan et al. found that patients injected with organic solvents showed a higher rate of amputation when initial debridement took place after 6 hours.

The material injected is arguably the most important factor when managing these patients and determining overall prognosis. Organic solvents such as turpentine, diesel fuel, and some forms of paint have detrimental effects on the surrounding soft tissue.   One study demonstrated that amputation was necessary for 80% of patients with turpentine injections but only 20% of patients with grease injections.

The location of the injection injury has also been shown to affect the risk of amputation. Hogan demonstrated a sixfold higher risk of amputation of the fingers compared to the palm and thumb.

It is unclear if there is a pressure threshold to determine the absolute indication for surgical amputation. However, multiple studies have reported an increased risk of amputation with higher pressured injuries.

# Complications

Complications of this injury can be a loss of range of motion or function of the extremity, associated bacterial infections, chronic granulomas, necrosis, or loss of limb. There are reports that chronic pain, hypersensitivities, paresthesias, motor dysfunction, and contractures can ensue.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Postoperative management is mostly dependent on the location, severity of the injury, and extent of debridement. The two primary goals are to promote wound healing and regain the function of the affected limb. The process of wound healing is variable based on size and contamination, but the use of whirlpool therapy, wet-to-dry dressings, and vacuum-assisted closure devices are options at the surgeon's discretion. Splinting the affected area can also be effective at reducing the motion across the wound and promoting wound healing. The second goal of restoration of function is only achievable with aggressive physical and occupational therapy. If the patient requires an amputation during the treatment, then prosthetic training is also necessary to regain function of the extremity.

# Consultations

When treating severe high-pressure injection injuries requiring amputation of the extremity, one should consider a second opinion and evaluation from a hand specialist. The treating surgeon should consider a consultation infectious disease specialist to follow along the perioperative course to help minimize and control any superinfection that arises. Furthermore, a toxicologist consultation can enhance the clinicians' understanding of the local and systemic effects of the injected substance during the treatment course.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients operating high-pressure spraying equipment professionally or privately should receive education on the risk of this injury. One must be attentive when cleaning the device because this is the most common time injection injury occurs. The affected hand can look deceivingly benign after the initial injury, yet patients must remain concerned. It is recommended to immediately go to the nearest hospital with a surgeon on staff that can properly evaluate high-pressure injection injury.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Having an interprofessional approach is key to the successful management of this injury. Clinicians in the emergency department must be familiar with this injury because it is easily overlooked, and prompt antibiotics and tetanus are paramount at preventing concomitant infection. Having a high index of suspicion will decrease the time to a definitive diagnosis and operative treatment if needed. The treating surgeon may need to take the patient to the operating room several times to clear the material and compromised tissue. As mentioned previously, co-management from infectious disease, toxicology, and hand specialists may enhance the treatment plan. The nursing staff and on-call physician will need to closely monitor the patient perioperatively and coordinate care and patient education to prevent any complications such as compartment syndrome or super-infection. Postoperatively, physical and occupational therapy play an especially important role in preventing contractures, increasing range of motion, and performing activities of daily living. Open, interprofessional communication between all of these different health care providers is critical to limiting morbidity from this injury. [Level 5]