Hepatitis C is a serious infection that has high morbidity and mortality. The management of HCV is prohibitively expensive, and newer antivirals offer a potential cure for the disorder. The infection is best managed by an interprofessional team, including nurses and pharmacists. All clinicians who see patients with HCV should educate them and advise them against the use of alcohol, which is known to accelerate the progression of the infection. Also, the infectious disease nurse should provide basic sex education and inform these patients that they may transmit the virus to their partners during sexual intercourse. Additionally, these patients should avoid sharing personal care products with others. The patients should be told not to donate blood or any organs as the risk of transmission is high.

The key is that many advances have taken place in the treatment of hepatitis C, which can eradicate the virus, shorten the duration of treatment, and hopefully prevent hepatocellular cancer. The board-certified infectious disease pharmacist should educate the patients about the newer antiviral drugs which are effective in eradicating the virus. Following treatment with the newer drugs, monitoring is still necessary to ensure compliance; here again, nursing can step to the front, alerting the clinician of any issues. Current short-term data indicate that the drugs can eliminate the virus from the bloodstream.

Only through open communication between members of the interprofessional team will the morbidity and mortality of this infection be reduced. [Level 5]