The diagnosis is based on history, clinical context, physical findings, and laboratory testing. Standard tests in the emergency department are thyroid studies (including free thyroxine (T4), T3 and thyroid-stimulating hormone levels (TSH), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein along with other tests as needed based on patient presentation. All patients have laboratory evidence of hyperthyroidism-mildly elevated serum free T4 and T3 and low TSH concentrations during the early stages of illness. This hyperthyroidism is transient and lasts for 2 to 8 weeks, followed by a period of transient, asymptomatic, or sometimes subclinical hypothyroidism. The interpretation of labs should be based on detailed history and examination findings.

Patients with de Quervain thyroiditis will often have elevated ESR (50-100) and CRP levels, along with elevated thyroglobulin concentrations, anemia, and mild leukocytosis. Liver function tests can be abnormal during the initial hyperthyroid phase and return to normal after 2 to 3 months. Levels of antithyroid peroxidase and antithyroglobulin antibodies are generally undetectable or low normal. Because patients often present with a fever, a septic workup is usually done. EKG should be performed in the presence of tachycardia.

The hyperthyroidism found in de Quervain can be differentiated from Graves disease by the lack of exophthalmos and pretibial myxedema. It also has a mild elevation of serum T3 and normal thyroid vascularity on ultrasonography.

The thyroid gland might be slightly enlarged or normal with a diffuse or focal hypoechogenic appearance on ultrasonography. The presence of ill-defined hypoechoic thyroid lesions without a round or oval shape is diagnostic for subacute thyroiditis in the proper clinical setting.

Subacute thyroiditis is a clinical diagnosis. Neck pain with tender thyroid gland on the exam is sufficient enough to establish the diagnosis. Signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism may be present or not. The diagnosis is confirmed with low TSH, elevated free T4, T3, ESR, C-reactive protein, and low radioiodine uptake. Radioiodine imaging can be deferred in a mild hyperthyroid state from subacute thyroiditis. Thyroid ultrasonography can help identify cysts, abscesses, or mass lesions in patients with less apparent clinical presentation and examination findings. Doppler sonography can help distinguish from Graves' disease; rarely, needle aspiration is required to distinguish from lymphoma, thyroid cancer, and hemorrhage.