- Tablets (50 mg, 100 mg, 300 mg)

- Elixir (50 mg/5 mL)

- Aqueous solution (100 mg/mL) for intravenous or intramuscular injection

- 5 mg/kg (maximum dose 300 mg)

- Tablets (100 mg, 400 mg)

Based on estimated lean body weight

- Patient weight 40 to 55 kg: 800 mg (14.5 to 20 mg/kg)

- Patient weight 56 to 75 kg: 1200 mg (16 to 21.4 mg/kg)

- Patient weight 76 to 90 kg: 1600 mg (17.8 to 21.1 mg/kg)

Renal dysfunction with creatinine clearance <30 mL/min (by Cockroft-Gault equation) or requiring intermittent hemodialysis, dosing consists of 20 to 25 mg/kg (ideal body weight) per dose orally 3 times a week.

1600 mg is the maximum dose regardless of weight.

- Capsules (150 mg, 300 mg)

- Aqueous solution for intravenous injection

- 10 mg/kg (maximum dose 600 mg)

- Capsule (150 mg)

- 5 mg/kg (maximum dose 300 mg)

- Tablet (500 mg)

Based on estimated lean body weight

- Patient weight 40 to 55 kg: 1000 mg (18.2 to 25 mg/kg)

- Patient weight 56 to 75 kg: 1500 mg (20 to 26.8 mg/kg)

- Patient weight 76 to 90 kg: 2000 mg (22.2 to 26.3 mg/kg)

Renal dysfunction with creatinine clearance <30 mL/min (by Cockroft-Gault equation) or requiring intermittent hemodialysis, dosing consists of 25 to 35 mg/kg (ideal body weight) per dose orally 3 times a week.

Patients weighing more than 90 kg should have serum concentration monitoring.

Weight-based dosing is likely best based on measurements of ideal (versus total) body weight in obese patients.

**Table 1. First-line drugs for the treatment of CNS tuberculosis**

15 mg/kg IM or IV once daily (maximum dose 1 g) adjusted according to serum concentrations.

Alternative: 25 mg/kg IM or IV three times per week.

Target trough <1 mcg/mL and target peak of 56 to 64 mcg/mL for once-a-day administration.

5 to 7 days a week, depending on disease severity

The initial duration of therapy is at least 2 to 3 months. After documentation of culture conversion, 3-days-per-week dosing can be used for the remaining duration of injectable use (normally through at least six months beyond culture conversion).

Pyridoxine (100 mg orally once daily) may be used to prevent or reduce peripheral neuropathy.

Start with 250 mg once daily and increase gradually as tolerated is recommended.

**Table 2. Second-line antituberculosis drugs in adults**