As already indicated, the diagnosis of corneal epithelial microsporidiosis is mainly clinical; however, corneal scraping for direct smear helps to make a definitive diagnosis.

Considering the inability to culture the microsporidia in any culture media, the direct smear findings become more important. Microsporidia spores stain well with Gram stain, silver stain, and 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) with 0.1% calcofluor white. For stromal microsporidial keratitis, the diagnosis is difficult to make. Because of deep stromal infiltrates, the corneal scraping may not help in this condition. A corneal biopsy or therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty in chronic culture-negative keratitis is a valid option to reach the diagnosis. The biopsy or excised corneal button is subjected to histopathological evaluation to get a tissue diagnosis. In the microsporidial keratoconjunctivitis anterior segment, optical coherence tomography (ASOCT) shows hyperreflective raised dots at the level of epithelium.

The microsporidia are obligate intracellular organisms and are not amenable to culture in routine media, and require cell cultures to grow. Initially, a pan microsporidian primer-guided test is done to ascertain the microsporidia; subsequently, species-specific PCR (polymerase chain reaction) is run to identify the species. Polymerase chain reaction with known sequenced pan-microsporidial primers has a sensitivity of 83% and specificity of 98%.

Blast search and DNA sequencing are also being used apart from pan-microsporidial PCR.