The lungs are paired organs (right and left). The right and left mainstem bronchus from the respective lung join together at the carina to form the central trachea. Each lung has three surfaces that include the costal, medial, and the inferior or diaphragmatic surface. A serous membrane encloses each lung called pleura, which has two layers; the outer (parietal pleura) and the inner (visceral pleura). The right lung is shorter and wider than the left lung, and the left lung occupies a smaller volume than the right.

The right lung consists of upper, middle, and lower lobes, whereas the left lung has only upper and lower lobes. The lingula in the left lung is part of the upper lobe. The right lobe is divided by a horizontal (which divides the upper and middle lobe) and the oblique fissure (which divides the middle and lower lobes). In the left lobe, there is only an oblique fissure that divides the upper and lower lobe.

Each lobe of the right and the left lung is made up of several individual structurally ad functionally independent units called the bronchopulmonary segments. There are a total of 18 bronchopulmonary segments; 10 on the right and 8 on the left. Each segment has its own separate artery, segmental bronchus, autonomic nerves, and lymph vessels.

The hilum or root of the lung lies on the medial part where the visceral and parietal pleura meet. The pulmonary vasculature and the bronchi enter and exit from the lung through the hilum. The pulmonary arteries ( right and left) carry deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle to the lungs. The pulmonary veins (4 in number) carry oxygenated blood from the lungs to the left side of the heart. For recipient pneumonectomy, each of these need to be identified, completely dissected, transected, and stapled.

Lung resections can be anatomical like segmentectomy, lobectomy, or pneumonectomy (depending upon the extent of the lung removed) or non-anatomic in the form of wedge resection.

Lungs suitable for transplantation are harvested from brain-dead donors (BDD) or after the declaration of circulatory death (DCD). Traditionally, lungs have been preserved in ice using cold static preservation before transfer to the recipient hospital for transplantation. However, due to the lack of ideal lung donors in the majority of cases and the recent findings that cold static preservation leads to exaggerated ischemia-reperfusion injury, lungs are now being transported in normothermic perfused condition. For this purpose, ex vivo lung perfusion has been recently developed for transport as well as evaluation and reconditioning of the donor's lungs before transplantation.