Viloxazine has been shown to be metabolized by the hepatic enzyme CYP2D6. One study was performed to investigate if there were any interactions between viloxazine and paroxetine, a CYP2D6 inhibitor. The study reported no severe drug interactions or adverse effects when both drugs were co-administered.

Viloxazine is metabolized by the CYP1A2 enzyme. Care is necessary when it is co-administered with other drugs metabolized by this enzyme.

In one study, a small percentage of children who were being treated with viloxazine for ADHD versus a placebo reported suicidal ideation in addition to anxiety, irritability, mania, aggression, panic attacks, and impulsive behavior.

In addition, the drug affects norepinephrine levels in the brain, increases diastolic blood pressure and heart rate, and can stimulate manic episodes in patients who have previously been diagnosed with bipolar disorders. The clinical study also shows that viloxazine induces nausea, vomiting, and drowsiness. Patients operating heavy machinery or driving a vehicle should exercise caution before performing these duties while taking viloxazine.

Finally, pregnant patients or those trying to become g pregnant should discontinue viloxazine. In animal studies, viloxazine resulted in fetus injury and poor development in the rat model at 400 mg. In another rabbit model, viloxazine caused maternal injury with fetal injury at seven times the maximum human dosage of 400 mg. Administration of viloxazine orally to pregnant and lactating mice caused maternal injury and death at 1 and 2 times the maximum human dosage of 400 mg. These dosages can lead to fetal injury.