Muscle tone decrease throughout body during normal sleep and relaxation of upper airway dialtor muscles results in relative narrowing of air passage. The normal persons will not develop any significant symptoms due to this physiological phenomenon.

In patients with Sleep disorder the upper airway narrowing result in marked air flow turbulence with repetitive partial or complete obstruction of the pharynx during sleep. Despite increasing breathing efforts the upper airway collapse results in episodes of obstructive hypopneas or apneas affecting the sleep architecture.

Neuromuscular activity in the Upper Airway(UA), including reflex activity, decreases with sleep and this decrease may be more pronounced in patients with OSA. Reduced ventilatory motor output to upper airway muscles is believed to be the critical initiating event leading to UA obstruction; this effect is most pronounced in patients with a UA predisposed to collapse for anatomical reasons.

The Bernoulli effect plays an important dynamic role in OSA pathophysiology. By this effect, airflow velocity increases at the site of stricture in the airway. As airway velocity increases, pressure on the lateral wall decreases. If the transmural closing pressure is reached, the airway collapses. Transmural pressure is the difference between intraluminal pressure and the surrounding tissue pressure.

This effect helps to partially explain why obese patients, particularly those with fat deposition in the neck, are most likely to have OSA.

OSA has been confirmed to be a causal factor in the pathogenesis of vascular dysfunction and hypertension.