Glycopyrronium reduces the body's ability to sweat. Therefore, it may cause hyperthermia and heat stroke in hot environments. Other observed adverse effects include dry mouth, difficulty urinating, headaches, diarrhea, and constipation. Monitor heart rate and maintain adequate hydration to avoid adverse events.

A dose adjustment may be necessary if urinary retention occurs. Existing renal impairment may be further complicated. In the general population, usage may increase the risk of confusion, hallucinations, and anticholinergic effects.

Use glycopyrrolate with caution in patients with a hiatal hernia and reflux esophagitis. It can worsen prostatic hyperplasia symptoms and/or bladder neck destruction as it may increase urinary retention. In ulcerative colitis cases, a high dose may inhibit intestinal motility and worsen toxic megacolon or ileus symptoms. Glycopyrrolate administration is contraindicated in patients with ulcerative colitis. Since gastrointestinal motility may decline, constipation or intestinal pseudo-obstruction may occur. If the latter condition arises, it may result in pain from abdominal distention, nausea, or vomiting. If intestinal obstruction of any type is suspected, it is imperative to discontinue use and simultaneously reevaluate. Symptoms presenting as diarrhea, particularly in patients who have undergone bowel resections of the ileum or colon, warrant a lower threshold for clinical suspicion. When an obstruction is suspected, or if the patient has diarrhea, promptly discontinue treatment.

Because of its quaternary structure, glycopyrrolate cannot cross the blood-brain barrier and is almost devoid of the central nervous system and ophthalmic activity. Potent inhibition of salivary gland and respiratory tract secretions is the primary rationale for using glycopyrrolate as a premedication. Heart rate usually increases after intravenous administration but not intramuscular.