**Oral Candidiasis**

Management of candidiasis involves maintaining proper oral and denture hygiene, evaluating and correcting predisposing factors, and selecting an appropriate antifungal agent.

Topical clotrimazole is the first line of treatment for candidiasis in adults. Nystatin suspension is most commonly used for infants.

**Aspergillosis**

Surgical debridement alone is sufficient for treating non-invasive aspergilloma in immunocompetent individuals. Surgical debridement and corticosteroid therapy is the treatment for allergic fungal sinusitis. Debridement followed by administration of voriconazole is the treatment for immunocompetent individuals with localized aspergillosis. Aggressive debridement and systemic antifungal therapy with voriconazole, itraconazole, or amphotericin B can be given for immunosuppressed patients with invasive aspergillosis.

**Mucormycosis**

Management involves surgical debridement of the necrotic tissue followed by administration of systemic antifungals like liposomal amphotericin B. Prosthetic obturator, or surgical closure, is the treatment for oronasal communication.

**Histoplasmosis**

Histoplasmosis is self-limited in immunocompetent patients. Intravenous amphotericin B is given for treating pulmonary histoplasmosis in immunosuppressed patients. Itraconazole can be given for localized infection, mild to moderate cases, and relapse prevention.

**Blastomycosis**

Itraconazole is the first-line therapy in non-life-threatening conditions. Systemic administration of amphotericin B may be essential only in patients with immunosuppression.

**Cryptococcosis**

Localized cryptococcosis infection without any underlying systemic immunodeficiency can be treated with oral fluconazole. Cryptococcal meningitis is treated with amphotericin B and flucytosine in three phases: induction, consolidation, and maintenance.

**Paracoccidioidomycosis**

Patients with oral paracoccidioidomycosis are treated with oral itraconazole or ketoconazole.

**Geotrichosis**

Treatment of oral Geotrichosis is similar to that of oral candidiasis.