Advanced Trauma Life Support principles remain the same whether the patient is non-gravid or full-term.  As always, taking care of the maternal patient will, in turn, take care of the fetus. The best early treatment of the fetus is the optimal resuscitation of the mother. Upon determining of gravidity consultation with obstetrics is critical. Nearly all female patients between the ages of 10 and 55 years warrant Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) testing. Transfer to an appropriate trauma center with applicable obstetrical specialized care has demonstrated improved maternal and neonatal outcomes post injury as opposed to non trauma centers.

The positioning of the patient to avoid or alleviate aortocaval compression syndrome, also known as a supine hypotensive syndrome, may be necessary. Woman in the second and third trimester should thus be placed onto their left side with a 15-degree bump or roll placed behind them for support to assist in displacing the uterus from vena cava compression, allowing increase in venous return and thus cardiac output.

The Rh blood type of the patient should be sought. If maternal negative, there is a chance of developing iso-immunization and compromising further pregnancies.  Rh Immunoglobulin (RhoGham) should be administered regardless of mechanism, including fall from standing, as maternal Rh sensitization will occur at 0.01-0.03 ml in 70% of Rh negative patients.  The dose of Rh Immunoglobulin is dependent upon the gestational age.  At less than 12-weeks gestational age, 150mcg is indicated.  At greater than 12 weeks, 300 mcg is indicated.  The amount will need to be increased if feto-maternal hemorrhage is marked, in massive blunt force abdominal trauma.  This is determined by the Klei-Hauer Betke test.  This test is an acid elution assay on blood drawn from the maternal patient.  After lysing cells with acid, it shows the amount of fetal blood in the maternal system.  Note that this test has a threshold of 5 ml of maternal-fetal hemorrhage, but iso-immunization can occur at 0.01 ml.  Therefore, this test should be utilized to determine not if, but rather how much,****additional Rh Immunoglobulin is required.

Maternal vital signs are less sensitive. If hypotension is present, immediate investigation and treatment must ensue. In cases of hypovolemic shock, the mother will shunt blood from her fetus. Further, the placenta is highly sensitive to catecholamines and vasopressors alike. Early aggressive intravascular repletion and volume resuscitation is thus paramount and permissive hypotension should be avoided in this population. Similaryl vasopressors should be used sparingly, with knowledge that this will further compromise placental blood flow. Similar to the non-pregnant female, blood product resuscitation should proceed with a 1:1:1 component ratio. In instances of severe hemorrhage within 3 hours from trauma, tranexamic acid (TXA) is deemed safe, and should likewise be utilized. For those whom require urgent central venous access, femoral catheters should be avoided when able, again due to potential uterine compression of the vena cava reducing venous return. Special consideration should as well be taken in those requiring thoracostomy tube placement. In later terms of pregnancy, the diaphragm may rise to an additional 4 cm, thus the inserting clinician should plan on an insertion site of 1 to 2 intrercostal spaces higher than traditional placement to avoid intra-abdominal placement.

Indications for exploratory laparotomy are the same in the pregnant patient as in the nonpregnant trauma victim, however it is important to note that laparotomy alone is not an indication for cesarean section. During laparotomy the uterus should obviously be handled with care, being careful not to twist or place excess traction, as this may lead to potential vascular compromise. With adequate resuscitation, the fetus should tolerate the operative procedure well. With this being said, an obstetric clinician should be readily available, and present at the time of exploration.

Nearly 25% of trauma patients with viable fetus may have pre-term labor; and nearly 40% will experience contractions. Preterm labor in general should be treat with standard obstetric protocol. Next to maternal death, placental abruption is the next most common cause of fetal death. Non-reassuring fetal heart tones with clinical evidence concerning for placental abruption warrants emergent cesarean section. In addition to placental abruption, severe pelvic or spine fractures, fetal malposition with premature labor, maternal disseminated intravascular coagulation, and gravid uterus when interfering with exposure of potential injuries / exposure during laparotomy are all indications for emergent cesarean section. The uterus is exposed through midline vertical celiotomy. The uterus itself is incised vertically with scissor, exposing the infants head with immediate suction of the oropharynx as the infant is delivered. The umbilical cord is subsequently clamped and divided. The placenta is next manually removed with inspection of the endometrium to ensure no retained membrane present. The uterus is then closed in layers with a running absorbable stitch. Oxytocin (Pitocin) may be administered for post-partum bleeding.

Special Consideration:

- Tetanus toxoid is safe to administer in pregnancy

- Standard antibiotic prophylaxis can be used however due to teratogenic potential, aminoglycosides, quinolones, metronidazole, and sulfonamides should be avoided

- Enoxaparin or heparin may be used for inpatient pharmacologic venous-thrombo-embolic prophylaxis as it does not cross the placenta

- Further medication guidelines for treatment of the pregnant patient may be obtained at: www.cdc.gov/pregnancy/meds/treatingfortwo/index.html

- Peri-mortem cesarean delivery can be performed with fetus that is at least 25 weeks gestation, if within 15 minutes between maternal death and delivery. Maternal CPR should be continued in conjunction with ACS protocol to allow immediate neonatal support and delivery to occur within 4 minutes of maternal death.