The management of cervical dislocations is challenging and complex. Proper diagnosis and treatment require an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including emergency room physicians, nurses, radiologists, and an orthopedic spine surgeon or neurosurgeon. Without proper management, the morbidity and mortality of cervical dislocations can be very high. The moment the patient with suspected cervical trauma hits the door, the emergency room physician is responsible for coordinating care, which includes:

- Immobilization of C-spine in a rigid collar in a neutral position

- Performing ATLS protocols in the unstable patient

- Monitoring the patient for signs of symptoms of mental status change, respiratory depression, rapidly declining neurological exam

- Monitoring for hypotension and bradycardia associated with neurogenic shock

- Obtaining proper initial imaging of the cervical spine

- Consulting with the orthopedic spine surgeon or neurosurgeon

If the patient presents with spinal cord injury and neurologic deficits, early time to reduction, decompression, and/or stabilization leads to improved outcomes. In the postoperative period, the role of the nurse, physical therapy/occupational therapy, and social work team are critical. The nurse will assist the team in monitoring the patient's neurological status, pain, wound drainage, and frequent offloading to prevent pressure ulcers. The physical therapy/occupational team will aid in early ambulation, range of motion of the extremities, isolated strength training, gait training, and teaching how to perform activities of daily living. The social worker will help properly arrange and coordinate the patient's needs relating to equipment and physical therapy at home or a rehab facility. Additionally, a consultation with a psychiatrist and psychologist to aid in the diagnosis and prevention of mental health disorders associated with these patients. Therefore, only by working as an interprofessional team can we better diagnose, improve prognosis, and overall survival from neurologic injury.