**Consensus Guidelines from the Mind Exchange Working Group**

- All patients with HIV should be assessed for neurocognitive functioning regardless of apparent symptoms or CD4/HIV viral load.

- Reassessment should occur every 6 to 12 months in high-risk patients or every 12 to 24 months in low-risk patients.

- Comprehensive neurocognitive evaluation includes the evaluation of at least 5 neurocognitive domains (verbal/language, attention/working memory, abstraction/executive function, learning/recall, speed of information processing, and motor skills).

- Any standardized and validated screening/evaluation tool is acceptable as no particular instrument has been shown to be of superior performance for the detection of this disorder.

- There is no data to support any preventive measures for this disease other than adequate treatment of HIV infection.

- Combination ART for 1 year has been shown to have modest benefits in neuropsychological functioning.

- This improved neurologic function was most apparent in attention, processing speed, and executive performance.

- Treatment regimens based on CNS penetration scores have not been consistently associated with improved neurologic functioning; therefore, changing ART to improve CNS penetration for patients whose infection is already well controlled is unwarranted.

- No therapy other than effective combination ART therapy is recommended for the treatment of this disease. Minocycline, memantine, selegiline, lithium, valproic acid, lexipafant, and nimodipine have been evaluated, but their effectiveness is not proven.