Health education is critical throughout the course of GBS. In the initial acute phase of GBS, the nurse should educate both the patient and family members about GBS including the symptoms of GBS, disease progression, medical management of the disease, current treatments for GBS including IVIG and plasmapheresis, risks associated with GBS, required monitoring of autonomic dysfunction including cardiac and respiratory monitoring, and morbidity and mortality associated with GBS. Patients admitted to the ICU and their family members will need to be educated about the equipment and monitoring routinely performed in this setting.

Health education in the continuing or recovery phase of GBS should focus on rehabilitation efforts by the members of continuing care interprofessional teams. Team members educate both the patient and family members on rehabilitation expectations, and activities designed to return the patient to functional status. Education is focused on the preparation of the patient and family members to assume activities in acute rehabilitation, long-term care, outpatient or home settings with an emphasis on specific activities such as physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, and nutritional therapy. Education for family members caring for the recovering GBS patient should also include training in the use of adaptive devices such as canes, walkers, wheelchairs, bedside commodes, bathtub or shower benches, and safety measures such as ramps for easy home access. Health education during the recovery phase of GBS should also include information about health promotion and health maintenance including education about optimal nutrition, exercise, adequate sleep, and the importance of social interactions with friends, co-workers, and family members. Health education about routine health maintenance screenings such as mammograms and screening for colorectal cancer and skin cancer should be provided to both patients and family members.