Of equal ambiguity is the side effect profile of deep brain stimulation. Whereas the surgical complications implicated with deep brain stimulation, such as hemorrhage, surgical revision of hardware, and infection, are more apparent and objective, the assessment of psychiatric and neurologic manifestations of adverse effects tend to be more discreet and protean, from patient to patient. This vagueness is multifactorial in origin. Firstly, patients may simply not relay these complaints to their respective physicians. Reciprocally, the physician, in turn, may not ask the appropriate questions in order to elucidate ongoing adverse side effects. It is plausible that even if side effects are reported, they may not be documented if they do not meet some arbitrary threshold level of severity. Moreover, it is sometimes hard to differentiate between pre-existing symptoms and comorbidities from the precipitating side effects of DBS. Furthermore, certain side effects tend to manifest over time and occur with latency. An example of this insidious onset is axial symptoms in Parkinson disease. Lastly, as science further evolves and behavioral derivatives of neurocircuitry are mapped out, it is possible that what was once celebrated as therapeutic gains from DBS treatment, will now be regarded as red flags. For example, whereas the spontaneous onset of initiative in STN-stimulated Parkinson disease patients was once applauded as progress, it is now, unfortunately, considered to be the pathological manifestation of disturbed impulse control.