**Dopaminergic Signaling in the Central Nervous System and Peripheral Tissues**

Dopamine is an important neurotransmitter regulating voluntary movement, reward and addictive behavior, moods such as mania and depression, cognition, memory, learning, sleep, and food intake. Dopamine also inhibits the synthesis and secretion of prolactin from the pituitary gland. In the peripheral tissue, dopamine plays an important role in the function of the cardiovascular system, kidney, pancreas, and gastrointestinal system. Dopamine agonists and antagonists, therefore, are important pharmacotherapeutic agents.

**Dopamine Replacement Therapy in Parkinson Disease**

After the discovery that the administration of levodopa, the precursor of dopamine, produced marked symptomatic improvement in Parkinson disease, levodopa has been the primary pharmacological therapeutic for Parkinson disease. Unfortunately, levodopa therapy causes unavoidable extrapyramidal side effects, which occur after several years of treatment. Dopamine agonists originally underwent development as adjunctive therapy to more potent levodopa treatment. Due to the side effects of long-term treatment with levodopa, initiation of treatment with dopamine agonist monotherapy is now recommended in young patients to postpone therapy with levodopa and the subsequent development of extrapyramidal side effects.

The older ergot derivatives are bromocriptine, cabergoline, lisuride, and pergolide. They are rarely used in Parkinson disease these days due to the risk of valvular and lung fibrosis. Pergolide has been withdrawn from the US market due to an increased risk of cardiac fibrosis. The newer non-ergot dopamine agonists are pramipexole, ropinirole, rotigotine, apomorphine, and piribedil. The most frequently prescribed dopamine agonists in the US are pramipexole and ropinirole. These dopamine agonists are the first-line treatment for another movement disorder, restless legs syndrome.

**Dopamine Agonists to Treat Side Effects of Antipsychotic Agents**

The neuroleptic malignant syndrome is rare but can be a fatal side effect of antipsychotic agents. Rarely, in patients with Parkinson's disease, withdrawal of dopamine agonists may also cause deadly side effects. Fever, mental status changes, and muscle rigidity (and ensuing respiratory distress) occur over 1 to 3 days (and 1 to 2 weeks after the initiation of antipsychotic therapy). Bromocriptine, a dopamine agonist, and amantadine are options, as well as muscle relaxants such as lorazepam and dantrolene.

**Dopamine Agonists to Treat Hyperprolactinemia**

These agents are also the first-line therapy for hyperprolactinemia, and associated endocrine abnormalities such as hypogonadism and infertility, secondary to a pituitary tumor, are dopamine agonists. Radiation therapy and surgery are reserved for medication-intolerant patients. The dopamine D2 receptor agonists, bromocriptine, and cabergoline are recommended.

Hyperprolactinemia is a highly prevalent side effect of antipsychotic treatment, particularly in patients treated with first-generation antipsychotics. Due to the risk of relapse and exacerbation of psychotic symptoms, dopamine agonists are not recommended.

**Dopamine Agonists to Treat Type 2 Diabetes**

Although research has not elucidated the cellular and molecular mechanisms of action, bromocriptine has been shown to improve glycemic control in type 2 diabetes.

**Dopamine Agonists to Treat Hypertensive Emergency**

Fenoldopam is a selective D1 receptor agonist that causes vasodilation of renal, splanchnic, and coronary arteries as well as blood vessels in the skeletal muscles. After intravenous injection, the onset of drug action is rapid (10 minutes), and the dose-response relationship is linear. It also has a short elimination half-life.