Tuberculosis is a serious infection with the potential to spread. Whenever a case of tuberculosis is identified, the public health department must be notified. Untreated tuberculosis carries a mortality rate of more than 50%. More important, it can lead to devastating complications. Thus, the treatment of tuberculosis involves an interprofessional team approach that includes the pulmonologist, an infectious disease expert, a thoracic surgeon, and a public health nurse or clinician. Besides treatment, patient education is vital. The nurse and pharmacist should educate patients on the BCG vaccine, especially in children. The pharmacist is critical for direct observation therapy and ensuring compliance to treatment, and reporting back to the physicians, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant managing the patient if compliance is lacking. Further, since patients are treated as outpatients, the pharmacist is in a position to note the presence of any adverse effects of drug therapy, which also needs to be reported to the interprofessional team. The social worker should be involved to ensure that the patient has adequate financial resources for treatment. The patient needs close follow up with serial monitoring by the clinicians to ensure that the treatment is working. The patient should be urged not to get pregnant while on therapy, but if pregnancy does happen, the obstetrician and the infectious disease expert should be involved in the care. The infection control nurse should assist in educating the patient and family and assure that the medications are taken for their full course, providing followup and reporting to the team.

The radiologist should be involved as regular imaging studies are required to determine the response to treatment. Only through open communication between the team members can the morbidity and mortality rates of tuberculosis be reduced.

**Outcomes**

The treatment of tuberculosis is slow, and full resolution can take months. Despite adequate therapy, recurrence rates vary from 2-12%. The recurrences usually occur with the first 12 months of therapy and may be due to reinfection or low compliance with drug therapy. Poor prognostic markers for the infection include immunocompromised state, extrapulmonary involvement, advanced age, and a history of prior infection. More important, complications of tuberculosis are also common and may include fibrothorax, collapsed lung, empyema, and massive hemoptysis.