Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), a life support system, is an invaluable tool to treat adults and children with life-threatening cardiac and pulmonary dysfunction that is refractory to the conventional management or when cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) measures are not successful in achieving the return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC).

According to the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization (ELSO) registry, ECMO has been used on 151,683 patients through 2020, including 45,205 neonates, 30,743 children, and 75,735 adults. In 1990 ECMO was initially started in 83 centers; those numbers increased to 492 centers in 2020. Veno-venous ECMO (VV ECMO) provides respiratory support, whereas veno-arterial ECMO (VA ECMO) provides cardio-respiratory support.

ECMO is supportive therapy, not a disease-modifying treatment. In 1944 Kolff and Berk reported oxygenation of the blood when passing through cellophane chambers of the artificial kidney. In 1953 Gibbon used this concept of artificial oxygenation and perfusion for the first successful open-heart operation. Before 1956 either a film oxygenator or bubble oxygenator was used. In a film oxygenator, blood flows through multiple vertical discs, and in a bubble oxygenator, oxygen is bubbled through the deoxygenated blood.

The major drawbacks of these devices were intravascular hemolysis, systemic inflammation, platelet destruction, and embolization. In 1956, Clows and Basler invented and used the prototype member of a membrane oxygenator that was suitable for cardiopulmonary bypass surgery.et al. reported in 1969 using a membrane oxygenator for cardiopulmonary bypass in infants. Baffes et al. in 1970 mentioned the use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in infants undergoing cardiac surgery. In 1972, Hill et al. reported the first-time use of ECMO for respiratory support in an adult patient with a post-traumatic severe respiratory failure.et al. reported of first successful use of ECMO in neonates with severe respiratory distress in 1975.

From the 1980s to the early 2000s, either silicone membrane or polypropylene hollow fiber oxygenators were used in the ECMO circuits.

Kolobow and his team analyzed the ECMO experience in the National Institute of Health trial in 1981. Gattanoni et al. showed in 1981 the first successful use of ECMO in a large population of ARDS patients. In 1987, Gattanoni et al. reported an approximately 50% survival rate.

In 1994, a randomized control trial published by Morris et al. failed to show the advantage of using additional extracorporeal support in acute respiratory distress syndrome compared to conventional management with mechanical ventilation. The survival rate with mechanical ventilation was 42% compared to 33% in the low-flow VV ECMO group. The use of ECMO flourished after the conventional ventilatory support versus extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for severe adult respiratory failure (CESAR) trial published in 2009. This trial randomized 180 patients in 68 centers. In this study, the outcome was significantly higher with ECMO than conventional management and showed marked improvement in death rate and severe disability with severe respiratory failure treated with extracorporeal support. Thereafter, ECMO support applications have remarkably increased.