Signs and symptoms can often include symptoms of eye redness and pain, sensitivity to light and wind, sagging of skin around the eye, epiphora, ocular irritation and decreased vision, especially if the cornea is damaged. Involutional entropion can be detected by the snapback test and distraction test. The snapback test can be performed when the eyelid margin is pulled away from the globe, with poor resultant snap back to the globe's surface. It is important the patient does not blink the lid back into the proper position. The distraction test is when the lower lid is pulled from the globe and distance is measured. If the distraction is greater than 6 mm, it is considered abnormal. Further, a slit lamp can be conducted to assess for eyelid retractor disinsertion. Several clinical clues may indicate disinsertion of the retractors. These include

- A white, subconjunctival line several millimeters below the inferior tarsal border caused by the leading edge of the detached retractors

- D(2) deeper-than-normal inferior fornix

- Reverse ptosis of the lower eyelid (lower eyelid margin sits higher than normal)

- Diminished inferior movement (excursion) of the lower eyelid on downgaze.

Cicatricial entropion usually displays scar tissue of the conjunctiva. Eversion of the eyelid margin is often difficult in cicatricial but can be performed with ease involutional. Spastic entropion commonly arises following ocular irritation or inflammation following surgical procedures. Congenital can be considered in dysgenesis of the lower eyelid retractors and may be present creating instability in the eyelid with sequential entropion formation.