Lung biopsies are performed in elective as well as emergent situations. The need for lung biopsy in each case should be determined by a multidisciplinary team approach, at least involving a pulmonologist and a radiologist.

In interstitial lung diseases, lung biopsy is recommended when the radiological pattern is non-classical for UIP or a possible UIP. Lung biopsy is also of significance in patients with clinical features such as age less than 50 years, weight loss, fever, hemoptysis, or signs of vasculitis. It is also indicated in patients presenting with a progressive disease course, atypical or rapidly changing HRCT findings, unexplained extrapulmonary manifestations, or pulmonary vascular disease of unclear origin. Specific neoplastic and infectious processes that can mimic chronic, progressive ILD can also be excluded from a lung biopsy. For immunocompetent patients, elective and urgent lung biopsies result in therapeutic changes and have acceptable operative mortality rates. Emergency biopsies rarely result in therapeutic changes and have high operative mortality rates.

Percutaneous CT guided biopsy is a safe and efficacious method for the diagnosis of intermediate pulmonary lesions. It is indicated for lesions that appear malignant and in cases with high suspicion for malignancy. An initial CT scan helps in determining the accessibility of the lesion and the risk of pneumothorax. Results of previous studies for CT guided lung biopsy of small lesions had safe and accurate outcomes but less accurate when compared to large lesions.

With regards to TBLB, it has often been accepted as a conventional method for lung biopsy for a long time for a wide array of diseases, including ILD's, vascular diseases, small airway diseases, and malignancies. It is a safe procedure having low overall mortality of 0.1% compared to surgical lung biopsy (1%). Another advantage is that the procedure does not require general anesthesia and can be done as an outpatient procedure.

Although VATS has been preferred over surgical lung biopsy, there are situations like severe pleural disease, anticipated bleeding, or more severe respiratory impairment that favor the use of SLB-thoracotomy. Patients with severe hypoxemia or mechanical ventilation are not good candidates for VATS, as it requires a period of single lung ventilation.

Recent advances in interventional pulmonology have further revolutionized the diagnosis of lung masses, nodules, lymphadenopathy, and pleural diseases. Newer diagnostic modalities like convex probe (CP) and radial probe (RP) EBUS (endobronchial ultrasound), ENB (electromagnetic navigational bronchoscopy), Cone beam CT and robotic bronchscopy are now available. The yield of these newer modalities is comparable to that of CT guided biopsy with lesser complications. These interventions help in the early diagnosis and management of the patients.