It is important to examine men for suspected urogenital abnormalities when the couple is diagnosed with fertility problems and particularly when there is an abnormal semen analysis.

A hormonal screening (testosterone, FSH, TSH LH, and prolactin) is necessary whenever an abnormal semen analysis is present in a male infertility patient.

A minimum of two semen analyses is recommended before making any conclusions regarding male infertility or semen/sperm quality.

It is imperative that both partners be examined to properly identify all the causes and contributing factors of their infertility.

Men with normal hormonal levels (or isolated FSH elevation) together with very low sperm concentrations (less than 5 million/mL) should be checked for Y chromosomal defects.

Bilateral absence of the vas on clinical examination suggests a cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CTFR) gene mutation, especially if associated with a positive family history.

Normal-sized testicles with low semen volumes suggest retrograde ejaculation or ejaculatory duct obstruction. Obtain a transrectal ultrasound and check a post-ejaculatory urinalysis.

Suspect testosterone abuse in muscular men with small testes.

Azoospermia with bilateral atrophic testes is exceedingly difficult to treat without ART. Possible Klinefelter's if associated with hypogonadism.

Vitamin D supplementation may help with sperm motility.

It may not be unreasonable to suggest that a couple with a male infertility factor consider a trial of treatment with one of the "unproven" therapies if no better treatment alternative is immediately available. This will buy time, and there is very little harm done even if they don't work. A pregnancy may develop just from waiting. Some of the treatments for them to consider would include clomiphene (with or without tamoxifen), aromatase inhibitors, and antioxidants (including coenzyme Q10 and L-carnitine). The treatments should be presented as possible fertility aides for which there may be some evidence of efficacy. The couple should be informed of the available data and allowed to decide for themselves. They should not have unrealistic expectations about the efficacy of any of these remedies.

Know who to refer infertile couples to in your community for reproductive endocrinology assistance as well as ART and IVF with ICSI. It is helpful to inform patients of the cost of these services in your community.

Do not be afraid to discuss adoption as a reasonable alternative to expensive and potentially futile fertility treatments.

**Summary of the Initial Evaluation of a Patient with Male Factor Infertility**

- A comprehensive history and physical with particular attention to the sexual history and examination of the body habitus, hair distribution, and male genitalia. For example, varicoceles can be surgically corrected, while bilateral small, firm testes would suggest Klinefelter syndrome, and bilateral absence of the vas deferens is associated with cystic fibrosis.

- At least two separate semen analyses are required.

- Hormonal screening should be performed, which should include testosterone, FSH, LH, and prolactin. A TSH level and estradiol can optionally be added.

- Consider a scrotal ultrasound.

- Genetic screening is recommended for patients with severe oligozoospermia (<5 million sperm/mL). This would include karyotype, CFTR, and Y chromosome testing for microdeletions (sometimes called AZF testing) as appropriate.

- If the workup shows mild or moderate sperm abnormalities without any obvious cause, consider discussing some of the optional treatments as noted earlier and summarized below.

- We have prepared a patient handout (below) to help couples determine if they wish to pursue any of the optional treatments discussed.

**A Couple’s Guide to Optional Treatments for Male Infertility**

Few patients are as anxious or desperate as the couple who have failed to conceive a child. It takes at least one year of adequate, unprotected sexual intercourse before a couple is considered medically infertile. We know that a contributing male factor will be present in about 50% of all infertility cases. Some men will have an obvious or easily correctable problem, such as a history of a vasectomy, an undescended testicle, or a varicocele that can be surgically corrected. Unfortunately, the vast majority of male infertility patients cannot be successfully treated by simple remedies and will ultimately require some degree of assisted reproduction which can be quite costly.

It should be pointed out that some infertile couples will be able to conceive a child even without treatment. About 23% of such couples will conceive after two years without getting any treatment.

The purpose of this guide is to inform couples about some of the somewhat unorthodox or unofficial treatments available for male infertility for which there is only incomplete, anecdotal, inadequate, or conflicting data supporting their use, making it difficult for physicians to recommend or prescribe. The following therapies have all demonstrated some beneficial effects on sperm quality or male infertility in the medical literature. This guide is not intended as a substitute for your physician’s advice, and you should always check with your doctor before starting any new treatment.

Standard lifestyle improvements, such as a healthy diet, losing weight and exercising, eliminating prescription medications (if possible), and avoiding all illegal drugs, smoking, marijuana, alcohol, and testosterone, should be implemented. (Men should avoid taking any testosterone supplements even if prescribed as this will significantly decrease sperm counts and worsen their infertility.)

Patients should already have had at least two semen analyses showing some mild to moderate problems with sperm count, concentration, maturity, motility (activity), or morphology (normal vs. abnormal sperm). Men with severe defects in any of these parameters are not likely to benefit from the remedies discussed here and should speak with their physicians about assisted reproduction techniques and other treatment options.

Those with relatively mild sperm defects might possibly benefit from trying one or more of the various treatments mentioned. None are specifically recommended or officially approved for male infertility, but there is at least some evidence of a benefit in the medical literature to warrant consideration. Most of the remedies will require at least three months of continuous treatment to show any benefit, and several will need six months.

**Clomiphene**

Clomiphene is an anti-estrogen drug that is primarily used as a fertility-enhancing drug for women, as men normally produce only a very small amount of estrogen. There is evidence that, in low doses, clomiphene can increase male fertility hormones (FSH and LH) and stimulate sperm production by lowering estrogen levels. It may also be useful in some hypogonadal, infertile men with low testosterone levels. The recommended dose for infertile men is 25 mg or 50 mg three times per week. Possible side effects include headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, flushing, and visual disturbances such as blurred vision. The estimated cost is only about $20 per month. A prescription will be required.

**Tamoxifen**

Tamoxifen is an estrogen receptor blocker that has been shown to improve semen parameters, especially when used together with clomiphene, so they are often taken together. Like many of the therapies listed here, there is evidence that it can improve sperm counts and other semen parameters in infertile men, but there is insufficient data on outcomes or pregnancies to recommend it officially. The usual dose is 10 mg twice a day. Possible side effects include weight gain, edema, leg swelling, nausea, skin rash, and erectile dysfunction. The estimated cost is about $20 to $30 per month, and a prescription will be needed.

**Aromatase Inhibitors (Anastrozole and Letrozole)**

Aromatase inhibitors are medications that block the conversion of various hormones, including testosterone, to estrogen compounds. They are usually used to reduce the estrogen effect in women but have shown beneficial activity in male infertility as well. They are considered the treatment of choice for infertile males with normal testosterone but relatively high estrogen levels and can be used together with clomiphene. The recommended dose of anastrozole is 1 mg three times a week, while the dose of letrozole is 2.5 mg three times a week. The most common side effect reported with these medications is joint pain and stiffness. The estimated monthly cost for either of these drugs is about $10.  A prescription is required.

**Antioxidants, Vitamins, and Minerals**

The most studied vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants for male infertility include Coenzyme Q10, Vitamins C, D, and E, folic acid, selenium, and zinc. As of yet, there is no consensus or recommendation as to which of these is the most effective or the optimal dosage. Given their low cost and lack of any negative effects, they should probably be part of the treatment regimen for every male infertility patient. The monthly cost varies but is generally nominal. Some combination products promoted specifically for male infertility may be more costly and therefore are not recommended. No prescription is needed.

**L-Carnitine**

L-Carnitine is an amino acid and antioxidant that is typically found in high concentrations in the epididymis and has long been suggested as a possible, non-toxic general therapy for male infertility. It increases sperm motility and maturity. A six-month trial is suggested using a daily dose of 3 grams per day. Since it is an amino acid, its use is extremely safe. No prescription is required.

**Suggested Dosages for Vitamins, Minerals, and Antioxidants for Empiric Therapy in Male Infertility**

- L-Carnitine: 3 grams daily.

- Coenzyme Q10: 300 mg daily.

- Folic acid: 1000 mcg daily

- Selenium: 200 mcg daily.

- Vitamin C: 500 mg twice a day.

- Vitamin D: 5,000 units daily.

- Vitamin E: 400 units daily.

- Zinc: 40 mg daily.

**Anti-Estrogen Medications**

- Clomiphene: 25 – 50 mg three times a week, plus either:

- Anastrozole: 1 mg three times a week, or

- Letrozole: 2.5 mg three times a week, or

- Tamoxifen: 10 mg twice a day