Excellent communication among allied health professionals working as an interprofessional team is essential to treating patients with retinal detachments, especially since patient outcomes can be time-sensitive. A careful medical history is necessary during the evaluation of a retinal detachment. As with any acute loss of vision, ophthalmology should be consulted as soon as possible. A rhegmatogenous retinal detachment constitutes an ocular emergency, and clinicians should make the consult to ophthalmology in a timely fashion.

It is important to refer patients to a retinal specialist or tertiary care center as soon as possible, as a referral from optometrists via general practitioners and local ophthalmic clinics can delay treatment leading to reduced outcomes.

Following with diagnosis and treatment of a retinal detachment, the care of the patient may involve a multitude of medical disciplines. Disabling decreased vision may require the involvement of physical and occupational therapy.  Depending on the underlying etiology of the retinal detachments, specialists including but not limited to endocrinology, neurology, infectious disease, rheumatology, or hematology/oncology may need to evaluate the patient. Specific ophthalmologic subspecialties that may be necessary for consult include the retina, uveitis, ocular oncology, pediatric ophthalmology, neuro-ophthalmology, and glaucoma. Regardless of the underlying cause, it is crucial that the patient follow-up with her or his regular ophthalmologist and/or vitreoretinal surgeon to prevent future complications and help control risk factors. Opthalmology specialty-trained nurses can assist in both surgical and non-surgical treatment. They will help with surgical prep and post-operative care, as well as counseling patients and acting as a point of contact and bridge between the clinician and patient, along with monitoring treatment progress in all cases, and reporting to the treating clinician. Open and transparent interprofessional communication between team members can lessen the morbidity of retinal detachment. [Level 5]