In the neck, after making a skin incision, one finds the superficial platysma muscle fibers. On the lateral side of the neck, just underneath the platysma is the external jugular vein which can be seen descending from the angle of the mandible and passing just underneath the clavicle. Similarly, superficial to the sternocleidomastoid muscle and deep to the platysma on the lateral side of the neck is the great auricular nerve and the cervical cutaneous nerves. These nerves provide sensation to the skin overlying parotid, mastoid, and external ear and the skin on the lateral neck, respectively. Superiorly, the most critical structure immediately deep to the platysma muscle is the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve. It originates at the stylomastoid foramen with the other branches of the facial nerve and courses approximately 2 cm below the inferior border of the mandible. Following the elevation of a platysmal flap to the level of the mandible, great care should be taken to identify and protect this critical contributor to facial expression.

Many surgical procedures in otolaryngology involving the neck, such as thyroid and parathyroid surgery, neck dissections, and laryngeal surgery, include raising a subplatysmal flap. In doing so, the surgeon can expose the contents of the neck. In people with large body habitus, the neck can be incised with impunity to the level of the platysma muscle due to the absence of any critical structures superficial to it (except for small blood vessels whose bleeding is easily controllable). In those with malnutrition or abnormally frail body habitus, incision to the platysma requires care; ubiquitously thin cervical musculature can be mistaken for platysma, leading the incision to be carried to the sternocleidomastoid and strap muscles and unintentionally damaging essential structures.

The platysma plays a role in facial plastic procedures as well. To prevent wrinkling of the neck, the platysma can be injected with botulinum toxin (botox) to paralyze the neck temporarily therapeutically; by inactivating the function of the platysma muscle, the skin overlying the neck is stretched and wrinkled less often thereby preserving its elasticity and preventing permanent creases. In cosmetic surgery to correct dependent and excess cervical skin, the superior insertion of the platysma muscle is reattached more superiorly near the earlobe, thereby giving the neck a more taught and youthful appearance.

**The great auricular nerve relative to the platysma muscle:**

More than 100000 cervicofacial rhytidectomies are performed in the United States every year. All of the varied techniques described require some degree of skin flap elevation in the neck. Injury to the great auricular nerve is the commonest injury seen in cervicofacial rhytidectomy, occurring in 6 to 7% of cases.

The great auricular nerve runs immediately deep to the platysma and courses over the mid-body of the sternocleidomastoid muscle and divides into anterior and posterior branches. Whereas some authors have given dimensions in centimeters to identify where the great auricular nerve runs on the sternocleidomastoid muscle, cadaver studies have shown that irrespective of the length of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, the great auricular nerve runs at the point which is one-third of the distance from either the mastoid process or the external auditory canal to the sternocleidomastoid muscle origin at the clavicle. Surgeons routinely mark this site so that a careful superficial dissection of the skin of the neck from the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle takes place under direct illuminated vision.

**Surgical glide plane**

The platysma is the most superficial muscle layer in the face. The platysma in the face has a glide plane beneath it which separates it from the deeper masseter muscle. The platysma is derived from the second branchial arch, the masseter from the first branchial arch.

**Surgical significance of the aging platysma**

As the platysma thins with age, it is noted that cervical platysmal bands often recur after a traditional facelift procedure where the platysma is "tightened" and fixed to the mastoid fascia. It is thought that the aging, thin platysma is not able to hold well with this technique, thereby explaining the recurrence of cervical laxity and neck bands. To that end, some have proposed that resection of central redundant platysma with a double or triple imbrication and tightening central closure of the platysma will give a better and longer-lasting cervical correction.

**Platysma and the sternocleidomastoid muscle**

A loose connective tissue layer called the superficial cervical fascia is present between the platysma and the sternocleidomastoid muscle, which allows an easy glide of the platysma over the sternocleidomastoid.