Traumatic and tension pneumothoraces are more common than spontaneous pneumothoraces. The rate of iatrogenic pneumothoraces is increasing in US hospitals as intensive care modalities have increasingly become dependent on positive pressure ventilation and central venous catheters. Central venous catheterization increases the risk of pneumothoraces when placed in the internal jugular or subclavian. The incidence is about 1 to 13% but can increase up to 30% in certain situations.

In a recent study, 95% of pneumothorax episodes were observed to be iatrogenic; of these, barotrauma secondary to mechanical ventilation resulted in 69.6% of cases, 41.1% of which were tension pneumothoraces. Moreover, central venous catheter insertion was responsible for 13.2% of cases.

Tension pneumothoraces can develop in 1 to 2% of cases initially presenting with idiopathic spontaneous pneumothoraces. It is difficult to determine the actual incidence of tension pneumothorax as by the time trauma patients are transported to trauma centers, they have already received decompressive needle thoracotomies. Patients with trauma tend to have an associated pneumothorax or tension pneumothorax 20% of the time. In cases of severe chest trauma, there is an associated pneumothorax 50% of the time. The incidence of traumatic pneumothorax depends on the size and mechanism of the injury. A review of military deaths from thoracic trauma suggests that up to 5% of combat casualties with thoracic trauma have tension pneumothorax at the time of death.