Patients suspected of toxic alcohol ingestion in which the toxic alcohol is unknown should undergo routine blood testing to include a complete blood count, basic metabolic profile, transaminases, pregnancy status, serum or urine ketones, lactate, ethanol, and acetaminophen and salicylate concentrations. An electrocardiogram should be obtained on all toxicological patients. Following an acute, unknown ingestion, toxic alcohol concentrations would be the best tests to perform but have limited availability in most hospitals because gas chromatography measures these concentrations with mass-spectroscopy confirmation.

Unlike the other toxic alcohols, isopropanol ingestion will reveal labs consistent with ketosis without an apparent metabolic acidosis and a normal serum glucose level. The reason that a metabolic acidosis does not develop in isopropanol ingestion is that the active metabolite, acetone, is a terminal ketone in the metabolic pathway and is an uncharged molecule, unlike the active metabolites in other toxic alcohol ingestions. However, the physician may note an elevated osmolar gap early in the presentation prior to significant metabolism, and reports have shown that an increase of 1 mg/dL in the serum of isopropanol will cause a 0.17 mOsm/kg rise in serum osmolality.

Pseudo-renal failure is a possible laboratory finding in isopropanol toxicity and is related to the Jaffe reaction, an analytical colorimetric method used to determine creatinine levels in both serum and urine. However, the presence of acetone in the serum can falsely elevate creatinine levels if this method is used without a corresponding elevation in blood urea nitrogen. Previous data has shown a creatinine level increase of 1 mg/dL for every 100 mg/dL of acetone in the serum. With this knowledge, a physician can calculate the serum acetone level in a patient by using this equation:

- Acetone = (measured serum creatinine – baseline creatinine) X 100