Practicing clinicians, e.g., MDs, DOs, are often visited by patients because the patient is looking for medications to help remedy their chief complaint. There are five different levels of scheduling for medications (I-V), with schedule I having the tightest controls, and V being the least restrictive. There needs to be an understanding by the physician of the mechanism and properties of the medication before prescribing, and the pharmacist must be aware of potential interactions the patient may have with their other medications.

Controlled substances are drugs considered to have the highest misuse and use disorder potential, and thus have the strictest regulation and prescription requirements on a federal and state level. To prescribe medication, a clinician must have a DEA (Drug Enforcement Administration) license; to fill a prescription, a pharmacist must also have a controlled substance license. schedule I medications (e.g., heroin), are unable to be prescribed or filled by a pharmacist because they have no indicated medical use in the USA. Schedule II drugs are the highest level of misuse potential medications that may be prescribed by a clinician; these drugs traditionally were only allowed to be filled by paper prescription; however, they are now prescribable via electronic prescribing of controlled substances (EPCS). Schedule III-V medications may be prescribed by a clinician via traditional paper prescription, by a verbal order over the phone, or using the EPCS system.

The EPCS was implemented in 2010 by the DEA, which stated that clinicians might submit controlled substance prescriptions electronically; it also stated that pharmacies could dispense these electronic prescriptions. Using the EPCS from a clinician and pharmacy standpoint is voluntary, and each party may choose to use the system or not (however, some states such as New York are making the use of electronic prescribing mandatory with certain exceptions). Practitioners may still write and sign prescriptions for schedule II-V medications if they choose; verbal orders are only permitted for schedule III-V medications. The implementation of electronic prescribing has significantly reduced the number of medication errors from a prescription standpoint (legibility, dosage, frequency, etc.).

For a pharmacist to dispense a controlled substance, the prescription must include specific information to be considered valid:

- Date of issue

- Patient’s name and address

- Patient's date of birth

- Clinician name, address, DEA number

- Drug name

- Drug strength

- Dosage form

- Quantity prescribed

- Directions for use

- Number of refills

- Signature of prescriber

There are legal limits on the number of refills and the number dispended that a prescription may have. For a schedule III-V drug, the maximum refills are 5, and the limit on quantity is 90 per allocation. Schedule II drugs have zero refills, and the maximum quantity dispensed is 30 days.