# Continuing Education Activity

Telangiectatic osteosarcoma is a rare high-grade malignant neoplasm, accounting for less than 10 percent of all cases of osteosarcoma. It is a rare variant of osteosarcoma characterized by distinctive radiographic, gross, and microscopic features. It is a bone-forming tumor that mimics radiologically and histopathologically aneurysmal bone cyst and giant cell tumor. Telangiectatic osteosarcoma is predominantly seen in children, adolescents, and young adults. The mean age at presentation of telangiectatic osteosarcoma is 17.5 years (range from 15 to 20 years) with a male-to-female ratio of 2 to 1. This activity reviews the workup of telangiectatic osteosarcoma and describes the role of the multidisciplinary team of health professionals working together to manage this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the epidemiology of telangiectatic osteosarcoma.
- Review the clinical features of telangiectatic osteosarcoma.
- Summarize the treatment of telangiectatic osteosarcoma. 
- Explain modalities to improve care coordination among interprofessional team members in order to improve outcomes for patients affected by telangiectatic osteosarcoma.

# Introduction

Osteosarcoma is the most common primary bone malignancy of non-hematopoietic origin. Several subtypes of osteosarcoma have been described on pathological evaluation- conventional, small cell, periosteal, parosteal, high-grade surface, low-grade central, giant cell, and telangiectatic types.

# Etiology

The exact etiology of telangiectatic osteosarcoma is still unknown, and so are the predisposing factors. It becomes challenging to conduct epidemiological studies and investigate the etiologic factors due to the rare occurrence of the disease. However, some anecdotal reports described genetic components due to the presence of the disease in family members.

# Epidemiology

Telangiectatic osteosarcoma is predominantly seen in children, adolescents, and young adults. The mean age at presentation of telangiectatic osteosarcoma is 17.5 years (range from 15 to 20 years) with a male-to-female ratio of 2 to 1.

Flat bone involvement is relatively rare, with around 8% incidence of non-appendicular non-spinal sites.

# Pathophysiology

**Histogenesis**

Telangiectatic osteosarcoma is presumed to derive from either transformed osteoblasts or stem cells of mesenchymal origin. Angiosarcomatous features are present in addition to osteoblast-like and fibroblast-like cells at the ultrastructural level. Tight intercellular junctions, Weibel-Palade bodies, and pinocytic vesicles are visible within the cell cytoplasm. These features suggest that telangiectatic osteosarcoma derives from multipotential stem cells of mesenchymal origin.

**Cytogenetics**

Only seven cases of telangiectatic osteosarcoma to date have had genetic studies. The cytogenetic analysis identified trisomy 3 in one case, and in three other tumors, more complex chromosomal changes were reported.

# Histopathology

On gross as well as microscopic appearance, telangiectatic osteosarcoma very closely resembles aneurysmal bone cysts.

**Macroscopic Findings**

Macroscopic examination reveals a hemorrhagic multicystic lesion filled with blood clots. Telangiectatic osteosarcomas have the classic description as ''a bag of blood.'' They are, by definition, composed of approximately 90% cystic components before treatment.

**Microscopic Findings**

Histologically, telangiectatic osteosarcoma is composed of blood-filled or empty cystic spaces resembling aneurysmal bone cysts. The septa are populated by pleomorphic cells with important nuclear hyperchromasia and also contain osteoclast-like giant cells. Osteoid formation is usually focal and confluent. Because telangiectatic osteosarcoma is sometimes not adequately sampled by core-needle biopsy due to its lytic and cystic nature, cellular atypia and osteoid formation may be absent, which may lead to misdiagnosis.

**Immunochemistry**

No immunohistochemical studies are useful in the diagnosis of telangiectatic osteosarcoma.

# History and Physical

There is no difference in the clinical presentation of telangiectatic and conventional osteosarcoma. Local pain and/or soft tissue mass are the most common symptoms of telangiectatic osteosarcoma. Sometimes, the patients may present with a pathologic fracture.

# Evaluation

Several imaging modalities are available for establishing the diagnosis of telangiectatic osteosarcoma. They include:

- Plain radiographs

- Computed tomography (CT)

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

**Radiographic Findings**

Telangiectatic osteosarcoma is typically a purely lytic lesion with a permeative destructive growth pattern. This rapidly growing tumor often expands the contour of bone and shows features of cortical disruption with minimal or no periosteal new bone formation. The massive expansile growth pattern of telangiectatic osteosarcoma can superficially simulate an aneurysmal bone cyst. Telangiectatic osteosarcoma can have a deceptively innocent radiographic appearance with sharply demarcated margins, simulating a benign bone cyst. Aneurysmal bone cysts generally have type 1A or 1B patterns of geographic bone destruction.

T1-weighted MRI shows heterogeneous low signal intensity, and T2-weighted images show high signal intensity with several cystic foci, fluid levels, and an extra-skeletal extension of the tumor, similar to an aneurysmal cyst, but with irregular walls, septae, and nodular and solid components.

The criteria for diagnosing telangiectatic osteosarcoma include the following:

- Radiographically, a destructive, osteolytic tumor with little or no matrix mineralization or periosteal new bone formation

- Cystic/cavitary gross specimen with little solid tumor tissue and no areas of a dense bone

- Histologically, a tumor with single or multiple cystic cavities containing blood or necrotic tissue, with thickened septa composed of anaplastic tumor cells

The high alkaline phosphatase level frequently seen in osteosarcoma is not a feature of telangiectatic osteosarcoma. On the other hand, the evaluation of platelet count, white cell count, lactate dehydrogenase, and alkaline phosphatase have been described for differentiating telangiectatic osteosarcoma from aneurysmal bone cysts. The sarcomas had a higher value of platelet count, white cell count, alkaline phosphatase, and lactate dehydrogenase than the aneurysmal bone cysts.

# Treatment / Management

Previously, the prognosis and clinical outcome of telangiectatic osteosarcoma were considered to be poor. However, with the advent of chemotherapy, the prognosis has significantly improved, with around a 60% survival rate at ten years, which is similar to that of conventional osteosarcoma.

Colomina et al. reported the outcome of 8 patients with telangiectatic osteosarcoma with pathologic fractures. They described that the presence of a pathologic fracture did not worsen the outcome and had similar survival and recurrence rates.

# Differential Diagnosis

The most common differential diagnosis is an aneurysmal bone cyst which closely mimics the radiographic, gross as well as microscopic features of telangiectatic osteosarcoma. This often delays the diagnosis leading to the delay in starting optimal treatment. Other differential diagnoses include:

- Giant cell tumor of bone

- Brodie abscess

- Blood clot

- Malignant fibrous histiocytoma

- Fibrosarcoma

# Treatment Planning

Chemotherapeutic protocols for telangiectatic osteosarcoma are similar to those of conventional osteosarcoma. Patients will have two to six cycles of chemotherapy administered before surgery. The common chemotherapeutic agents used include cisplatin, carboplatin, methotrexate, doxorubicin, and ifosfamide.

# Staging

The two common staging systems for telangiectatic osteosarcoma include the Enneking system for malignant bone neoplasms and the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) system for staging bone sarcomas. The Enneking system includes tumor histological grade, the local extent of the tumor- intracompartmental or extracompartmental and the presence of metastasis. The AJCC system considers tumor histological grade, tumor size, and the presence and location of metastases.

# Prognosis

Telangiectatic osteosarcoma usually shows a better response to chemotherapy than conventional osteosarcoma. Survival rates with current chemotherapy protocols are within the range of 65% after five years.

Tumor necrosis greater than 95% is considered one of the most important prognostic factors.

# Complications

The complications in managing telangiectatic osteosarcoma include local recurrence, metastases, decreased survival, implant failure, infection, and cardiotoxicity due to chemotherapy.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Telangiectatic osteosarcoma is an aggressive and rare variant of osteosarcoma. In contrast to the previous reports, its prognosis is comparable to conventional osteosarcoma. These tumors have a good response to chemotherapy. However, these tumors have a higher incidence of pathologic fracture owing to the cystic nature of the lesion that weakens the bone.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Telangiectatic osteosarcoma is a rare and aggressive variant of osteosarcoma with distinctive radiological and pathological features. It poses diagnostic difficulties, mainly with an aneurysmal bone cyst. Distinguishing between these two entities is vital since their management and prognosis differ significantly. Telangiectatic osteosarcoma is ideally managed by an interprofessional team that consists of orthopedists, oncologists, radiologists, pathologists, pharmacists, and specialty care nurses. Pharmacists review chemotherapeutic regimens, check for drug-drug interactions, and provide patient and family education. Specialty care oncology nurses administer chemotherapy, educate patients and their families, monitor for side effects, and give the team feedback on the patient's condition. All team members must maintain accurate and updated patient documentation so all caregivers can access accurate, up-to-date patient data. Interprofessional patient care will result in improved diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes for patients with telangiectatic osteosarcoma. [Level 5]