The Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database published in 2017 reported estimated operative mortality of 1.2% and an average length of stay of 13 days for the Fontan procedure nationally.

The postoperative period is an important part of the Fontan procedure. Complications include but are not limited to the following:

- Hemorrhage

- Arrhythmias

- Pleural effusions

- Hepatic fibrosis

- Heart failure

- Chylothorax

- Cyanosis of the body

- Exercise intolerance

- Aortic root dysfunction

- Ventricular dysfunction

- Pulmonary vascular dysfunction

- Protein-losing enteropathy (PLE)

- Thromboembolism

- Kidney disease

- Liver disease

- Venous insufficiency

- Death

Although life-saving, there are physiologic disturbances that affect the rest of the body and result in short-term and long-term complications.

Systemic complications become challenging to quantify since they occur outside of the heart and affect other organ systems. Research is currently ongoing to determine the role of lymphatic drainage in failed Fontan circulation, which results in multiple co-morbidities.

Ultimately, patients with Fontan circulation will have lower than expected exercise tolerance when they reach adolescence. Usually, there is some type of ventricular dysfunction. Long-term results are still being studied since even more patients are surviving into adolescence and early adulthood. It is uncertain whether there are modifiable risk factors that will prevent this clinical deterioration, but if a patient is in heart failure after Fontan, they will need to be considered for heart transplantation.

Atz et al., as part of the Pediatric Heart Network, followed about 373 adult patients from an initial cohort of 546 subjects to study the rates of transplant-free survival into adulthood. They found cardiac reoperation (32%), arrhythmia treatment (32%), thrombosis (12%), and protein-losing enteropathy (9%) as the most common complications. About 10% received transplants or died without transplantation.