Neuroimaging, preferably, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the LS spine and electrodiagnostic studies (nerve conduction study and electromyography) are important in confirmation of the diagnosis of LS plexopathy.

**Imaging**

MRI with gadolinium contrast is the best test for the evaluation of the LS plexus. When there are contraindications to MRI (e.g., a noncompatible pacemaker), a computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast can be utilized.

In cases of malignancy, it can be challenging to differentiate direct compression from metastatic disease. Thus advanced imaging is often needed.

**Electrodiagnostic Studies**

Electrodiagnostic studies such as electromyography (EMG) are useful to help differentiate lumbosacral plexopathy from other types of neuropathy or radiculopathies. Electromyography helps in the localization of neurological injury. EMG can also help differentiate malignancy from radiation-induced plexopathy.

**Laboratory Investigations**

Recommended blood tests to identify the etiology in patients with LS plexopathy should include a complete blood count with an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), coagulation studies, autoantibodies testing (antinuclear antibodies (ANA), Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), Anti-Sjögren's-syndrome-related antigen A, anti-Ro/anti-La antibodies, etc.) and hemoglobin A1c. Furthermore, serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) levels, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Lyme antibodies, rapid plasma reagin (RPR), and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) serology may be indicated for specific cases.

**Other Investigations**

If the cause of LS plexopathy is still not identified despite the above investigations, it indicates the need for a lumbar puncture. When malignancy is found, a biopsy of pelvic organs, as well as a biopsy of the suspected affected nerve root is needed. Sciatic nerve fascicular biopsies aid in diagnosis for difficult cases; for cases of suspected malignancy present in the distribution of the sciatic nerve.