For the localization of lesions in cortical blindness, knowledge of the visual pathway is important. In cortical blindness, lesion lies in the striate cortex, but often the nearby areas of the brain are also involved in giving rise to different manifestations.

**Visual Pathway**

The optic disc is the starting point of the optic nerve. The optic disc does not contain any visual receptors. It forms the physiological blind spot. Fibers from the temporal hemiretina are situated in the lateral half, i.e., the temporal half of the optic nerve, while fibers from the nasal hemiretina are situated in the medial half, i.e., the nasal half. Similarly, upper retinal fibers are present superiorly, and lower fibers are present inferiorly in the optic nerve. The optic nerve extends from the retina to the optic chiasm, and the length is about 5 cm. It is conventionally divided into four portions- intraocular, intraorbital, intracanalicular, and intracranial.

The optic nerve is covered by the layers of meninges. The intraocular part is the optic disc wherefrom the intraorbital portion starts leading to the intracanalicular portion as the nerve traverses the optic canal. Then the two optic nerves exit from the optic canals and form the optic chiasm where temporal hemiretinal fibers continue ipsilaterally, and nasal hemiretinal fibers decussate and join the opposite optic tract. The tracts extend from the chiasm to the lateral geniculate body (LGB). Afferent fibers from the pupil leave the tract just anterior to the LGB. The visual afferents synapse in the LGB and second-order neuron starts as geniculocalcarine pathways (optic radiation) and terminate in the calcarine cortex of the occipital lobe. The primary visual cortex (V1) lies in Brodmann’s area 17. Area 18 (V2), also known as the parastriate or parareceptive area, receives and interprets impulses from area 17. The peristriate or perireceptive cortex, area 19 (V3, V4, V5), has connections with areas 17, 18, and with other portions of the cortex.

The anterior choroidal artery and thalamoperforating vessels from the posterior cerebral artery (PCA) supply the optic tract. Optic radiation is supplied by the middle cerebral artery (MCA), and the occipital lobe is primarily supplied by the PCA. The occipital lobe also receives supply from the MCA.