The cause of necrobiosis lipoidica remains unknown. However, the most common theory is vascular disturbance involving immune complex deposition or microangiopathic changes leading to collagen degeneration.

**Diabetic Microangiopathy**

As there exists a strong association between diabetes and necrobiosis lipoidica, several studies have emphasized diabetic microangiopathy to be the prime etiological factor.

**Immunoglobulins, Complement, and Fibrinogen**

It has been described that the deposition of immunoglobulins, C3 - the 3rd component of complement, and fibrinogen in the walls of the vasculature results in the development of necrobiosis lipoidica.

**Abnormal Collagen**

Additionally, it has been theorized that the etiology of necrobiosis lipoidica is associated with abnormal collagen. It is well-recognized that abnormal collagen fibrils are responsible for diabetes-related end-organ damage and expedited aging. In diabetes, collagen cross-linking increases as a result of elevated lysyl oxidase levels. This increase in collagen cross-linking could cause the thickening of the basement membrane in necrobiosis lipoidica.

**Impaired Neutrophil Migration**

It also has been observed that there could be defective neutrophil migration causing an increase in the number of macrophages, possibly justifying the formation of granuloma in necrobiosis lipoidica.

**Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF)–Alpha**

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)–alpha has been observed to play a potentially crucial role in granulomatous diseases such as necrobiosis lipoidica and disseminated granuloma.

A study conducted by Hammer et al. on 64,133 patients who have type 1 diabetes observed that those with necrobiosis lipoidica were more likely to have worse metabolic control, a lengthier course of diabetes, and an increased need for insulin doses as opposed to the other patients. Additionally, a correlation was noted between celiac disease and necrobiosis lipoidica, and it was observed that a larger percentage of patients having necrobiosis lipoidica had raised levels of thyroid antibodies.