The foramen lacerum is in the middle aspect of the petrous temporal bone, between the central part of the body of the sphenoid anteriorly, the basilar part of the occipital bone medially, and the carotid canal. This location allows the passing of the internal carotid artery to the foramen lacerum then to the cavernous sinus to supply the brain parenchyma and the eye posterolaterally.

The deep petrosal nerve and the greater petrosal nerve meet in the foramen lacerum to form the Vidian nerve, which is composed of the fusion of the deep petrosal nerve and great petrosal nerve in the pterygoid canal.

The pterygoid canal is an opening that extends from the bony part of the lacerum anteriorly, to reach the pterygopalatine fossa.

The vidian nerve carries parasympathetic and sympathetic fibers to the pterygopalatine ganglion, which is in the pterygopalatine fossa. The parasympathetic fibers are the contribution of the greater petrosal nerve, and the sympathetic fibers are the contribution of the deep petrosal nerve which originates in the foramen lacerum from the carotid plexus.

Pterygopalatine fossa which contains the pterygopalatine ganglion is located inferior to the posterior part of the inferior orbital fissure, behind the posterior wall of the maxillary sinus, and antero-inferiorly to the middle cranial fossa.

The internal carotid artery (ICA), passes from the carotid canal to the foramen lacerum. In the lacerum, postganglionic sympathetic fibers ascend along with the internal carotid artery known as the deep petrosal nerve connect to the greater petrosal nerve gives the Vidian nerve or nerve to the pterygoid canal.