The Immune response is the body's ability to stay safe by affording protection against harmful agents and involves lines of defense against most microbes as well as specialized and highly specific response to a particular offender. This immune response classifies as either innate which is non-specific and adaptive acquired which is highly specific. The innate response, often our first line of defense against anything foreign,  defends the body against a pathogen in a similar fashion at all times. These natural mechanisms include the skin barrier, saliva, tears, various cytokines, complement proteins, lysozyme, bacterial flora, and numerous cells including neutrophils, basophils, eosinophils, monocytes, macrophages, reticuloendothelial system, natural killer cells (NK cells), epithelial cells, endothelial cells, red blood cells, and platelets.

The adaptive acquired immune response will utilize the ability of specific lymphocytes and their products (immunoglobulins, and cytokines) to generate a response against the  invading microbes and its typical features are

- Specificity: as the triggering mechanism is a particular pathogen, immunogen or antigen.

- Heterogeneity: signifies the production of millions of different effectors of the immune response (antibodies) against millions of intruders.

- Memory: The immune system has the ability not only to recognize the pathogen on its second contact but to generate a faster and stronger response.

The inflammatory immune response is an example of innate immunity as it blocks the entry of invading pathogens through the skin, respiratory or gastrointestinal tract. If pathogens can breach the epithelial surfaces, they encounter macrophages in the subepithelial tissues that will not only attempt to engulf them but also produce cytokines to amplify the inflammatory response.

Active immunity results from the immune system's response to an antigen and therefore is acquired. Immunity resulting from the transfer of immune cells or antibodies from an immunized individual is passive immunity.

The immune system has evolved for the maintenance of homeostasis, as it can discriminate between foreign antigens and self; however, when this specificity is affected an autoimmune reaction or disease develops.