Lupus pernio is a rare form of cutaneous sarcoidosis, which is resistant to therapy compared to other skin manifestations of sarcoidosis and can result in scarring and disfiguration. There have been very few randomized trials in sarcoidosis that have evaluated therapies, and current evidence on most treatments was derived from small uncontrolled prospective studies, retrospective analyses, and case reports. The choice of initial therapy is based on the location, extent, and severity of skin involvement.

Topical or intralesional corticosteroids are often the first choice in the treatment of cutaneous sarcoidosis. But intralesional steroid injections like triamcinolone are preferred due to better therapeutic response in lupus pernio.

Topical calcineurin inhibitors like tacrolimus 0.1% ointment or pimecrolimus 1% cream are used in conjunction with steroids to reduce corticosteroid use in patients requiring long-term or frequent use to maintain remission.

Systemic glucocorticoids like oral prednisone are only considered in patients with rapidly progressing skin lesions or those with lesions with disfiguration and the initial dose is prednisone 0.5 - 1 mg/kg. Once there is a clinical response the prednisone dose is tapered slowly by 5 mg every week. If the lesions recur with prednisone taper, patients should be started on methotrexate.

Systemic agents like hydroxychloroquine, methotrexate, and minocycline are used for patients with extensive skin involvement, and patients who did not respond to initial therapies like corticosteroids. Hydroxychloroquine and methotrexate have immunomodulatory effects and the selection of the agent is based on the patient's comorbidities, contraindications, and medication tolerance. Hydroxychloroquine 200 mg or 400 mg once a day is the usual dose and patients require once a year eye exam for toxicity monitoring.

The methotrexate dose varies from 5 mg to 25 mg orally once a week based on the severity of the lesions. It has a faster therapeutic response compared to hydroxychloroquine but warrants frequent lab monitoring for methotrexate toxicity. Patients need blood tests every 3 months to monitor complete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitors like adalimumab and infliximab are indicated in patients with lupus pernio who are resistant to treatments like methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, and oral prednisone. Adalimumab 40 mg subcutaneous injection once a week was shown to be effective compared to placebo in a small randomized controlled trial (RCT) of patients with cutaneous sarcoidosis.

Thalidomide is also an option for patients with resistant lupus pernio and its use is based on case reports and non-randomized studies. However, the potential toxicities and teratogenic side effects limit its utility. The patient and provider must enroll in the thalidomide risk evaluation and mitigation strategy (REMS) program before thalidomide can be prescribed and dispensed.

Surgical excision of cutaneous sarcoidosis lesions is not recommended as there is a high risk of recurrence in the surgical scars. However, reconstructive surgery can be considered for improvement in cosmetic appearance in patients with severely disfiguring lesions on the nose.