The treatment of both arterial and venous thrombosis differs. Venous thromboembolism management encompasses the use of various anticoagulant agents that target procoagulant factors, while arterial thrombosis management is predominantly with antiplatelet agents as monotherapy or dual-antiplatelet therapy. There are many variations and combinations of these treatment options. As noted, many of the specific scenarios on anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy indications are beyond the scope of this review article. Subspecialty consultation with pulmonology, cardiology, neurology, and/or hematology may be necessary in special cases. Please refer to societal guidelines (i.e., American Society of Chest Physicians, American Heart Association, & American Society of Hematology) for case- and disease-specific recommendations.

Regarding venous thromboembolism (VTE), the American Society of Hematology (ASH) established a 2018 update to their guidelines for managing venous thrombosis, including prophylaxis use in hospitalized patients. In general, venous thrombosis divides into provoked or unprovoked etiologies; this is incredibly important as it helps to guide management and consideration of any further hypercoagulable workup that may be necessary for select patients. Furthermore, one must determine if the thrombosis is a first episode or recurrent episode, as this may change the duration of anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy. A thorough personal and family history of VTE with careful assessment of provoking risk factors and comorbidities is essential. As noted, a provoked venous thrombosis results from reversible, modifiable, or acquired risk factors (e.g., recent surgery, trauma, infection, pregnancy, morbid obesity, OCP usage, long voyage, or immobility, heavy smoking, underlying malignancy, among others). Unprovoked thrombosis, on the other hand, occurs in the absence of any apparent or strong provoking factor. The treatment of venous thrombosis entails three stages, the initial, chronic, and extended stages,s according to Becattini C. et al. (2016).

Management of acute deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) in hospitalized patients typically includes anticoagulation with IV unfractionated heparin (UFH) or low molecular weight heparin with an eventual transition to oral anticoagulation as below. Anticoagulation promptly with heparin or LMWH provides a quick therapeutic range to avoid the progression of thrombosis and reduce associated mortality.

In those with true unprovoked thrombosis, the duration of therapy is typically longterm and can be lifelong. With the advent of newer direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs), many of which are non-inferior to older agents such as warfarin (with certain clinical exceptions, notably antiphospholipid syndrome or valvular A. Fib), the options for anticoagulation in acute thrombosis continues to expand. As of this writing, DOAC agents include dabigatran, edoxaban, rivaroxaban, and apixaban. Dabigatran is a direct thrombin inhibitor, while the other three are direct factor Xa inhibitors. The American Society of Hematology (ASH) has recommended in 2018 that the direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) can be used in certain circumstances for the management of acute VTE while taking into consideration the risk of bleeding, renal impairment, and comorbidities that may reduce their efficacy (e.g., morbid obesity).

For patients who are admitted to the hospital, the American Society of Hematology (ASH), consistent with other subspecialty society guidelines have recommended that prophylactic-dose unfractionated heparin (UFH) or low molecular heparin (LMWH) should be used (with adjustment for renal impairment as indicated). If there is any contraindication to anticoagulation or high bleeding risk, mechanical prophylaxis of lower extremities should be employed.

Apart from pharmacological management, endovascular treatment is also used in some facilities to manage thrombosis. It is reported to be more successful if the thrombus is truly acute (i.e., formation two weeks before the presentation). Different endovascular methods include catheter-directed thrombolysis, percutaneous aspiration thrombectomy, venous balloon dilatation, pharmacomechanical catheter-directed thrombolysis.