Blood returns to the heart via the superior and inferior vena cava into the right atrium. There is no flow of blood across the TV due to atresia of the valve, and the right ventricle is hypoplastic.

There is obligate right to left shunt at the atrial level as there is no forward flow of blood across the TV. There is a mixing of systemic venous blood and pulmonary venous blood in the left atrium. The amount of oxygen saturated blood reaching the left ventricle, the aorta, and therefore, the rest of the body depends on the relative volumes of pulmonary and systemic venous return.

The amount of pulmonary blood flow is determined by:

1)  The degree of pulmonary obstruction.

2)  The presence of ventricular septal defect (VSD)

3)  The relationship of the great arteries

Patients with pulmonary obstruction due to pulmonary stenosis or atresia would have decreased pulmonary venous return and hence would have decreased systemic arterial oxygen saturation. Therefore, the patient would be cyanotic. In contrast, patients without pulmonary obstruction would have a higher pulmonary venous return and, thus, a relatively high systemic arterial saturation. These patients would not be cyanotic.

This lesion has been classified based on the relationship of the great arteries, presence of a VSD, and degree of pulmonary obstruction.

Type I (70 to 80 percent): Normal anatomy of the great arteries

- Subgroup a – Intact ventricular septum with pulmonary atresia

- Subgroup b – Small VSD with pulmonary stenosis (PS)/ hypoplasia

- Subgroup c – Large VSD without PS

Type II (12 to 25 percent): D-transposition of the great arteries (D-TGA)

- Subgroup a – VSD with pulmonary atresia

- Subgroup b – VSD with PS or hypoplasia

- Subgroup c – VSD without PS

Type III (3 to 6 percent): Malposition defects of the great arteries other than D-TGA (e.g., truncus arteriosus, atrioventricular septal defects, and double outlet right ventricle)

**The flow of blood through the heart in patients with pulmonary obstruction**

In patients who have normally related great arteries and no VSD, there is pulmonary atresia, and hence blood supply to the lungs depends on a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). In type Ia, blood from the right atrium is shunted across the atrial septum to the left atrium and then across the mitral valve into the left ventricle and out the aorta to supply blood to the body and also through the PDA to the lungs.  If a VSD is present, there is flow through the VSD into the pulmonary arteries. The degree of pulmonary blood flow would correlate with the size of the VSD and degree of pulmonary stenosis. (types Ib and Ic). See figure 1.

**The flow of blood through the heart in patients without pulmonary obstruction**

Patients who have transposition of the great arteries universally have VSDs and usually have an unobstructed pulmonary blood supply. (type IIc) These patients do not rely on PDA to supply pulmonary blood flow. In type II TA the blood from the right atrium flows into the left atrium across the mitral valve into the left ventricle and out the pulmonary artery.

Additionally, blood flows across the VSD into the aorta to supply blood to the body. Types IIa and IIb have some degree of pulmonary obstruction hence may rely on a PDA for pulmonary blood flow. In types IIa and IIb, blood flows from the right atrium flows into the left atrium across the mitral valve into the left ventricle across the VSD into the aorta and through the PDA to the lungs. See figure 2.