In addition to CML, Philadelphia chromosome has shown an association with different leukemias including

- Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML)

- Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL)  (mostly B cell ALL, rarely T cell ALL)

- Chronic Neutrophilic Leukemia (CNL)

- Mixed Phenotype Acute Leukemia (MPAL)

There have been reports of detection of the chromosomal abnormality rarely in normal healthy people.

**CML:**The Ph chromosome is the diagnostic feature of CML. CML has an incidence of 50 per million per year and accounts for approximately 7 to 15% of the leukemias in the adult population.

**ALL:**Philadelphia chromosome has been detected in 11 to 29 % of patients with ALL, although it is rarer with a prevalence of 1 to 3% in childhood ALL.

**AML:**In patients with AML, the chromosomal abnormality has a reported incidence of less than 1.5%.

**MPAL:**Data collected from patients diagnosed with MPAL shows that the Ph chromosome is the most frequent aberrant cytogenetic abnormality, which has led to the recognition of Ph+MPAL as a distinct disease entity with a prevalence of less than 1% of all acute leukemias.

**THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS:
**

For CML, at the moment, many (five FDA approved) tyrosine kinase inhibitors, belonging to different generations, (TKI) are being used for the treatment. TKIs belonging to different generations are currently available. Frist generation TKI includes imatinib, and second-generation TKI includes bosutinib, dasatinib, and nilotinib. Third generation TKIs include ponatinib. For the chronic phase, TKI first and second-generation TKIs are included in the frontline treatments recommended.

In patients diagnosed with the chronic phase of CML, risk calculations are performed before initiation of therapy. For this purpose, two different scoring systems are used.

For patients with treatment failure or resistance to prior lines, the third generation TKI should be used.

For patients with Ph+ive ALL, in addition to TKI, concurrent use of chemotherapeutic agents has shown remarkable results. For patients who are refractory to the TKI therapy and for patients with Ph+ive MPAL, a combination of alternative or advanced generation TKIs, and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation are recommendations.

**PROGNOSTIC SIGNIFICANCE:
**

The status of the Philadelphia chromosome is associated with substantially different prognoses in patients of different leukemic phenotypes. The presence of the Ph chromosome has also correlated with a higher risk of concurrent genomic abnormalities.

In patients of CML, the location of the breakpoint in the BCR gene has shown an important association with prognosis. CML patients with a double Philadelphia chromosome are associated with a worse prognosis than those with a single Philadelphia chromosome.

ALL patients, both adults, as well as children who are Ph+ive, have shown a poor prognosis in comparison to those who are Ph -ive.

Patients with Ph+ive MPAL have shown a worse outcome in comparison to other leukemic phenotypes.