**PAPVC**

The main physiologic manifestation of PAPVC is similar to atrial septal defect (ASD), which is left to right shunt at the atrial level leading to recirculation of oxygenated blood through the pulmonary vasculature. The increased blood to the left side leads to dilatation of the right atrium and ventricle and increased pulmonary blood flow. The factors that determine the magnitude of left to right shunting include the number and size of the anomalous veins, the site of origin of the anomalous veins, and the size of ASD and the pulmonary vascular resistance.

**TAPVC**

In TAPVC, the entire oxygenated blood from the lungs returns to the right atrium. Therefore, communication between the left and right atrium is crucial for survival in TAPVC. Mixing of the oxygenated and deoxygenated blood occurs in the right atrium, which is then shunted right to the left at the level of atria. Therefore, the left atrium and aorta get mixed blood, which leads to cyanosis in patients with TAPVC.

**TAPVC Without Obstruction**

Supracardiac and cardiac type TAPVC are usually non obstructed. At birth, the pulmonary and systemic vascular resistances are similar. However, in the early weeks of life, there is a significant drop in pulmonary vascular resistance, leading to increased recirculation of flow in the lungs causing pulmonary over circulation. Progressive right atrial and ventricular dilation ensue. Pulmonary vascular changes over time can lead to pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure.

**TAPVC With Obstruction**

Infracardiac type is the most common cause of obstructive TAPVC. Pulmonary venous obstruction can occur at the level of the diaphragm, vein entering the IVC, or in the hepatic sinusoids.  Elevated pressures in the pulmonary venous system are transmitted to the lung bed leading to pulmonary edema. This, in turn, can lead to pulmonary vascular resistance, pulmonary hypertension, right ventricular hypertrophy, and right-sided heart failure. The obstructive TAPVC is usually present in the neonatal period as severe respiratory distress.