The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis requires that at least two of the following three criteria are met, based on the Revised Atlanta Classification system:

- Characteristic clinical features

- Laboratory evidence

- Imaging suggestive of pancreatitis

Clinical features include constant upper abdominal pain, with or without radiation to the back, and tenderness of the abdomen with palpation. Laboratory criteria include a serum lipase of at least three times the upper limit of normal.  Lipase peaks more rapidly, remains elevated for a more extended period, and has a higher sensitivity and specificity than amylase. Testing for both enzymes does not improve sensitivity or specificity.  A hepatic panel, calcium level, and triglyceride level may help differentiate alcoholic from other causes of AP. Finally, **computerized tomography (CT) of abdomen with IV contrast**is the imaging modality of choice and findings may include pancreatic enlargement, loss of pancreatic borders, surrounding fluid, and/or fat stranding. Areas of no enhancement indicate pancreatic necrosis. Imaging is normal in 15% to 30% of cases of mild pancreatitis and is not routinely indicated or needed for diagnosis. An exception to this rule is in cases where the patient does not respond to treatment after 48 hours, and further imaging can rule out other abdominal pathology or complications. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is not beneficial in alcohol-induced pancreatitis unless there are signs of comorbid biliary etiology