Plain radiography is a useful starting point for suspected tarsal tunnel syndrome to identify potential fractures and osteophytes and evaluate overall foot structure. Computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lower extremity can help look for specific mechanical causes of tibial nerve damage such as local inflammation, mass lesions, or bony spurs. MRI, in particular, helps identify masses or tenosynovitis compared to CT.

Ultrasound can provide a fast, dynamic study at the bedside to aid the diagnosis, particularly in suspected tarsal tunnel syndrome cases.

Electrodiagnostic testing with nerve conduction studies (NCS) and electromyography (EMG) is a key component of diagnosing tibial neuropathy. Mixed or sensory studies of the medial and lateral plantar nerves should be performed. NCS will reveal decreased sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) in the medial and lateral plantar nerves. It is common for studies of these nerves to be difficult to obtain. The potentials of these nerves are often small in amplitude and require averaging.

It is not unusual to have unobtainable medial and lateral plantar nerve studies in normal patients. Therefore it is key to perform side-to-side comparisons in all suspected cases of tibial neuropathy. NCS will also reveal decreased compound motor action potentials (CMAPs) in the tibial motor nerve. The distal latencies of the abductor hallucis brevis and abductor digiti minimi muscles are important to compare from side to side to evaluate the medial and lateral plantar nerves. Hoffmann reflexes, as well as tibial and peroneal F responses, should be compared from side to side.

EMG will show abnormalities in the tibial innervated muscles distal to the injury site. In tarsal tunnel syndrome, the plantar muscles in the foot will be affected. This includes abductor hallucis, adductor hallucis, flexor digitorum brevis, lumbricals, interossei, and quadratus plantae. If the tibial nerve is damaged more proximally above the ankle, then the medial and lateral gastrocnemius muscles may show signs of denervation. EMG can also help with diagnosing the chronicity of the injury. Fibrillation potentials and positive sharp waves may be present in acute tibial nerve injury, while polyphasic potentials and motor potentials with long duration and large amplitude may be seen in chronic injuries.

Electrodiagnostic testing of tibial neuropathy is often technically difficult, particularly in cases of tarsal tunnel syndrome, due to difficulty isolating the distal portions of the tibial nerve. This is particularly evident in older patients. Abnormal EMG findings may be present in the intrinsic muscles of the foot in asymptomatic patients. It is extremely difficult to diagnose distal tibial neuropathy in the presence of superimposed polyneuropathy. Therefore, it is essential to correlate clinical history and physical exam with electrodiagnostic findings to avoid over-diagnosing cases of tibial neuropathy.