Blood tests do not have a role in diagnosing urethral strictures. However, many lower urinary tract flow studies provide a detailed assessment of the urethra.

Uroflowmetry is the preferred initial investigation. It provides a good assessment of the urethral flow. Also, the interpretation of triphasic uroflowmetry provides data to distinguish patterns of healthy individuals, benign prostatic obstruction, and urethral strictures. A maximum flow (Qmax) of less than 15 mL per second raises the suspicion of lower urinary tract stricture. It is also of importance to study the curve shape to differentiate the cause. Urethral strictures typically produce a plateau at the level of Qmax. Ideally, uroflowmetry studies should be of more than 150mL in volume to yield reliable results.

Urethroscopy or cystoscopy is a relatively easy and fast investigation to diagnose urethral stricture, and it can be done under local anesthesia (flexible cystoscopy). It helps to determine the location of the stricture. However, it can be of limited use when it is unable to pass through the stricture to assess the length or the state of the urethra proximal to it. In this case, using a smaller caliber ureteroscope can sometimes help pass beyond the stricture and provide more information. Again, another limitation is its inability to provide information about the surrounding fibrosis. So, although it is of limited diagnostic value, it can provide a quick diagnosis in case of clinical doubt.

Urethrography is the next investigation if the clinical picture and uroflowmetry suggest stricture to confirm the diagnosis. A retrograde urethrography (RUG) can visualize the entire urethra up to the bladder if the patient is relaxed. Frequently, especially when the stricture is significant and insufficient distention of the proximal urethra happens, RUG will not provide sufficient information about the proximal urethra and extent of the stricture. In such cases, a voiding cystourethrography (VCUG) will provide valuable additional information. This is by either asking the patient to void after the bladder is filled with contrast from the RUG or by introducing the contrast through a suprapubic catheter. The combination of RUG and VCUG yields a good image of the entire urethra. It provides information about the location, number, length, and severity of strictures. They are usually the most definitive diagnostic tools. However, these studies have limitations when interpreting the images. This relates to the position of the stricture and the state of the proximal urethra, as these techniques provide a 2D image of a 3D structure.

Ultrasonography (US) is mainly used to assess the bladder and upper urinary tract. It can show a thickened urinary bladder wall. Residual post-voiding urine can be seen on ultrasound as well, which may guide the clinician as to how significant the urethra is obstructed.****

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan use in diagnosing simple urethral strictures is debatable. However, it can provide excellent images when cancer is suspected to be the cause of the stricture, showing the location and extent of the tumor into surrounding tissues.